The Anonymous Sayings of the Desert Fathers
A Select Edition and Complete English Translation by John Wortley
Note on the Translation
Some Greek words now current in English have been presented in their English form, e.g. accidie, higoumen.
Where the Greek text uses a Coptic word, this has been retained, e.g. abba, amma (father, mother).
Some Greek words have been retained because it would take too many words to translate them (e.g. porneia, which means any illicit sexual activity in mind, word or deed) or because of the peculiar ambivalence of the word (e.g. logismos, -oi and hêsychia) the meaning of which the reader must construe from its context.
The Old English word "worldling" has been resurrected to translate kosmikos, a person not a monk, which would otherwise require a significant periphrasis. "Lord-and-master" represents the word despôtes.
Introduction
This volume contains a first complete edition and English translation of the second of the three major forms in which the so-called "Sayings of the Desert Fathers" (Apophthegmata Patrum, AP) have come down to us. The first form is known as the "Alphabetic" collection (APalph) because its roughly a thousand items are arranged in more or less alphabetical order by reference to the approximately one hundred and twenty fathers who allegedly uttered the sayings or are mentioned in the tales, ranging from Abba Antony to Abba Ôr, A–Ω. One version of the text of APalph has been available since the seventeenth century in the well-known edition with Latin translation by Jean-Baptiste Cotelier.
There is now an excellent critical edition of the third, the "systematic" collection of apophthegmata (APsys). In one form or another, most of the contents of APsys can be found in one of the first and second collections; extracts from the Ascetic Discourses of Isaiah of Scete and a number of pieces from elsewhere were subsequently added to these. APsys is systematic in that here the items (some twelve hundred in the extant Greek manuscripts) have been rearranged systematically under twenty-one heads, each bearing the name of some monastic virtue or difficulty, e.g. Sorrow for sin/Compunction, Porneia, Obedience and Humility.
The sections are by no means of equal length, the longest being the one on Discretion (diakrisis) while the shortest (concerned with Hospitality and Almsgiving) contains only nineteen. The classification is by no means rigid; items occur in one section which might very well have been placed under another head, or under several heads. In each section the pattern is more or less the same: extracts from APalph come first, then the extracts from Isaiah of Scete followed by any extraneous items, then the pieces from APanon.
Since both APalph and APanon are generally thought to have been constituted at the end of the fifth century, the first version of APsys could not have been much earlier than c. AD 500. A terminus ante quem is established in the mid sixth century by the existence of a Latin translation of the text made by the deacon Pelagius and the subdeacon John, each of whom subsequently became pope of Rome, from 556 to 561 and from 561 to 574 respectively. The contents of Pelagius and John, however, number only 737, scarcely two-thirds of what is found in the critical edition. Examination of the extant Greek manuscripts of APsys suggests that Pelagius and John represents the earliest surviving evidence of a text in a state of evolution, two further stages of which are discernible. There are no extracts from Isaiah of Scete in Pelagius and John, while a second version of APsys is characterised by the incorporation of a little material by that author. A third version (the one that has come down to us) contains a significant amount of Isaiah material and also presents evidence of the other contents having been rearranged somewhat to accommodate it.
Turning now to the second collection, APanon, let us say that, rather than "a collection", this should probably be called "the second part of (or an appendix to) the first collection". For, after explaining the alphabetical arrangement of the items, the writer of the Prologue to APalph continues:
"Since there are also other words and deeds of the holy elders that do not indicate the names of those who spoke or performed them, we have set them out under headings after the completion of the alphabetic sequence. But, after searching out and looking into many books, we set down as much as we were able to find at the end of the headings."
This passage is of interest, not least in its statement that theirs was not the first attempt to record such material in writing. But the authors claim to have created a supplement or appendix to the first collection and the three things they say about that appendix that are of especial interest are: (a) that its contents are anonymous; (b) that they are arranged under headings; and (c) that anything else coming to their notice was added at the end, i.e. after the section with headings. There are several reasons for believing that the text this volume presents is indeed the appendix of which the above quotation speaks. Not the least of these is the fact that, in the principal manuscripts containing APalph, the text of APanon follows directly after. But whereas the contents of the former are in nearly every case clearly linked to the name of a person, the contents of more than the first half of the latter are sharply distinguished from those of APalph precisely by recording the deeds and sayings of unnamed persons. Furthermore, in the same section the contents of APanon are indeed set out under headings.
The contents of the latter part of the collection are very mixed and might well have been whatever the compilers were able to scrape together from various sources, as they say in the passage cited above. There is little doubt that subsequent copyists added other material, much of which cannot be dated any earlier than the seventh century, but it seems safe to conclude that the main body of APanon is indeed the appendix to APalph of which the compilers speak.
The Sayings of the Holy Elders
N.1
Our holy father Athanasius, bishop of Alexandria, was asked: "In what way is the Son equal to the Father?" He replied: "In the same way that there is seeing in two eyes."
N.2
Our holy father Gregory the Theologian was asked: "How are the Son and the Holy Spirit equal to the Father?" He replied: "The Divinity is a single fusion of light as in three suns adjacent to each other."
N.3
The same father said: "God requires these three things of every man who has been baptised: right belief of his soul, truth of his tongue and sobriety of his body."
N.4
Of two actual brothers living at Scete one happened to fall ill. His brother came into church asking the priest for the Sacrament. When the priest heard, he said to the brothers: "Let us go and visit the brother." They came, they prayed and went away. Then again, on the following Sunday, the priest asked him how his brother was. "Pray for him", he said. Again, taking the brothers, the priest went with them to the sick brother. They came and, as they were sitting there, he was at the point of death. The brothers began to argue, some saying that he was worthy of the Paraclete while others were taking the contrary position on this. Looking at them, his brother said to them: "Why are you arguing with each other? Do you want to know who has power?" And, turning to his brother, he said to him: "You are going, my brother" and the sick man said: "Yes, but pray for me." He said to him: "My brother, I am certainly not going to let you depart before me" and, turning to the seated brothers, he said: "Give me a rush mat and a pillow." When he got them he laid down his head and surrendered his soul first; afterwards the sick man did likewise. After immediately holding a funeral for both of them, the fathers carried them off and buried them joyfully, for they had received the perceptible light.
N.5
There were two brothers living together in the desert. One of them, when he had recalled the judgement of God many times, ran off wandering in the desert; the other went out after him, searching for him. Toiling mightily until he found him, he said to him: "Why are you running away like this? Are you the only one who has committed the sins of the world?" His brother said to him: "Do you think I do not know whether my sins are forgiven? Yes, I know that God has pardoned my sins, but I am toiling like this so that I might be a witness of those who are being judged at the Day of Judgement."
N.6
There were two brothers who were neighbours to each other; one of them would secrete whatever he might have (whether small change or crusts of bread) and thrust it among his neighbour's things. Unaware of this, the other was amazed that his possessions were increasing. Then one day he suddenly came upon his neighbour doing this and took issue with him, saying: "By your carnal gifts you stripped me of the spiritual ones." He demanded the other's word that he would not do that any more and thus he forgave him.
N.7
A brother made a duplicate key which he used to open the cell of one of the elders and take his small change. But the elder wrote a note in which he said: "Brother, whoever you are sir, have the kindness to leave me half for my needs." Then, dividing his change into two, he placed the note there. The other came in again, tore up the note and took the lot. Then, two years later, he lay dying but his soul would not come out. Then he called for the elder and said: "Pray for me, father, for it was I who stole your change." "Why did you not say so earlier?" the elder said. Nevertheless, after he had prayed, the brother surrendered his soul.
N.8
A brother had an elder who, he observed, buried the dead in a wonderful way. "When I die, will you bury me like that too?" he said to him. "I shall bury you like that until you say it is enough", the elder said to him. Shortly afterwards the disciple did die and the word became deed. After the elder devoutly performed his obsequies he said in the hearing of all: "Have you been well buried, my son, or is there some detail still wanting?" The young man let a voice be heard: "You have done well, father, for you have fulfilled your promise."
N.9
Abba Bessarion said that there was a man who renounced the world although he had a wife and also a daughter who was a catechumen, but nevertheless a Christian, so he divided his belongings into three parts. Meanwhile, the daughter who was a catechumen died, so the father gave her share to the poor as a ransom for her soul, also for his wife's and for his own. He made no end of beseeching God on her behalf. As he was praying a voice came to him saying: "Your daughter was baptised; do not be faint-hearted", but he did not believe it. Again the invisible voice spoke to him: "Dig at her grave and see whether you find her!" He went to the tomb and dug; but he did not find her, for she had been transferred to be with the faithful.
N.10
An elder said: "The voice itself shouts to man until his last breath: 'Turn around today!'"
N.11
Abba Theodotus said: "Do not judge the one who indulges in porneia if you are chaste, for in that way you transgress the law—because he who says: 'Do not indulge in porneia' also says: 'Do not judge'."
N.12
A person possessed by a demon once came to Scete and, for a long time, he was not cured. But, taking compassion, one of the elders made the sign of the cross on the one possessed by a demon and cured him. Annoyed, the demon said to the elder: "Look, you have cast me out: I am coming upon you." "Come on then," said the elder to him; "I gladly accept." So the elder spent twelve years having the demon and mortifying it, eating twelve date-kernels each day. Then, leaping out, the demon went away from him. When he saw that it had gone out from him, the elder said to it: "Why are you running away? Stay longer!" but in answer the demon said to him: "God will bring you to nought for none but he alone has power over you."
N.13
They said of a person who lived in a one-room cell in Egypt that one brother and one virgin were in the habit of visiting him. One day the two of them met at the elder's. When evening fell, he spread his sleeping-mat and lay down between them, but the brother was tempted; he roused the virgin and they committed sin. But the elder, perceiving it, said nothing to them. When it was morning, the elder was sending them on their way without showing them any sign of disapproval. As they travelled along the road they asked each other whether the elder had noticed or not. They went back to the elder, prostrated themselves before him and said: "Abba, did you not notice how Satan led us astray?" "I did", he said to them, and they said to him: "Then where was your mind at that time?" "My mind at that time was there where Christ was crucified, standing and weeping", he said to them. After receiving absolution from the elder they went their way and became chosen vessels.
N.14
Abba Zoilos, the priest at Tamiathis, said that he heard his father, Abba Nathanael, saying that another seven senators emulated Abba Arsenius and practised monasticism at Scete. Having renounced all their personal possessions, they used crude earthenware dishes, saying: "This is so that the great God may see and, taking pity on us, may absolve us of our sins."
N.15
They used to say of Abba Arsenius that nobody could comprehend the way in which he led his life.
N.16
They said of Abba Macarius the Great that once he spent four months visiting a brother at Scete every day and not even once did he find him idle. Visiting him yet again, while he was standing outside at the door, he heard him saying with weeping: "Lord, even if your ears do not ring with my crying to you, have mercy on me concerning my sins; for I myself do not grow weary pleading with you."
N.17
There was a novice who wished to renounce the world and he said to the elder: "I want to become a monk." The elder said: "You are not able." He said: "I am able." The elder said to him: "If you are willing, go and renounce the world then come and reside in your cell." He went off and, keeping back a hundred pieces of gold for himself, gave away what he possessed, and then came to the elder. But the elder said to him: "Go and reside in your cell." He went and took up residence but, while he was residing there, the logismoi said: "The door is old; it wants to be replaced." Coming to the elder, he said: "The logismoi are saying that the door is old and wants to be replaced." The elder said to him: "You have not renounced the world but go, renounce it and reside there." So off he went and gave away ninety pieces of gold, concealing ten pieces for himself. Coming to the elder he said: "Look, I have renounced the world." Said the elder to him: "Go and reside in your cell." He went and took up residence there, but while he was residing there the logismoi said that the roof was old and wanted to be renewed. He went away and said to the elder: "My logismoi are telling me that the roof is old and wants to be renewed." "Go and renounce the world," the elder said, and he went off and gave away the ten pieces of gold too, came back and said to the elder: "Look, I have renounced the world." When he had taken up residence, the logismoi said to him: "Everything here is old and the lion is coming to devour me." He told his logismoi to the elder and the elder said to him: "I am expecting everything to come down on top of me and the lion to come and eat me up so I may be at rest. Go, reside in your cell and pray to God."
N.18
An elder said to another elder who had great love and who fraternised with both monks and worldlings: "A lamp sheds light on many, but it burns its own mouth."
N.19
They used to say of an elder that, while he was walking in the desert, there were two angels accompanying him, one on the right and one on the left. As they came along they found a corpse on the road and the elder covered his nose because of the stench, and the angels did likewise. When they had gone a little way, the elder said to them: "Do you smell those things too?" "No," they said, "but we too covered our noses because of you since we don't smell the impurity of this world nor does it reach us. But souls that are stinking in sin, those we do smell."
N.20
There was an elder who used to eat three dried loaves each day. A brother visited him and, when they sat down to eat, he set three dried loaves before the brother. When the elder saw that he was in need of more, the elder brought him three more. When they had eaten enough and stood up, the elder condemned the brother and said to him: "Brother, we should not be slaves to the flesh", then the brother prostrated himself before the elder and went out. The following day, when it was time for the elder to eat, he put out three dried loaves for himself as usual. Eating them, he was hungry again but restrained himself from taking more. The same thing happened again next day. He began to grow weak and the elder perceived that abandonment by God had happened to him. Throwing himself before God in tears, he besought him about the abandonment that had happened and he saw an angel saying to him: "This came upon you because you condemned the brother. Bear this in mind: one who is able to fast or to do any other good thing does not do it by virtue of his own power. It is the goodness of God that gives the man the strength."
N.21
They used to say of an elder at The Cells that he lived in confinement and did not even come to church. He had a natural brother residing in another cell. This one fell sick and sent for his brother so he might see him before departing from the body. "I cannot come," said the other, "because he is my natural brother." Again the other sent saying: "At least come tonight so I may see you", but he said: "I cannot, for otherwise my heart will not be pure in the sight of God." The sick brother died and they did not see each other.
N.22
The fathers recounted that there was a father of a coenobion and it came about that the one who waited on him became negligent, left the monastery and went off to another place. The elder went to him almost every day, urging him to come back, but he would not. For three years the elder kept this up then, convinced in that way, the attendant did return. So the elder gave him orders to go out and gather straw and, after the attendant had done this, through the operation of Satan, he lost an eye. The elder was greatly distressed and began advising him in his suffering. "It is my fault," said the attendant; "I have undergone this because of the trouble you gave me." Eventually the pain abated while the condition remained. Again the elder gave him orders to go out and pluck some palm branches. As he was working, by the operation of the enemy, a small branch sprang back and he lost the other eye. So he came to the monastery and practised hêsychia, doing nothing any more. The abba was vexed again and, as his summons had come, being aware of it, he sent for all the brothers and said to them: "My summons is near; look after yourselves." They each began to say: "To whom are you leaving us, abba?"—but the elder remained silent. He sent for the blind monk alone and spoke to him about his summons. The monk wept, saying: "To whom are you leaving me, the blind man?" but the elder said: "Pray for me that I may be able to speak freely in the presence of God and I hope that you will conduct the synaxis on Sunday." A few days after he died the monk recovered his sight and became father of the coenobion.
N.23
A domestic slave became a monk and remained content with salt, bread and water for forty-five years. After a significant time his master was conscience-stricken; he withdrew from the world too and, in abject obedience, became the disciple of his own slave. When the time of his summons was approaching, he said to the elder: "Abba, I see the powers of darkness coming towards me and turning back again through your prayers." When the elder's summons also approached, he saw one angel to his right and another on his left. They were saying to him: "Will you come, abba, or are we to go away?" and the elder said to them: "I am willing; stay and take my soul", and that is how he died.
N.24
An elder said: "Joseph of Arimathea took the body of Jesus and placed it in a clean shroud in a new sepulchre, that is, in a new man. Let each one studiously endeavour not to sin in order not to do violence to the God who dwells within him and drive him out of his soul. Manna was given to Israel to eat in the desert: to the true Israel the Body of Christ was given."
N.25
An elder said: "Bare your sword." The brother said: "My passions do not let me." The elder replied: "'Call upon me in the day of your trouble and I will deliver you and you shall glorify me'. Call upon him then, and he shall deliver you from every temptation."
N.26
A brother living in voluntary exile questioned an elder saying: "I want to go away to my own parts" and the elder said to him: "Be aware of this, brother: that when you were coming here from your country, you had the Lord guiding you; if you return, you will have him no longer."
N.27
One of the elders sent his disciple to draw water but the well was a long way from their cell. He forgot to take the rope and realised that he had not brought it when he got to the well. He offered a prayer, crying out saying: "Cistern, cistern: my abba said: 'Fill the pot with water'", and the water promptly rose. Then, when the brother had filled his vessel, the water descended back to its place.
N.28
One of the bishops visited the fathers at Scete each year. A brother met him and conducted him into his own cell, setting before him bread and salt with the words: "Forgive me, my lord, for I have nothing else to set before you." The bishop said to him: "When I come next year I don't want even to find salt."
N.29
One of the brothers used to say that an enquiry took place at the Lavra of Egypt and everybody spoke, great and small; there was only one who did not speak. As they were coming out, one brother asked him, saying: "How was it that you did not speak?" Pressed by the brother, the other said: "Forgive me, but I said to my logismos: 'If the cushion under me does not speak, don't you speak' and thus I remained silent, not uttering anything."
N.30
There was an elder who was sick and, as he lacked the necessities of life, the father of a coenobion took him in and looked after him. He said to the brothers: "Constrain yourselves a little so we can look after the sick man." Now the sick man possessed a pot of gold and, after excavating beneath himself, he concealed it. Now it happened that he died and did not confess it. After he had been buried the abba said to the brothers: "Take this couch away" and, when they were overturning it, they found the gold. Said the abba: "Since he said nothing about this when he was alive nor spoke of it at his death, but had his hope in it, I am not touching it; go and bury it with him." And fire came down from heaven and rested on his tomb for many days in the sight of all; those who saw it were filled with wonder.
N.31
There was a bishop in a city who, by the operation of the devil, fell into porneia. Nobody knew about his sin but, one day when there was a synaxis in the church, he confessed of his own free will in the presence of the whole congregation, saying: "I have fallen into porneia" and he deposited his pallium on the altar saying: "I can no longer be your bishop." Now the whole congregation cried out in lamentation, saying: "This sin is upon us, only do you remain in the bishopric." In answer he said: "If you want me to remain in the bishopric, do what I tell you." Having ordered the doors of the church to be shut, he threw himself face down at one of the side doors and said: "He who does not trample me as he is walking out has no place with God." When they had done as he ordered and the last person was going out, there came a voice from heaven saying: "I have pardoned his sin on account of his great humility."
N.32
There was another bishop of a city and it happened that he fell ill, with the result that everybody despaired of him. There was a women's monastery there; when the superior learned that the bishop had been despaired of, she went to visit him, taking two sisters with her. As the bishop was talking with her, one of her disciples standing near his foot touched it, wishing to find out how he was. Embattled by the touch, he entreated the superior, saying: "I get no ministering from those close to me; please be willing to leave me this sister so she may minister to me" and, suspecting no evil, she left her. Empowered by the devil, he said to her: "Prepare me a little food so I may eat" and she did as he told her. When he had eaten, he said to her: "Lie with me", and he committed the sin. When she became pregnant the clergy laid hands on her, saying: "Tell us who made you pregnant", but she did not want to confess. Then the bishop said: "Let her go, for I committed this sin" and, rising up from his sickness, he went into the church and deposited his pallium on the altar. Coming out, he took a staff in his hand and set off to a monastery where he was not known. But the abba of the coenobion, possessed of second sight, was aware that a bishop was going to come to the monastery. He told the doorkeeper: "Keep an eye open brother, because a bishop is going to come today." Now the doorkeeper, expecting that he was coming in a litter or with some retinue like a bishop, did not notice the event, so the abba went out to meet him and embraced him, saying: "Welcome, my lord bishop." The bishop was devastated that he had been recognised and wanted to flee to another monastery, but the abba said to him: "No matter where you go, I am coming with you." After entreating him at some length, the abba brought him into the monastery. Then, when he had truly repented, he died in peace, so that wonders occurred at his departing.
N.33
There was an elder in the district of the Thebaid named Hierax who had lived for about ninety years. Wishing to cast him into accidie through his longevity, the demons set upon him one day, saying: "What are you going to do, elder, for you have another fifty years to live?" In answer he said to them: "You have greatly distressed me, because I made preparations for two hundred years"—and they went away from him, howling.
N.34
There was an anchorite in the yard district who fought the good fight for a good many years and was found worthy of the grace not to suffer onslaughts from the enemy, with the result that, in the presence of all those who came to him for the benefit of their souls he would hurl insults at the devil, saying that the devil was nothing, and was incapable of doing anything against those who were fighting the good fight—unless he found people like himself: unclean, ever enslaved to sin; those he would unnerve. This anchorite was not aware that it was by God's help that he was protected and that this was why he did not suffer attacks from the adversary. Then, one day, by divine permission, the devil appeared to him, face to face, and said to him: "What have I done to you, abba? Why do you shower me with insults? Did I ever give you any trouble?" But the other spat at him again and used the same words: "'Get thee behind me Satan' for you can do nothing against the servants of Christ." But the other hurled this back: "Very well, but since you still have another forty years to live, won't I be able to find one hour in so many years to trip you up?" and, having thrown out the bait, he disappeared. Immediately assailed by logismoi, the anchorite began to say: "I have been wearing myself out here all these years and now God wants me to live another forty years? I am leaving and going back to the world. I will see those who are different from me and be with them for some years, then I will come back and resume my ascetic life." This thought no sooner came to him than it was done: he charged out of his cell and took the road. But before he had gone very far, an angel of the Lord sent to his aid said to him: "Abba, where are you going?" "To the city", he said, and the angel said to him: "Go back to your cell and let there be no truck between you and Satan; regard yourself as one deluded by him." Coming back to his senses, he returned to his cell, lived for three days and then died.
N.35
To a great anchorite who said: "Why do you do battle with me like this, Satan?" Satan took heed, saying: "It is you who mightily does battle with me."
N.36
An anchorite saw one demon inciting another one to go and awaken a sleeping monk. And he heard the other one saying: "I cannot do that because I did awaken him once. He got up and burnt me, singing psalms and praying."