knows itself, its own knowledge does not rise above itself, because itself
knows, and itself is known. When, therefore, it knows itself entirely, and
no other thing with itself, then its knowledge is equal to itself; because its
knowledge is not from another nature, since it knows itself. And when it
perceives itself entirely, and nothing more, then it is neither less nor
greater. We said therefore rightly, that these three things, , when they are perfect, are by consequence equal.
5. Similar reasoning suggests to us, if indeed we can any way understand
the matter, that these things  exist in the soul,
and that, being as it were involved in it, they are so evolved from it as to
be perceived and reckoned up substantially, or, so to say, essentially. Not
as though in a subject; as color, or shape, or any other quality or quantity,
are in the body. For anything of this  kind does not go beyond
the subject in which it is; for the color or shape of this particular body
cannot be also those of another body. But the mind can also love
something besides itself, with that love with which it loves itself. And
further, the mind does not know itself only, but also many other things.
Wherefore love and knowledge are not contained in the mind as in a
subject, but these also exist substantially, as the mind itself does;
because, even if they are mutually predicated relatively, yet they exist
each severally in their own substance. Nor are they so mutually
predicated relatively as color and the colored subject are; so that color is
in the colored subject, but has not any proper substance in itself, since
colored body is a substance, but color is in a substance; but as two friends
are also two men, which are substances, while they are said to be men not
relatively, but friends relatively.
6. But, further, although one who loves or one who knows is a substance,
and knowledge is a substance, and love is a substance, but he that loves
and love, or, he that knows and knowledge, are spoken of relatively to
each other, as are friends: yet mind or spirit are not relatives, as neither
are men relatives: nevertheless he that loves and love, or he that knows
and knowledge, cannot exist separately from each other, as men can that
are friends. Although it would seem that friends, too, can be separated in
body, not in mind, in as far as they are friends: nay, it can even happen
that a friend may even also begin to hate a friend, and on this account

cease to be a friend, while the other does not know it, and still loves him.
But if the love with which the mind loves itself ceases to be, then the mind
also will at the same time cease to love. Likewise, if the knowledge by
which the mind knows itself ceases to be, then the mind will also at the
same time cease to know itself. just as the head of anything that has a
head is certainly a head, and they are predicated relatively to each other,
although they are also substances: for both a head is a body, and so is that
which has a head; and if there be no head, then neither will there be that
which has a head. Only these things can be separated from each other by
cutting off, those cannot.
7. And even if there are some bodies which cannot be wholly separated
and divided, yet they would not be bodies unless they consisted of their
own proper parts. A part then is predicated relatively to a whole, since
every part is a part of some whole, and a whole is a whole by having all its
parts. But since both part and whole are bodies, these things are not only
predicated relatively, but exist also substantially. Perhaps, then, the mind
is a whole, and the love with which it loves itself, and the knowledge with
which it knows itself, are as it were its parts, of which two parts that
whole consists. Or are there three equal parts which make up the one
whole? But no part embraces the whole, of which it is a part; whereas,
when the mind knows itself as a whole, that is, knows itself perfectly, then
the knowledge of it extends through the whole of it; and when it loves
itself perfectly, then it loves itself as a whole, and the love of it extends
through the whole of it. Is it, then, as one drink is made from wine and
water and honey, and each single part extends through the whole, and yet
they are three things (for there is no part of the drink which does not
contain these three things; for they are not joined as if they were water
and oil, but are entirely commingled: and they are all substances, and the
whole of that liquor which is composed of the three is one substance),—is
it, I say, in some such way as this we are to think these three to be
together, mind, love, and knowledge? But water, wine, and honey are not
of one substance, although one substance results in the drink made from
the commingling of them. And I cannot see how those other three are not
of the same substance. since the mind itself loves itself, and itself knows
itself; and these three so exist, as that the mind is neither loved nor
known by any other thing at all. These three, therefore, must needs be of