no anger, no gain-saying, but they came forth. Had they regarded it as an act of
vengeance that they had been thrown into the furnace, they would have been
grieved against the man who had cast them in; as it is, there is nothing of the
kind; but, as though they were going forth from Heaven itself, so went they
forth. And what the Prophet says of the Sun, that "He is as a bridegroom coming
forth out of his chamber," [Psalm 19:5] one would not go amiss in saying also of
them. But though he goes forth thus, yet came they forth there more gloriously
than he, for he indeed comes forth to enlighten the world with natural light, they
to enlighten the world in a different way, I mean, spiritually. For because of them
the king straightway issued a decree, containing these words, "It has seemed
good unto me to show the signs and wonders that the Most High God has
wrought toward me. How great are His signs! And how mighty are His
wonders!" [Daniel 4:2-3] So that they went forth, shedding a yet more glorious
radiance, beaming indeed in that region itself, but, what is more than all,
capable, by means of the king's writings, of being diffused over the world and
thus of dispelling the darkness which every where prevails. "Come forth," said
he, "and come hither." He gave no commandment to extinguish the flame, but
hereby most especially honored them, by believing that they were able not only
to walk within it, but even to come out of it while it was still burning.
But let us look again, if it seem good to you, at the words of the jailor,
"Sirs, what must I do to be saved?" What language sweeter than this? This
makes the very Angels leap for joy. To hear this language, even the Onlybegotten Son of God Himself became a servant. This language they who
believed at the beginning addressed to Peter. [Acts 2:37] "What shall we do?"
And what said he in answer? "Repent and be baptized." To have heard this
language from the Jews, gladly would Paul have been cast even in to hell, in his
eagerness for their salvation and obedience. But observe, he commits the whole
matter to them, he wastes no unnecessary pains. Let us however look at the next
point. The king here does not say, What must I do to be saved? But the teaching
is plainer in his case than any language whatever; for he straightway becomes a

preacher, he needs not to be instructed like the jailor. He proclaims God, and
makes confession of His power. "Of a truth your God is the God of Gods and the
Lord of Kings, because He has sent His Angel, and has delivered you." [Daniel
2:47; 3:28] And what was the sequel? Not one single jailor, but numbers are
instructed by the king's writings, by the sight of the facts. For that the king
would not have told a falsehood is evident enough to every one, because he
never would have chosen to bear such testimony to captives, nor to overthrow
his own acts; he never would have chosen to incur the imputation of such utter
madness: so that had not the truth been abundantly manifest, he would not have
written in such terms, and with so many persons present.
Perceive ye how great is the power of bonds? How great the force of those
praises that are sung in tribulation? Their heart failed not, they were not cast
down, but were then yet more vigorous, and their courage then yet greater and
justly so.
While we are considering these things one question yet remains for us: Why
was it that in the prison on the one hand, the prisoners were loosed, while in the
furnace the executioners were burnt to death: for that indeed should have been
the king's fate, because neither were they who bound them, nor they who cast
them into the furnace, guilty of so great sin as the man who commanded this
should be done. Why then did they perish? On this point there is not any very
great need of minute examination; for they were wicked men. And therefore this
was providentially ordered, that the power of the fire might be shown, and the
miracle might be made more signal; for if it thus devoured them that were
without, how did it show them unscathed that were within it? It was that the
power of God might be made manifest. And let no one wonder that I have put
the king on a level with the jailor, for he did the same thing; the one was in no
wise more noble than the other, and they both had their reward.
But, as I said, the righteous, when they are in tribulations, are then
especially more energetic, and when they are in bonds: for to suffer any thing for
Christ's sake is the sweetest of all consolation.