might have even devised something amiss touching herself, and have gone on to
strangle or to stab herself, not enduring the disgrace. For wondrous indeed was
that Virgin, and Luke points out her excellency, saying, that when she heard the
salutation, she did not straightway pour herself out, neither did she accept the
saying, but "was troubled," seeking "what manner of salutation this might be."
[Luke 1:29] Now she who was of such perfect delicacy would even have been
distracted with dismay at the thought of her shame, not expecting, by whatever
she might say, to convince any one who should hear of it, but that what had
happened was adultery. Therefore to prevent these things, the angel came before
the conception. Besides that, it was meet that womb should be free from trouble
which the Maker of all things entered; and the soul rid of all perturbation, which
was thought worthy to become the minister of such mysteries. For these reasons
He speaks to the Virgin before the conception, but to Joseph at the time of
travail.
And this many of the simpler sort, not understanding, have said there is a
discordance; because Luke says it was Mary to whom he declared the good
tidings, but Matthew, that it was Joseph; not knowing that both took place. And
this sort of thing it is necessary to bear in mind throughout the whole history; for
in this way we shall solve many seeming discordances.
10. The angel then comes, when Joseph is troubled. For in addition to the
causes mentioned, with a view also to the manifestation of his self-command, he
defers his coming. But when the thing was on the point of taking place, then at
last he presents himself. "While he thought on these things, an angel appears to
Joseph in a dream." [Matthew 1:20]
Do you see the mildness of the husband? So far from punishing, he did not
even declare it to any one, no not even to her whom he suspected, but was
thinking it over with himself, as aiming to conceal the cause even from the
Virgin herself. For neither is it said that he was minded to "cast her out," but to
"put her away," so very mild and gentle was the man. "But while he is thinking
on these things, the angel appears in a dream."

And why not openly, as to the shepherds, and to Zacharias, and to the
Virgin? The man was exceedingly full of faith, and needed not this vision.
Whereas the Virgin, as having declared to her very exceeding good tidings,
greater than to Zacharias, and this before the event, needed also a marvellous
vision; and the shepherds, as being by disposition rather dull and clownish. But
this man, after the conception, and wide the interval between the two men;
wherefore neither was there need of rebuke.
But by saying, "fear not," he signifies him to have been afraid, lest he
should give offense to God, as retaining an adulteress; since, if it had not been
for this, he would not have even thought of casting her out. In all ways then he
points out that the angel came from God, bringing forward and setting before
him all, both what he thought to do, and what he felt in his mind.
Now having mentioned her name, he stayed not at this, but added also,
"your wife;" whereas he would not have called her so, if she had been corrupted.
And here he calls her that is espoused "a wife;" as indeed the Scripture is wont to
call betrothed husbands sons-in-law even before marriage.
But what means, "to take unto you?" To retain her in his house, for in
intention she had been now put away by him. "Her, being put away, do thou
retain," says he, "as committed unto you by God, not by her parents. And He
commits her not for marriage; but to dwell with you; and by my voice does He
commit her." Much as Christ Himself afterwards committed her to His disciple,
so even now unto Joseph.
12. Then having obscurely signified the matter in hand, he mentioned not
the evil suspicion; but, in a manner more reverent and seemly, by telling the
cause of travail he removed this also; implying that the very thing which had
made him afraid, and for which he would have cast her out—this very thing, I
say, was a just cause why he should take her and retain her in his house. Thus
more than entirely doing away with his distress. "For she is not only free," says
he, "from unlawful intercourse, but even above all nature is her conception. Not
only therefore put away your fear, but even rejoice more exceedingly, 'for that