John 8:39-40
"They said unto Him, Abraham is our father. Jesus says unto them, If you had
Abraham to your father, you would do the works of Abraham. But now ye seek to
kill Me."
He here repeatedly handles their murderous intention, and makes mention
of Abraham. And this He does desiring to draw off their attention from this
relationship, and to take away their excessive boasting, and also to persuade
them no longer to rest their hopes of salvation in Abraham, nor in the
relationship which is according to nature, but in that which is according to the
will. For what hindered their coming to Christ was this, their deeming that
relationship to be sufficient for them to salvation. But what is the "truth" of
which He speaks? That He is equal with the Father. For it was on this account
that the Jews sought to slay Him; and He says,
"You seek to kill Me because I have told you the truth, which I have heard of
My Father."
To show that these things are not opposed to the Father, He again betakes
Himself to Him. They say unto Him,

John 8:41
"We be not born of fornication, we have one Father, even God."
3. "What do you say? You have God for your Father, and do ye blame
Christ for asserting this?" Do you see that He said that God was His Father in a
special manner? When therefore He had cast them out of their relationship to
Abraham, having nothing to reply, they dare a greater thing, and betake
themselves to God. But from this honor also He expels them, saying,

John 8:42-44
"If God were your Father, you would love Me; for I proceeded forth and came
from God; neither came I of Myself, but He sent Me. Why do ye not understand
My speech? Even because ye cannot hear My word. You are of your father the
devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do: he was a murderer from the
beginning, and abode not in the truth: when he speaks a lie, he speaks of his
own."
He had driven them out of their relationship to Abraham, and when they
dared greater things, He then adds a blow, telling them that they not only are not
Abraham's children, but that they are even children of the devil, and inflicting a
wound which might counterbalance their shamelessness; nor does He leave it
unsupported, but establishes it by proofs. "For," He says, "to murder belongs to
the wickedness of the devil." And He said not merely, "ye do his works," but, "ye
do his lusts," showing that both he and they hold to murder, and that envy was
the cause. For the devil destroyed Adam, not because he had any charge against
him, but only from envy. To this also He alludes here.
"And abode not in the truth." That is, in the right life. For since they
continually accused Him of not being from God, He tells them that this also is
from thence. For the devil first was the father of a lie, when he said, "In the day
that you eat thereof your eyes shall be opened" [Genesis 3:5], and he first used
it. For men use a lie not as a thing proper, but alien to their nature, but he as
proper.