THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.84, C.7.

the sea is to be safeguarded in a whole ship, while the second help
when the ship is wrecked, is to cling to a plank; so too the first help
in this life's ocean is that man safeguard his integrity, while the
second help is, if he lose his integrity through sin, that he regain it
by means of Penance.
Reply to Objection 1: To hide one's sins may happen in two ways:
first, in the very act of sinning. Now it is worse to sin in public than
in private, both because a public sinner seems to sin more from
contempt, and because by sinning he gives scandal to others.
Consequently in sin it is a kind of remedy to sin secretly, and it is in
this sense that the gloss says that "to hide one's sins is a second
plank after shipwreck"; not that it takes away sin, as Penance does,
but because it makes the sin less grievous. Secondly, one hides
one's sin previously committed, by neglecting to confess it: this is
opposed to Penance, and to hide one's sins thus is not a second
plank, but is the reverse, since it is written (Prov. 28:13): "He that
hideth his sins shall not prosper."
Reply to Objection 2: Penance cannot be called the foundation of the
spiritual edifice simply, i.e. in the first building thereof; but it is the
foundation in the second building which is accomplished by
destroying sin, because man, on his return to God, needs Penance
first. However, the Apostle is speaking there of the foundation of
spiritual doctrine. Moreover, the penance which precedes Baptism is
not the sacrament of Penance.
Reply to Objection 3: The three sacraments which precede Penance
refer to the ship in its integrity, i.e. to man's state of integrity, with
regard to which Penance is called a second plank.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.84, C.8.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether this sacrament was suitably instituted in

the New Law?
Objection 1: It would seem that this sacrament was unsuitably
instituted in the New Law. Because those things which belong to the
natural law need not to be instituted. Now it belongs to the natural
law that one should repent of the evil one has done: for it is
impossible to love good without grieving for its contrary. Therefore
Penance was unsuitably instituted in the New Law.
Objection 2: Further, that which existed in the Old Law had not to be
instituted in the New. Now there was Penance in the old Law
wherefore the Lord complains (Jer. 8:6) saying: "There is none that
doth penance for his sin, saying: What have I done?" Therefore
Penance should not have been instituted in the New Law.
Objection 3: Further, Penance comes after Baptism, since it is a
second plank, as stated above (Article 6). Now it seems that our Lord
instituted Penance before Baptism, because we read that at the
beginning of His preaching He said (Mt. 4:17): "Do penance, for the
kingdom of heaven is at hand." Therefore this sacrament was not
suitably instituted in the New Law.
Objection 4: Further, the sacraments of the New Law were instituted
by Christ, by Whose power they work, as stated above (Question 62,
Article 5; Question 64, Article 1). But Christ does not seem to have
instituted this sacrament, since He made no use of it, as of the other
sacraments which He instituted. Therefore this sacrament was
unsuitably instituted in the New Law.
On the contrary, our Lord said (Lk. 24:46,47): "It behooved Christ to
suffer, and to rise again from the dead the third day: and that
penance and remission of sins should be preached in His name unto
all nations."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1, ad 1, ad 2), in this
sacrament the acts of the penitent are as matter, while the part taken
by the priest, who works as Christ's minister, is the formal and
completive element of the sacrament. Now in the other sacraments
the matter pre-exists, being provided by nature, as water, or by art,
as bread: but that such and such a matter be employed for a