Let there be then two ways of most holy life, and let the one secure the
goodness of him that practises it, but the other of his neighbor also. Let us see
whether is the more approved and leads us to the summit of virtue. Surely he,
who seeks his own things only, will receive even from Paul endless blame, and
when I say from Paul, I mean from Christ, but the other commendations and
crowns. Whence is this evident? Hear what His language is to one, what to the
other. "Let no man seek his own, but every man another's wealth."
[1 Corinthians 10:24] Do you see he rejects the one, and brings in the other?
Again, "Let every one of you please his neighbor for good to edification." Then
comes also the praise beyond words with an admonition, "For even Christ
pleased not Himself." [Romans 15:2-3]
Even these judgments then are sufficient to show the victory; but that this
may be done even superabundantly, let us see among good works, which are
confined to ourselves, and which pass over from us to others also. Fasting then,
and lying on the bare ground, and keeping virginity, and a self-denying life,
these things bring their advantage to the persons themselves who do them; but
those that pass from ourselves to our neighbors are almsgiving, teaching, charity.
Hear then Paul in this matter also saying, "Though I bestow all my goods to feed
the poor, and though I give my body to be burned, and have not charity, I am
nothing profited." [1 Corinthians 13:3]
6. Do you see it in itself gloriously celebrated, and crowned?
But if you be willing, from a third point also let us compare them; and let
the one fast, and deny himself, and be a martyr, and be burnt to death, but let
another delay his martyrdom for his neighbor's edification; and let him not only
delay it, but let him even depart without martyrdom; who will be the more
approved after his removal hence? We need not have many words, nor a long
circumlocution. For the blessed Paul is at hand, giving his judgment, and saying,
"To depart and to be with Christ is better, nevertheless to abide in the flesh is
more needful for you;" [Philippians 1:23-24] even to his removal unto Christ did
he prefer his neighbor's edification. For this is in the highest sense to be with

Christ, even to be doing His will, but nothing is so much His will, as that which
is for one's neighbor's good.
Will you that I tell you a fourth proof also of these things? "Peter, do you
love me," says He; "Feed my sheep:" [John 21:15-17] and having asked him a
third time, declared this to be an infallible proof of love. But not to priests only
is this said, but to every one of us also, who are also entrusted with a little flock.
For do not despise it, because it is a little flock: For "my Father," He says, "has
pleasure in them." [Luke 12:32] Each of us has a sheep, let him lead that to the
proper pastures. And let the man, as soon as he has risen from his bed, seek after
nothing else, but how he may do and say something whereby he may render his
whole house more reverent. The woman again, let her be indeed a good
housekeeper; but before attending to this, let her have another more needful care,
that the whole household may work the works of Heaven. For if in worldly
matters, before attending to the affairs of our household, we labor diligently to
pay public dues, that we may not for our undutifulness in these matters be beaten
and dragged to the market places, and suffer ten thousand unseemly things;
much more ought we to do this in things spiritual, and to render what is due to
God, the King of all, first, that we may not come to that place, "where is
gnashing of teeth."
And after these virtues let us seek, which together with our own salvation
will be able in the greatest degree to profit our neighbor. Such is almsgiving,
such is prayer, or rather even this latter is by the former made efficacious, and
furnished with wings. "For your prayers," it is said, "and your alms have come
up for a memorial before God." [Acts 10:4] But not prayers only, but fasting also
has its strength from hence. Should you fast without almsgiving; the act is not so
much as counted for fasting; but such a one is worse than a gluttonous man and a
drunkard; and so much worse, as cruelty is a more grievous thing than luxury.
And why do I speak of fasting? Though thou practise self-denial, though thou
practise virginity, you are set without the bridechamber, if you have not
almsgiving. And yet what is equal to virginity, which not even in the new