John 10:6
"This parable spoke Jesus unto them, but they understood not what things they
were which He spoke unto them."
And wherefore spoke He obscurely? Because He would make them more
attentive; when He had effected this, He removes the obscurity, saying,

John 10:9
"I am the door, by Me if any man enter in, he shall go in and out, and find
pasture."
As though He had said, "shall be in safety and security," (but by "pasture,"
He here means His nurturing and feeding the sheep, and His power and
Lordship,) that is, "shall remain within, and none shall thrust him out." Which
took place in the case of the Apostles, who came in and went out securely, as
having become lords of all the world, and none was able to cast them out.

John 10:8
"All that ever came before Me are thieves and robbers, but the sheep did not
hear them."
He does not here speak of the Prophets, (as the heretics assert,) for as many
as believed on Christ did hear them also, and were persuaded by them; but of
Theudas and Judas, and the other exciters of sedition. Besides, He says, "the
sheep did not hear them," as praising them; now nowhere is He seen to praise
those who refused to hearken to the Prophets, but, on the contrary, to reproach
and accuse them vehemently; whence it is evident that the, "did not hear," refers
to those leaders of sedition.

John 10:10
"The thief comes not but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy."
Which then took place when all (their followers) were slain and perished.
"But I have come that they might have life, and that they might have more."
And what is "more" than life, tell me? The kingdom of heaven. But He does
not as yet say this, but dwells on the name of "life," which was known to them.

John 10:11
"I am the good Shepherd."
Here He next speaks concerning the Passion, showing that this should be
for the salvation of the world, and that He came to it not unwillingly. Then again
He mentions the character of the shepherd and the hireling.
"For the shepherd lays down his life."

John 10:12
"But he that is an hireling and not a shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, sees
the wolf coming, and leaves the sheep and flees, and the wolf comes and catches
them."
Here He declares Himself to be Master even as the Father, if so be that He
is the Shepherd, and the sheep are His. Do you see how He speaks in a more
lofty tone in His parables, where the sense is concealed; and gives no open
handle to the listeners? What then does this hireling? He "sees the wolf coming,
and leaves the sheep, and the wolf comes, and scatters them." This those false
teachers did, but He the contrary. For when He was taken, He said, "Let these go
their way, that the saying might be fulfilled" [c. xviii. 8, 9], that not one of them
was lost. Here also we may suspect a spiritual wolf to be intended; for neither
did Christ allow him to go and seize the sheep. But he is not a wolf only, but a
lion also. "Because our adversary the devil," It says, "walks about as a roaring
lion." [1 Peter 5:8] He is also a serpent, and a dragon; for, "Tread ye on serpents
and scorpions." [Luke 10:19]
4. Wherefore, I beseech you, let us remain pasturing beneath this Shepherd;
and we shall remain, if we obey Him, if we hear His voice, if we follow not a
stranger. And what is His voice? "Blessed are the poor in spirit, blessed are the
pure in heart, blessed are the merciful." [Matthew 5:3-8] If thus we do, we shall
remain beneath the Shepherd, and the wolf will not be able to come in; or if he
come against us, he will do so to his own hurt. For we have a Shepherd who so
loves us, that He gave even His life for us. When therefore He is both powerful
and loves us, what is there to hinder us from being saved? Nothing, unless we
ourselves revolt from Him. And how can we revolt? Hear Him saying, "You
cannot serve two masters, God and mammon." [Matthew 6:24] If then we serve
God, we shall not submit to the tyranny of mammon. And truly a bitterer thing
than any tyranny is the desire of riches; for it brings no pleasure, but cares, and