1 Corinthians 16:6
"But with you it may be that I shall abide, or even winter." For I do not at all
wish to take you merely in my way, but to continue among you and spend some
time. For when he wrote this letter, he was in Ephesus, and it was winter; as you
may know by his saying, "Until Pentecost I will tarry at Ephesus; but after this I
shall go away to Macedonia, and after having gone through it, I will be with you
in the summer; and perhaps I shall even spend the winter with you." And why
did he say, "perhaps;" and did not positively affirm it? Because Paul did not
foreknow all things; for good purposes. Wherefore neither does he absolutely
affirm, in order that if it came not to pass, he might have something to resort to;
first, his previous mention of it having been indefinite; and next, the power of
the Spirit leading him wheresoever It willed, not where he himself desired. And
this also he expresses in the second Epistle, when excusing himself on account
of his delay, and saying, "Or the things which I purpose, do I purpose according
to the flesh, that with me there should be the yea yea and the nay nay?" [2
Corinthians 1:17]
"That ye may set me forward on my journey wheresoever I go." This also is
a mark of love, and great strength of affection.

1 Corinthians 16:7
"For I do not wish to see you now by the way; for I hope to tarry awhile
with you, if the Lord permit."
Now these things he said, both to signify his love and also to terrify the
sinners, not however openly, but with outward demonstration of friendship.

1 Corinthians 16:8
"But I will tarry at Ephesus until Pentecost."
As we should expect, he tells them all exactly, informing them as friends.
For this too is a mark of friendship to say the reason why he was not with them,
why he delayed, and where he was staying.

1 Corinthians 16:9
"For a great door and effectual is opened unto me, and there are many
adversaries."
Now if it was "great," how could there be "adversaries?" Why on this very
account the adversaries were many, because men's faith was great; because the
entrance was great and wide. But what means, "A great door?" There are many
prepared to receive the faith, many ready to approach and be converted. There is
a spacious entrance for me, things being now come to that point that the mind of
those approaching is at its prime for the obedience of the faith. On this account,
vehement was the blast of the breath of the devil, because he saw many turning
away from him.
You see then on both accounts it was needful for him to stay; both because
the gain was abundant, and because the struggle was great.
And herewith also he cheered them up, namely, by saying, that henceforth
the word works every where and springs up readily. And if there be many who
plot against it, this also is a sign of the advance of the Gospel. For at no time
does that evil demon wax fierce, except on seeing his goods made spoil of
abundantly. [Matthew 12]
6. Let us then, when we desire to effect any thing great and noble, not
regard this, the greatness of the labor which it brings, but let us rather look to the
gain. Mark, for instance, Paul, not therefore lingering, not therefore shrinking
back, because "there were many adversaries;" but because "there was a great
door," pressing on and persevering. Yea, and as I was saying, this was a sign that
the devil was being stripped, for it is not, depend on it, by little and mean
achievements that men provoke that evil monster to wrath. And so when you see
a righteous man performing great and excellent deeds, yet suffering innumerable
ills, marvel not; on the contrary, one might well marvel, if the devil receiving so