sacrament of Penance, none but a priest is the minister of the
sacrament: and consequently sacramental confession which should
be made to a minister of the Church, should be made to none but a
priest.
Reply to Objection 1: James speaks on the presupposition of the
Divine institutions: and since confession had already been
prescribed by God to be made to a priest, in that He empowered
them, in the person of the apostles, to forgive sins, as related in Jn.
20:23, we must take the words of James as conveying an
admonishment to confess to priests.
Reply to Objection 2: Baptism is a sacrament of greater necessity
than Penance, as regards confession and absolution, because
sometimes Baptism cannot be omitted without loss of eternal
salvation, as in the case of children who have not come to the use of
reason: whereas this cannot be said of confession and absolution,
which regard none but adults, in whom contrition, together with the
purpose of confessing and the desire of absolution, suffices to
deliver them from everlasting death. Consequently there is no parity
between Baptism and confession.
Reply to Objection 3: In satisfaction we must consider not only the
quantity of the punishment but also its power, inasmuch as it is part
of a sacrament. In this way it requires a dispenser of the sacraments,
though the quantity of the punishment may be fixed by another than
a priest.
Reply to Objection 4: It may be necessary for two reasons to know
the sheep by sight. First, in order to register them as members of
Christ's flock, and to know the sheep by sight thus belongs to the
pastoral charge and care, which is sometimes the duty of those who
are not priests. Secondly, that they may be provided with suitable
remedies for their health; and to know the sheep by sight thus
belongs to the man, i.e. the priest, whose business it is to provide
remedies conducive to health, such as the sacrament of the
Eucharist, and other like things. It is to this knowledge of the sheep
that confession is ordained.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether it is ever lawful to confess to another

than a priest?
Objection 1: It would seem that it is never lawful to confess to
another than a priest. For confession is a sacramental accusation, as
appears from the definition given above (Question 7, Article 1). But
the dispensing of a sacrament belongs to none but the minister of a
sacrament. Since then the proper minister of Penance is a priest, it
seems that confession should be made to no one else.
Objection 2: Further, in every court of justice confession is ordained
to the sentence. Now in a disputed case the sentence is void if
pronounced by another than the proper judge; so that confession
should be made to none but a judge. But, in the court of conscience,
the judge is none but a priest, who has the power of binding and
loosing. Therefore confession should be made to no one else.
Objection 3: Further, in the case of Baptism, since anyone can
baptize, if a layman has baptized, even without necessity, the
Baptism should not be repeated by a priest. But if anyone confess to
a layman in a case of necessity, he is bound to repeat his confession
to a priest, when the cause for urgency has passed. Therefore
confession should not be made to a layman in a case of necessity.
On the contrary, is the authority of the text (Sent. iv, D, 17).
I answer that, Just as Baptism is a necessary sacrament, so is
Penance. And Baptism, through being a necessary sacrament has a
twofold minister: one whose duty it is to baptize, in virtue of his
office, viz. the priest, and another, to whom the conferring of
Baptism is committed, in a case of necessity. In like manner the
minister of Penance, to whom, in virtue of his office, confession
should be made, is a priest; but in a case of necessity even a layman
may take the place of a priest, and hear a person's confession.
Reply to Objection 1: In the sacrament of Penance there is not only
something on the part of the minister, viz. the absolution and
imposition of satisfaction, but also something on the part of the
recipient, which is also essential to the sacrament, viz. contrition and
confession. Now satisfaction originates from the minister in so far as
he enjoins it, and from the penitent who fulfills it; and, for the fulness