John 4:24
"God is a Spirit"
But when He says this, He declares nothing else than His incorporeal
Nature. Now the service of that which is incorporeal must needs be of the same
character, and must be offered by that in us which is incorporeal, to wit, the soul,
and purity of mind. Wherefore He says, "they that worship Him, must worship
Him in spirit and in truth." For because both Samaritans and Jews were careless
about the soul, but took great pains about the body, cleansing it in various ways,
it is not, He says, by purity of body, but by that which is incorporeal in us,
namely the mind, that the incorporeal One is served. Sacrifice then not sheep and
calves, but dedicate yourself to the Lord; make yourself a holocaust, this is to
offer a living sacrifice. You must worship "in truth " ; as former things were
types, such as circumcision, and whole burnt offerings, and victims, and incense,
they now no longer exist, but all is "truth." For a man must now circumcise not
his flesh, but his evil thoughts, and crucify himself, and remove and slay his
unreasonable desires. The woman was made dizzy by His discourse, and fainted
in at the sublimity of what He said, and, in her trouble, hear what she says:

John 4:25-26
"I know that Messias comes, which is called Christ: when He has come, He will
tell us all things. Jesus says unto her, I am that speak unto you."
And whence came the Samaritans to expect the coming of Christ, seeing
that they received Moses only? From the writings of Moses themselves. For
even in the beginning He revealed the Son. "Let Us make man in Our Image,
after Our Likeness" [Genesis 1:26], was said to the Son. It was He who talked
with Abraham in the tent. [Genesis 18] And Jacob prophesying concerning Him
said, "A ruler shall not fail from Judah, nor a leader from his thighs, until He
come for whom it is reserved, and He is the expectation of nations." [Genesis 18]
And Moses himself says, "The Lord your God will raise up unto you a Prophet
of your brethren like me, unto Him shall you hearken." [Deuteronomy 18:15]
And the circumstances attending the serpent, and the rod of Moses, and Isaac,
and the sheep, and many other things they who chose might select as
proclaiming His coming.
"And why, pray," says one, "did not Christ lead on the woman by these
means? Why did He instance the serpent to Nicodemus, and mention prophecy to
Nathanael, but to her say nothing of the kind? For what reason, and why?"
Because they were men, and were versed in these things, she a poor ignorant
woman unpracticed in the Scriptures. Wherefore He does not speak to her from
them, but draws her on by the "water" and by prophecy, and brings her to make
mention of Christ and then reveals Himself; which had He at first told the
woman when she had not questioned Him, He would have seemed to her to trifle
and talk idly, while as it is by bringing her little by little to mention Him, at a
fitting time He revealed Himself. To the Jews, who continually said, "How long
dost Thou make us to doubt? Tell us if You are the Christ" [John 10:24], to them
He gave no clear answer, but to this woman He said plainly, that He is . For the
woman was more fair-minded than the Jews; they did not enquire to learn, but