dead."
Do you see how he gives the obstacles, as well as the high spirit of the
righteous man which surmounts all? "Against hope," he says, was that which
was promised: this is the first obstacle. For Abraham had no other person who
had received a son in this way to look to. They that were after him looked to
him, but he to no one, save to God only. And this is why he said, "against hope."
Then, "his body now dead." This is a second. And, "the deadness of Sarah's
womb." This is a third, aye and a fourth obstacle.
Ver. 20. "But he staggered not at the promise of God through unbelief."
For God neither gave any proof nor made any sign, but there were only bare
words promising such things as nature did not hold out any hopes of. Yet still he
says, "he staggered not." He does not say, "He did not disbelieve," but, "He
staggered not," that is, he neither doubted nor hesitated though the hindrances
were so great. From this we learn, that if God promise even countless
impossibilities, and he that hears does not receive them, it is not the nature of
things that is to blame, but the unreasonableness of him who receives them not.
"But was strong in faith." See the pertinacity of Paul. For since this discourse
was about them that work and them that believe, he shows that the believer
works more than the other, and requires more power, and great strength, and
sustains no common degree of labor. For they counted faith worthless, as having
no labor in it. Insisting then upon this, he shows that it is not only he that
succeeds in temperance, or any other virtue of this sort, but he that displays faith
also who requires even greater power. For as the one needs strength to beat off
the reasonings of intemperance, so has the faithful also need of a soul endued
with power, that he may thrust aside the suggestions of unbelief. How then did
he become "strong?" By trusting the matter, he replies, to faith and not to
reasonings: else he had fallen. But how came he to thrive in faith itself? By
giving glory to God, he says.
Ver. 21. "And being fully persuaded that what He had promised, He was
able also to perform."

Abstaining then from curious questionings is glorifying God, as indulging
in them is transgressing. But if by entering into curious questions, and searching
out things below, we fail to glorify Him, much more if we be over curious in the
matter of the Lord's generation, shall we suffer to the utmost for our insolence.
For if the type of the resurrection is not to be searched into, much less those
unutterable and awestriking subjects. And he does not use the word "believed"
merely, but, "being fully persuaded." For such a thing is faith, it is clearer than
the demonstration by reasons, and persuades more fully. For it is not possible for
another reasoning succeeding to it to shake it afterwards. He indeed that is
persuaded with words may have his persuasion altered too by them. But he that
stays himself upon faith, has henceforward fortified his hearing against words
that may do hurt to it. Having said then, that he was justified by faith, he shows
that he glorified God by that faith; which is a thing specially belonging to a good
life. For, "Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works,
and glorify your Father Which is in heaven." [Matthew 5:16] But lo! This is
shown also to belong to faith! Again, as works need power, so does faith. For in
their case the body often shares the toil, but in the faith the well-doing belongs to
the soul alone. And so the labor is greater, since it has no one to share the
struggles with it. Do you observe how he shows that all that belonged to works
attached to faith in a far greater degree, as having whereof to glory before God—
requiring power and labor—and again, glorifying God? And after saying, that
"what He had promised, He is able also to perform," he seems to me to speak
beforehand of things to come. For it is not things present merely that He
promises, but also things to come. For the present are a type of the other. It is
then a sign of a weak, little, and pitiful mind not to believe. And so when any
make faith a charge against us, let us make want of faith a charge against them in
return, as pitiful, and little-minded, and foolish, and weak, and no better in
disposition than asses. For as believing belongs to a lofty and high-born soul, so
disbelieving does to a most unreasonable and worthless one, and such as is
sunken drowsily ([κατενηνεγμένης]) into the senselessness of brutes. Therefore