5. Again, motion cannot exist without matter. But the mathematician ought to consider motion,
because, since motion is measured relative to space, to consider the quantity of space, which
pertains to the mathematician, and the quantity of motion, has the same nature and belongs to the
same science. Therefore, the mathematician does not entirely leave matter out of consideration.

6. Again, astronomy is a part of mathematics, and so too is the science of the moved sphere, the
science of weights, and music, all of which treat of motion and mobile things So mathematics
does not entirely abstract from matter and motion.

7. Again, natural science is entirely concerned with matter and motion. But some conclusions are
demonstrated alike by the mathematician and the natural scientist, for instance, whether the earth
is round and whether it is in the middle of the universe. Therefore, mathematics cannot entirely
abstract from matter. If it be said that mathematics abstracts only from sensible matter, the
contrary seems true. Sensible matter seems to be particular matter, because what the senses
perceive are particular things, and all the sciences abstract from this kind of matter. So
mathematical thinking should not be called more abstract than that of the other sciences.

8. Again, the Philosopher says that there are three branches of study: the first concerns what is
mutable and corruptible, the second what is mutable and incorruptible, and the third what is
immutable and incorruptible. As Ptolemy explains, the first is natural science the third divine
science, and the second mathematics. Therefore mathematics concerns what is mutable.

To the contrary is the Philosopher's statement in the Metaphysics.

Moreover, some things, although existing in matter, do not contain matter in their definition; for
instance, curve, which differs in this respect from snub. Now philosophy should treat of all
beings. Hence some part of philosophy must consider beings of this sort; and this is

mathematics, for this does not belong to any other part.

Moreover, what is prior from the point of view of the intellect can be considered without what is
posterior. Now mathematicals are prior to natural things existing in matter and motion, for the
latter are so related to mathematicals that they add something to them, as is said in the De Caelo
et Mundo. Therefore, mathematical investigation can be without matter and motion.

Reply: In order to throw light on this question we must understand how the intellect in its
operation is able to abstract.

We must realize that, as the Philosopher says, the intellect has two operations, one called the
"understanding of indivisibles," by which it knows what a thing is, and another by which it joins
and divides, that is to say, by forming affirmative and negative statements. Now these two
operations correspond to two principles in things, The first operation concerns the nature itself of
a thing, in virtue of which the object known holds a certain rank among beings, whether it be a
complete thing, like some whole, or an incomplete thing, like a part or an accident. The second
operation has to do with a thing's being (esse), which results from the union of the principles of
a thing in composite substances, or, as in the case of simple substances, accompanies the thing's
simple nature.