not the standing in need of others, but seizing the things of others, that is
grievous. But now we have never prayed in respect to that nor said, 'Grant me
not to covet other men's goods.' but to stand in need, this we think a fit subject of
deprecation. Yet Paul stood in need many times, and was not ashamed; nay, even
prided himself upon it, and praised those that had ministered to him, saying,
"For you sent once and again to my need;" [Philippians 4:16] and again, "I
robbed other Churches, taking wages of them that I might minister unto you." [2
Corinthians 11:8] It is no mark therefore of a generous temper, but of weakness
and of a low minded and senseless spirit, to be ashamed of this. For it is even
God's decree that we should stand in need one of another. Push not therefore
your philosophy beyond the mean. 'But,' says one, 'I cannot bear a man that is
entreated often and complies not.' And how shall God bear you who art entreated
by Him, and yet obeyest not; and entreated too in things that advantage you?
"For we are ambassadors on behalf of Christ," [2 Corinthians 5:20] says he, "as
though God were entreating by us; be ye reconciled unto God." 'And yet, I am
His servant,' says he. And what of that? For when thou, the servant, art drunken,
while He, the Master, is hungry and has not even necessary food, how shall your
name of servant stand you in stead? Nay, this itself will even the more weigh you
down, when thou indeed abidest in a three-storied dwelling while He owns not
even a decent shelter; when thou [liest] upon soft couches while He has not even
a pillow. 'But,' says one, 'I have given.' But you ought not to leave off so doing.
For then only will you have an excuse, when you have not what [to give], when
you possess nothing; but so long as you have, (though thou have given to ten
thousand,) and there be others hungering, there is no excuse for you. But when
thou both shuttest up grain and raisest the price, and devisest other unusual tricks
of traffic; what hope of salvation shall you have henceforth? You have been
bidden to give freely to the hungry, but thou dost not give at a suitable price
even. He emptied Himself of so great glory for your sake, but thou dost not
count Him deserving even of a loaf; but your dog is fed to fullness while Christ
wastes with hunger; and your servant bursts with surfeiting while your Lord and

his is in want of necessary food. And how are these the deeds of friends? "Be
reconciled unto God," [2 Corinthians 5:20] for these are [the deeds] of enemies
and such as are in hostility.
4. Let us then think with shame on the great benefits we have already
received, the great benefits we are yet to receive. And if a poor man come to us
and beg, let us receive him with much good will, comforting, raising him up
with [our] words, that we ourselves also may meet with the like, both from God
and from men. "For whatsoever ye would that they should do unto you, do ye
also unto them." [Matthew 7:12] Nothing burdensome, nothing offensive, does
this law contain. 'What you would receive, that do,' it says. The return is equal.
And it said not, 'what you would not receive, that do not,' but what is more. For
that indeed is an abstinence from evil things, but this is a doing of good things,
in which the other is involved. Also He said not 'that do ye also wish, but do, to
them.' And what is the advantage? "This is the Law and the Prophets." Would
you have mercy shown you? Then show mercy. Would you obtain forgiveness?
Then grant it. Would you not be evil spoken of? Then speak not evil. Longest
thou to receive praise? Then bestow it. Would you not be wronged? Then do not
thou plunder. Do you see how He shows that virtue is natural, and that we need
no external laws nor teachers? For in the things we wish to receive, or not to
receive from our neighbors, we legislate unto ourselves. So that if you would not
receive a thing, yet doest it, or if you would receive it, yet doest it not, you have
become self-condemned and art henceforth without any excuse, on the ground of
ignorance and of not knowing what ought to be done. Wherefore, I beseech you,
having set up this law in ourselves for ourselves, and reading this that is written
so clearly and succinctly, let us become such to our neighbors, as we would have
them be to ourselves; that may we both enjoy present immunity , and obtain the
future good things, though the grace and love towards men of our Lord Jesus
Christ, with Whom to the Father, together with the Holy Spirit, be glory, power,
honor, now and for ever, and world without end. Amen.