natures, but also as to their singularity; so through the species
imparted to them do the angels know things, not only as to their
universal nature, but likewise in their individual conditions, in so far
as they are the manifold representations of that one simple essence.
Reply to Objection 1: The Philosopher is speaking of our intellect,
which apprehends only by a process of abstraction; and by such
abstraction from material conditions the thing abstracted becomes a
universal. Such a manner of understanding is not in keeping with the
nature of the angels, as was said above (Question 55, Article 2,
Article 3. ad 1), and consequently there is no comparison.
Reply to Objection 2: It is not according to their nature that the
angels are likened to material things, as one thing resembles another
by agreement in genus, species, or accident; but as the higher bears
resemblance to the lower, as the sun does to fire. Even in this way
there is in God a resemblance of all things, as to both matter and
form, in so far as there pre-exists in Him as in its cause whatever is
to be found in things. For the same reason, the species in the angel's
intellect, which are images drawn from the Divine essence, are the
images of things not only as to their form, but also as to their matter.
Reply to Objection 3: Angels know singulars by universal forms,
which nevertheless are the images of things both as to their
universal, and as to their individuating principles. How many things
can be known by the same species, has been already stated above
(Question 55, Article 3, ad 3).

### ARTICLE 3. Whether angels know the future?

Objection 1: It would seem that the angels know future events. For
angels are mightier in knowledge than men. But some men know
many future events. Therefore much more do the angels.
Objection 2: Further, the present and the future are differences of
time. But the angel's intellect is above time; because, as is said in De
Causis, "an intelligence keeps pace with eternity," that is, aeviternity.
Therefore, to the angel's mind, past and future are not different, but
he knows each indifferently.
Objection 3: Further, the angel does not understand by species
derived from things, but by innate universal species. But universal
species refer equally to present, past, and future. Therefore it
appears that the angels know indifferently things past, present, and
future.
Objection 4: Further, as a thing is spoken of as distant by reason of
time, so is it by reason of place. But angels know things which are
distant according to place. Therefore they likewise know things
distant according to future time.
On the contrary, Whatever is the exclusive sign of the Divinity, does
not belong to the angels. But to know future events is the exclusive
sign of the Divinity, according to Is. 41:23: "Show the things that are
to come hereafter, and we shall know that ye are gods." Therefore
the angels do not know future events.
I answer that, The future can be known in two ways. First, it can be
known in its cause. And thus, future events which proceed
necessarily from their causes, are known with sure knowledge; as
that the sun will rise tomorrow. But events which proceed from their
causes in the majority of cases, are not known for certain, but
conjecturally; thus the doctor knows beforehand the health of the
patient. This manner of knowing future events exists in the angels,
and by so much the more than it does in us, as they understand the
causes of things both more universally and more perfectly; thus
doctors who penetrate more deeply into the causes of an ailment can
pronounce a surer verdict on the future issue thereof. But events
which proceed from their causes in the minority of cases are quite