5. Wherefore there would be no changeable goods, unless there were the
unchangeable good. Whenever then thou art told of this good thing and
that good thing, which things can also in other respects be called not
good, if thou canst put aside those things which are good by the
participation of the good, and discern that good itself by the participation
of which they are good (for when this or that good thing is spoken of,
thou understandest together with them the good itself also): if, then, I say
thou canst remove these things, and canst discern the good in itself, then
thou wilt have discerned God. And if thou shalt cleave to Him with love,
thou shalt be forthwith blessed. But whereas other things are not loved,
except because they are good, be ashamed, in cleaving to them, not to
love the good itself whence they are good. That also, which is a mind, only
because it is a mind, while it is not yet also good by the turning itself to
the unchangeable good, but, as I said, is only a mind; whenever it so
pleases us, as that we prefer it even, if we understand aright, to all
corporeal light, does not please us in itself, but in that skill by which it
was made. For it is thence approved as made, wherein it is seen to have
been to be made. This is truth, and simple good: for it is nothing else than
the good itself, and for this reason also the chief good. For no good can be
diminished or increased, except that which is good from some other
good. Therefore the mind turns itself, in order to be good, to that by
which it comes to be a mind. Therefore the will is then in harmony with
nature, so that the mind may be perfected in good, when that good is
loved by the turning of the will to it, whence that other good also comes
which is not lost by the turning away of the will from it. For by turning
itself from the chief good, the mind loses the being a good mind; but it
does not lose the being a mind. And this, too, is a good already, and one
better than the body. The will, therefore, loses that which the will obtains.
For the mind already was, that could wish to be turned to that from which
it was: but that as yet was not, that could wish to be before it was. And
herein is our  good, when we see whether the thing ought to be
or to have been, respecting which we comprehend that it ought to be or to
have been, and when we see that the thing could not have been unless it
ought to have been, of which we also do not comprehend in what manner
it ought to have been. This good then is not far from every one of us: for
in it we live, and move, and have our being.

### CHAP. 4.—GOD MUST FIRST BE KNOWN BY AN UNERRING FAITH, THAT HE MAY BE LOVED.

6. But it is by love that we must stand firm to this and cleave to this, in
order that we may enjoy the presence of that by which we are, and in the
absence of which we could not be at all. For as "we walk as yet by faith,
and not by sight," we certainly do not yet see God, as the same
saith, "face to face:" whom however we shall never see, unless now
already we love. But who loves what he does not know? For it is possible
something may be known and not loved: but I ask whether it is possible
that what is not known can be loved; since if it cannot, then no one loves
God before he knows Him. And what is it to know God except to behold
Him and steadfastly perceive Him with the mind? For He is not a body to
be searched out by carnal eyes. But before also that we have power to
behold and to perceive God, as He can be beheld and perceived, which is
permitted to the pure in heart; for "blessed are the pure in heart, for they
shall see God;" except He is loved by faith, it will not be possible for the
heart to be cleansed, in order that it may be apt and meet to see Him. For
where are there those three, in order to build up which in the mind the
whole apparatus of the divine Scriptures has been raised up, namely
Faith, Hope, and Charity,5 except in a mind believing what it does not yet
see, and hoping and loving what it believes? Even He therefore who is not
known, but yet is believed, can be loved. But indisputably we must take
care, lest the mind believing that which it does not see, feign to itself
something which is not, and hope for and love that which is false. For in
that case, it will not be charity out of a pure heart, and of a good
conscience, and of faith unfeigned, which is the end of the
commandment, as the same apostle says.
7. But it must needs be, that, when by reading or hearing of them we
believe in any corporeal things which we have not seen, the mind frames
for itself something under bodily features and forms, just as it may occur
to our thoughts; which either is not true, or even if it be true, which can
most rarely happen, yet this is of no benefit to us to believe in by faith,
but it is useful for some other purpose, which is intimated by means of it.
For who is there that reads or hears what the Apostle Paul has written, or
what has been written of him, that does not imagine to himself the