THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.27, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the Blessed Virgin was cleansed from the

infection of the fomes?
Objection 1: It would seem that the Blessed Virgin was not cleansed
from the infection of the fomes. For just as the fomes, consisting in
the rebellion of the lower powers against the reason, is a punishment
of original sin; so also are death and other corporeal penalties.
Therefore the fomes was not entirely removed from her.
Objection 2: Further, it is written (2 Cor. 12:9): "Power is made
perfect in infirmity," which refers to the weakness of the fomes, by
reason of which he (the Apostle) felt the "sting of the flesh." But it
was not fitting that anything should be taken away from the Blessed
Virgin, pertaining to the perfection of virtue. Therefore it was
unfitting that the fomes should be entirely taken away from her.
Objection 3: Further, Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii) that "the
Holy Ghost came upon" the Blessed Virgin, "purifying her," before
she conceived the Son of God. But this can only be understood of
purification from the fomes: for she committed no sin, as Augustine
says (De Nat. et Grat. xxvi). Therefore by the sanctification in the
womb she was not absolutely cleansed from the fomes.
On the contrary, It is written (Canticles 4:7): "Thou art all fair, O my
love, and there is not a spot in thee!" But the fomes implies a
blemish, at any rate in the flesh. Therefore the fomes was not in the
Blessed Virgin.
I answer that, on this point there are various opinions. For some
have held that the fomes was entirely taken away in that
sanctification whereby the Blessed Virgin was sanctified in the
womb. Others say that it remained as far as it causes a difficulty in
doing good, but was taken away as far as it causes a proneness to
evil. Others again, that it was taken away as to the personal
corruption, by which it makes us quick to do evil and slow to do
good: but that it remained as to the corruption of nature, inasmuch
as it is the cause of transmitting original sin to the offspring. Lastly,
others say that, in her first sanctification, the fomes remained
essentially, but was fettered; and that, when she conceived the Son
of God, it was entirely taken away. In order to understand the
question at issue, it must be observed that the fomes is nothing but

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.27, C.4.

a certain inordinate, but habitual, concupiscence of the sensitive
appetite. for actual concupiscence is a sinful motion. Now sensual
concupiscence is said to be inordinate, in so far as it rebels against
reason; and this it does by inclining to evil, or hindering from good.
Consequently it is essential to the fomes to incline to evil, or hinder
from good. Wherefore to say that the fomes was in the Blessed
Virgin without an inclination to evil, is to combine two contradictory
statements.
In like manner it seems to imply a contradiction to say that the fomes
remained as to the corruption of nature, but not as to the personal
corruption. For, according to Augustine (De Nup. et Concup. i.), it is
lust that transmits original sin to the offspring. Now lust implies
inordinate concupiscence, not entirely subject to reason: and
therefore, if the fomes were entirely taken away as to personal
corruption, it could not remain as to the corruption of nature.
It remains, therefore, for us to say, either that the fomes was entirely
taken away from her by her first sanctification or that it was fettered.
Now that the fomes was entirely taken away, might be understood in
this way, that, by the abundance of grace bestowed on the Blessed
Virgin, such a disposition of the soul's powers was granted to her,
that the lower powers were never moved without the command of
her reason: just as we have stated to have been the case with Christ
(Question 15, Article 2), who certainly did not have the fomes of sin;
as also was the case with Adam, before he sinned, by reason of
original justice: so that, in this respect, the grace of sanctification in
the Virgin had the force of original justice. And although this appears
to be part of the dignity of the Virgin Mother, yet it is somewhat
derogatory to the dignity of Christ, without whose power no one had
been freed from the first sentence of condemnation. And though,
through faith in Christ, some were freed from that condemnation,
according to the spirit, before Christ's Incarnation, yet it does not
seem fitting that any one should be freed from that condemnation,
according to the flesh, except after His Incarnation, for it was then
that immunity from condemnation was first to appear. Consequently,
just as before the immortality of the flesh of Christ rising again, none
obtained immortality of the flesh, so it seems unfitting to say that
before Christ appeared in sinless flesh, His Virgin Mother's or
anyone else's flesh should be without the fomes, which is called "the
law of the flesh" or "of the members" (Rm. 7:23,25).
Therefore it seems better to say that by the sanctification in the