down in thick darkness." [Exodus 19:16-20]
"For if the word spoken by angels was steadfast." What is "was steadfast"?
True, as one may say; and faithful in its proper season; and all the things which
had been spoken came to pass. Either this is his meaning, or that they prevailed,
and the threatenings were coming to be accomplished. Or by "the word" he
means injunctions. For apart from the Law, Angels sent from God enjoined
many things: for instance at Bochim, in the Judges, in [the history of] Samson.
[Judges 2:1; 13:3] For this is the cause why he said not "the Law" but "the
word." And he seems to me haply rather to mean this, viz., those things which
are committed to the management of angels. What shall we say then? The angels
who were entrusted with the charge of the nation were then present, and they
themselves made the trumpets, and the other things, the fire, the thick darkness.
[Exodus 19:16]
"And every transgression and disobedience," says he. Not this one and that
one, but "every" one. Nothing, he says, remained unavenged, but "received a just
recompense of reward," instead of [saying] punishment. Why now spoke he
thus? Such is the manner of Paul, not to make much account of his phrases, but
indifferently to put down words of evil sound, even in matters of good meaning.
As also in another place he says, "Bringing into captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ." [2 Corinthians 10:5] And again he has put "the
recompense" for punishment, as here he calls punishment "reward." "If it be a
righteous thing," he says, "with God to recompense tribulation to them that
trouble you, and to you who are troubled rest." [2 Thessalonians 1:6-7] That is,
justice was not violated, but God went forth against them, and caused the penalty
to come round on the sinners, though not all their sins are made manifest, but
only where the express ordinances were transgressed.
"How then shall we," he says, "escape if we neglect so great salvation?"
Hereby he signified, that other salvation was no great thing. Well too did he add
the "So great." For not from wars (he says) will He now rescue us, nor bestow
on us the earth and the good things that are in the earth, but it will be the

dissolution of death, the destruction of the devil, the kingdom of Heaven,
everlasting life. For all these things he has briefly expressed, by saying, "if we
neglect so great salvation."
7. Then he subjoins what makes this worthy of belief. "Which at the first
began to be spoken by the Lord": that is, had its beginning from the fountain
itself. It was not a man who brought it over into the earth, nor any created power,
but the Only-Begotten Himself.
"And was confirmed unto us by them that heard [Him]." What is
"confirmed"? It was believed, or, it came to pass. For (he says) we have the
earnest; that is, it has not been extinguished, it has not ceased, but it is strong and
prevails. And the cause is, the Divine power works therein. It means they who
heard from the Lord, themselves confirmed us. This is a great thing and
trustworthy: which also Luke says in the beginning of his Gospel, "As they
delivered unto us, which from the beginning were eyewitnesses and ministers of
the Word." [Luke 1:2]