FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.83, C.2.

cause, either principal, or instrumental; secondly, as in its subject.
Accordingly the original sin of all men was in Adam indeed, as in its
principal cause, according to the words of the Apostle (Rm. 5:12): "In
whom all have sinned": whereas it is in the bodily semen, as in its
instrumental cause, since it is by the active power of the semen that
original sin together with human nature is transmitted to the child.
But original sin can nowise be in the flesh as its subject, but only in
the soul.
The reason for this is that, as stated above (Question 81, Article 1),
original sin is transmitted from the will of our first parent to this
posterity by a certain movement of generation, in the same way as
actual sin is transmitted from any man's will to his other parts. Now
in this transmission it is to be observed, that whatever accrues from
the motion of the will consenting to sin, to any part of man that can
in any way share in that guilt, either as its subject or as its
instrument, has the character of sin. Thus from the will consenting to
gluttony, concupiscence of food accrues to the concupiscible
faculty, and partaking of food accrues to the hand and the mouth,
which, in so far as they are moved by the will to sin, are the
instruments of sin. But that further action is evoked in the nutritive
power and the internal members, which have no natural aptitude for
being moved by the will, does not bear the character of guilt.
Accordingly, since the soul can be the subject of guilt, while the
flesh, of itself, cannot be the subject of guilt; whatever accrues to the
soul from the corruption of the first sin, has the character of guilt,
while whatever accrues to the flesh, has the character, not of guilt
but of punishment: so that, therefore, the soul is the subject of
original sin, and not the flesh.
Reply to Objection 1: As Augustine says (Retract. i, 27) [Questions.
lxxxiii, qu. 66], the Apostle is speaking, in that passage, of man
already redeemed, who is delivered from guilt, but is still liable to
punishment, by reason of which sin is stated to dwell "in the flesh."
Consequently it follows that the flesh is the subject, not of guilt, but
of punishment.
Reply to Objection 2: Original sin is caused by the semen as
instrumental cause. Now there is no need for anything to be more in
the instrumental cause than in the effect; but only in the principal
cause: and, in this way, original sin was in Adam more fully, since in
him it had the nature of actual sin.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.83, C.2.

Reply to Objection 3: The soul of any individual man was in Adam, in
respect of his seminal power, not indeed as in its effective principle,
but as in a dispositive principle: because the bodily semen, which is
transmitted from Adam, does not of its own power produce the
rational soul, but disposes the matter for it.
Reply to Objection 4: The corruption of original sin is nowise caused
by God, but by the sin alone of our first parent through carnal
generation. And so, since creation implies a relation in the soul to
God alone, it cannot be said that the soul is tainted through being
created. On the other hand, infusion implies relation both to God
infusing and to the flesh into which the soul is infused. And so, with
regard to God infusing, it cannot be said that the soul is stained
through being infused; but only with regard to the body into which it
is infused.
Reply to Objection 5: The common good takes precedence of private
good. Wherefore God, according to His wisdom, does not overlook
the general order of things (which is that such a soul be infused into
such a body), lest this soul contract a singular corruption: all the
more that the nature of the soul demands that it should not exist
prior to its infusion into the body, as stated in the FP, Question 90,
Article 4; FP, Question 118, Article 3. And it is better for the soul to
be thus, according to its nature, than not to be at all, especially since
it can avoid damnation, by means of grace.