John 8:50
"I seek not My own glory."
"These things," He says, "I have spoken to show that it becomes not you,
being murderers, to call God your Father; so that I have spoken them through
honor for Him, and for His sake do I hear these reproaches, and for His sake do
ye dishonor Me. Yet I care not for this insolence ; to Him, for whose sake I now
hear these things, you owe an account of your words. For 'I seek not My own
glory.' Wherefore I omit to punish you, and betake Myself to exhortation, and
counsel you so to act, that you shall not only escape punishment, but also attain
eternal life."

John 8:51
"Verily, verily, I say unto you, If a man keep My saying, he shall never see
death."
Here He speaks not of faith only, but of a pure life. Above He said, "shall
have everlasting life," but here, "shall not see death." [John 6:40] At the same
time He hints to them that they could do nothing against Him, for if the man that
should keep His saying should not die, much less should He Himself. At least
they understood it so, and said to Him,

John 8:52
"Now we know that you have a devil; Abraham is dead, and the Prophets are
dead."
That is, "they who heard the word of God are dead, and shall they who have
heard yours not die?"

John 8:53
"Are you greater than our father Abraham?"
Alas for their vainglory! Again do they betake themselves to his
relationship. Yet it would have been suitable to say, "Are you greater than God?
Or they who have heard you than Abraham?" But they say not this, because they
thought that He was even less than Abraham. At first, therefore, He showed that
they were murderers, and so led them away from the relationship; but when they
persevered, He contrived this in another way, showing that they labored
uselessly. And concerning the "death," He said nothing to them, neither did He
reveal or tell them what kind of death He meant, but in the meantime He would
have them believe, that He is greater than Abraham, that even by this He may
put them to shame. "Certainly," He says, "were I a common man I ought not to
die, having done no wrong; but when I speak the truth, and have no sin, am sent
from God, and am greater than Abraham, are you not mad, do ye not labor in
vain when you attempt to kill Me?" What then is their reply? "Now we know that
you have a devil." Not so spoke the woman of Samaria. She said not to Him,
"You have a devil"; but only, "Are you greater than our father Jacob?" [John
4:12] For these men were insolent and accursed, while she desired to learn;
wherefore she doubted and answered with proper moderation, and called Him,
"Lord." For one who promised far greater things, and who was worthy of credit,
ought not to have been insulted, but even admired; yet these men said that He
had a devil. Those expressions of the Samaritan woman were those of one in
doubt; these were the words of men unbelieving and perverse. "Are you greater
than our father Abraham?" so that this (which He had said) makes Him to be
greater than Abraham. "When therefore you have seen Him lifted up, you shall
confess that He is greater." On this account He said, "When you have lifted Me
up, you shall know that I Am." [John 8:28] And observe His wisdom. Having
first rent them away from Abraham's kindred, He shows that He is greater than