while we laugh at these as unmanly and cowards? So then let us do in the affairs
of life. Him that bears all easily let us crown, as we do that noble champion ; but
weep over him that shrinks and trembles at his dangers, and who before he
receives the blow is dead with fear. For so in the games; if any before he raised
his hands, at the mere sight of his adversary extending his right hand, should fly,
though he receive no wound, he will be laughed to scorn as feeble and
effeminate and unversed in such struggles. Now this is like what happens to
these who fear poverty, and cannot so much as endure the expectation of it.
Evidently then it is not we that make you wretched, but you yourselves. For
how can it be that the devil should not hence-forth make sport of you, seeing you
even before the stroke afraid and trembling at the menace? Or rather, when thou
dost but esteem this a threat, he will have no need so much as to strike you any
more, but leaving you to keep your wealth, by the expectation of its being taken
away he will render you softer than any wax. And because it is our nature (so to
speak,) not to consider the objects of our dread so fearful after suffering, as
before and while yet untried: therefore to prevent you from acquiring even this
virtue, he detains you in the very height of fear; by the fear of poverty, before all
experience of it, melting you down as wax in the fire. Yea, and such a man is
softer than any wax and lives a life more wretched than Cain himself. For the
things which he has in excess, he is in fear: for those which he has not, in grief;
and again, concerning what he has he trembles, keeping his wealth within as a
wilful runaway slave, and beset by I know not what various and unaccountable
passions. For unaccountable desire, and manifold fear and anxiety, and trembling
on every side, agitate them. And they are like a vessel driven by contrary winds
from every quarter, and enduring many heavy seas. And how much better for
such a man to depart than to be enduring a continual storm? Since for Cain also
it were more tolerable to have died than to be for ever trembling.
Lest we then for our part suffer these things, let us laugh to scorn the device
of the devil, let us burst his cords asunder, let us sever the point of his terrible
spear and fortify every approach. For if you laugh at money, he has not where to

strike, he has not where he may lay hold. Then have you rooted up the root of
evils; and when the root is no more, neither will any evil fruit grow.
9. Well: these things we are always saying and never leave off saying them:
but whether our sayings do any good, the day will declare, even that day which
is revealed by fire, which tries every man's work, [1 Corinthians 3:13] which
shows what lamps are bright and what are not so. Then shall he who has oil, and
he who has it not, be manifest. But may none then be found destitute of the
comfort; rather may all, bringing in with them abundance of mercy, and having
their lamps bright, enter in together with the Bridegroom.
Since nothing is more fearful and full of anguish than that voice which they
who departed without abundant almsgiving shall then hear the Bridegroom, "I
know you not." [Matthew 25:12] But may we never hear this voice, but rather
that most pleasant and desirable one, "Come, you blessed of My Father, inherit
the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world." [Matthew
25:34] For thus shall we live the happy life, and enjoy all the good things which
even pass man's understanding: unto which may we all attain, through the grace
and mercy, etc.