the needy, or otherwise succors the oppressed, benefits his neighbors to some
extent, but so much less than the priest in proportion as the body is inferior to the
soul. Rightly therefore did the Lord say that zeal for the flock was a token of
love for Himself.
Basil: But you yourself— do you not love Christ?
Chrysostom: Yea, I love Him, and shall never cease loving Him; but I fear
lest I should provoke Him whom I love.
Basil: But what riddle can there be more obscure than this— Christ has
commanded him who loves Him to tend His sheep, and yet you say that you
decline to tend them because you love Him who gave this command?
Chrysostom: My saying is no riddle, but very intelligible and simple, for if I
were well qualified to administer this office, as Christ desired it, and then
shunned it, my remark might be open to doubt, but since the infirmity of my
spirit renders me useless for this ministry, why does my saying deserve to be
called in question? For I fear lest if I took the flock in hand when it was in good
condition and well nourished, and then wasted it through my unskilfulness, I
should provoke against myself the God who so loved the flock as to give
Himself up for their salvation and ransom.
Basil: You speak in jest: for if you were in earnest I know not how you
would have proved me to be justly grieved otherwise than by means of these
very words whereby you have endeavored to dispel my dejection. I knew indeed
before that you had deceived and betrayed me, but much more now, when you
have undertaken to clear yourself of my accusations, do I plainly perceive and
understand the extent of the evils into which you have led me. For if you
withdrew yourself from this ministry because you were conscious that your spirit
was not equal to the burden of the task, I ought to have been rescued from it
before you, even if I had chanced to have a great desire for it, to say nothing of
having confided to you the entire decision of these matters: but as it is, you have
looked solely to your own interest and neglected mine. Would indeed you had
entirely neglected them; then I should have been well content: but you plotted to

facilitate my capture by those who wished to seize me. For you cannot take
shelter in the argument that public opinion deceived you and induced you to
imagine great and wonderful things concerning me. For I was none of your
wonderful and distinguished men, nor, had this been the case, ought you to have
preferred public opinion to truth. For if I had never permitted you to enjoy my
society, you might have seemed to have a reasonable pretext for being guided in
your vote by public report; but if there is no one who has such thorough
knowledge of my affairs, if you are acquainted with my character better than my
parents and those who brought me up, what argument can you employ which
will be convincing enough to persuade your hearers that you did not purposely
thrust me into this danger: say, what answer shall I make to your accusers?
Chrysostom: Nay! I will not proceed to those questions until I have
resolved such as concern yourself alone, if you were to ask me ten thousand
times to dispose of these charges. You said indeed that ignorance would bring
me forgiveness, and that I should have been free from all accusation if I had
brought you into your present position not knowing anything about you, but that
as I did not betray you in ignorance, but was intimately acquainted with your
affairs, I was deprived of all reasonable pretext and excuse. But I say precisely
the reverse: for in such matters there is need of careful scrutiny, and he who is
going to present any one as qualified for the priesthood ought not to be content
with public report only, but should also himself, above all and before all,
investigate the man's character. For when the blessed Paul says, "He must also
have a good report of them which are without," [1 Timothy 3:7] he does not
dispense with an exact and rigorous inquiry, nor does he assign to such
testimony precedence over the scrutiny required in such cases. For after much
previous discourse, he mentioned this additional testimony, proving that one
must not be contented with it alone for elections of this kind, but take it into
consideration along with the rest. For public report often speaks false; but when
careful investigation precedes, no further danger need be apprehended from it.
On this account, after the other kinds of evidence he places that which comes