never more resume your former conceit.
14. For all these things then let us give thanks to God who loves man; and
for His tender care over us, render Him a recompense, that will also be profitable
to ourselves; and as regards the commandment which I so frequently discourse
of to you, let us use our utmost diligence! For I will not desist from the
exhortation until you are amended: seeing that what we aim at is not that we may
address you seldom or frequently, but that we may continue speaking till we
have persuaded you. To the Jews when God said by the prophet, "If you fast for
strife and debate, to what purpose do ye fast for me?" [Isaiah 58:4-5] And by us
He says to you, If you fast unto oaths and perjuries, to what purpose do ye fast?
For how shall we behold the sacred Passover? How shall we receive the holy
Sacrifice? How shall we be partakers of those wonderful mysteries by means of
the same tongue with which we have trampled upon God's law, the same tongue
with which we have contaminated the soul? For if no one would dare to receive
the royal purple with filthy hands, how shall we receive the Lord's Body with a
tongue that has become polluted! For the oath is of the wicked one, but the
Sacrifice is of the Lord. "What communion then has light with darkness, and
what concord has Christ with Belial?" [1 Corinthians 6:14-15]
15. That you are desirous, indeed, to be rid of this impiety, I know well; but
since each man may not be able easily to accomplish this by himself, let us enter
into fraternities and partnerships in this matter; and as the poor do in their feasts,
when each one alone would not be able to furnish a complete banquet; when
they all meet together, they each bring their contribution to the feast; so also let
us act. Inasmuch as we are of ourselves too listless, let us make partnerships with
each other, and pledge ourselves to contribute counsel, and admonition, and
exhortation, and rebuke and reminiscence, and threatening; in order that from the
diligence of each we may all be amended. For seeing that we observe the affairs
of our neighbour more sharply than we do our own, let us be watchful of the
safety of others, and commit the guardianship of ourselves to them; and let us
engage in this pious rivalry, to the end that thus becoming superior to such an

evil habit, we may come with boldness to this holy feast; and be partakers of the
holy Sacrifice, with a favourable hope and a good conscience; through the grace
and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom and with whom, be glory
to the Father, with the Holy Spirit, for ever and ever. Amen.

## Homily 12 on the Statues
Thanksgiving to God for the pardon granted to the offenders against
the Emperor. Physical discourse on the Creation. Proof that God, in
creating man, implanted in him a natural law. Duty of avoiding oaths with
the utmost diligence.
1. Yesterday I said "Blessed be God!" and today again I say the very same
thing. For although the evils we dreaded have passed away, we should not suffer
the memory of them to disappear; not indeed that we may grieve, but that we
may give thanks. For if the memory of these terrors abide with us, we shall never
be overtaken by the actual experience of such terrors. For what need have we of
the experience, while our memory acts the part of a monitor? Seeing then that
God has not permitted us to be overwhelmed in the flood of those troubles when
upon us, let us not permit ourselves to become careless when these are passed
away. Then, when we were sad, He consoled us, let us give thanks to Him now
that we are joyful. In our agony He comforted us, and did not forsake us;
therefore let us not betray ourselves in prosperity by declining into sloth. "Forget
not," says one, "the time of famine in the day of plenty." [Sirach 18:25] Therefore
let us be mindful of the time of temptation in the day of relief; and with respect
to our sins let us also act in the same manner. If you have sinned, and God has
pardoned your sin, receive your pardon, and give thanks; but be not forgetful of
the sin; not that you should fret yourself with the thought of it, but that you may
school your soul, not to grow wanton, and relapse again into the same snares.
2. Thus also Paul did; for having said, "He counted me faithful, putting me
into the ministry," he goes on to add, "who was before a blasphemer, a
persecutor, and injurious." [1 Timothy 1:12-13] "Let the life of the servant," says
he, "be openly exposed, so that the lovingkindness of the Master be apparent.
For although I have received the remission of sins, I do not reject the memory of