John 16:20
"Verily, verily, I say unto you, That you shall weep and lament"—which
belonged to the Death and the Cross—"but the world shall rejoice."
Because by reason of their not desiring His death, they quickly ran into the
belief that He would not die, and then when they heard that He would die, cast
about, not knowing what that "little" meant, He says, "You shall mourn and
lament."
"But your sorrow shall be turned into joy." Then having shown that after
grief comes joy, and that grief genders joy, and that grief is short, but the
pleasure endless, He passes to a common example; and what says He?

John 16:21
"A woman when she is in travail has sorrow."
And He has used a comparison which the Prophets also use continually,
likening despondencies to the exceeding pains of childbirth. But what He says is
of this kind: "Travail pains shall lay hold on you, but the pang of childbirth is
the cause of joy"; both confirming His words relative to the Resurrection, and
showing that the departing hence is like passing from the womb into the light of
day. As though He had said, "Marvel not that I bring you to your advantage
through such sorrow, since even a mother to become a mother, passes in like
manner through pain." Here also He implies something mystical, that He has
loosened the travail pangs of death, and caused a new man to be born of them.
And He said not, that the pain shall pass away only, but, "she does not even
remember it," so great is the joy which succeeds; so also shall it be with the
Saints. And yet the woman does not rejoice because "a man has come into the
world," but because a son has been born to her; since, had this been the case,
nothing would have hindered the barren from rejoicing over another who bears.
Why then spoke He thus? Because He introduced this example for this purpose
only, to show that sorrow is for a season, but joy lasting: and to show that (death)
is a translation unto life; and to show the great profit of their pangs. He said not,
"a child has been born," but, "A man." For to my mind He here alludes to His
own Resurrection, and that He should be born not unto that death which bare the
birth-pang, but unto the Kingdom. Therefore He said not, "a child has been born
unto her," but, "A man has been born into the world."

John 16:22-23
"And ye now therefore have sorrow—[but I will see you again, and your sorrow
shall be turned into joy]." Then, to show that He shall die no more, He says,
"And no man takes it from you. And in that day you shall ask Me nothing."
Again He proves nothing else by these words, but that He is from God.
"For then you shall for the time to come know all things." But what is, "You shall
not ask Me"? "You shall need no intercessor, but it is sufficient that you call on
My Name, and so gain all things."
"Verily, verily, I say unto you, Whatsoever you shall ask My Father in My
Name."
He shows the power of His Name, if at least being neither seen nor called
upon, but only named, He even makes us approved by the Father. But where has
this taken place? Where they say, "Lord, behold their threatenings, and grant
unto Your servants that with boldness they may speak Your word" [Acts 4:29-31],
"and work miracles in Your Name." "And the place was shaken where they
were."