"Hateful," he says, "and hating one another." For it must necessarily
happen, when we let loose every pleasure on the soul, that there should be much
hatred. For where love is, with virtue, no man overreaches another in any matter.
Mark also what Paul says, "Be not deceived, neither fornicators, nor idolaters,
nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor
covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, shall inherit the kingdom of God. And
such were some of you." [1 Corinthians 6:9-10] Do you see how every species of
wickedness prevailed? It was a state of gross darkness, and the corruption of all
that was right. For if those who had the advantage of prophecies, and who saw
so many evils inflicted upon their enemies, and even upon themselves,
nevertheless did not restrain themselves, but committed numberless foolish
crimes, what would be the case with others? One of their lawgivers ordered that
virgins should wrestle naked in the presence of men. Many blessings on you!
That you cannot endure the mention of it; but their philosophers were not
ashamed of the actual practice. Another, the chief of their philosophers, approves
of their going out to the war, and of their being common, as if he were a pimp
and pander to their lusts.
"Living in malice and envy."
For if those who professed philosophy among them made such laws, what
shall we say of those who were not philosophers? If such were the maxims of
those who wore a long beard, and assumed the grave cloak, what can be said of
others? Woman was not made for this, O man, to be prostituted as common. O
you subverters of all decency, who use men, as if they were women, and lead out
women to war, as if they were men! This is the work of the devil, to subvert and
confound all things, to overleap the boundaries that have been appointed from
the beginning, and remove those which God has set to nature. For God assigned
to woman the care of the house only, to man the conduct of public affairs. But
you reduce the head to the feet, and raise the feet to the head. You suffer women
to bear arms, and are not ashamed. But why do I mention these things? They
introduce on the stage a woman that murders her own children, nor are they

ashamed to stuff the ears of men with such abominable stories.
Ver. 4. "But after that the kindness and love of God our Saviour towards
man appeared, Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but
according to His mercy He saved us by the washing of regeneration, and
renewing of the Holy Ghost, which He shed on us abundantly through Jesus
Christ our Saviour, that being justified by His grace we should be made heirs
according to the hope of eternal life."
What means, "according to the hope"? That, as we have hoped, so we shall
enjoy eternal life, or because you are even already heirs.
"This is a faithful saying."
Because he had been speaking of things future and not of the present,
therefore he adds, that it is worthy of credit. These things are true, he says, and
this is manifest from what has gone before. For He who has delivered us from
such a state of iniquity, and from so many evils, will assuredly impart to us the
good things to come, if we abide in grace. For all proceeds from the same kind
concern.
Moral. Let us then give thanks to God, and not revile them; nor accuse
them, but rather let us beseech them, pray for them, counsel and advise them,
though they should insult and spurn us. For such is the nature of those who are
diseased. But those who are concerned for the health of such persons do all
things and bear all things, though it may not avail, that they may not have
themselves to accuse of negligence. Do you not know that often, when a
physician despairs of a sick man, some relative standing by addresses him,
"Bestow further attendance, leave nothing undone, that I may not have to accuse
myself, that I may incur no blame, no self-reproach." Do you not see the great
care that near kinsmen take of their relations, how much they do for them, both
entreating the physicians to cure them, and sitting perseveringly beside them?
Let us at least imitate them. And yet there is no comparison between the objects
of our concern. For if any one had a son diseased in his body, he could not refuse
to take a long journey to free him from his disease. But when the soul is in a bad