greater than that honor. Wherefore one might with more justice indite those
persons of arrogance who accuse me of it. For they would never have suspected
this of others if they had not previously depreciated the matter as being of no
account. But if they say that I have done this with a view to glory, they will be
convicted of fighting openly against themselves and falling into their own snare;
for I do not know what kind of arguments they could have sought in preference
to these if they had wished to release me from the charge of vainglory.
2. For if this desire had ever entered my mind, I ought to have accepted the
office rather than avoided it. Why? Because it would have brought me much
glory. For the fact that one of my age, who had so recently abandoned secular
pursuits, should suddenly be deemed by all worthy of such admiration as to be
advanced to honor before those who have spent all their life in labors of this
kind, and to obtain more votes than all of them, might have persuaded all men to
anticipate great and marvellous things of me. But, as it is, the greater part of the
Church does not know me even by name: so that even my refusal of the office
will not be manifest to all, but only to a few, and I am not sure that all even of
these know it for certain; but probably many of them either imagine that I was
not elected at all, or that I was rejected after the election, being considered
unsuitable, not that I avoided the office of my own accord.
3. Basil: But those who do know the truth will be surprised.
Chrysostom: And lo! These are they who, according to you, falsely accuse
me of vainglory and pride. Whence then am I to hope for praise? From the
many? They do not know the actual fact. From the few? Here again the matter is
perverted to my disadvantage. For the only reason why you have come here now
is to learn what answer ought to be given to them. And what shall I now
certainly say on account of these things? For wait a little, and you will clearly
perceive that even if all know the truth they ought not to condemn me for pride
and love of glory. And in addition to this there is another consideration: that not
only those who make this venture, if there be any such (which for my part I do
not believe), but also those who suspect it of others, will be involved in no small

danger.
4. For the priestly office is indeed discharged on earth, but it ranks among
heavenly ordinances; and very naturally so: for neither man, nor angel, nor
archangel, nor any other created power, but the Paraclete Himself, instituted this
vocation, and persuaded men while still abiding in the flesh to represent the
ministry of angels. Wherefore the consecrated priest ought to be as pure as if he
were standing in the heavens themselves in the midst of those powers. Fearful,
indeed, and of most awful import, were the things which were used before the
dispensation of grace, as the bells, the pomegranates, the stones on the
breastplate and on the ephod, the girdle, the mitre, the long robe, the plate of
gold, the holy of holies, the deep silence within. But if any one should examine
the things which belong to the dispensation of grace, he will find that, small as
they are, yet are they fearful and full of awe, and that what was spoken
concerning the law is true in this case also, that "what has been made glorious
has no glory in this respect by reason of the glory which excels."
[2 Corinthians 3:10] For when you see the Lord sacrificed, and laid upon the
altar, and the priest standing and praying over the victim, and all the worshippers
empurpled with that precious blood, can you then think that you are still among
men, and standing upon the earth? Are you not, on the contrary, straightway
translated to Heaven, and casting out every carnal thought from the soul, do you
not with disembodied spirit and pure reason contemplate the things which are in
Heaven? Oh! What a marvel! What love of God to man! He who sits on high
with the Father is at that hour held in the hands of all, and gives Himself to those
who are willing to embrace and grasp Him. And this all do through the eyes of
faith! Do these things seem to you fit to be despised, or such as to make it
possible for any one to be uplifted against them?
Would you also learn from another miracle the exceeding sanctity of this
office? Picture Elijah and the vast multitude standing around him, and the
sacrifice laid upon the altar of stones, and all the rest of the people hushed into a
deep silence while the prophet alone offers up prayer: then the sudden rush of