SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.43, C.4.

manner, and this is done by his loving God and his neighbor.
Reply to Objection 2: As stated above (Question 28, Article 4;
Question 29, Article 3), the other acts of charity result from the act of
love as effects from their cause. Hence the precepts of love virtually
include the precepts about the other acts. And yet we find that, for
the sake of the laggards, special precepts were given about each
act---about joy (Phil. 4:4): "Rejoice in the Lord always"---about peace
(Heb. 12:14): "Follow peace with all men"---about beneficence (Gal.
6:10): "Whilst we have time, let us work good to all men"---and Holy
Writ contains precepts about each of the parts of beneficence, as
may be seen by anyone who considers the matter carefully.
Reply to Objection 3: To do good is more than to avoid evil, and
therefore the positive precepts virtually include the negative
precepts. Nevertheless we find explicit precepts against the vices
contrary to charity: for, against hatred it is written (Lev. 12:17):
"Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thy heart"; against sloth (Ecclus.
6:26): "Be not grieved with her bands"; against envy (Gal. 5:26): "Let
us not be made desirous of vainglory, provoking one another,
envying one another"; against discord (1 Cor. 1:10): "That you all
speak the same thing, and that there be no schisms among you";
and against scandal (Rm. 14:13): "That you put not a stumblingblock or a scandal in your brother's way."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.43, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether it is fittingly commanded that man

should love God with his whole heart?
Objection 1: It would seem that it is unfittingly commanded that man
should love God with his whole heart. For the mode of a virtuous act
is not a matter of precept, as shown above (Article 1, ad 1; FS,
Question 100, Article 9). Now the words "with thy whole heart"
signify the mode of the love of God. Therefore it is unfittingly
commanded that man should love God with his whole heart.
Objection 2: Further, "A thing is whole and perfect when it lacks
nothing" (Phys. iii, 6). If therefore it is a matter of precept that God be
loved with the whole heart, whoever does something not pertaining
to the love of God, acts counter to the precept, and consequently
sins mortally. Now a venial sin does not pertain to the love of God.
Therefore a venial sin is a mortal sin, which is absurd.
Objection 3: Further, to love God with one's whole heart belongs to
perfection, since according to the Philosopher (Phys. iii, text. 64), "to
be whole is to be perfect." But that which belongs to perfection is
not a matter of precept, but a matter of counsel. Therefore we ought
not to be commanded to love God with our whole heart.
On the contrary, It is written (Dt. 6:5): "Thou shalt love the Lord thy
God with thy whole heart."
I answer that, Since precepts are given about acts of virtue, an act is
a matter of precept according as it is an act of virtue. Now it is
requisite for an act of virtue that not only should it fall on its own
matter, but also that it should be endued with its due circumstances,
whereby it is adapted to that matter. But God is to be loved as the
last end, to which all things are to be referred. Therefore some kind
of totality was to be indicated in connection with the precept of the
love of God.
Reply to Objection 1: The commandment that prescribes an act of
virtue does not prescribe the mode which that virtue derives from
another and higher virtue, but it does prescribe the mode which
belongs to its own proper virtue, and this mode is signified in the
words "with thy whole heart."