gathered together in My Name, there am I in the midst of them." [Matthew
20:18] If where two or three are gathered together, He is in the midst, much
more is He among you. For that which a man praying by himself is not able to
receive, that he shall receive praying with a multitude. Why? Because although
his own virtue has not, yet the common consent has much power.
"Where two or three," it is said, "are gathered together." Why did you say,
"Two"? For if there be one in Your Name, why are You not there? Because I
wish all to be together, and not to be separated. Let us therefore close up
together; let us bind one another together in love, let no one separate us. If any
one accuses, or is offended, let him not retain it in his mind, whether against his
neighbor, or against us. This favor I ask of you, to come to us, and bring the
accusation, and receive our defense. "Reprove him," it says, "lest haply he has
not said it. Reprove him, lest haply he has not done it" [Sirach 19:14-15]; and if
he has done it, that he add not thereto. For we have either defended ourselves, or
being condemned have asked pardon, and henceforth endeavor not to fall into
the same faults. This is expedient both for you and for us. For you indeed having
accused us perhaps without reason, when you have learned the truth of the
matter, will stand corrected, and we have offended unawares and are corrected.
For you indeed it is not expedient. For punishment is appointed for those who
utter any idle word. But we put off accusations, whether false or true. The false,
by showing that they are false; the true, by not again doing the same things. For
it must needs happen that he who has the care of so many things should be
ignorant, and through ignorance commit errors. For if every one of you having a
house, and presiding over wife and children, and slaves, one more and another
fewer, among souls that are so easily numbered, is nevertheless compelled to
commit many errors involuntarily, or from ignorance, or when wishing to set
something right; much more must it be so with us who preside over so many
people.
And may God still multiply you and bless you, the little with the great! For
although the care becomes greater from the increase of numbers, we do not cease

praying that this our care may be increased, and that this number may be added
to, and be many times as great and without limit. For fathers, although often
harassed by the number of their children, nevertheless do not wish to lose any
one. All things are equal between us and you, even the very chief of our
blessings. I do not partake of the holy Table with greater abundance, and you
with less, but both equally participate of the same. And if I take it first, it is no
great privilege, since even among children, the elder first extends his hand to the
feast, but nevertheless no advantage is gained thereby. But with us all things are
equal. The saving life that sustains our souls is given with equal honor to both. I
do not indeed partake of one Lamb and you of another, but we partake of the
same. We both have the same Baptism. We have been vouchsafed the same
Spirit. We are both hastening to the same kingdom. We are alike brethren of
Christ, we have all things in common.
Where then is my advantage? In cares, in labors, in anxieties, in grieving
for you. But nothing is sweeter than this grief, since even a mother grieving for
her child is delighted with her grief, she thinks carefully of those whom she has
brought forth, she is delighted at her cares. And yet care in itself is bitter, but
when it is for children, at least it has in it much pleasure. Many of you have I
begotten, but after this are my pangs. For in the case of mothers in the flesh the
pangs are first, and then the birth. But here the pangs last till the latest breath,
lest there should be anywhere some abortion even after the birth. And I indeed
have a further longing; for although perchance another has begotten you, yet I
nevertheless am harassed with cares. For we do not of ourselves beget you, but it
is all of the grace of God. But if we both through the Spirit beget, he will not err
who calls those begotten by me, his children, and those begotten by him, mine.
All these things then consider, and stretch forth your hand, that you may be our
boast and we yours, in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ, which God grant that we
may all see with confidence, through Jesus Christ our Lord, with whom, etc.