things which a demon would never either choose, or at any time be able to effect.
For the devils bring men to idols, and withdraw them from God, and persuade
them to disbelieve the life to come. The devil does not bestow kindness when he
is insulted; forasmuch as even when not insulted, he harms those that court and
honor him.
But He does the contrary. For after these their insults and revilings,
3. "He went about," it is said, "all the cities and villages, teaching in their
synagogues, and preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing every
sickness and every disease."
And so far from punishing them for their insensibility, He did not even
simply rebuke them; at once both evincing His meekness, and so refuting the
calumny; and at the same time minded also by the signs which followed to
exhibit His proof more completely: and then to adduce also the refutation by
words. He went about therefore both in cities, and in countries, and in their
synagogues; instructing us to requite our calumniators, not with fresh calumnies,
but with greater benefits. Since, if not for man's sake, but God's, you do good to
your fellow-servants; whatsoever they may do, leave not thou off doing them
good, that your reward may be greater; since he surely, who upon their calumny
leaves off his doing good, signifies that for their praise' sake, not for God's sake,
he applies himself to that kind of virtue.
For this cause Christ, to teach us that of mere goodness He had entered on
this, so far from waiting for the sick to come to Him, of Himself hastened unto
them, bearing them two of the greatest blessings; one, the gospel of the
kingdom; another, the perfect cure of all their diseases. And not a city did He
overlook, not a village did He hasten by, but visited every place.
4. And not even at this does He stop, but He exhibits also another instance
of His forethought. That is,
"When He saw," it is said, "the multitudes, He was moved with compassion
on them, because they were troubled, and scattered abroad, as sheep having no
shepherd. Then says He unto His disciples, The harvest truly is plenteous, but

the laborers are few, pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that He will send
forth laborers into His harvest."
See again His freedom from vainglory. That He may not draw all men unto
Himself, He sends out His disciples.
And not with this view only, but that He might also teach them, after
practising in Palestine, as in a sort of training-school, to strip themselves for
their conflicts with the world. For this purpose then He makes the exercises even
more serious than the actual conflicts, so far as pertained to their own virtue; that
they might more easily engage in the struggles that were to ensue; as it were a
sort of tender nestlings whom He was at length leading out to fly. And for the
present He makes them physicians of bodies, dispensing to them afterwards the
cure of the soul, which is the principal thing.
And mark how He points out the facility and necessity of the thing. For
what says He? "The harvest truly is plenteous, but the laborers are few." That is,
"not to the sowing," says He, "but to the reaping do I send you." Which in John
He expressed by, "Other men labored, and you are entered into their labors."
[John 4:38]
And these things he said, at once repressing their pride, and preparing them
to be of good courage, and signifying that the greater part of the labor came first.
And contemplate Him here too beginning from love to man, not with any
requital. "For He had compassion, because they were troubled and scattered
abroad as sheep having no shepherd." This is His charge against the rulers of the
Jews, that being shepherds they acted the part of wolves. For so far from
amending the multitude, they even marred their progress. For instance, when
they were marvelling and saying, "It was never so seen in Israel:" these were
affirming the contrary, "He casts out devils through the prince of the devils."
But of what laborers does He speak here? Of the twelve disciples. What
then? Whereas He had said, "But the laborers are few," did He add to their
number? By no means, but He sent them out alone. Wherefore then did He say,
"Pray ye the Lord of the harvest, that He would send forth laborers into His