must take into consideration the difference between a particular
agent, that presupposes something and produces something else,
and the universal agent, who produces the whole. The particular
agent produces the form, and presupposes the matter; and hence it
is necessary that it introduce the form in due proportion into a
suitable matter. Hence it is correct to say that it introduces the form
into such matter, and not into another, on account of the different
kinds of matter. But it is not correct to say so of God Who produces
form and matter together: whereas it is correct to say of Him that He
produces matter fitting to the form and to the end. Now, a particular
agent presupposes time just as it presupposes matter. Hence it is
correctly described as acting in time "after" and not in time "before,"
according to an imaginary succession of time after time. But the
universal agent who produces the thing and time also, is not
correctly described as acting now, and not before, according to an
imaginary succession of time succeeding time, as if time were
presupposed to His action; but He must be considered as giving
time to His effect as much as and when He willed, and according to
what was fitting to demonstrate His power. For the world leads more
evidently to the knowledge of the divine creating power, if it was not
always, than if it had always been; since everything which was not
always manifestly has a cause; whereas this is not so manifest of
what always was.
Reply to Objection 7: As is stated (Phys. iv, text 99), "before" and
"after" belong to time, according as they are in movement. Hence
beginning and end in time must be taken in the same way as in
movement. Now, granted the eternity of movement, it is necessary
that any given moment in movement be a beginning and an end of
movement; which need not be if movement be a beginning. The
same applies to the "now" of time. Thus it appears that the idea of
the instant "now," as being always the beginning and end of time,
presupposes the eternity of time and movement. Hence Aristotle
brings forward this reason (Phys. viii, text 10) against those who
asserted the eternity of time, but denied the eternity of movement.
Reply to Objection 8: God is prior to the world by priority of duration.
But the word "prior" signifies priority not of time, but of eternity. Or
we may say that it signifies the eternity of imaginary time, and not of
time really existing; thus, when we say that above heaven there is
nothing, the word "above" signifies only an imaginary place,
according as it is possible to imagine other dimensions beyond
those of the heavenly body.

Reply to Objection 9: As the effect follows from the cause that acts
by nature, according to the mode of its form, so likewise it follows
from the voluntary agent, according to the form preconceived and
determined by the agent, as appears from what was said above
(Question 19, Article 4; Question 41, Article 2). Therefore, although
God was from eternity the sufficient cause of the world, we should
not say that the world was produced by Him, except as preordained
by His will---that is, that it should have being after not being, in order
more manifestly to declare its author.
Reply to Objection 1:: Given the action, the effect follows according
to the requirement of the form, which is the principle of action. But in
agents acting by will, what is conceived and preordained is to be
taken as the form, which is the principle of action. Therefore from the
eternal action of God an eternal effect did not follow; but such an
effect as God willed, an effect, to wit, which has being after not
being.