"sufferings," as we call them] engendered by anger, viz. dimness of vision,
insanity, and numberless others. "But he insulted my boy," say you; "but [he
called him] clown." Deem it not weakness your not doing the same thing
yourself. For, I ask you, was it well done? You will not say that: then leave that
undone which being done were not well done. I know what passions are
engendered in such cases. "But," say you, "how if he despise me, how if he say it
again?" Show him that he is in the wrong: rebuke him, entreat him: by meekness
anger is put down: go and expostulate with him. For though in cases of wrong
done to ourselves it is right not to do even this, yet it is quite necessary to do it in
behalf of others. Do not look on it as an insult to yourself that your boy has been
insulted: annoyed you may be for his sake, yet not as if you were insulted: for it
does not follow because your boy has been ill-treated, that you are disgraced, but
he is disgraced that did the ill. Quench (your anger) that sharp sword: let it lie in
its scabbard. If we have it unsheathed, we shall be apt to use it even when the
time is not proper, being drawn on by it: but if it be hidden, though a necessity
should arise, yet, while we seek it in order to draw it, the anger will be quenched.
Christ would not have us be angry on his account: (hear what He says to Peter:
"Put up again your sword into the sheath:") [Matthew 26:52] and are you angry
on account of a boy? Teach your boy also to be philosophical: tell him your own
sufferings: imitate (herein) your Teacher. [Matthew 26:52] When they too (His
disciples) were about to be treated with dishonor, He said not, "I will avenge
you:" but, "to Me also," says He, "they have done the same: bear it nobly, for
you are not better than I." These words too do thou speak to your son and your
boy: "You are not better than your master." But these words of philosophy are
counted as the talk of a widow woman. Alas! That it is not in the power of words
to bring it home to people in the way that it is possible to be taught it by actual
experience! And that you may learn this; stand between two combatants, take
part with the wronged, not with the wrong-doers [that you may learn] whether
you shall not see the victory on your side, whether you shall not get splendid
crowns.— See, how God is insulted, and how He answers; how gently, "Where,"

says He, "is Abel your brother?" and what says the other: "Am I my brother's
keeper?" [Genesis 6:9] What could be more contumacious than this? Would any
one have heard it (patiently) even from a son? And if from a brother, would he
not have thought such conduct an insult? What then? See how again God gently
answers, "The voice of your brother's blood," says He "cries unto Me." "But
God," it will be said, "is superior to wrath." Yes, but for this reason the Son of
God came down, that He might make you a God as far as human power can go.
"But I cannot," says one, "seeing I am man." Well then, let us give you men for
instances. And do not suppose I speak of Paul or of Peter: no, but of some of
inferior sort, yea, very much lower down. Eli's menial insulted Hannah, saying,
"Put away your wine from you." [1 Samuel 1:14] What could be more insulting
than this? What then said she? "I am a woman of a hard lot." Indeed, there is
nothing equal to affliction: she is the mother of true philosophy. But this same
woman, though she has her rival, insulted her not: but what does she? She takes
refuge with God, and in her prayer does not even make mention of her, nor say,
"Avenge me, for such an one reproaches me:" so magnanimous was that woman
(let us men be ashamed):— and yet ye know, that there is nothing like jealousy.
The publican, when insulted by the Pharisee, insulted not in return, though, had
he wished it, he might have done so: but he bore it like a philosopher, saying,
"Be merciful to me a sinner." [Luke 18:13] Mephibosheth, having been accused
and calumniated by his servant, neither said, nor did, any evil to him, not even in
the presence of the king himself. [2 Samuel 19:26] Shall I tell you even of a
harlot, what philosophic magnanimity she showed? Hear Christ saying, as she
was wiping His feet with her hair, "The publicans and harlots go into the
kingdom before you." [Matthew 21:31] Do you see her standing, and taking
courage, and washing away her own sins? Observe, how she was not angry even
with the Pharisee, when reproached by him: "for had He known," says he, that
this woman is a sinner, He would not have suffered her [Luke 7:39]: and how
she said not to him, "What then? Say, are you pure from sins?" but felt more,
wept more, and let fall hotter tears. But if women and publicans and harlots play