FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.6.

the flesh: also, if he have "a dry scurf," which covers the body
without giving pain, and is a blemish on the comeliness of the
members; which denotes avarice. Lastly, he is rejected "if he have a
rupture" or hernia; through baseness rending his heart, though it
appear not in his deeds.
The vestments denote the virtues of God's ministers. Now there are
four things that are necessary to all His ministers, viz. chastity
denoted by the breeches; a pure life, signified by the linen tunic; the
moderation of discretion, betokened by the girdle; and rectitude of
purpose, denoted by the mitre covering the head. But the highpriests needed four other things in addition to these. First, a
continual recollection of God in their thoughts; and this was
signified by the golden plate worn over the forehead, with the name
of God engraved thereon. Secondly, they had to bear with the
shortcomings of the people: this was denoted by the ephod which
they bore on their shoulders. Thirdly, they had to carry the people in
their mind and heart by the solicitude of charity, in token of which
they wore the rational. Fourthly, they had to lead a godly life by
performing works of perfection; and this was signified by the violet
tunic. Hence little golden bells were fixed to the bottom of the violet
tunic, which bells signified the teaching of divine things united in the
high-priest to his godly mode of life. In addition to these were the
pomegranates, signifying unity of faith and concord in good morals:
because his doctrine should hold together in such a way that it
should not rend asunder the unity of faith and peace.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether there was any reasonable cause for the

ceremonial observances?
Objection 1: It would seem that there was no reasonable cause for
the ceremonial observances. Because, as the Apostle says (1 Tim.
4:4), "every creature of God is good, and nothing to be rejected that
is received with thanksgiving." It was therefore unfitting that they
should be forbidden to eat certain foods, as being unclean according
to Lev. 11 [Dt. 14].
Objection 2: Further, just as animals are given to man for food, so
also are herbs: wherefore it is written (Gn. 9:3): "As the green herbs
have I delivered all" flesh "to you." But the Law did not distinguish
any herbs from the rest as being unclean, although some are most
harmful, for instance, those that are poisonous. Therefore it seems
that neither should any animals have been prohibited as being
unclean.
Objection 3: Further, if the matter from which a thing is generated be
unclean, it seems that likewise the thing generated therefrom is
unclean. But flesh is generated from blood. Since therefore all flesh
was not prohibited as unclean, it seems that in like manner neither
should blood have been forbidden as unclean; nor the fat which is
engendered from blood.
Objection 4: Further, Our Lord said (Mt. 10:28; cf. Lk. 12:4), that
those should not be feared "that kill the body," since after death they
"have no more that they can do": which would not be true if after
death harm might come to man through anything done with his body.
Much less therefore does it matter to an animal already dead how its
flesh be cooked. Consequently there seems to be no reason in what
is said, Ex. 23:19: "Thou shalt not boil a kid in the milk of its dam."
Objection 5: Further, all that is first brought forth of man and beast,
as being most perfect, is commanded to be offered to the Lord (Ex.
13). Therefore it is an unfitting command that is set forth in Lev.
19:23: "when you shall be come into the land, and shall have planted
in it fruit trees, you shall take away the uncircumcision of them," i.e.
the first crops, and they "shall be unclean to you, neither shall you
eat of them."