among the prophets also one was afflicted more, and another less? Because so it
was expedient for each. Wherefore upon each our remark must be, "Your
judgments are a great deep." [Psalm 36:6] For if those great and wonderful men
were not alike exercised by God, but one by poverty, and another by riches; one
by ease, and another by trouble; much more ought we now to bear these things in
mind.
8. But besides this, it becomes one to consider also that many of the things
which happen do not take place according to His mind, but arise from our
wickedness. Say not then, "Why is one man rich who is wicked, and another
poor who is righteous?" For first of all, one may give an account of these things
also, and say that neither does the righteous receive any harm from his poverty,
nay, even a greater addition of honor; and that the bad man in his riches
possesses but a store of punishment on his future road, unless he be changed:
and, even before punishment, often-times his riches become to him the cause of
many evils, and lead him into ten thousand pitfalls. But God permits it, at the
same to signify the free choice of the will, and also to teach all others not to be
mad nor rave after money.
"How is it then, when a man being wicked is rich, and suffers nothing
dreadful?" say you. "Since if being good he has wealth, he has it justly: but if
bad, what shall we say?" That even therein he is to be pitied. For wealth added
to wickedness aggravates the mischief. But is he a good man, and poor? Yet is he
nothing injured. Is he then a bad man, and poor? This is he so justly and by
desert, or rather even with advantage to himself. "But such an one," say you,
"received his riches from his ancestors and lavishes it upon harlots and
parasites, and suffers no evil." What do you say? Does he commit whoredom,
and do you say, "he suffers no evils?" Is he drunken, and do you think that he is
in luxury? Does he spend for no good, and do you judge that he is to be envied?
Nay what can be worse than this wealth which destroys the very soul? But you,
if the body were distorted and maimed, wouldest say that his was a case for great
lamentation; and do you see his whole soul mutilated, yet countest him even

happy? "But he does not perceive it," say you. Well then, for this very reason
again is he to be pitied, as all frantic persons are. For he that knows he is sick
will of course both seek the physician and submit to remedies; but he that is
ignorant of it will have no chance at all of deliverance. Do you call such an one
happy, tell me?
But it is no marvel: for the more part are ignorant of the true love of
wisdom. Therefore do we suffer the extremest penalty, being chastised and not
even withdrawing ourselves from the punishment. For this cause are angers,
dejections, and continual tumults; because when God has shown us a life without
sorrow, the life of virtue, we leave this and mark out another way, the way of
riches and money, full of infinite evils. And we do the same, as if one, not
knowing how to discern the beauty of men's bodies but attributing the whole to
the clothes and the ornaments worn, when he saw a handsome woman and
possessed of natural beauty, should pass quickly by her, but when he beheld one
ugly, ill-shaped, and deformed, but clothed in beautiful garments, should take her
for his wife. Now also in some such way are the multitude affected about virtue
and vice. They admit the one that is deformed by nature on account of her
external ornaments, but turn away from her that is fair and lovely, on account of
her unadorned beauty, for which cause they ought especially to choose her.
9. Therefore am I ashamed that among the foolish heathen there are those
that practise this philosophy, if not in deeds, yet so far at least as judgment goes;
and who know the perishable nature of things present: whereas among us some
do not even understand these things, but have their very judgment corrupted: and
this while the Scripture is ever and anon sounding in our ears, and saying, "In his
sight the vile person is contemned, but he honors them that fear the Lord:
[Psalm 15:4] the fear of the Lord excels every thing ; fear God, and keep His
commandments; for this is the whole of man: [Ecclesiastes 12:13;] be not thou
envious of evil men; [Psalm 49:16;] all flesh is grass, and all the glory of man
as the flower of grass;" [Isaiah 40:7] For these and such-like things though we
hear every day, we are yet nailed to earth. And as ignorant children, who learn