from the debt of eternal punishment, but that his punishment was
suspended for a time, that is, until the judgment day. Nor does it
follow that this is the general result of suffrages, because things
happen differently in accordance with the general law from that
which is permitted in particular cases and by privilege. Even so the
bounds of human affairs differ from those of the miracles of the
Divine power as Augustine says (De Cura pro Mort. xvi).

### ARTICLE 6. Whether suffrages profit those who are in

purgatory?
Objection 1: It would seem that suffrages do not profit even those
who are in purgatory. For purgatory is a part of hell. Now "there is no
redemption in hell" [Office of the Dead, Resp. vii], and it is written
(Ps. 6:6), "Who shall confess to Thee in hell?" Therefore suffrages
do not profit those who are in purgatory.
Objection 2: Further, the punishment of purgatory is finite. Therefore
if some of the punishment is abated by suffrages, it would be
possible to have such a great number of suffrages, that the
punishment would be entirely remitted, and consequently the sin
entirely unpunished: and this would seem incompatible with Divine
justice.
Objection 3: Further, souls are in purgatory in order that they may be
purified there, and being pure may come to the kingdom. Now
nothing can be purified, unless something be done to it. Therefore
suffrages offered by the living do not diminish the punishment of
purgatory.
Objection 4: Further, if suffrages availed those who are in purgatory,
those especially would seem to avail them which are offered at their
behest. Yet these do not always avail: for instance, if a person before
dying were to provide for so many suffrages to be offered for him
that if they were offered they would suffice for the remission of his
entire punishment. Now supposing these suffrages to be delayed
until he is released from punishment, they will profit him nothing.
For it cannot be said that they profit him before they are discharged;
and after they are fulfilled, he no longer needs them, since he is
already released. Therefore suffrages do not avail those who are in
purgatory.
On the contrary, As quoted in the text (Sent. iv, D, 45), Augustine
says (Enchiridion cx): "Suffrages profit those who are not very good
or not very bad." Now such are those who are detained in purgatory.
Therefore, etc.
Further, Dionysius says (Eccl. Hier. vii) that the "godlike priest in
praying for the departed prays for those who lived a holy life, and yet

contracted certain stains through human frailty." Now such persons
are detained in purgatory. Therefore, etc.
I answer that, The punishment of purgatory is intended to
supplement the satisfaction which was not fully completed in the
body. Consequently, since, as stated above (Articles 1,2; Question
13, Article 2), the works of one person can avail for another's
satisfaction, whether the latter be living or dead, the suffrages of the
living, without any doubt, profit those who are in purgatory.
Reply to Objection 1: The words quoted refer to those who are in the
hell of the damned, where there is no redemption for those who are
finally consigned to that punishment. We may also reply with
Damascene (Serm.: De his qui in fide dormierunt) that such
statements are to be explained with reference to the lower causes,
that is according to the demands of the merits of those who are
consigned to those punishments. But according to the Divine mercy
which transcends human merits, it happens otherwise through the
prayers of the righteous, than is implied by the expressions quoted
in the aforesaid authorities. Now "God changes His sentence but not
his counsel," as Gregory says (Moral. xx): wherefore the Damascene
(Serm.: De his qui in fide dormierunt) quotes as instances of this the
Ninevites, Achab and Ezechias, in whom it is apparent that the
sentence pronounced against them by God was commuted by the
Divine mercy [FP, Question 19, Article 7, ad 2].
Reply to Objection 2: It is not unreasonable that the punishment of
those who are in purgatory be entirely done away by the multiplicity
of suffrages. But it does not follow that the sins remain unpunished,
because the punishment of one undertaken in lieu of another is
credited to that other.
Reply to Objection 3: The purifying of the soul by the punishment of
purgatory is nothing else than the expiation of the guilt that hinders
it from obtaining glory. And since, as stated above (Question 13,
Article 2), the guilt of one person can be expiated by the punishment
which another undergoes in his stead, it is not unreasonable that
one person be purified by another satisfying for him.
Reply to Objection 4: Suffrages avail on two counts, namely the
action of the agent ["Ex opere operante" and "ex opere operato"] and
the action done. By action done I mean not only the sacrament of the