the whole time, unless they had enjoyed much grace of the Spirit.
"But," says one, "if they were to hear from the Spirit, why needed they to
accompany Christ when they would not retain His words?" Be cause the Spirit
taught them not, but called to their mind what Christ had said before; and it
contributes not a little to the glory of Christ, that they were referred to the
remembrance of the words He had spoken to them. At the first then it was of the
gift of God that the grace of the Spirit lighted upon them so largely and
abundantly; but after that, it was of their own virtue that they retained the Gift.
For they displayed a shining life, and much wisdom, and great labors, and
despised this present life, and thought nothing of earthly things, but were above
them all; and like a sort of light-winged eagle, soaring high by their works;
reached to heaven itself, and by these possessed the unspeakable grace of the
Spirit.
Let us then imitate them, and not quench our lamps, but keep them bright
by alms-doing, for so is the light of this fire preserved. Let us collect the oil into
our vessels while we are here, for we cannot buy it when we have departed to
that other place, nor can we procure it elsewhere, save only at the hands of the
poor. Let us therefore collect it thence very abundantly, if, at least, we desire to
enter in with the Bridegroom. But if we do not this, we must remain without the
bridechamber, for it is impossible, it is impossible, though we perform ten
thousand other good deeds, to enter the portals of the Kingdom without almsdoing. Let us then show forth this very abundantly, that we may enjoy those
ineffable blessings; which may it come to pass that we all attain, by the grace
and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom to the Father and the
Holy Ghost be glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

Homily 24 on the Gospel of John
John 2:23
"Now when He was in Jerusalem at the Passover, in the feast, many believed on
Him."
1. Of the men of that time some clung to their error, others laid hold on the
truth, while of these last, some having retained it for a little while again fell off
from it. Alluding to these, Christ compared them to seeds not deeply sown, but
having their roots upon the surface of the earth; and He said that they should
quickly perish. And these the Evangelist has here pointed out to us, saying,
"When He was in Jerusalem, at the Passover, in the feast, many believed on
Him, when they saw the miracles which He did."

John 2:24
"But Jesus did not commit Himself unto them."
For they were the more perfect among His disciples, who came to Him not
only because of His miracles, but through His teaching also. The grosser sort the
miracles attracted, but the better reasoners His prophecies and doctrines; and so
they who were taken by His teaching were more steadfast than those attracted by
His miracles. And Christ also called them "blessed," saying, "Blessed are they
that have not seen, and yet have believed." [John 20:29] But that these here
mentioned were not real disciples, the following passage shows, for it says,
"Jesus did not commit Himself unto them." Wherefore? "Because He knew all
things,"