God if it be not this, to do good to all mankind, alike by chastisements and by
enjoyments? Let us not then give thanks only when we are in prosperity, for
there is nothing great in this. And this the devil also well knows, and therefore
he said, "Does Job fear God for nought? Have You not made an hedge about him
and about all that he has on every side? Touch all that he has; no doubt, he will
renounce You to Your face!" [Job 1:10-11] However, that cursed one gained no
advantage; and God forbid he should gain any advantage of us either; but
whenever we are either in penury, or in sicknesses, or in disasters, then let us
increase our thanksgiving; thanksgiving, I mean, not in words, nor in tongue, but
in deeds and works, in mind and in heart. Let us give thanks unto Him with all
our souls. For He loves us more than our parents; and wide as is the difference
between evil and goodness, so great is the difference between the love of God
and that of our fathers. And these are not my words, but those of Christ Himself
Who loves us. And hear what He Himself says, "What man is there of you, who,
if his son shall ask him for a loaf, will give him a stone? If you then, being evil,
know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your
Father which is in Heaven give good things to them that ask Him?" [Matthew
7:9-11] And again, bear what He says also elsewhere: "Can a woman forget her
sucking child that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb? Yea,
they may forget, yet will not I forget you, says the Lord." [Isaiah 49:15] For if He
loves us not, wherefore did He create us? Had He any necessity? Do we supply
to Him any ministry and service? Needs He anything that we can render? Hear
what the Prophet says; "I have said unto the Lord, You are my Lord, I have no
good beyond You." [Psalm 16:2]
The ungrateful, however, and unfeeling say, that this were worthy of God's
goodness, that there should be an equality among all. Tell me, ungrateful mortal,
what sort of things are they which you deny to be of God's goodness, and what
equality do you mean? "Such an one," you will say, "has been a cripple from his
childhood; another is mad, and is possessed; another has arrived at extreme old
age, and has spent his whole life in poverty; another in the most painful

diseases: are these works of Providence? One man is deaf, another dumb,
another poor, while another, impious, yea, utterly impious, and full of ten
thousand vices, enjoys wealth, and keeps concubines, and parasites, and is
owner of a splendid mansion, and lives an idle life." And many instances of the
sort they string together, and weave a long account of complaint against the
providence of God.
What then are we to say to them? Now if they were Greeks, and were to tell
us that the universe is governed by some one or other, we should in turn address
to them the self-same words, "What then, are things without a providence? How
then is it that you reverence gods, and worship genii and heroes? For if there is
a providence, some one or other superintends the whole." But if any, whether
Christians or Heathen, should be impatient at this, and be wavering, what shall
we say to them? Why, could so many good things, tell me, arise of themselves?
The daily light? The beautiful order and the forethought that exist in all things?
The mazy dances of the stars? The equable course of nights and days? The
regular gradation of nature in vegetables, and animals, and men? Who, tell me, is
it that orders these? If there were no superintending Being, but all things
combined together of themselves, who then was it that made this vault revolve,
so beautiful, so vast, I mean the sky, and set it upon the earth, nay more, upon
the waters? Who is it that gives the fruitful seasons? Who implanted so great
power in seeds and vegetables? For that which is accidental is necessarily
disorderly; whereas that which is orderly implies design. For which, tell me, of
the things around us that are accidental, is not full of great disorder, and of great
tumult and confusion? Nor do I speak of things accidental only, but of those also
which imply some agent, but an unskillful agent. For example, let there be
timber and stone, and let there be lime withal; and let a man unskilled in building
take them, and begin building, and set hard to work; will he not spoil and destroy
everything? Again, take a vessel without a pilot, containing everything which a
vessel ought to contain, without a shipwright; I do not say that it is unequipped
and unfinished, but though well equipped, it will not be able to sail. And could