FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.22, C.3.

drawn to a thing, as it is in itself; but knows it by reason of an
"intention" of the thing, which "intention" it has in itself, or receives
in its own way. Hence we find it stated (Metaph. vi, 4) that "the true
and the false," which pertain to knowledge, "are not in things, but in
the mind." Consequently it is evident that the nature of passion is
consistent with the appetitive, rather than with the apprehensive
part.
Reply to Objection 1: In things relating to perfection the case is the
opposite, in comparison to things that pertain to defect. Because in
things relating to perfection, intensity is in proportion to the
approach to one first principle; to which the nearer a thing
approaches, the more intense it is. Thus the intensity of a thing
possessed of light depends on its approach to something endowed
with light in a supreme degree, to which the nearer a thing
approaches the more light it possesses. But in things that relate to
defect, intensity depends, not on approach to something supreme,
but in receding from that which is perfect; because therein consists
the very notion of privation and defect. Wherefore the less a thing
recedes from that which stands first, the less intense it is: and the
result is that at first we always find some small defect, which
afterwards increases as it goes on. Now passion pertains to defect,
because it belongs to a thing according as it is in potentiality.
Wherefore in those things that approach to the Supreme Perfection, i.
e. to God, there is but little potentiality and passion: while in other
things, consequently, there is more. Hence also, in the supreme, i.e.
the apprehensive, power of the soul, passion is found less than in
the other powers.
Reply to Objection 2: The appetitive power is said to be more active,
because it is, more than the apprehensive power, the principle of the
exterior action: and this for the same reason that it is more passive,
namely, its being related to things as existing in themselves: since it
is through the external action that we come into contact with things.
Reply to Objection 3: As stated in the FP, Question 78, Article 3. the
organs of the soul can be changed in two ways. First, by a spiritual
change, in respect of which the organ receives an "intention" of the
object. And this is essential to the act of the sensitive apprehension:
thus is the eye changed by the object visible, not by being colored,
but by receiving an intention of color. But the organs are receptive of
another and natural change, which affects their natural disposition;
for instance, when they become hot or cold, or undergo some similar

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.22, C.3.

change. And whereas this kind of change is accidental to the act of
the sensitive apprehension; for instance, if the eye be wearied
through gazing intently at something or be overcome by the intensity
of the object: on the other hand, it is essential to the act of the
sensitive appetite; wherefore the material element in the definitions
of the movements of the appetitive part, is the natural change of the
organ; for instance, "anger is" said to be "a kindling of the blood
about the heart." Hence it is evident that the notion of passion is
more consistent with the act of the sensitive appetite, than with that
of the sensitive apprehension, although both are actions of a
corporeal organ.