constantly engaged in warfare and fighting, and is more exhausted by the shame
and the reproaches which assail him on all sides than by actual calamities. For
that which has never taken place has now come to pass, the barbarians leaving
their own country have overrun an infinite space of our territory, and that many
times over, and having set fire to the land, and captured the towns they are not
minded to return home again, but after the manner of men who are keeping
holiday rather than making war, they laugh us all to scorn; and it is said that one
of their kings declared that he was amazed at the impudence of our soldiers, who
although slaughtered more easily than sheep still expect to conquer, and are not
willing to quit their own country; for he said that he himself was satiated with
the work of cutting them to pieces. Imagine what the feelings of the Emperor
and his wife must be on hearing these words!
5. And since I have made mention of this war, a great crowd of widows has
occurred to me, who in past times derived very great lustre from the honour
enjoyed by their husbands, but now are all arrayed in a dark mourning robe and
spend their whole time in lamentation. For they had not the advantage which was
enjoyed by your dear self. For thou, my excellent friend, saw that goodly
husband of yours lying on his bed, and heard his last words, and receive his
instructions as to what should be done about the affairs of the family, and learn
how by the provisions of his will they were guarded against every kind of
encroachment on the part of rapacious and designing men. And not only this, but
also when he was yet lying dead you often flung yourself upon the body, and
kissed his eyes, and embraced him, and wailed over him, and you saw him
conducted to burial with much honour, and did everything necessary for his
obsequies, as was fitting, and from frequent visits to his grave you have no slight
consolation of your sorrow. But these women have been deprived of all these
things, having all sent out their husbands to war in the hope of receiving them
back again, instead of which it has been their lot to receive the bitter tidings of
their death. Neither has any one come back to them with the bodies of their slain,
or bringing anything save a message describing the manner of their death. And

some there are who have not even been vouchsafed this record, or been enabled
to learn how their husbands fell, as they were buried beneath a heap of slain in
the thick of battle.
And what wonder if most of the generals perished thus, when even the
Emperor himself having been blockaded in a certain village with a few soldiers
did not dare to go out and oppose the assailants, but remained inside and when
the enemy had set fire to the building was burnt to death together with all that
were therein, not men only, but horses, beams and walls, so that the whole was
turned into a heap of ashes? And this was the tale which they who departed to
war with the Emperor brought back to his wife in place of the Emperor himself.
For the splendours of the world differ in no-wise whatever from the things which
happen on the stage, and the beauty of spring flowers. For in the first place they
flee away before they have been manifested; and then, even if they have strength
to last a little while, they speedily become ready to decay. For what is more
worthless than the honour and glory which is paid by the multitude? What fruit
has it? What kind of profit? What serviceable end does it meet? And would that
this only was the evil! But in fact besides failing to get anything good from the
possession, he who owns this most cruel mistress is continually forced to bear
much which is painful and injurious; for mistress she is of those who own her,
and in proportion as she is flattered by her slaves does she exalt herself against
them, and ties them down by increasingly harsh commands; but she would never
be able to revenge herself on those who despise and neglect her; so much fiercer
is she than any tyrant and wild beast. For tyrants and wild animals are often
mollified by humouring, but her fury is greatest when we are most complaisant
to her, and if she finds any one who will listen to her, and yield to her in
everything there is no kind of command from which in future she can be induced
to abstain. Moreover she has also another ally whom one would not do wrong to
call her daughter. For after she herself has grown to maturity and fairly taken
root among us, she then produces arrogance, a thing which is no less able than
herself to drive the soul of those who possess it into headlong ruin.