SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.25, C.12.

### ARTICLE 11. Whether a man ought to love his wife more than

his father and mother?
Objection 1: It would seem that a man ought to love his wife more
than his father and mother. For no man leaves a thing for another
unless he love the latter more. Now it is written (Gn. 2:24) that "a
man shell leave father and mother" on account of his wife. Therefore
a man ought to love his wife more than his father and mother.
Objection 2: Further, the Apostle says (Eph. 5:33) that a husband
should "love his wife as himself." Now a man ought to love himself
more than his parents. Therefore he ought to love his wife also more
than his parents.
Objection 2: Further, love should be greater where there are more
reasons for loving. Now there are more reasons for love in the
friendship of a man towards his wife. For the Philosopher says
(Ethic. viii, 12) that "in this friendship there are the motives of utility,
pleasure, and also of virtue, if husband and wife are virtuous."
Therefore a man's love for his wife ought to be greater than his love
for his parents.
On the contrary, According to Eph. 5:28, "men ought to love their
wives as their own bodies." Now a man ought to love his body less
than his neighbor, as stated above (Article 5): and among his
neighbors he should love his parents most. Therefore he ought to
love his parents more than his wife.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 9), the degrees of love may be
taken from the good (which is loved), or from the union between
those who love. On the part of the good which is the object loved, a
man should love his parents more than his wife, because he loves
them as his principles and considered as a more exalted good.
But on the part of the union, the wife ought to be loved more,
because she is united with her husband, as one flesh, according to
Mt. 19:6: "Therefore now they are not two, but one flesh."
Consequently a man loves his wife more intensely, but his parents
with greater reverence.
Reply to Objection 1: A man does not in all respects leave his father

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.25, C.12.

and mother for the sake of his wife: for in certain cases a man ought
to succor his parents rather than his wife. He does however leave all
his kinsfolk, and cleaves to his wife as regards the union of carnal
connection and co-habitation.
Reply to Objection 2: The words of the Apostle do not mean that a
man ought to love his wife equally with himself, but that a man's love
for himself is the reason for his love of his wife, since she is one with
him.
Reply to Objection 3: There are also several reasons for a man's love
for his father; and these, in a certain respect, namely, as regards
good, are more weighty than those for which a man loves his wife;
although the latter outweigh the former as regards the closeness of
the union.
As to the argument in the contrary sense, it must be observed that in
the words quoted, the particle "as" denotes not equality of love but
the motive of love. For the principal reason why a man loves his wife
is her being united to him in the flesh.