the like, so do we the penal laws: laws, which not man enacted, but the OnlyBegotten Son of God Himself. Let him that has no mercy, He says, be punished
[Matthew 18:23]; for such is the import of the parable. Let him that remembers
injuries, pay the last penalty. Let him that is angry without cause, be cast into the
fire. Let him that reviles, receive his due in hell. If you think these laws which
you hear strange, be not amazed. For if Christ was not intended to make new
laws, why did He come? Those other laws are manifest to us; we know that the
murderer and adulterer ought to be punished. If then we were meant only to be
told the same things over again, where was the need of a heavenly Teacher?
Therefore He does not say, Let the adulterer be punished, but, whoso looks on
with unchaste eyes. And where, and when, the man will receive punishment, He
there tells us. And not in fine public monuments, nor yet somewhere out of sight,
did He deposit His laws; not pillars of brass did He raise up, and engrave letters
thereon, but twelve souls raised He up for us, the souls of the Apostles, and in
their minds has He by the Spirit inscribed this writing. This cite we to you. If this
was authorized to Jews, that none might take refuge in the plea of ignorance,
much more is it to us. But should any say, "I do not hear, therefore have no
guilt," on this very score he is most liable to punishment. For, were there no
teacher, it would be possible to take refuge in this plea; but if there be, it is no
longer possible. Thus see how, speaking of Jews, the Lord deprives them of all
excuse; "If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not had sin:" [John
15:22]: and Paul again, "But I say, have they not heard? Nay, but into all the
earth went forth their sound." [Romans 10:18] For then there is excuse, when
there is none to tell the man; but when the watchman sits there, having this as the
business of his life, there is excuse no longer. Nay, rather, it was the will of
Christ, not that we should look only upon these written pillars, but that we
should ourselves be such. But since we have made ourselves unworthy of the
writing, at least let us look to those. For just as the pillars threaten others, but are
not themselves obnoxious to punishment, nor yet the laws, even so the blessed
Apostles. And observe; not in one place only stands this pillar, but its writing is

carried round about in all the world. Whether you go among the Indians, you
shall hear this: whether into Spain, or to the very ends of the earth, there is none
without the hearing, except it be of his own neglect. Then be not offended, but
give heed to the things spoken, that you may be able to lay hold upon the works
of virtue, and attain unto the eternal blessings in Christ Jesus our Lord, with
Whom to the Father and Holy Ghost together be glory, power, honor, now and
ever, world without end. Amen.