comrades, and the results of their active benevolence will extend to more.
And he said not merely, "be fellow-helpers," but added, "whatsoever
directions they give, obey;" implying the strictest obedience. And that he might
not appear to be favoring them, he adds, "and to every one that helps in the work
and labors." "Let this," says he, "be a general rule: for I do not speak about
them individually, but if there be any one like them, let him also have the same
advantages." And therefore when he begins to commend, he calls upon
themselves as witnesses, saying, "I beseech you, you know the house of
Stephanas." "For you also yourselves are aware," says he, "how they labor, and
have no need to learn from us."

1 Corinthians 16:17
"But I was glad of the coming of Stephanas and Fortunatus and Achaicus,
for that which was lacking on your part they supplied."

1 Corinthians 16:18
"For they refreshed my spirit and yours."
Thus, since it was natural for them to be greatly irritated against these
persons, for it was they who had come and showed him all about the division,
inasmuch as by them also they had written the questions about the virgins, and
about the married persons:— mark how he softened them down; both in the
beginning of his Epistle by saying, "For it has been signified unto me by them
which are of the house of Chloe;" thus at once concealing these and bringing
forward the others: (for it should seem that the latter had given their information
by means of the former:) and in this place again, "They have supplied your lack,
and refreshed my spirit and yours:" signifying that they had come instead of all,
and had chosen to undertake so great a journey on their behalf. How then may
this, their peculiar praise, become common? "If you will solace me for what was
wanting on your part by your kindness towards them; if you will honor, if you
will receive, them, if you will communicate with them in doing good." Wherefore
he says, "Acknowledge ye then them that are such." And while praising those
that came, he embraces also the others in his praise, the senders together with the
sent: where he says, "'They refreshed my spirit and yours, therefore acknowledge
such as these,' because for your sakes they left country and home." Do you
perceive his consideration? He implies that they had obliged not Paul only, but
the Corinthians likewise, in that they bore about in themselves the whole city. A
thing which both added credit to them, and did not allow the others to sever
themselves from them, inasmuch as in their persons they had presented
themselves to Paul.

1 Corinthians 16:19
"All the Churches of Asia salute you." He is continually making the
members combine and cleave together in one by means of the salutation.
"Aquila and Priscilla salute you much in the Lord;"— for with them he was
lodging, being a tent-maker— "with the Church which is in their house." This
thing too is no small excellency, that they had made their very house a Church.