And those even that crucified Him, and acted in so many instances with
contumely against Him, see how He continues to treat with kindness. For even to
His Father He speaks for them, saying, "Forgive them, for they know not what
they do." And He sent His disciples moreover, after these things, unto them.
This love then let us also imitate, unto this let us look, that being followers
of Christ, we may attain both unto the good things here, and unto those to come,
by the grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory
and might world without end. Amen.

## Homily 61 on Matthew

Matt. XVIII. 21.
"Then came Peter to Him, and said, Lord, how oft shall my brother sin
against me, and I forgive him? Till seven times? Jesus says unto him, I say not
unto you, Until seven times, but, Until seventy times seven."
Peter supposed he was saying something great, wherefore also as aiming at
greatness he added, "Until seven times?" For this thing, says he, which You have
commanded to do, how often shall I do? For if he forever sins, but forever when
reproved repents, how often do you command us to bear with this man? For with
regard to that other who repents not, neither acknowledges his own faults, You
have set a limit, by saying, "Let him be to you as the heathen and the publican;"
but to this no longer so, but You have commanded to accept him.
How often then ought I to bear with him, being told his faults, and
repenting? Is it enough for seven times?
What then says Christ, the good God, who is loving towards man? "I say
not unto you, until seven times, but, until seventy times seven," not setting a
number here, but what is infinite and perpetual and forever. For even as ten
thousand times signifies often, so here too. For by saying, "The barren has borne
seven," [1 Samuel 2:5] the Scripture means many. So that He has not limited the
forgiveness by a number, but has declared that it is to be perpetual and forever.
This at least He indicated by the parable that is put after. For that He might
not seem to any to enjoin great things and hard to bear, by saying, "Seventy times
seven," He added this parable, at once both leading them on to what He had said,
and putting down him who was priding himself upon this, and showing the act
was not grievous, but rather very easy. Therefore let me add, He brought forward
His own love to man, that by the comparison, as He says, you might learn, that
though thou forgive seventy times seven, though thou continually pardon your

neighbor for absolutely all his sins, as a drop of water to an endless sea, so
much, or rather much more, does your love to man come short in comparison of
the boundless goodness of God, of which you stand in need, for that you are to
be judged, and to give an account.
Wherefore also He went on to say, "The Kingdom of Heaven is likened unto
a certain king, which would take account of his servants. And when he had
begun to reckon, one was brought unto him, which owed him ten thousand
talents. But forasmuch as he had not to pay, he commanded him to be sold, and
his wife, and his children, and all that he had."
Then after this man had enjoyed the benefit of mercy, he went out, and
"took by the throat his fellow-servant, which owed him an hundred pence;"
[Matthew 18:28] and having by these doings moved his lord, he caused him to
cast him again into prison, until he should pay off the whole.
Do you see how great the difference between sins against man and against
God? As great as between ten thousand talents, and a hundred pence, or rather
even much more. And this arises both from the difference of the persons, and the
constant succession of our sins. For when a man looks at us, we stand off and
shrink from sinning: but when God sees us every day, we do not forbear, but do
and speak all things without fear.
But not hereby alone, but also from the benefit and from the honor of which
we have partaken, our sins become more grievous.
And if you are desirous to learn how our sins against Him are ten thousand
talents, or rather even much more, I will try to show it briefly. But I fear lest to
them that are inclined to wickedness, and love continually to sin, I should
furnish still greater security, or should drive the meeker sort to despair, and they
should repeat that saying of the disciples, "who can be saved?"
Nevertheless for all that I will speak, that I may make those that attend
more safe, and more meek. For they that are incurably diseased, and past feeling,
even without these words of mine, do not depart from their own carelessness,
and wickedness; and if even from hence they derive greater occasion for