SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.31, C.2.

### ARTICLE 1. Whether almsgiving is an act of charity?

Objection 1: It would seem that almsgiving is not an act of charity.
For without charity one cannot do acts of charity. Now it is possible
to give alms without having charity, according to 1 Cor. 13:3: "If I
should distribute all my goods to feed the poor . . . and have not
charity, it profiteth me nothing." Therefore almsgiving is not an act of
charity.
Objection 2: Further, almsdeeds are reckoned among works of
satisfaction, according to Dan. 4:24: "Redeem thou thy sins with
alms." Now satisfaction is an act of justice. Therefore almsgiving is
an act of justice and not of charity.
Objection 3: Further, the offering of sacrifices to God is an act of
religion. But almsgiving is offering a sacrifice to God, according to
Heb. 13:16: "Do not forget to do good and to impart, for by such
sacrifices God's favor is obtained." Therefore almsgiving is not an
act of charity, but of religion.
Objection 4: Further, the Philosopher says (Ethic. iv, l) that to give
for a good purpose is an act of liberality. Now this is especially true
of almsgiving. Therefore almsgiving is not an act of charity.
On the contrary, It is written 2 Jn. 3:17: "He that hath the substance
of this world, and shall see his brother in need, and shall put up his
bowels from him, how doth the charity of God abide in him?"
I answer that, External acts belong to that virtue which regards the
motive for doing those acts. Now the motive for giving alms is to
relieve one who is in need. Wherefore some have defined alms as
being "a deed whereby something is given to the needy, out of
compassion and for God's sake," which motive belongs to mercy, as
stated above (Question 30, Articles 1,2). Hence it is clear that
almsgiving is, properly speaking, an act of mercy. This appears in its
very name, for in Greek eleemosyne it is derived from having mercy
eleein even as the Latin "miseratio" is. And since mercy is an effect
of charity, as shown above (Question 30, Article 2, Article 3,
Objection 3), it follows that almsgiving is an act of charity through
the medium of mercy.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.31, C.2.

Reply to Objection 1: An act of virtue may be taken in two ways: first
materially, thus an act of justice is to do what is just; and such an act
of virtue can be without the virtue, since many, without having the
habit of justice, do what is just, led by the natural light of reason, or
through fear, or in the hope of gain. Secondly, we speak of a thing
being an act of justice formally, and thus an act of justice is to do
what is just, in the same way as a just man, i.e. with readiness and
delight, and such an act of virtue cannot be without the virtue.
Accordingly almsgiving can be materially without charity, but to give
alms formally, i.e. for God's sake, with delight and readiness, and
altogether as one ought, is not possible without charity.
Reply to Objection 2: Nothing hinders the proper elicited act of one
virtue being commanded by another virtue as commanding it and
directing it to this other virtue's end. It is in this way that almsgiving
is reckoned among works of satisfaction in so far as pity for the one
in distress is directed to the satisfaction for his sin; and in so far as
it is directed to placate God, it has the character of a sacrifice, and
thus it is commanded by religion.
Wherefore the Reply to the Third Objection is evident.
Reply to Objection 4: Almsgiving belongs to liberality, in so far as
liberality removes an obstacle to that act, which might arise from
excessive love of riches, the result of which is that one clings to
them more than one ought.