unity than several things united. Therefore a multitude is better
governed by one than by several. From this it follows that the
government of the world, being the best form of government, must
be by one. This is expressed by the Philosopher (Metaph. xii, Did. xi,
10): "Things refuse to be ill governed; and multiplicity of authorities
is a bad thing, therefore there should be one ruler."
Reply to Objection 1: Movement is "the act of a thing moved, caused
by the mover." Wherefore dissimilarity of movements is caused by
diversity of things moved, which diversity is essential to the
perfection of the universe (Question 47, Articles 1,2; Question 48,
Article 2), and not by a diversity of governors.
Reply to Objection 2: Although contraries do not agree with each
other in their proximate ends, nevertheless they agree in the ultimate
end, so far as they are included in the one order of the universe.
Reply to Objection 3: If we consider individual goods, then two are
better than one. But if we consider the essential good, then no
addition is possible.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the effect of government is one or many?

Objection 1: It would seem that there is but one effect of the
government of the world and not many. For the effect of government
is that which is caused in the things governed. This is one, namely,
the good which consists in order; as may be seen in the example of
an army. Therefore the government of the world has but one effect.
Objection 2: Further, from one there naturally proceeds but one. But
the world is governed by one as we have proved (Article 3).
Therefore also the effect of this government is but one.
Objection 3: Further, if the effect of government is not one by reason
of the unity of the Governor, it must be many by reason of the many
things governed. But these are too numerous to be counted.
Therefore we cannot assign any definite number to the effects of
government.
On the contrary, Dionysius says (Div. Nom. xii): "God contains all
and fills all by His providence and perfect goodness." But
government belongs to providence. Therefore there are certain
definite effects of the Divine government.
I answer that, The effect of any action may be judged from its end;
because it is by action that the attainment of the end is effected. Now
the end of the government of the world is the essential good, to the
participation and similarity of which all things tend. Consequently
the effect of the government of the world may be taken in three ways.
First, on the part of the end itself; and in this way there is but one
effect, that is, assimilation to the supreme good. Secondly, the effect
of the government of the world may be considered on the part of
those things by means of which the creature is made like to God.
Thus there are, in general, two effects of the government. For the
creature is assimilated to God in two things; first, with regard to this,
that God is good; and so the creature becomes like Him by being
good; and secondly, with regard to this, that God is the cause of
goodness in others; and so the creature becomes like God by
moving others to be good. Wherefore there are two effects of
government, the preservation of things in their goodness, and the
moving of things to good. Thirdly, we may consider in the individual
the effects of the government of the world; and in this way they are