of our misdoings, that not even he who knew all exactly would be able to choose
from among these only. Which of us, for instance, has not been careless in his
prayers? Which has not been insolent, or vainglorious? Who has not spoken evil
of his brother, has not admitted a wicked desire, has not looked with unchaste
eyes, has not remembered things with hostile feeling, even till he made his heart
swell?
And if while we are in church, and in a short time we have become guilty of
so great evils; what shall be when we are gone out from hence? If in the harbor
the waves are so high, when we are gone forth into the channel of wickednesses,
the forum I mean, and to public business, and our cares at home, shall we indeed
be able so much as to know ourselves again?
But yet from our so great and so many sins, God has given us a short and
easy way of deliverance, and one that is free from all toil. For what sort of toil is
it to forgive him that has grieved us? Nay, it is a toil not to forgive, but to keep
up our enmity: even as to be delivered from the anger, both works in us a great
refreshment, and is very easy to him that is willing. For there is no sea to be
crossed, nor long journey to be travelled, nor summits of mountains to be passed
over, nor money to be spent, no need to torment your body; but it suffices to be
willing only, and all our sins are done away.
But if so far from forgiving him yourself, you make intercession to God
against him, what hope of salvation will you then have, if at the very time when
you ought rather to appease God, even then you provoke Him; putting on the
garb of a suppliant, but uttering the cries of a wild beast, and darting out against
yourself those shafts of the wicked one? Wherefore Paul also, making mention
of prayer, required nothing so much as the observance of this commandment; for
He says, "lifting up holy hands without wrath and doubting." And if when you
have need of mercy, not even then will you let go your anger, but art rather
exceedingly mindful of it, and that, although you know you are thrusting the
sword into yourself; when will it be possible for you to become merciful, and to
spew out the evil venom of this wickedness?

But if you have not yet seen this outrageousness in its full extent, suppose it
happening among men, and then you will perceive the excess of the insolence.
As thus: should one approach you who are a man, seeking to obtain mercy, and
then, in the midst of his lying on the ground, should see an enemy, and leaving
off to supplicate you, begin to beat him; would you not make yourself more
angry with him? This do thou consider as taking place with regard to God also.
For so thou likewise, making supplication unto God, leavest your supplication in
the midst, and smitest your enemy with your words, and insultest the laws of
God. Him who made a law to dismiss all anger, you are summoning against
those that have vexed you, and requiring Him to do things contrary to His own
commandments. Is it not enough for you in the way of revenge, that you yourself
transgressest the law of God, but do you entreat Him likewise to do so? What?
Has He forgotten what He commanded? What? Is He a man who spoke these
things? It is God, who knows all things, and whose will is, that His own laws be
kept with the utmost exactness, and who, so far from doing these things which
you are requiring of Him, does even regard you who sayest these things, merely
because you say them, with aversion and hatred, and exacts of you the most
extreme penalty. How then do you seek to obtain of Him things, from which He
very seriously bids you refrain?
Yet some there are, who have come to such a point of brutishness, as not
only to make intercession against their enemies, but even to curse their children,
and to taste, if only it might be, of their very flesh; or rather they are even tasting
thereof. For tell me not this, that you have not fixed your teeth in the body of
him that vexed you; since you have done, at least as far as concerned you, what
is much more grievous; in claiming that wrath from above should fall upon him,
and that he should be delivered over to undying punishment, and be overthrown
with his whole house.
Why, what sort of bites are as ferocious as this? What kind of weapons as
bitter? Not so did Christ instruct you; not so did He command you to stain your
mouth with blood. Nay, mouths made bloody with human flesh are not so