THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.55, C.2.

Thee." Consequently, such things are not known by man except
through Divine revelation, as the Apostle says (1 Cor. 2:10): "God
hath revealed them to us by His spirit." Since, then, Christ rose by a
glorious Resurrection, consequently His Resurrection was not
manifested to everyone, but to some, by whose testimony it could be
brought to the knowledge of others.
Reply to Objection 1: Christ's Passion was consummated in a body
that still had a passible nature, which is known to all by general
laws: consequently His Passion could be directly manifested to all.
But the Resurrection was accomplished "through the glory of the
Father," as the Apostle says (Rm. 6:4). Therefore it was manifested
directly to some, but not to all.
But that a public penance is imposed upon public sinners, is to be
understood of the punishment of this present life. And in like manner
public merits should be rewarded in public, in order that others may
be stirred to emulation. But the punishments and rewards of the
future life are not publicly manifested to all, but to those specially
who are preordained thereto by God.
Reply to Objection 2: Just as Christ's Resurrection is for the
common salvation of all, so it came to the knowledge of all; yet not
so that it was directly manifested to all, but only to some, through
whose testimony it could be brought to the knowledge of all.
Reply to Objection 3: A woman is not to be allowed to teach publicly
in church; but she may be permitted to give familiar instruction to
some privately. And therefore as Ambrose says on Lk. 24:22, "a
woman is sent to them who are of her household," but not to the
people to bear witness to the Resurrection. But Christ appeared to
the woman first, for this reason, that as a woman was the first to
bring the source of death to man, so she might be the first to
announce the dawn of Christ's glorious Resurrection. Hence Cyril
says on Jn. 20:17: "Woman who formerly was the minister of death,
is the first to see and proclaim the adorable mystery of the
Resurrection: thus womankind has procured absolution from
ignominy, and removal of the curse." Hereby, moreover, it is shown,
so far as the state of glory is concerned, that the female sex shall
suffer no hurt; but if women burn with greater charity, they shall also
attain greater glory from the Divine vision: because the women
whose love for our Lord was more persistent---so much so that
"when even the disciples withdrew" from the sepulchre "they did not

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.55, C.2.

depart" [Gregory, Hom. xxv in Evang.]---were the first to see Him
rising in glory.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.55, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether it was fitting that the disciples should

see Him rise again?
Objection 1: It would seem fitting that the disciples should have seen
Him rise again, because it was their office to bear witness to the
Resurrection, according to Acts 4:33: "With great power did the
apostles give testimony to the Resurrection of Jesus Christ our
Lord." But the surest witness of all is an eye-witness. Therefore it
would have been fitting for them to see the very Resurrection of
Christ.
Objection 2: Further, in order to have the certainty of faith the
disciples saw Christ ascend into heaven, according to Acts 1:9:
"While they looked on, He was raised up." But it was also necessary
for them to have faith in the Resurrection. Therefore it seems that
Christ ought to have risen in sight of the disciples.
Objection 3: Further, the raising of Lazarus was a sign of Christ's
coming Resurrection. But the Lord raised up Lazarus in sight of the
disciples. Consequently, it seems that Christ ought to have risen in
sight of the disciples.
On the contrary, It is written (Mk. 16:9): The Lord "rising early the
first day of the week, appeared first to Mary Magdalen." Now Mary
Magdalen did not see Him rise; but, while searching for Him in the
sepulchre, she heard from the angel: "He is risen, He is not here."
Therefore no one saw Him rise again.
I answer that, As the Apostle says (Rm. 13:1): "Those things that are
of God, are well ordered." Now the divinely established order is this,
that things above men's ken are revealed to them by angels, as
Dionysius says (Coel. Hier. iv). But Christ on rising did not return to
the familiar manner of life, but to a kind of immortal and God-like
condition, according to Rm. 6:10: "For in that He liveth, He liveth
unto God." And therefore it was fitting for Christ's Resurrection not
to be witnessed by men directly, but to be proclaimed to them by
angels. Accordingly, Hilary (Comment. Matth. cap. ult.) says: "An
angel is therefore the first herald of the Resurrection, that it might be
declared out of obedience to the Father's will."
Reply to Objection 1: The apostles were able to testify to the