THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.15, C.6.

assumed, so that the custom of our body was atoned for by the
custom of our nature. Or when He took drink or food, He acceded,
not to the body's necessity, but to its custom." And he uses the word
"necessity" in reference to the first cause of these defects, which is
sin, as above stated (Question 14, Articles 1,3), so that Christ's flesh
is said not to have lain under the necessity of these defects, in the
sense that there was no sin in it. Hence he adds: "For He" (i.e.
Christ) "had a body---one proper to His origin, which did not exist
through the unholiness of our conception, but subsisted in the form
of our body by the strength of His power." But as regards the
proximate cause of these defects, which is composition of
contraries, the flesh of Christ lay under the necessity of these
defects, as was said above (Question 14, Article 2).
Reply to Objection 2: Flesh conceived in sin is subject to pain, not
merely on account of the necessity of its natural principles, but from
the necessity of the guilt of sin. Now this necessity was not in Christ;
but only the necessity of natural principles.
Reply to Objection 3: As was said above (Question 14, Article 1, ad
2), by the power of the Godhead of Christ the beatitude was
economically kept in the soul, so as not to overflow into the body,
lest His passibility and mortality should be taken away; and for the
same reason the delight of contemplation was so kept in the mind as
not to overflow into the sensitive powers, lest sensible pain should
thereby be prevented.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.15, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether there was sorrow in Christ?

Objection 1: It would seem that in Christ there was no sorrow. For it
is written of Christ (Is. 42:4): "He shall not be sad nor troublesome."
Objection 2: Further, it is written (Prov. 12:21): "Whatever shall befall
the just man, it shall not make him sad." And the reason of this the
Stoics asserted to be that no one is saddened save by the loss of his
goods. Now the just man esteems only justice and virtue as his
goods, and these he cannot lose; otherwise the just man would be
subject to fortune if he was saddened by the loss of the goods
fortune has given him. But Christ was most just, according to Jer.
23:6: "This is the name that they shall call Him: The Lord, our just
one." Therefore there was no sorrow in Him.
Objection 3: Further, the Philosopher says (Ethic. vii, 13,14) that all
sorrow is "evil, and to be shunned." But in Christ there was no evil to
be shunned. Therefore there was no sorrow in Christ.
Objection 4: Furthermore, as Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xiv, 6):
"Sorrow regards the things we suffer unwillingly." But Christ
suffered nothing against His will, for it is written (Is. 53:7): "He was
offered because it was His own will." Hence there was no sorrow in
Christ.
On the contrary, Our Lord said (Mt. 26:38): "My soul is sorrowful
even unto death." And Ambrose says (De Trin. ii.) that "as a man He
had sorrow; for He bore my sorrow. I call it sorrow, fearlessly, since I
preach the cross."
I answer that, As was said above (Article 5, ad 3), by Divine
dispensation the joy of contemplation remained in Christ's mind so
as not to overflow into the sensitive powers, and thereby shut out
sensible pain. Now even as sensible pain is in the sensitive appetite,
so also is sorrow. But there is a difference of motive or object; for
the object and motive of pain is hurt perceived by the sense of
touch, as when anyone is wounded; but the object and motive of
sorrow is anything hurtful or evil interiorly, apprehended by the
reason or the imagination, as was said in the FS, Question 35,
Articles 2,7, as when anyone grieves over the loss of grace or
money. Now Christ's soul could apprehend things as hurtful either to