and to show this, the writer premises, "filled with the Holy Ghost," that is, with
His operation. "And now behold the hand of the Lord is upon you." [Acts 13:11]
It was not vengeance then, but healing: for it is as though he said: "It is not I that
do it, but the hand of God." Mark how unassuming! No "light," as in the case of
Paul, "shone round about him." [Acts 9:3] "You shall be blind," he says, "not
seeing the sun for a season," that he may give him opportunity for repentance:
for we nowhere find them wishing to be made conspicuous by the more stern
(exercise of their authority), even though it was against enemies that this was put
forth: in respect of those of their own body (they used severity), and with good
reason, but in dealing with those without, not so; that (the obedience of faith)
might not seem to be matter of compulsion and fear. It is a proof of his
blindness, his "seeking some to lead him by the hand." [Acts 5:1 ff.] And the
proconsul sees the blindness inflicted, "and when he saw what was done, he
believed:" and both alone believed not merely this, but, "being astonished at the
doctrine of the Lord" [Acts 13:12]: he saw that these things were not mere
words, nor trickery. Mark how he loved to receive instruction from his teachers,
though he was in a station of so high authority. And (Paul) said not to the
sorcerer, "Will you not cease to pervert" the proconsul? What may be the reason
of John's going back from them? For "John," it says, "departing from them
returned to Jerusalem" [Acts 13:13]: (he does it) because they are undertaking a
still longer journey: and yet he was their attendant, and as for the danger, they
incurred it (not he).— Again, when they had come to Perga, they hastily passed
by the other cities, for they were in haste to the metropolis, Antioch. And
observe how concise the historian is. "They sat down in the synagogue," he says,
and, "on the sabbath day" (v. 14, 15): that they might prepare the way
beforehand for the Word. And they do not speak first, but when invited: since as
strangers, they called upon them to do so. Had they not waited, there would have
been no discourse. Here for the first time we have Paul preaching. And observe
his prudence: where the word was already sown, he passes on: but where there
was none (to preach), he makes a stay: as he himself writes: "Yea, so have I

strived to preach the Gospel, not where Christ was named." [Romans 15:20]
Great courage this also. Truly, from the very outset, a wonderful man! crucified,
ready for all encounters ([παρατεταγμένος]), he knew how great grace he had
obtained, and he brought to it zeal equivalent. He was not angry with John: for
this was not for him: but he kept to the work, he quailed not, he was unappalled,
when shut up in the midst of a host. Observe how wisely it is ordered that Paul
should not preach at Jerusalem: the very hearing that he has become a believer,
this of itself is enough for them; for him to preach, they never would have
endured, such was their hatred of him: so he departs far away, where he was not
known. But it is well done, that "they entered the synagogue on the sabbath day"
when all were collected together. "And after the reading of the Law and the
Prophets, the rulers of the synagogue sent unto them, saying, You men and
brethren, if you have any word or exhortation for the people, say on." [Acts
13:15] Behold how they do this without grudging, but no longer after this. If you
did wish this (really), there was more need to exhort.
He first convicted the sorcerer (and showed), what he was; and that he was
such, the sign showed: "you shall be blind, not seeing the sun" this was a sign of
the blindness of his soul: "for a season" [Acts 13:11]: he says, to bring him to
repentance. But, oh that love of rule! Oh, that lust of vainglory! How it does
overturn and ruin everything; makes people stand up against their own, against
each other's salvation; renders them blind indeed, and dark, insomuch that they
have even to seek for some to lead them by the hand! Oh that they did even this,
oh that they did seek were it but some to lead them by the hand! But no, they no
longer endure this, they take the whole matter into their own hands. (This vice)
will let no man see: like a mist and thick darkness it spreads itself over them, not
letting any see through it. What pleas shall we have to offer, we who for one evil
affection, overcome another evil affection (supra p. 176), but not for the fear of
God! For example, many who are both lewd and covetous, have for their
niggardliness put a bridle upon their lust, while other such, on the contrary, have
for pleasure's sake, despised riches. Again, those who are both the one and the