alms, it is preserved:" but He threatened also the opposite thing, that if you give
not, it perishes.
And see His unspeakable prudence. For neither did He say, "Thou dost but
leave them to others;" since this too is pleasant to men: He alarms them however
on a new ground, by signifying that not even this do they obtain: since though
men defraud not, there are those which are sure to defraud, "the moth" and "the
rust." For although this mischief seem very easy to restrain, it is nevertheless
irresistible and uncontrollable, and devise what you will, you will be unable to
check this harm.
"What then, does moth make away with the gold?" Though not moth, yet
thieves do. "What then, have all been despoiled?" Though not all, yet the more
part.
3. On this account then He adds another argument, which I have already
mentioned, saying,
"Where the man's treasure is, there is his heart also."
For though none of these things should come to pass, says He, you will
undergo no small harm, in being nailed to the things below, and in becoming a
slave instead of a freeman, and casting yourself out of the heavenly things, and
having no power to think on anything that is high, but all about money, usuries
and loans, and gains, and ignoble traffickings. Than this what could be more
wretched? For in truth such an one will be worse off than any slave, bringing
upon himself a most grievous tyranny, and giving up the chiefest thing of all,
even the nobleness and the liberty of man. For how much soever any one may
discourse unto you, you will not be able to hear any of those things which
concern you, while your mind is nailed down to money; but bound like a dog to
a tomb, by the tyranny of riches, more grievously than by any chain, barking at
all that come near you, you have this one employment continually, to keep for
others what you have laid up. Than this what can be more wretched?
However, forasmuch as this was too high for the mind of His hearers, and
neither was the mischief within easy view of the generality, nor the gain evident,

but there was need of a spirit of more self-command to perceive either of these;
first, He has put it after those other topics, which are obvious, saying, "Where the
man's treasure is, there is his heart also;" and next He makes it clear again, by
withdrawing His discourse from the intellectual to the sensible, and saying,
"The light of the body is the eye."
What He says is like this: Bury not gold in the earth, nor do any other such
thing, for thou dost but gather it for the moth, and the rust, and the thieves. And
even if you should entirely escape these evils, yet the enslaving of your heart, the
nailing it to all that is below, you will not escape: "For wheresoever your
treasure may be, there is your heart also." As then, laying up stores in heaven,
you will reap not this fruit only, the attainment of the rewards for these things,
but from this world you already receive your recompence, in getting into harbor
there, in setting your affections on the things that are there, and caring for what
is there (for where you have laid up your treasures, it is most clear you transfer
your mind also); so if you do this upon earth, you will experience the contrary.
But if the saying be obscure to you, hear what comes next in order. "The
light of the body is the eye; if therefore your eye be single, your whole body shall
be full of light. But if your eye be evil, your whole body shall be full of darkness.
But if the light that is in you be darkness, how great is the darkness!"
He leads His discourse to the things which are more within the reach of our
senses. I mean, forasmuch as He had spoken of the mind as enslaved and
brought into captivity, and there were not many who could easily discern this, He
transfers the lesson to things outward, and lying before men's eyes, that by these
the others also might reach their understanding. Thus, "If you know not," says
He, "what a thing it is to be injured in mind, learn it from the things of the body;
for just what the eye is to the body, the same is the mind to the soul." As
therefore you would not choose to wear gold, and to be clad in silken garments,
your eyes withal being put out, but accountest their sound health more desirable
than all such superfluity (for, should you lose this health or waste it, all your life
besides will do you no good): for just as when the eyes are blinded, most of the