Homily 32 on the Gospel of John
John 4:13-14
"Jesus answered and said unto her, Whosoever drinks of this water shall thirst
again: but whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give him, shall never thirst;
but the water that I shall give him, shall be in him a well of water springing up
into everlasting Life."
1. Scripture calls the grace of the Spirit sometimes "Fire," sometimes
"Water," showing that these names are not descriptive of its essence, but of its
operation; for the Spirit, being Invisible and Simple, cannot be made up of
different substances. Now the one John declares, speaking thus, "He shall
baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with Fire" [Matthew 3:11]: the other,
Christ, "Out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water." [John 7:38] "But this,"
says John, "spoke He of the Spirit, which they should receive." So also
conversing with the woman, He calls the Spirit water; for, "Whosoever shall
drink of the water which I shall give him, shall never thirst." So also He calls the
Spirit by the name of "fire," alluding to the rousing and warming property of
grace, and its power of destroying transgressions; but by that of "water," to
declare the cleansing wrought by it, and the great refreshment which it affords to
those minds which receive it. And with good reason; for it makes the willing
soul like some garden thick with all manner of trees fruitful and ever-flourishing,
allowing it neither to feel despondency nor the plots of Satan, and quenches all
the fiery darts of the wicked one.
And observe, I pray you, the wisdom of Christ, how gently He leads on the
woman; for He did not say at first, "If you knew who it is that says to you, Give
Me to drink," but when He had given her an occasion of calling Him "a Jew,"
and brought her beneath the charge of having done so, repelling the accusation
He says, "If you knew who it is that says to you, Give Me to drink, you would

have asked of Him"; and having compelled her by His great promises to make
mention of the Patriarch, He thus allows the woman to look through, and then
when she objects, "Are you greater than our father Jacob?" He says not, "Yea, I
am greater," (for He would have seemed but to boast, since the proof did not as
yet appear,) but by what He says He effects this. For He said not simply, "I will
give you water," but having first set that given by Jacob aside, He exalts that
given by Himself, desiring to show from the nature of the things given, how
great is the interval and difference between the persons of the givers, and His
own superiority to the Patriarch. "If," says He, "you admire Jacob because he
gave you this water, what will you say if I give you Water far better than this?
You have yourself been first to confess that I am greater than Jacob, by arguing
against Me, and asking, 'Are you greater than Jacob, that you promise to give
me better water?' If you receive that Water, certainly you will confess that I am
greater." Do you see the upright judgment of the woman, giving her decision
from facts, both as to the Patriarch, and as to Christ? The Jews acted not thus;
when they even saw Him casting out devils, they not only did not call Him
greater than the Patriarch but even said that He had a devil. Not so the woman,
she draws her opinion whence Christ would have her, from the demonstration
afforded by His works. For by these He justifies Himself, saying, "If I do not the
works of My Father, believe Me not; but if I do, if you believe not Me, believe the
works." [c. x. 37, 38] And thus the woman is brought over to the faith.
Wherefore also He, having heard, "Are you greater than our father Jacob,"
leaves Jacob, and speaks concerning the water, saying, "Whosoever shall drink
of this water, shall thirst again"; and He makes His comparison, not by
depreciating one, but by showing the excellence of the other; for He says not,
that "this water is naught," nor "that it is inferior and contemptible," but what
even nature testifies that He says: "Whosoever shall drink of this water shall
thirst again; but whosoever shall drink of the Water which I shall give him, shall
never thirst." The woman before this had heard of "living Water" [John 4:10],
but had not known its meaning. Since because that water is called "living" which