things are said: for it were less grievous uttered in words than done in deeds. For
is not this the cry, day by day, of the inhuman and cruel tyrant, Covetousness, to
those who are led captive by her? "Let your goods be set before informers and
robbers and traitors for luxury, and not before the hungry and needy for their
sustenance." Is it not ye then who make robbers? Is it not ye who minister fuel to
the fire of the envious? Is it not ye who make vagabonds and traitors, putting
your wealth before them for a bait? What madness is this? (for a madness it is,
and plain distraction,) to fill your chests with apparel, and overlook him that is
made after God's image and similitude, naked and trembling with cold, and with
difficulty keeping himself upright.
"But he pretends," says one, "this tremor and weakness." And do you not
fear lest a thunderbolt from heaven, kindled by this word, should fall upon you?
(For I am bursting with wrath: bear with me.) You, I say, pampering and
fattening yourself and extending your potations to the dead of night and
comforting yourself in soft coverlets, dost not deem yourself liable to judgment,
so lawlessly using the gifts of God: (for wine was not made that we should be
drunken; nor food, that we should pamper our appetites; nor meats, that we
should distend the belly.) But from the poor, the wretched, from him that is as
good as dead, from him do you demand strict accounts, and do you not fear
Christ's tribunal, so full of all awfulness and terror? Why, if he do play the
hypocrite, he does it of necessity and want, because of your cruelty and
inhumanity, requiring the use of such masks and refusing all inclination to
mercy. For who is so wretched and miserable as without urgent necessity, for one
loaf of bread, to submit to such disgrace, and to bewail himself and endure so
severe a punishment? So that this hypocrisy of his goes about, the herald of your
inhumanity. For since by supplicating and beseeching and uttering piteous
expressions and lamenting and weeping and going about all day, he does not
obtain even necessary food, he devised perhaps even this contrivance also, the
disgrace and blame whereof falls not so much on himself as on you: for he
indeed is meet to be pitied because he has fallen into so great necessity; but we

are worthy of innumerable punishments because we compel the poor to suffer
such things. For if we would easily give way, never would he have chosen to
endure such things.
And why speak I of nakedness and trembling? For I will tell a thing yet
more to be shuddered at, that some have been compelled even to deprive their
children of sight at an early age in order that they might touch our insensibility.
For since when they could see and went about naked, neither by their age nor by
their misfortunes could they win favor of the unpitying, they added to so great
evils another yet sterner tragedy, that they might remove their hunger; thinking it
to be a lighter thing to be deprived of this common light and that sunshine which
is given to all, than to struggle with continual famine and endure the most
miserable of deaths. Thus, since you have not learned to pity poverty, but delight
yourselves in misfortunes, they satisfy your insatiable desire, and both for
themselves and for us kindle a fiercer flame in hell.
9. And to convince you that this is the reason why these and such like
things are done, I will tell you of an acknowledged proof which no man can
gainsay. There are other poor men, of light and unsteady minds and not knowing
how to bear hunger, but rather enduring every thing than it. These having often
tried to deal with us by piteous gestures and words and finding that they availed
nothing, have left off those supplications and henceforward our very wonderworkers are surpassed by them, some chewing the skins of worn-out shoes, and
some fixing sharp nails into their heads, others lying about in frozen pools with
naked stomachs, and others enduring different things yet more horrid than these,
that they may draw around them the ungodly spectators. And thou, while these
things are going on, standest laughing and wondering the while and making a
fine show of other men's miseries, our common nature disgracing itself. And
what could a fierce demon do more? Next, you give him money in abundance
that he may do these things more promptly. And to him that prays and calls on
God and approaches with modesty, you vouchsafe neither an answer nor a look:
rather you utter to him, continually teazing you, those disgusting expressions,