good for those purposes, and all things will be easy from the Spirit and the love,
while you are made to glow from both sides. Do you not see the bulls (Hannibal.
ap. Liv. xxii. 16) that carry a flame upon their back, how nobody is able to
withstand them? So thou also will be more than the devil can sustain, if you take
both these flames. "Serving the Lord." For it is possible to serve God in all these
ways; in that whatever you do to your brother passes on to your Master, and as
having been Himself benefited, He will reckon your reward accordingly. See to
what height he has raised the spirit of the man that works these things! Then to
show how the flame of the Spirit might be kindled, he says,
Ver. 12. "Rejoicing in hope, patient in tribulation, continuing instant in
prayer."
For all these things are fuel for that fire. For when he had required the
expenditure of money and the labor of the person, and ruling, and zeal, and
teaching, and other laborious occupations, he again supplies the wrestler with
love, with the Spirit, through hope. For there is nothing which makes the soul so
courageous and venturesome for anything as a good hope. Then even before the
good things hoped for, he gives another reward again. For since hope is of things
to come, he says, "patient in tribulation." And before the things to come, in this
life present you will gain a great good [see on Romans 5:4, p. 397] from
tribulation, that of becoming hardy and tried. And after this he affords them
another help, when he says, "continuing instant in prayer." When therefore love
makes things easy, and the Spirit assists, and hope lightens, and tribulation
makes you tried and apt for bearing everything nobly, and you have along with
these another very great weapon, to wit, "prayer" and the aidances that come of
prayer, what further grievousness can there be in what he is enjoining? Surely
none. You see how in every way he gives the wrestler firm footing and shows
that the injunctions are perfectly easy. Consider again how he vindicates
almsgiving, or rather not almsgiving absolutely, but that to the saints. For above
when he says, "he that shows mercy with cheerfulness," he makes us openhanded to everybody. Here, however, it is in behalf of the faithful that he is

speaking. And so he proceeds to say,
Ver. 13. "Sharing with the necessity ([χρείαις], al. [μνείαις], memories) of
the saints."
He does not say, Bestow upon, but "share with the necessity of the saints,"
to show that they receive more than they give, that it is a matter of merchandise,
because it is a community. Do you bring in money? They bring you in boldness
toward God. "Given to (Gr. pursuing) hospitality." He does not say doing it, but
"given" to it, so to instruct us not to wait for those that shall ask it, and see when
they will come to us, but to run to them, and be given to finding them.
Thus did Lot, thus Abraham. For he spent the whole day upon it, waiting
for this goodly prey, and when he saw it, leaped upon it, and ran to meet them,
and worshipped upon the ground, and said, "My Lord, if now I have found favor
in Your sight, pass not away from Your servant." [Genesis 18:3] Not as we do, if
we happen to see a stranger or a poor man, knitting our brows, and not deigning
even to speak to them. And if after thousands of entreaties we are softened, and
bid the servant give them a trifle, we think we have quite done our duty. But he
did not so, but assumed the fashion of a suppliant and a servant, though he did
not know who he was going to take under his roof. But we, who have clear
information that it is Christ Whom we take in, do not grow gentle even for this.
But he both beseeches, and entreats, and falls on his knees to them, yet we insult
those that come to us. And he indeed did all by himself and his wife, whereas we
do it not even by our attendants. But if you have a mind to see the table that he
set before them, there too you will see great bounteousness, but the
bounteousness came not from excess of wealth, but of the riches of a ready will.
Yet how many rich persons were there not then? Still none did anything of the
kind. How many widows were there in Israel? Yet none showed hospitality to
Elijah. How many wealthy persons again were there not in Elisha's day? But the
Shunamite alone gathered in the fruits of hospitality; as did Abraham also,
whom beside his largeness and ready mind it is just especially to admire, on this
ground, that when he had no knowledge who they were that had come, yet he so