Matt. xvi. 24, 25.

of the Lord's passion, having become martyrs of the suffering One; these we do also enrol with the
martyrs themselves. For, when inquisition shall be made for their blood, and they shall attain to
glory, then all shall be confounded by Christ, who have cast a slur upon their martyrdom. And from
this fact, that He exclaimed upon the cross, "Father, forgive them, for they know not what they
do," the long-suffering, patience, compassion, and goodness of Christ are exhibited, since He
both suffered, and did Himself exculpate those who had maltreated Him. For the Word of God,
who said to us, "Love your enemies, and pray for those that hate you," Himself did this very
thing upon the cross; loving the human race to such a degree, that He even prayed for those putting
Him to death. If, however, any one, going upon the supposition that there are two [Christs], forms
a judgment in regard to them, that [Christ] shall be found much the better one, and more patient,
and the truly good one, who, in the midst of His own wounds and stripes, and the other [cruelties]
inflicted upon Him, was beneficent, and unmindful of the wrongs perpetrated upon Him, than he
who flew away, and sustained neither injury nor insult.
6. This also does likewise meet [the case] of those who maintain that He suffered only in
appearance. For if He did not truly suffer, no thanks to Him, since there was no suffering at all;
and when we shall actually begin to suffer, He will seem as leading us astray, exhorting us to endure
buffering, and to turn the other cheek, if He did not Himself before us in reality suffer the same;
and as He misled them by seeming to them what He was not, so does He also mislead us, by
exhorting us to endure what He did not endure Himself. [In that case] we shall be even above the
Master, because we suffer and sustain what our Master never bore or endured. But as our Lord is
alone truly Master, so the Son of God is truly good and patient, the Word of God the Father having
been made the Son of man. For He fought and conquered; for He was man contending for the
fathers, and through obedience doing away with disobedience completely: for He bound the
strong man, and set free the weak, and endowed His own handiwork with salvation, by destroying
sin. For He is a most holy and merciful Lord, and loves the human race.
7. Therefore, as I have already said, He caused man (human nature) to cleave to and to become,
one with God. For unless man had overcome the enemy of man, the enemy would not have been
legitimately vanquished. And again: unless it had been God who had freely given salvation, we
could never have possessed it securely. And unless man had been joined to God, he could never
have become a partaker of incorruptibility. For it was incumbent upon the Mediator between God
and men, by His relationship to both, to bring both to friendship and concord, and present man to