to David? Are you conversing, oh tell me, of some man, and giving him Jesse's
son for a father? And wherein are these things worthy of what you have just
spoken of? Yea, they are fully worthy. For our discourse is not, says he, of any
bare man. Such was my reason for adding, "according to the flesh;" as hinting
that there is also a Generation of the Same after the Spirit. And why did he begin
from that and not from this the higher? It is because that was what Matthew, and
Luke, and Mark, began from. For he who would lead men by the hand to
Heaven, must needs lead them upwards from below. So too was the actual
dispensation ordered. First, that is, they saw Him a man upon earth, and then
they understood Him to be God. In the same direction then, as He Himself had
framed His teaching, did His disciple also shape out the way which leads there.
Therefore the generation according to the flesh is in his language placed first in
order, not because it was first, but because he was for leading the hearer from
this up to that.
Ver. 4. "And declared to be the Son of God with power, according to the
Spirit of Holiness, by the resurrection from the dead, even Jesus Christ."
What is said has been made obscure by the close-folding of the words, and
so it is necessary to divide it. What then is it, which he says? We preach, says he,
Him Who was made of David. But this is plain. Whence then is it plain, that this
incarnate "Person" was also the Son of God? First, it is so from the prophets;
wherefore he says, "Which He had promised afore by the Prophets in the Holy
Scriptures." [Romans 1:2] And this way of demonstration is no weak one. And
next also from the very way of His Generation: which also he sets forth by
saying, "of the seed of David according to the flesh:" for He broke the rule of
nature. Thirdly, from the miracles which He did, yielding a demonstration of
much power, for "in power" means this. Fourthly, from the Spirit which He gave
to them that believe upon Him, and through which He made them all holy,
wherefore he says, "according to the Spirit of holiness." For it was of God only
to grant such gifts. Fifthly, from the Resurrection; for He first and He alone
raised Himself: and this Himself too said to be above all a miracle sufficient to

stop the mouths even of them that behaved shamelessly. For, "Destroy this
Temple," He says, "and in three days I will raise it up" [John 19]; and, "When
you have lifted" Me "up from the earth, then shall you know that I am He" [John
8:28]; and again, This "generation seeks after a sign; and there shall no sign be
given unto it, but the sign of Jonas." [Matthew 12:39] What then is the being
"declared?" being shown, being manifested, being judged, being confessed, by
the feeling and suffrage of all; by Prophets, by the marvelous Birth after the
Flesh, by the power which was in the miracles, by the Spirit, through which He
gave sanctification, by the Resurrection, whereby He put an end to the tyranny
of death.
Ver. 5. "By Whom we have received grace and Apostleship for obedience to
the faith."
See the candor of the servant. He wishes nothing to be his own, but all his
Master's. And indeed it was the Spirit that gave this. Wherefore He says, "I have
many things to say unto you, but you cannot bear them now. Howbeit when He,
the Spirit of Truth, has come, He will guide you into all truth" [John 16:12]: and
again, "Separate Me Paul and Barnabas." [Acts 13:2] And in the Epistle to the
Corinthians, he says, that "to one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom, to
another the word of knowledge" [1 Corinthians 12:8-11]; and that It divides all
as It wills. And in addressing the Milesians, he says, "Over which the Holy
Ghost has made you shepherds and overseers." [Acts 20:28] You see, he calls
the things of the Spirit, the Son's, and the things of the Son, the Spirit's. "Grace
and Apostleship;" that is, it is not we that have achieved for ourselves, that we
should become Apostles. For it was not by having toiled much and labored that
we had this dignity allotted to us, but we received grace, and the successful
result is a part of the heavenly gift. "For obedience to the faith." So it was not
the Apostles that achieved it, but grace that paved the way before them. For it
was their part to go about and preach, but to persuade was of God, Who wrought
in them. As also Luke says, that "He opened their heart" [Acts 16:14]; and
again, To whom it was given to hear the word of God. "To obedience;" he says