1 Corinthians 15:21
"For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the
dead."
But if by a man, doubtless by one having a body. And observe his
thoughtfulness, how on another ground also he makes his argument inevitable.
As thus: "he that is defeated," says he, "must in his own person also renew the
conflict, the nature which was cast down must itself also gain the victory. For so
the reproach was wiped away."
But let us see what kind of death he is speaking of.

1 Corinthians 15:22
"For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive."
What then? Tell me; did all die in Adam the death of sin ? How then was
Noah righteous in his generation? And how Abraham? And how Job? And how
all the rest? And what, I pray? Shall all be made alive in Christ? Where then are
those who are led away into hell fire? Thus, if this be said of the body, the
doctrine stands: but if of righteousness and sin, it does so no longer.
Further, lest, on hearing that the making alive is common to all, you should
also suppose that sinners are saved, he adds,

1 Corinthians 15:23
"But every man in his own order."
For do not, because you hear of a resurrection, imagine that all enjoy the
same benefits. Since if in the punishment all will not suffer alike but the
difference is great; much more where there are sinners and righteous men shall
the separation be yet wider.
"Christ the first-fruits, then they that are Christ's;" i.e., the faithful and the
approved.

1 Corinthians 15:24
"Then comes the end."
For when these shall have risen again, all things shall have an end, not as
now when after Christ's resurrection things abide yet in suspense. Wherefore he
added, "at His coming," that you may learn that he is speaking of that time,
"when He shall have delivered up the kingdom to God even the Father; when He
shall have abolished all rule and all authority and power."
6. Here, give heed to me carefully, and see that no part escape you of what I
say. For our contest is with enemies : wherefore we first must practice the
reductio ad absurdum which also Paul often does. Since in this way shall we find
what they say most easy of detection. Let us ask them then first, what is the
meaning of the saying, "When he shall have delivered up the kingdom to God,
even the Father?" For if we take this just as it stands and not in a sense
becoming Deity, He will not after this retain it. For he that has delivered up to
another, ceases any longer to retain a thing himself. And not only will there be
this absurdity, but that also the other person who receives it will be found not to
be possessor of it before he has so received it. Therefore according to them,
neither was the Father a King before, governing our affairs: nor will it seem that
the Son after these things will be a King. How then, first of all, concerning the
Father does the Son Himself say, "My Father works hitherto, and I work:" [John
5:17] and of Him Daniel, "That His kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, which
shall not pass away?" [Daniel 7:14] Do you see how many absurdities are
produced, and repugnant to the Scriptures, when one takes the thing spoken after
the manner of men?
But what "rule," then does he here say, that Christ "puts down?" That of the
angels? Far from it. That of the faithful? Neither is it this. What rule then? That
of the devils, concerning which he says, "Our wrestling is not against flesh and