31. On the other hand, I wish to emphasize how profoundly the Catholic Church, the
Orthodox Church and the ancient Churches of the East feel united by love and praise of
the Theotokos. Not only "basic dogmas of the Christian faith concerning the Trinity and
God's Word made flesh of the Virgin Mary were defined in Ecumenical Councils held in
the East," but also in their liturgical worship "the Orientals pay high tribute, in very
beautiful hymns, to Mary ever Virgin...God's Most Holy Mother."

The brethren of these Churches have experienced a complex history, but it is one that has
always been marked by an intense desire for Christian commitment and apostolic
activity, despite frequent persecution, even to the point of bloodshed. It is a history of
fidelity to the Lord, an authentic "pilgrimage of faith" in space and time, during which
Eastern Christians have always looked with boundless trust to the Mother of the Lord,
celebrated her with praise and invoked her with unceasing prayer. In the difficult
moments of their troubled Christian existence, "they have taken refuge under her

protection," conscious of having in her a powerful aid. The Churches which profess the
doctrine of Ephesus proclaim the Virgin as "true Mother of God," since "our Lord Jesus
Christ, born of the Father before time began according to his divinity, in the last days, for
our sake and for our salvation, was himself begotten of Mary, the Virgin Mother of God
according to his humanity." The Greek Fathers and the Byzantine tradition
contemplating the Virgin in the light of the Word made flesh, have sought to penetrate
the depth of that bond which unites Mary, as the Mother of God, to Christ and the
Church: the Virgin is a permanent presence in the whole reality of the salvific mystery.

The Coptic and Ethiopian traditions were introduced to this contemplation of the mystery
of Mary by St. Cyril of Alexandria, and in their turn they have celebrated it with a
profuse poetic blossoming. The poetic genius of St. Ephrem the Syrian, called "the lyre
of the Holy Spirit," tirelessly sang of Mary, leaving a still living mark on the whole
tradition of the Syriac Church. In his panegyric of the Theotókos, St. Gregory of Narek,
one of the outstanding glories of Armenia, with powerful poetic inspiration ponders the
different aspects of the mystery of the Incarnation, and each of them is for him an
occasion to sing and extol the extraordinary dignity and magnificent beauty of the Virgin
Mary, Mother of the Word made flesh.

It does not surprise us therefore that Mary occupies a privileged place in the worship or
the ancient Oriental Churches with an incomparable abundance of feasts and hymns.

32. In the Byzantine liturgy, in all the hours of the Divine Office, praise of the Mother is
linked with praise of her Son and with the praise which, through the Son, is offered up to
the Father in the Holy Spirit. In the Anaphora or Eucharistic Prayer of St. John
Chrysostom, immediately after the epiclesis the assembled community sings in honor of
the Mother of God: "It is truly just to proclaim you blessed, O Mother of God, who are
most blessed, all pure and Mother of our God. We magnify you who are more honorable
than the Cherubim and incomparably more glorious than the Seraphim. You who, without
losing your virginity, gave birth to the Word of God. You who are truly the Mother of
God."