SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.36, C.2.

charity, although the first movements of such discord are venial sins
by reason of their being imperfect acts.
The accidental in human acts is that which occurs beside the
intention. Hence when several intend a good pertaining to God's
honor, or our neighbor's profit, while one deems a certain thing
good, and another thinks contrariwise, the discord is in this case
accidentally contrary to the Divine good or that of our neighbor.
Such like discord is neither sinful nor against charity, unless it be
accompanied by an error about things necessary to salvation, or by
undue obstinacy, since it has also been stated above (Question 29,
Articles 1,3, ad 2) that the concord which is an effect of charity, is
union of wills not of opinions. It follows from this that discord is
sometimes the sin of one party only, for instance, when one wills a
good which the other knowingly resists; while sometimes it implies
sin in both parties, as when each dissents from the other's good, and
loves his own.
Reply to Objection 1: One man's will considered in itself is not the
rule of another man's will; but in so far as our neighbor's will
adheres to God's will, it becomes in consequence, a rule regulated
according to its proper measure. Wherefore it is a sin to disaccord
with such a will, because by that very fact one disaccords with the
Divine rule.
Reply to Objection 2: Just as a man's will that adheres to God is a
right rule, to disaccord with which is a sin, so too a man's will that is
opposed to God is a perverse rule, to disaccord with which is good.
Hence to cause a discord, whereby a good concord resulting from
charity is destroyed, is a grave sin: wherefore it is written (Prov.
6:16): "Six things there are, which the Lord hateth, and the seventh
His soul detesteth," which seventh is stated (Prov. 6:19) to be "him
that soweth discord among brethren." On the other hand, to arouse a
discord whereby an evil concord (i.e. concord in an evil will) is
destroyed, is praiseworthy. In this way Paul was to be commended
for sowing discord among those who concorded together in evil,
because Our Lord also said of Himself (Mt. 10:34): "I came not to
send peace, but the sword."
Reply to Objection 3: The discord between Paul and Barnabas was
accidental and not direct: because each intended some good, yet the
one thought one thing good, while the other thought something else,
which was owing to human deficiency: for that controversy was not

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.36, C.2.

about things necessary to salvation. Moreover all this was ordained
by Divine providence, on account of the good which would ensue.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.36, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether discord is a daughter of vainglory?

Objection 1: It would seem that discord is not a daughter of
vainglory. For anger is a vice distinct from vainglory. Now discord is
apparently the daughter of anger, according to Prov. 15:18: "A
passionate man stirreth up strifes." Therefore it is not a daughter of
vainglory.
Objection 2: Further, Augustine expounding the words of Jn. 7:39,
"As yet the Spirit was not given," says (Tract. xxxii) "Malice severs,
charity unites." Now discord is merely a separation of wills.
Therefore discord arises from malice, i.e. envy, rather than from
vainglory.
Objection 3: Further, whatever gives rise to many evils, would seem
to be a capital vice. Now such is discord, because Jerome in
commenting on Mt. 12:25, "Every kingdom divided against itself shall
be made desolate," says: "Just as concord makes small things
thrive, so discord brings the greatest things to ruin." Therefore
discord should itself be reckoned a capital vice, rather than a
daughter of vainglory.
On the contrary stands the authority of Gregory (Moral. xxxi, 45).
I answer that, Discord denotes a certain disunion of wills, in so far,
to wit, as one man's will holds fast to one thing, while the other
man's will holds fast to something else. Now if a man's will holds fast
to its own ground, this is due to the act that he prefers what is his
own to that which belongs to others, and if he do this inordinately, it
is due to pride and vainglory. Therefore discord, whereby a man
holds to his own way of thinking, and departs from that of others, is
reckoned to be a daughter of vainglory.
Reply to Objection 1: Strife is not the same as discord, for strife
consists in external deeds, wherefore it is becoming that it should
arise from anger, which incites the mind to hurt one's neighbor;
whereas discord consists in a divergence in the movements of wills,
which arises from pride or vainglory, for the reason given above.
Reply to Objection 2: In discord we may consider that which is the
term "wherefrom," i.e. another's will from which we recede, and in