gained? For if those who applauded you were benefited, changed in their minds,
become better men, and had desisted from their evil deeds, then might thou
indeed rejoice, not at the praises bestowed, but at the wonderful change for the
better. But if they continue their praises, and loud plaudits, but gain no good by
what they applaud, you ought rather to grieve: for these things turn to their
judgment and condemnation. But you obtain glory for your piety. If you are truly
pious, and conscious of no guilt, you should rejoice, not because thou are
reputed pious, but because you are so. But if, without being so, you desire the
good opinion of the multitude, consider that they will not be your judges at the
last day, but He who knows perfectly the things that are hid. And if while
conscious of guilt, you are supposed by all to be pure, instead of rejoicing, you
should grieve and mourn bitterly, keeping constantly in view that Day, in which
all things will be revealed, in which the hidden things of darkness will be
brought to light.
Do you enjoy honor? Reject it, knowing that it renders you a debtor. Does
no one honor you? You ought to rejoice at it. For God will not lay to your charge
this, among other things, that you have enjoyed honor. Do you see not that God
upbraids Israel with this among other things, by his prophet, "I took of your sons
for Prophets, and of your young men for sanctification"? [Amos 2:11,
Septuagint] You will therefore gain this advantage at least, that you will not
aggravate your punishment. For he who is not honored in the present life, who is
despised, and held in no consideration, but is insulted and scorned, gains this at
least, if nothing else, that he has not to answer for being honored by his fellowservants. And on many other accounts he gains by it. He is brought down and
humbled, nor if he would, can he be high-minded, if he takes the more heed to
himself. But he, who enjoys more honor, besides being responsible for great
debts, is lifted up into arrogance and vainglory, and becomes the slave of men;
and as this tyranny increases, he is compelled to do many things which he would
not.
Knowing therefore that it is better to want glory, than to possess it, let us

not seek for honors, but evade them when they are offered, let us cast them from
us, let us extinguish that desire. This we have said at once to the rulers of the
church, and to those under their rule. For a soul desirous of honor, and of being
glorified, shall not see the kingdom of heaven. This is not my own saying. I
speak not my own words, but those of the Spirit of God. He shall not see it,
though he practice virtue. For he says, "They have their reward." [Matthew 6:5]
He then, who has no reward to receive, how shall he see the kingdom of heaven?
I forbid you not to desire glory, but I would wish it to be the true glory, that
which proceeds from God. "Whose praise," it is said, "is not of men, but of God."
[Romans 2:29] Let us be pious in secret, not cumbered with parade, and show,
and hypocrisy. Let us cast away the sheep's clothing, and rather let us become
sheep. Nothing is more worthless than the glory of men. Should thou see a
company of little children, mere sucklings, would you desire glory from them?
Be thus affected towards all men with respect to glory.
It is for this reason called vainglory. Do you see the masks worn by stageplayers? How beautiful and splendid they are, fashioned to the extreme height of
elegance. Can you show me any such real countenance? By no means. What
then? Did you ever fall in love with them? No. Wherefore? Because they are
empty, imitating beauty, but not being really beautiful. Thus human glory is
empty, and an imitation of glory: it is not true glory. That beauty only which is
natural, which is within, is lasting: that which is put on externally often conceals
deformity, conceals it from men until the evening. But when the theater breaks
up, and the masks are taken off, each appears what he really is.
Let us therefore pursue truth, and not be as if we were on the stage and
acting a part. For of what advantage is it, tell me, to be gazed at by a multitude?
It is vainglory, and nothing else. For return to your house, and solitude, and
immediately all is gone. You have gone to the market-place, you have turned
upon you the eyes of all present. What have you gained? Nothing. It vanished,
and passed away like dissolving smoke. Do we then love things thus
unsubstantial? How unreasonable is this! What madness! To one thing only let