Ps. l. 9.

heart glorifying Him who formed it." For if, when angry, He had repudiated these sacrifices of
theirs, as if they were persons unworthy to obtain His compassion, He would not certainly have
urged these same things upon them as those by which they might be saved. But inasmuch as God
is merciful, He did not cut them off from good counsel. For after He had said by Jeremiah, "To
what purpose bring ye Me incense from Saba, and cinnamon from a far country? Your whole
burnt-offerings and sacrifices are not acceptable to Me;" He proceeds: "Hear the word of the
Lord, all Judah. These things saith the Lord, the God of Israel, Make straight your ways and your
doings, and I will establish you in this place. Put not your trust in lying words, for they will not at
all profit you, saying, The temple of the Lord, The temple of the Lord, it is [here]."
3. And again, when He points out that it was not for this that He led them out of Egypt, that
they might offer sacrifice to Him, but that, forgetting the idolatry of the Egyptians, they should be
able to hear the voice of the Lord, which was to them salvation and glory, He declares by this same
Jeremiah: "Thus saith the Lord; Collect together your burnt-offerings with your sacrifices and eat
flesh. For I spake not unto your fathers nor commanded them in the day that I brought them out of
Egypt, concerning burnt-offerings or sacrifices: but this word I commanded them, saying, Hear
My voice, and I will be your God, and ye shall be My people; and walk in all My ways whatsoever
I have commanded you, that it may be well with you. But they obeyed not, nor hearkened; but
walked in the imaginations of their own evil heart, and went backwards, and not forwards." And
again, when He declares by the same man, "But let him that glorieth, glory in this, to understand
and know that I am the Lord, who doth exercise loving-kindness, and righteousness, and judgment
in the earth;" He adds, "For in these things I delight, says the Lord," but not in sacrifices, nor in
holocausts, nor in oblations. For the people did not receive these precepts as of primary importance
(principaliter), but as secondary, and for the reason already alleged, as Isaiah again says: "Thou
hast not [brought to] Me the sheep of thy holocaust, nor in thy sacrifices hast thou glorified Me:
thou hast not served Me in sacrifices, nor in [the matter of] frankincense hast thou done anything
laboriously; neither hast thou bought for Me incense with money, nor have I desired the fat of thy
sacrifices; but thou hast stood before Me in thy sins and in thine iniquities." He says, therefore,
"Upon this man will I look, even upon him that is humble, and meek, and who trembles at My
Gospel according to the Egyptians. It is remarkable that we find the same words quoted also by Clement of Alexandria. [But he
(possibly with this place in view) merely quotes it as a saying, in close connection with Ps. li. 19, which is here partially cited.
See Clement, Pædagogue, b. iii. cap. xii.]