FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.29, C.4.

heat of tertian fever; because the heat of the hectic fever is habitual
and like a second nature. For this reason, love is felt more keenly in
the absence of the object loved; thus Augustine says (De Trin. x, 12)
that "love is felt more keenly when we lack what we love." And for
the same reason, the unbecomingness of that which is hated is felt
more keenly than the becomingness of that which is loved.
Secondly, because comparison is made between a hatred and a love
which are not mutually corresponding. Because, according to
different degrees of good there are different degrees of love to which
correspond different degrees of hatred. Wherefore a hatred that
corresponds to a greater love, moves us more than a lesser love.
Hence it is clear how to reply to the First Objection. For the love of
pleasure is less than the love of self-preservation, to which
corresponds flight from pain. Wherefore we flee from pain more than
we love pleasure.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.29, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether a man can hate himself?

Objection 1: It would seem that a man can hate himself. For it is
written (Ps. 10:6): "He that loveth iniquity, hateth his own soul." But
many love iniquity. Therefore many hate themselves.
Objection 2: Further, him we hate, to whom we wish and work evil.
But sometimes a man wishes and works evil to himself, e.g. a man
who kills himself. Therefore some men hate themselves.
Objection 3: Further, Boethius says (De Consol. ii) that "avarice
makes a man hateful"; whence we may conclude that everyone hates
a miser. But some men are misers. Therefore they hate themselves.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (Eph. 5:29) that "no man ever
hated his own flesh."
I answer that, Properly speaking, it is impossible for a man to hate
himself. For everything naturally desires good, nor can anyone
desire anything for himself, save under the aspect of good: for "evil
is outside the scope of the will," as Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iv).
Now to love a man is to will good to him, as stated above (Question
26, Article 4). Consequently, a man must, of necessity, love himself;
and it is impossible for a man to hate himself, properly speaking.
But accidentally it happens that a man hates himself: and this in two
ways. First, on the part of the good which a man wills to himself. For
it happens sometimes that what is desired as good in some
particular respect, is simply evil; and in this way, a man accidentally
wills evil to himself; and thus hates himself. Secondly, in regard to
himself, to whom he wills good. For each thing is that which is
predominant in it; wherefore the state is said to do what the king
does, as if the king were the whole state. Now it is clear that man is
principally the mind of man. And it happens that some men account
themselves as being principally that which they are in their material
and sensitive nature. Wherefore they love themselves according to
what they take themselves to be, while they hate that which they
really are, by desiring what is contrary to reason. And in both these
ways, "he that loveth iniquity hateth" not only "his own soul," but
also himself.