unjust." [Matthew 5:45] As then He loves us, do thou love Him. For He is our
Friend ([φιλεἵ γὰρ]). And how comes it, some will say, that one who is our
Friend threatens hell, and punishment, and vengeance? It is owing to His loving
us alone. For all He does and is busied with, is with a view to strike out your
wickedness, and to refrain with fear, as with a kind of bridle, your inclinableness
to the worse side, and by blessings and by pains recovering you from your
downward course, and leading you up to Him, and keeping you from all vice,
which is worse than hell. But if you mock what is said, and wouldest rather live
continually in misery, than be punished for a single day, it is no marvel. For this
is but a sign of your unformed judgment ([ἀ] [τελοὕς γνώμης]), drunkenness,
and incurable disorder. Since little children even when they see the physician
going to apply burning or the knife, flee and leap away screaming and
convulsed, and choose to have a continual sore eating into their body, rather than
to endure a temporary pain, and so enjoy health afterwards. But those who have
come to discretion, know that to be diseased is worse than submitting to the
knife, as also to be wicked is worse than to be punished. For the one is to be
cured and to be healthy, the other to ruin one's constitution and to be in continual
feebleness. Now that health is better than feebleness, surely is plain to every one.
Thieves then ought to weep not when they have their sides pierced through, but
when they pierce through walls and murder. For if the soul be better than the
body (as it is), when the former is ruined there is more reason to groan and
lament; but if a man does not feel it, so much the more reason to bewail it. For
those that love with an unchastened love ought to be more pitied than those who
have a violent fever, and those that are drunken, than those that are undergoing
torture. But if these are more painful (some may say), how come we to give
them the preference? Because there are many of mankind, who, as the proverb
says, like the worse, and they choose these, and pass by the better. And this one
may see happening as well in victuals as in forms of government, in emulous
aims of life too, and in the enjoyment of pleasure, and in wives, and in houses,
and in slaves, and in lands, and in the case of all other things. For which is more

pleasurable pray, cohabiting with women or with males? With women or with
mules? Yet still we shall find many that pass over women, and cohabit with
creatures void of reason, and abuse the bodies of males. Yet natural pleasures are
greater than unnatural ones. But still many there are that follow after things
ridiculous and joyless, and accompanied with a penalty, as if pleasurable. Well
but to them, a man may say, these things appear so. Now this alone is ground
enough to make them miserable, that they think those things to be pleasurable
which are not so. Thus they assume punishment to be worse than sin which it is
not, but just the contrary. Yet, if it were an evil to the sinner, God would not have
added evils to the evil; for He that does everything to extinguish evil, would not
have increased it. Being punished then is no evil to the man who has done
wrong, but not being punished, when in that plight, is evil, just as for the infirm
not to be cured. (Plat. Gorg. p. 478, sqq.) For there is nothing so evil as
extravagant desire. And when I say, extravagant, I mean that of luxury, and that
of ill-placed glory, and that of power, and in general that of all things which go
beyond what is necessary. For such is he who lives a soft and dissolute life, who
seems to be the happiest of men, but is the most wretched, as superinducing
upon his soul harsh and tyrannical sovereigns. For this cause has God made the
present a life of labor to us, that He may rid us of that slavery, and bring us into
genuine freedom. For this cause He threatened punishment, and made labors a
part of our portion in life, so muzzling our vaunting spirit. In this way the Jews
also, when they were fettered to the clay and brick making, were at once selfgoverned, and called continually upon God. But when they were in the
enjoyment of freedom, then they murmured, and provoked the Lord, and pierced
themselves through with countless evils. What then, it may be said, will you say
to those frequent instances of men being altered for the worse by tribulations?
Why, that this is no effect of tribulation, but of their own imbecility. For neither
if a man had a weak stomach and could not take a bitter medicine which would
act as a purgative, but was made even worse by it, would it be the drug we
should find fault with, but the weakness of the part, as we should therefore here