whether these things may not be predicated of the Son also. "Being Lord," he
says, "of heaven and earth"— which they accounted to be God's. Both the
creation he declares to be His work, and mankind also. "Having determined," he
says, "the times assigned to them, and the bounds of their habitation," (v. 25,
26), "that they should seek the Lord, if haply they might feel after Him, and find
Him, though He be not far from every one of us: for in Him we live, and move,
and have our being: as certain also of your own poets have said, For we are also
His offspring." (v. 27, 28.) This is said by Aratus the poet. Observe how he
draws his arguments from things done by themselves, and from sayings of their
own. "Forasmuch then as we are the offspring of God, we ought not to think that
the Godhead is like gold, or silver, or stone, graven by art." [Acts 17:29] And
yet for this reason we ought. By no means: for surely we are not like (to such),
nor are these souls of ours. "And imagination of man." How so? * * But some
person might say, "We do not think this." But it was to the many that he was
addressing himself, not now to Philosophy. How then did they think so
unworthily of Him? Again, putting it upon their ignorance, he says, "Now the
times of ignorance God overlooked." Having agitated their minds by the fear, he
then adds this: and yet he says, "but now he commands all men everywhere to
repent." [Acts 17:30] "Because He has appointed a day, in the which He will
judge the world in righteousness by that man whom He has ordained; whereof
He has given assurance unto all men, in that He has raised Him from the dead."
[Acts 17:31] But let us look over again what has been said.
(Recapitulation.) (b) "And while Paul waited," etc. [Acts 17:16] It is
providentially ordered that against his will he stays there, while waiting for those
others. (a) "His spirit," it says, "within him" [παρωξύνετο] . It does not mean
there anger or exasperation: just as elsewhere it says, "There was [παροξυσμὸς]
between them." [Acts 15:30] (c) Then what is [παρωξύνετο]? Was roused: for the
gift is far removed from anger and exasperation. He could not bear it, but pined
away. "He reasoned therefore in the synagogue," etc. [Acts 17:17] Observe him
again reasoning with Jews. By "devout persons" he means the proselytes. For the

Jews were dispersed everywhere before (mod. text "since") Christ's coming, the
Law indeed being henceforth, so to say, in process of dissolution, but at the same
time (the dispersed Jews) teaching men religion. But those prevailed nothing,
save only that they got witnesses of their own calamities. (e) "And certain
philosophers," etc. [Acts 17:18] How came they to be willing to confer with
him? (They did it) when they saw others reasoning, and the man having repute
(in the encounter). And observe straightway with overbearing insolence, "some
said, What would this babbler say? For the natural man receives not the things
of the Spirit." [1 Corinthians 2:14] Other some, He seems to be a setter-forth of
strange deities: [δαιμονίων], for so they called their gods. "And having taken
him, they brought him," etc. [Acts 17:19] (a) The Athenians no longer enjoyed
their own laws, but had become subject to the Romans. (g) (Then) why did they
hale him to the Areopagus? Meaning to overawe him— (the place) where they
held the trials for bloodshed. "May we know, what is this new doctrine spoken of
by you? For you bring certain strange things to our ears; we would fain know
therefore what these things mean. For all the Athenians and strangers which
were there spent their time in nothing else, but either to tell, or to hear some new
thing." (v. 20, 21.) Here the thing noted is, that though ever occupied only in this
telling and hearing, yet they thought those things strange— things which they
had never heard. "Then Paul standing in the midst of the Areopagus said, You
men of Athens, I look upon you as being in all things more religiously disposed"
[Acts 17:22]: (f) for the cities were full of gods ([δαιμόνων], al. [εἰδώλων]): (h)
this is why he says [δεισιδαιμονεστέρους] . For as I passed by and viewed the
objects of your worship — he does not say simply [τοὺς δαίμονας] (the demons,
or deities), but paves the way for his discourse: "I beheld an altar," etc. [Acts
17:23] This is why he says, "I look upon you as being more religiously
disposed," viz. because of the altar. "God," he says, "that made the world." [Acts
17:24] He uttered one word, by which he has subverted all the (doctrines) of the
philosophers. For the Epicureans affirm all to be fortuitously formed and (by
concourse) of atoms, the Stoics held it to be body and fire ([ἐ] [κπύρωσιν]). "The