SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.50, C.4.

so as to judge well. Even so, in speculative matters some are good at
research, through their reason being quick at arguing from one thing
to another (which seems to be due to a disposition of their power of
imagination, which has a facility in forming phantasms), and yet
such persons sometimes lack good judgment (and this is due to a
defect in the intellect arising chiefly from a defective disposition of
the common sense which fails to judge aright). Hence there is need,
besides euboulia (deliberating well), for another virtue, which judges
well, and this is called synesis (judging well according to common
law).
Reply to Objection 1: Right judgment consists in the cognitive power
apprehending a thing just as it is in reality, and this is due to the
right disposition of the apprehensive power. Thus if a mirror be well
disposed the forms of bodies are reflected in it just as they are,
whereas if it be ill disposed, the images therein appear distorted and
misshapen. Now that the cognitive power be well disposed to receive
things just as they are in reality, is radically due to nature, but, as to
its consummation, is due to practice or to a gift of grace, and this in
two ways. First directly, on the part of the cognitive power itself, for
instance, because it is imbued, not with distorted, but with true and
correct ideas: this belongs to synesis (judging well according to
common law) which in this respect is a special virtue. Secondly
indirectly, through the good disposition of the appetitive power, the
result being that one judges well of the objects of appetite: and thus
a good judgment of virtue results from the habits of moral virtue; but
this judgment is about the ends, whereas synesis (judging well
according to common law) is rather about the means.
Reply to Objection 2: In wicked men there may be right judgment of a
universal principle, but their judgment is always corrupt in the
particular matter of action, as stated above (Question 47, Article 13).
Reply to Objection 3: Sometimes after judging aright we delay to
execute or execute negligently or inordinately. Hence after the virtue
which judges aright there is a further need of a final and principal
virtue, which commands aright, and this is prudence.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.50, C.4.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.50, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether gnome (judging well according to

general law) is a special virtue?
Objection 1: It would seem that gnome (judging well according to
general law) is not a special virtue distinct from synesis (judging well
according to common law). For a man is said, in respect of synesis
(judging well according to common law), to have good judgment.
Now no man can be said to have good judgment, unless he judge
aright in all things. Therefore synesis (judging well according to
common law) extends to all matters of judgment, and consequently
there is no other virtue of good judgment called gnome (judging well
according to general law).
Objection 2: Further, judgment is midway between counsel and
precept. Now there is only one virtue of good counsel, viz. euboulia
(deliberating well) and only one virtue of good command, viz.
prudence. Therefore there is only one virtue of good judgment, viz.
synesis (judging well according to common law).
Objection 3: Further, rare occurrences wherein there is need to
depart from the common law, seem for the most part to happen by
chance, and with such things reason is not concerned, as stated in
Phys. ii, 5. Now all the intellectual virtues depend on right reason.
Therefore there is no intellectual virtue about such matters.
On the contrary, The Philosopher concludes (Ethic. vi, 11) that
gnome (judging well according to general law) is a special virtue.
I answer that cognitive habits differ according to higher and lower
principles: thus in speculative matters wisdom considers higher
principles than science does, and consequently is distinguished
from it; and so must it be also in practical matters. Now it is evident
that what is beside the order of a lower principle or cause, is
sometimes reducible to the order of a higher principle; thus
monstrous births of animals are beside the order of the active
seminal force, and yet they come under the order of a higher
principle, namely, of a heavenly body, or higher still, of Divine
Providence. Hence by considering the active seminal force one
could not pronounce a sure judgment on such monstrosities, and
yet this is possible if we consider Divine Providence.