unwittingly. For if there were only one or two snares, the precaution would be
easy. But now, hear how Solomon speaks when he wishes to set forth the
multitude of these; "Perceive that you go in the midst of snares;" he does not say,
that you "go by" snares, but "in the midst" of snares. On either side are the pitfalls; on either side the deceits. One goes into the forum; one sees an enemy; one
is inflamed by the bare sight of him! One sees a friend honoured; one is envious!
One sees a poor man; one despises and takes no notice of him! One sees a rich
man; one envies him! One sees some one injuriously treated; one recoils in
disgust! One sees some one acting injuriously; one is indignant! One sees a
handsome woman, and is caught! Do you see, beloved, how many snares there
are? Therefore it is said, "Remember that you go in the midst of snares." There
are snares in the house, snares at the table, and snares in social intercourse. Very
often a person unwittingly, in the confidence of friendship, gives utterance to
some particular of those matters which ought not to be repeated again, and so
great a peril is brought about, that the whole family is thereby ruined!
8. On every side then let us search closely into these matters. Often has a
wife, often have children, often have friends, often have neighbours, proved a
snare to the unheeding! And why, it is asked, are there so many snares? That we
may not fly low, but seek the things that are above. For just as birds, as long as
they cleave the upper air, are not easily caught; so also thou, as long as you look
to things above, will not be easily captured, whether by a snare, or by any other
device. The devil is a fowler. Soar, then, too high for his arrows. The man who
has mounted aloft will no longer admire any thing in the affairs of this life. But
as when we have ascended to the top of the mountains, the city and its walls
seem to us to be but small, and the men appear to us to be going along upon the
earth like ants; so when you have ascended to the heights of spiritual wisdom,
nothing upon the earth will be able to fascinate you; but every thing, yea even
riches, and glory, and honour, and whatever else there be of that kind, will
appear insignificant when you regard heavenly things. According to Paul all the
glories of the present life appeared trifling, and more unprofitable than dead

things. Hence his exclamation, "The world is crucified unto me."
[Galatians 6:14] Hence also his admonition, "Set your affections on things
above." [Colossians 3:2] Above? What kinds of things do you speak of pray?
Where the sun is, where the moon is? Nay, says he. But where then? Where
angels are? Where archangels? Where the cherubim? Where the seraphim are?
Nay, says he. But where then? "Where Christ sits at the right hand of God."
9. Let us obey then, and let us think of this continually, that even as to the
bird caught in the snare, wings are of no service, but he beats them about vainly,
and to no purpose; so also to you there is no utility in your reasonings, when
once you are powerfully captivated by wicked lust, but struggle as much as you
may, you are captured! For this reason wings are given to birds; that they may
avoid snares. For this reason men have the power of thinking; that they may
avoid sin. What pardon then, or what excuse will be ours, when we become
more senseless than the brutes? For the bird which has once been captured by the
snare, yet afterwards escaped, and the deer which has fallen into the net, but has
broken through it, are hard to be captured again with the like; since experience
becomes a teacher of caution to every one. But we, though often snared in the
same nets, fall into the same again; and though honoured with reason, we do not
imitate the forethought and care of the irrational animals! Hence how often do
we, from beholding a woman, suffer a thousand evils; returning home, and
entertaining an inordinate desire, and experiencing anguish for many days; yet,
nevertheless, we are not made discreet; but when we have scarcely cured one
wound, we again fall into the same mischief, and are caught by the same means;
and for the sake of the brief pleasure of a glance, we sustain a kind of lengthened
and continual torment. But if we learn constantly to repeat to ourselves this
saying, we shall be kept from all these grievous evils.
10. The beauty of woman is the greatest snare. Or rather, not the beauty of
woman, but unchastened gazing! For we should not accuse the objects, but
ourselves, and our own carelessness. Nor should we say, Let there be no women,
but Let there be no adulteries. We should not say, Let there be no beauty, but Let