THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.78, C.4.

it is that the priest pronounces all these words, under the same rite
and manner, namely, holding the chalice in his hands. Moreover, in
Lk. 22:20, the words that follow are interposed with the preceding
words: "This is the chalice, the new testament in My blood."
Consequently it must be said that all the aforesaid words belong to
the substance of the form; but that by the first words, "This is the
chalice of My blood," the change of the wine into blood is denoted,
as explained above (Article 2) in the form for the consecration of the
bread; but by the words which come after is shown the power of the
blood shed in the Passion, which power works in this sacrament,
and is ordained for three purposes. First and principally for securing
our eternal heritage, according to Heb. 10:19: "Having confidence in
the entering into the holies by the blood of Christ"; and in order to
denote this, we say, "of the New and Eternal Testament." Secondly,
for justifying by grace, which is by faith according to Rm. 3:25,26:
"Whom God hath proposed to be a propitiation, through faith in His
blood . . . that He Himself may be just, and the justifier of him who is
of the faith of Jesus Christ": and on this account we add, "The
Mystery of Faith." Thirdly, for removing sins which are the
impediments to both of these things, according to Heb. 9:14: "The
blood of Christ . . . shall cleanse our conscience from dead works,"
that is, from sins; and on this account, we say, "which shall be shed
for you and for many unto the forgiveness of sins."
Reply to Objection 1: The expression "This is the chalice of My
blood" is a figure of speech, which can be understood in two ways.
First, as a figure of metonymy; because the container is put for the
contained, so that the meaning is: "This is My blood contained in the
chalice"; of which mention is now made, because Christ's blood is
consecrated in this sacrament, inasmuch as it is the drink of the
faithful, which is not implied under the notion of blood; consequently
this had to be denoted by the vessel adapted for such usage.
Secondly, it can be taken by way of metaphor, so that Christ's
Passion is understood by the chalice by way of comparison,
because, like a cup, it inebriates, according to Lam. 3:15: "He hath
filled me with bitterness, he hath inebriated me with wormwood":
hence our Lord Himself spoke of His Passion as a chalice, when He
said (Mt. 26:39): "Let this chalice pass away from Me": so that the
meaning is: "This is the chalice of My Passion." This is denoted by
the blood being consecrated apart from the body; because it was by
the Passion that the blood was separated from the body.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.78, C.4.

Reply to Objection 2: As was said above (ad 1; Question 76, Article 2,
ad 1), the blood consecrated apart expressly represents Christ's
Passion, and therefore mention is made of the fruits of the Passion
in the consecration of the blood rather than in that of the body, since
the body is the subject of the Passion. This is also pointed out in our
Lord's saying, "which shall be delivered up for you," as if to say,
"which shall undergo the Passion for you."
Reply to Objection 3: A testament is the disposal of a heritage. But
God disposed of a heavenly heritage to men, to be bestowed through
the virtue of the blood of Jesus Christ; because, according to Heb.
9:16: "Where there is a testament the death of the testator must of
necessity come in." Now Christ's blood was exhibited to men in two
ways. First of all in figure, and this belongs to the Old Testament;
consequently the Apostle concludes (Heb. 9:16): "Whereupon
neither was the first indeed dedicated without blood," which is
evident from this, that as related in Ex. 24:7,8, "when every"
commandment of the law "had been read" by Moses, "he sprinkled
all the people" saying: "This is the blood of the testament which the
Lord hath enjoined unto you."
Secondly, it was shown in very truth; and this belongs to the New
Testament. This is what the Apostle premises when he says (Rm.
9:15): "Therefore He is the Mediator of the New Testament, that by
means of His death . . . they that are called may receive the promise
of eternal inheritance." Consequently, we say here, "The blood of the
New Testament," because it is shown now not in figure but in truth;
and therefore we add, "which shall be shed for you." But the internal
inspiration has its origin in the power of this blood, according as we
are justified by Christ's Passion.
Reply to Objection 4: This Testament is a "new one" by reason of its
showing forth: yet it is called "eternal" both on account of God's
eternal pre-ordination, as well as on account of the eternal heritage
which is prepared by this testament. Moreover, Christ's Person is
eternal, in Whose blood this testament is appointed.
Reply to Objection 5: The word "mystery" is inserted, not in order to
exclude reality, but to show that the reality is hidden, because
Christ's blood is in this sacrament in a hidden manner, and His
Passion was dimly foreshadowed in the Old Testament.