Reply to Objection 1: Since the object of the appetite of the soul is
an apprehended good, diversity of apprehension pertains, in a way,
to diversity of the object. And so delights of the soul, which are also
called joys, are distinct from bodily delights, which are not called
otherwise than delights: as we have observed above in regard to
concupiscences (Question 30, Article 3, ad 2).
Reply to Objection 2: A like difference is to be observed in
concupiscences also: so that delight corresponds to concupiscence,
while joy corresponds to desire, which seems to pertain more to
concupiscence of the soul. Hence there is a difference of repose
corresponding to the difference of movement.
Reply to Objection 3: These other names pertaining to delight are
derived from the effects of delight; for "laetitia" [gladness] is derived
from the "dilation" of the heart, as if one were to say "latitia";
"exultation" is derived from the exterior signs of inward delight,
which appear outwardly in so far as the inward joy breaks forth from
its bounds; and "cheerfulness" is so called from certain special
signs and effects of gladness. Yet all these names seem to belong to
joy; for we do not employ them save in speaking of rational beings.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.31, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether delight is in the intellectual appetite?

Objection 1: It would seem that delight is not in the intellectual
appetite. Because the Philosopher says (Rhet. i, 11) that "delight is a
sensible movement." But sensible movement is not in an intellectual
power. Therefore delight is not in the intellectual appetite.
Objection 2: Further, delight is a passion. But every passion is in the
sensitive appetite. Therefore delight is only in the sensitive appetite.
Objection 3: Further, delight is common to us and to the irrational
animals. Therefore it is not elsewhere than in that power which we
have in common with irrational animals.
On the contrary, It is written (Ps. 36:4): "Delight in the Lord." But the
sensitive appetite cannot reach to God; only the intellectual appetite
can. Therefore delight can be in the intellectual appetite.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 3), a certain delight arises
from the apprehension of the reason. Now on the reason
apprehending something, not only the sensitive appetite is moved,
as regards its application to some particular thing, but also the
intellectual appetite, which is called the will. And accordingly in the
intellectual appetite or will there is that delight which is called joy,
but not bodily delight.
However, there is this difference of delight in either power, that
delight of the sensitive appetite is accompanied by a bodily
transmutation, whereas delight of the intellectual appetite is nothing
but the mere movement of the will. Hence Augustine says (De Civ.
Dei xiv, 6) that "desire and joy are nothing else but a volition of
consent to the things we wish."
Reply to Objection 1: In this definition of the Philosopher, he uses
the word "sensible" in its wide acceptation for any kind of
perception. For he says (Ethic. x, 4) that "delight is attendant upon
every sense, as it is also upon every act of the intellect and
contemplation." Or we may say that he is defining delight of the
sensitive appetite.
Reply to Objection 2: Delight has the character of passion, properly