THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.83, C.7.

past (De Mem. et Remin. i).
But if it seem to the priest that he has probably omitted some of the
words that are not necessary for the sacrament, I think that he ought
not to repeat them on that account, changing the order of the
sacrifice, but that he ought to proceed: but if he is certain that he has
left out any of those that are necessary for the sacrament, namely,
the form of the consecration, since the form of the consecration is
necessary for the sacrament, just as the matter is, it seems that the
same thing ought to be done as was stated above (ad 4) with regard
to defect in the matter, namely, that he should begin again with the
form of the consecration, and repeat the other things in order, lest
the order of the sacrifice be altered.
Reply to Objection 6: The breaking of the consecrated host, and the
putting of only one part into the chalice, regards the mystical body,
just as the mixing with water signifies the people, and therefore the
omission of either of them causes no such imperfection in the
sacrifice, as calls for repetition regarding the celebration of this
sacrament.
Reply to Objection 7: According to the decree, De Consecr., dist. ii,
quoting a decree of Pope Pius I, "If from neglect any of the blood
falls upon a board which is fixed to the ground, let it be taken up with
the tongue, and let the board be scraped. But if it be not a board, let
the ground be scraped, and the scrapings burned, and the ashes
buried inside the altar and let the priest do penance for forty days.
But if a drop fall from the chalice on to the altar, let the minister suck
up the drop, and do penance during three days; if it falls upon the
altar cloth and penetrates to the second altar cloth, let him do four
days' penance; if it penetrates to the third, let him do nine days'
penance; if to the fourth, let him do twenty days' penance; and let the
altar linens which the drop touched be washed three times by the
priest, holding the chalice below, then let the water be taken and put
away nigh to the altar." It might even be drunk by the minister,
unless it might be rejected from nausea. Some persons go further,
and cut out that part of the linen, which they burn, putting the ashes
in the altar or down the sacrarium. And the Decretal continues with a
quotation from the Penitential of Bede the Priest: "If, owing to
drunkenness or gluttony, anyone vomits up the Eucharist, let him do
forty days' penance, if he be a layman; but let clerics or monks,
deacons and priests, do seventy days' penance; and let a bishop do
ninety days'. But if they vomit from sickness, let them do penance

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.83, C.7.

for seven days." And in the same distinction, we read a decree of the
(Fourth) Council of Arles: "They who do not keep proper custody
over the sacrament, if a mouse or other animal consume it, must do
forty days' penance: he who loses it in a church, or if a part fall and
be not found, shall do thirty days' penance." And the priest seems to
deserve the same penance, who from neglect allows the hosts to
putrefy. And on those days the one doing penance ought to fast, and
abstain from Communion. However, after weighing the
circumstances of the fact and of the person, the said penances may
be lessened or increased. But it must be observed that wherever the
species are found to be entire, they must be preserved reverently, or
consumed; because Christ's body is there so long as the species
last, as stated above (Question 77, Articles 4,5). But if it can be done
conveniently, the things in which they are found are to be burned,
and the ashes put in the sacrarium, as was said of the scrapings of
the altar-table, here above.