even the things that were much lower than these, and were daily instilled into
them, they understood not? But they sought one thing only, to enjoy the first
honors, and to stand before the rest, and that no one should stand before them
with Him; even as I have already said before, that, since they heard of twelve
thrones, in ignorance what the saying could mean, they asked for the first place.
What therefore Christ says is this: "You shall die indeed for me, and shall
be slain for the sake of the gospel, and shall be partakers with me, as far as
regards the passion: but this is not sufficient to secure you the enjoyment of the
first seat, and to cause that you should occupy the first place. For if any one else
should come, together with the martyrdom, possessed of all the other parts of
virtue far more fully than you, not because I love you now, and prefer you to the
rest, therefore shall I set aside him that is distinguished by his good works, and
give the first honors to you."
But thus indeed He did not say it, so as not to pain them, but darkly He
intimates the self-same thing, saying, "You shall drink indeed of my cup, and you
shall be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with; but to sit on my right
hand and on my left, this is not mine to give, but it shall be given to those for
whom it is prepared."
But for whom is it prepared? For them who could become distinguished by
their works. Therefore He said not, It is not mine to give, but my Father's, lest
any should say that He was too weak, or wanting in vigor for their recompense;
but how? It is not mine, but of those for whom it is prepared.
And in order that what I say may be more plain, let us work it on an
illustration, and let us suppose there was some master of the games, then that
many excellent combatants went down to the contest, and that some two of the
combatants that were most nearly connected with the master of the games were
to come to him and say, "Cause us to be crowned and proclaimed," confiding in
their good-will and friendship with him; and that he were to say to them, "This is
not mine to give, but it shall be given to them for whom it is prepared, by their
labors, and their toils;" should we indeed condemn him as powerless? By no

means, but we should approve him for his justice, and for having no respect of
persons. Like then as we should not say that he did not give the crown from want
of vigor, but as not wishing to corrupt the law of the games, nor to disturb the
order of justice; in like manner now should I say Christ said this, from every
motive to compel them, after the grace of God, to set their hopes of salvation and
approval on the proof of their own good works.
Therefore He says, "For whom it is prepared." For what, says He, if others
should appear better than you? What, if they should do greater things? For shall
you, because you have become my disciples, therefore enjoy the first honors, if
you yourselves should not appear worthy of the choice?
For that He Himself has power over the whole, is manifest from His having
the entire judgment. For to Peter too He speaks thus, "I will give you the keys of
the Heavens." And Paul also makes this clear where he says, "Henceforth is laid
up for me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, will
give me in that day; and not to me only, but unto all them also which have loved
His appearing." [2 Timothy 4:8] But the appearing was of Christ. But that no
one will stand before Paul, is surely clear to every one.
And if He has expressed these things somewhat obscurely, marvel not. For
to lead them on by hidden instruction, not to be rudely pressing Him without
object or cause for the first honors (for from a human passion they felt this), and
not wishing to give them pain, by the obscurity He effects both these objects.
"Then were the ten moved with indignation with respect to the two." Then.
When.? When He had reproved them. So long as the judgment was Christ's, they
were not moved with indignation; but seeing them preferred, they were
contented, and held their peace, out of reverence and honor to their Master.
And if they were vexed in mind, yet they dared not utter this. And when
they had some feeling of human weakness towards Peter, at the time that He
gave the didrachmas, they did not give way to anger, but asked only, "Who then
is greatest?" But since here the request was the disciples', they are moved with
indignation. And not even here are they straightway moved with indignation,