Therefore taking [the instance of] colors that are not superficial but almost of the
substance of the materials, He said that He would bring them into the opposite
state. For He did not simply say that He would "wash" us, but that He would
"make" us "white, as snow and as wool," in order to hold out good hopes before
us. Great then is the power of repentance, at least if it makes us as snow, and
whitens us as wool, even if sin have first got possession and dyed our souls.
Let us labor earnestly then to become clean; He has enjoined nothing
burdensome. "Judge the fatherless, and do justice for the widow." [Isaiah 1:17]
You see everywhere how great account God makes of mercy, and of standing
forward in behalf of those that are wronged. These good deeds let us pursue
after, and we shall be able also, by the grace of God, to attain to the blessings to
come: which may we all be counted worthy of, in Christ Jesus our Lord, with
whom to the Father together with the Holy Ghost, be glory, power, honor, now
and for ever and world without end. Amen.

## Homily 13 on Hebrews

Hebrews 7:11-14
" If therefore perfection were by the Levitical priesthood; (for under it the
people have received the law?' ) what further need was there that another priest
should arise after the order of Melchisedec, and not be called after the order of
Aaron? For the priesthood being changed, there is made of necessity a change
also of the law. For He of whom these things are spoken, pertained to another
tribe, of which no man gave attendance at the altar. For it is evident that our
Lord sprang out of Judah, of which tribe Moses spoke nothing concerning
priests."
1. " If therefore" (he says) "perfection were by the Levitical priesthood."
Having spoken concerning Melchisedec, and shown how much superior he was
to Abraham, and having set forth the great difference between them, he begins
from this point forward to prove the wide difference as to the covenant itself, and
how the one is imperfect and the other perfect. However he does not even yet
enter on the matters themselves, but first contends on the ground of the
priesthood, and the tabernacle. For these things would be more easily received
by the unbelieving, when the proof was derived from things already allowed, and
believed.
He had shown that Melchisedec was greatly superior both to Levi and to
Abraham, being to them in the rank of the priests. Again he argues from a
different point. What then is this? Why (he says) did he not say, "after the order
of Aaron"? And observe, I pray you, the great superiority [of his argument]. For
from the very circumstance which naturally excluded His priesthood, viz. that
He was not "after the order of Aaron," from that he establishes Him, and
excludes the others. For this is the very thing that I say (he declares); why has