FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.89, C.3.

"shall not obtain the kingdom of God," which signifies to be saved;
whereas the Apostle says that he who builds wood, hay, and stubble
"shall be saved yet so as by fire." Consequently wood, hay, stubble
cannot be understood to denote mortal sins.
Others say that wood, hay, stubble designate good works, which are
indeed built upon the spiritual edifice, but are mixed with venial sins:
as, when a man is charged with the care of a family, which is a good
thing, excessive love of his wife or of his children or of his
possessions insinuates itself into his life, under God however, so
that, to wit, for the sake of these things he would be unwilling to do
anything in opposition to God. But neither does this seem to be
reasonable. For it is evident that all good works are referred to the
love of God, and one's neighbor, wherefore they are designated by
"gold," "silver," and "precious stones," and consequently not by
"wood," "hay," and "stubble."
We must therefore say that the very venial sins that insinuate
themselves into those who have a care for earthly things, are
designated by wood, hay, and stubble. For just as these are stored in
a house, without belonging to the substance of the house, and can
be burnt, while the house is saved, so also venial sins are multiplied
in a man, while the spiritual edifice remains, and for them, man
suffers fire, either of temporal trials in this life, or of purgatory after
this life, and yet he is saved for ever.
Reply to Objection 1: Venial sins are not said to be built upon the
spiritual foundation, as though they were laid directly upon it, but
because they are laid beside it; in the same sense as it is written (Ps.
136:1): "Upon the waters of Babylon," i.e. "beside the waters":
because venial sins do not destroy the edifice.
Reply to Objection 2: It is not said that everyone who builds wood,
hay and stubble, shall be saved as by fire, but only those who build
"upon" the "foundation." And this foundation is not dead faith, as
some have esteemed, but faith quickened by charity, according to
Eph. 3:17: "Rooted and founded in charity." Accordingly, he that dies
in mortal sin with venial sins, has indeed wood, hay, and stubble, but
not built upon the spiritual edifice; and consequently he will not be
saved so as by fire.
Reply to Objection 3: Although those who are withdrawn from the

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.89, C.3.

care of temporal things, sin venially sometimes, yet they commit but
slight venial sins, and in most cases they are cleansed by the fervor
of charity: wherefore they do not build up venial sins, because these
do not remain long in them. But the venial sins of those who are
busy about earthly remain longer, because they are unable to have
such frequent recourse to the fervor of charity in order to remove
them.
Reply to Objection 4: As the Philosopher says (De Coelo i, text. 2),
"all things are comprised under three, the beginning, the middle, the
end." Accordingly all degrees of venial sins are reduced to three, viz.
to "wood," which remains longer in the fire; "stubble," which is burnt
up at once; and "hay," which is between these two: because venial
sins are removed by fire, quickly or slowly, according as man is
more or less attached to them.