St. John is here strangely overlooked.

Ex. xxvii. 1; "altitudo" in the text must be exchanged for "latitudo."

case, we do not therefore affirm that there are five Æons above the Demiurge; nor do we consecrate
the Pentad, as if it were some divine thing; nor do we strive to establish things that are untenable,
nor ravings [such as they indulge in], by means of that vain kind of labour; nor do we perversely
force a creation well adapted by God [for the ends intended to be served], to change itself into types
of things which have no real existence; nor do we seek to bring forward impious and abominable
doctrines, the detection and overthrow of which are easy to all possessed of intelligence.
5. For who can concede to them that the year has three hundred and sixty-five days only, in
order that there may be twelve months of thirty days each, after the type of the twelve Æons, when
the type is in fact altogether out of harmony [with the antitype]? For, in the one case, each of the
Æons is a thirtieth part of the entire Pleroma, while in the other they declare that a month is the
twelfth part of a year. If, indeed, the year were divided into thirty parts, and the month into twelve,
then a fitting type might be regarded as having been found for their fictitious system. But, on the
contrary, as the case really stands, their Pleroma is divided into thirty parts, and a portion of it into
twelve; while again the whole year is divided into twelve parts, and a certain portion of it into thirty.
The Saviour therefore acted unwisely in constituting the month a type of the entire Pleroma, but
the year a type only of that Duodecad which exists in the Pleroma; for it was more fitting to divide
the year into thirty parts, even as the whole Pleroma is divided, but the month into twelve, just as
the Æons are in their Pleroma. Moreover, they divide the entire Pleroma into three portions,—namely,
into an Ogdoad, a Decad, and a Duodecad. But our year is divided into four parts, —namely, spring,
summer, autumn, and winter. And again, not even do the months, which they maintain to be a type
of the Triacontad, consist precisely of thirty days, but some have more and some less, inasmuch as
five days remain to them as an overplus. The day, too, does not always consist precisely of twelve
hours, but rises from nine to fifteen, and then falls again from fifteen to nine. It cannot therefore
be held that months of thirty days each were so formed for the sake of [typifying] the Æons; for,
in that case, they would have consisted precisely of thirty days: nor, again, the days of these months,
that by means of twelve hours they might symbolize the twelve Æons; for, in that case, they would
always have consisted precisely of twelve hours.
6. But further, as to their calling material substances "on the left hand," and maintaining that
those things which are thus on the left hand of necessity fall into corruption, while they also affirm
that the Saviour came to the lost sheep, in order to transfer it to the right hand, that is, to the ninety
and nine sheep which were in safety, and perished not, but continued within the fold, yet were of