Isa. xliii. 5.

prone to turn to idols, instructing them by repeated appeals to persevere and to serve God, calling
them to the things of primary importance by means of those which were secondary; that is, to things
that are real, by means of those that are typical; and by things temporal, to eternal; and by the carnal
to the spiritual; and by the earthly to the heavenly; as was also said to Moses, "Thou shalt make all
things after the pattern of those things which thou sawest in the mount." For during forty days
He was learning to keep [in his memory] the words of God, and the celestial patterns, and the
spiritual images, and the types of things to come; as also Paul says: "For they drank of the rock
which followed them: and the rock was Christ." And again, having first mentioned what are
contained in the law, he goes on to say: "Now all these things happened to them in a figure; but
they were written for our admonition, upon whom the end of the ages is come." For by means of
types they learned to fear God, and to continue devoted to His service.

### Chapter XV.—At first God deemed it sufficient to inscribe the natural law, or the Decalogue,
upon the hearts of men; but afterwards He found it necessary to bridle, with the yoke of the
Mosaic law, the desires of the Jews, who were abusing their liberty; and even to add some
special commands, because of the hardness of their hearts.

1. They (the Jews) had therefore a law, a course of discipline, and a prophecy of future things.
For God at the first, indeed, warning them by means of natural precepts, which from the beginning
He had implanted in mankind, that is, by means of the Decalogue (which, if any one does not
observe, he has no salvation), did then demand nothing more of them. As Moses says in
Deuteronomy, "These are all the words which the Lord spake to the whole assembly of the sons
of Israel on the mount, and He added no more; and He wrote them on two tables of stone, and gave
them to me." For this reason [He did so], that they who are willing to follow Him might keep
these commandments. But when they turned themselves to make a calf, and had gone back in their
minds to Egypt, desiring to be slaves instead of free-men, they were placed for the future in a state
of servitude suited to their wish,—[a slavery] which did not indeed cut them off from God, but
subjected them to the yoke of bondage; as Ezekiel the prophet, when stating the reasons for the
giving of such a law, declares: "And their eyes were after the desire of their heart; and I gave them
statutes that were not good, and judgments in which they shall not live." Luke also has recorded
that Stephen, who was the first elected into the diaconate by the apostles, and who was the first
slain for the testimony of Christ, spoke regarding Moses as follows: "This man did indeed receive