well doing of their own, but came of the grace of God: and this the Prophet also
says, upbraiding them; "He has not done so to any nation, neither has he showed
His judgments unto them;" [Psalm 147:20] and Moses again; "Ask now whether
there has been any such thing as this?" he says, "did ever people hear the voice
of God speaking out of the midst of the fire, and live?") [Deuteronomy 4:32-33],
this then he does here also. For as, when speaking of circumcision, he did not
say, Circumcision is valueless without a good life, but, Circumcision is of value
with a good life, pointing out the same thing but in a more subdued tone. And
again he does not say, If you be a breaker of the Law, thou who art circumcised
art no whit profited, but "your circumcision is made uncircumcision:" and after
this again, "the uncircumcision," says he, shall "judge," not the circumcision, but
"you that dost transgress the Law," so sparing the things of the Law, and smiting
the persons. So he does here also. For after setting before himself this objection,
and saying, "what advantage then has the Jew?" he says not, None, but he
concurs with the statement, and confutes it again by the sequel, and shows that
they were even punished owing to this preëminence. And how he does so, I will
tell you when I have stated the objection. "What advantage then," he says, "has
the Jew," or "what profit is there of circumcision?"
Ver. 2. "Much every way: chiefly, because that they were entrusted with the
oracles of God."
Do you see that, as I said above, it is not their well doings, but the benefits
of God, that he everywhere counts up? And what is the word [ἐ] [πιστεύθησαν]?
(they were trusted.) It means, that they had the Law put into their hands because
He held them to be of so much account that He entrusted to them oracles which
came down from above. I know indeed that some take the "entrusted" not of the
Jews, but of the oracles, as much as to say, the Law was believed in. But the
context does not admit of this being held good. For in the first place he is saying
this with a view to accuse them, and to show that, though in the enjoyment of
many a blessing from above, they yet showed great ingratitude. Then, the
context also makes this clear. For he goes on to say, "For what if some did not

believe?" If they did not believe, how do some say, the oracles were believed in?
What does he mean then? Why that God entrusted the same to them, and not that
they trusted to the oracles: how else will the context make sense? For he farther
goes on to say,
Ver. 3. "For what if some did not believe?"
And what comes next makes the same point clear. For he again adds and
follows; "Shall their unbelief make the faith of God without effect?"
Ver. 4. "God forbid." The word [ἐ] [πιστεύθησαν], then, proclaims God's
gift.
And I would have you here also note his judgment. For again he does not
bring in his accusation of them on his own part, but as it were by way of
objection, as if he said, But perhaps you will say, 'What then is the use of this
circumcision since they used it not as was fitting, since they were trusted with
the Law and were unfaithful to the trust?' And hitherto he is not a severe accuser,
but as if to clear God of complaints against Him, he by this means turns the
whole of the accusation round upon themselves. For why, he would say, do you
complain that they did not believe? And how does this affect God? For as for His
benefit, does the ingratitude of those benefited overturn it? Or does it make the
honor to be no honor? For this is what the words, "Shall their unfaithfulness
make the faith of God without effect," amount to. "God forbid." As if one should
say, I have honored such an one. And if he did not receive the honor, this gives
no ground for accusing me, nor impairs my kindness, but shows his want of
feeling. But Paul does not say this merely, but what is much more. That not only
does their unbelief not leave the soil of complaint upon God, but even shows His
honor and love of man to be the greater, in that He is seen to have bestowed
honor upon one who would dishonor Him. See how he has brought them out
guilty of misdemeanors by means of what they gloried in; forasmuch as the
honor with which God treated them was so great, that even when He saw what
would come thereof, He withheld not His good-will toward them! Yet they made
the honors bestowed on them a means of insulting Him that Honor them! Next,