the same words, you may not condemn him for vain talking; nor deem him
impertinent or wearisome. He desired to have been heard by once speaking, but
because not many gave heed to what was spoken from the first, by reason of
deep sleep, he again rouses them by this second call. Now observe; he had said,
"He that comes after me, is preferred before me": and that "I am not worthy to
unloose the latchet of His shoe"; and that "He baptizes with the Holy Ghost, and
with fire"; and that he "saw the Spirit descending like a dove, and it abode upon
Him," and he "bare record that this is the Son of God." No one gave heed, nor
asked, nor said, "Why do you say these things? In whose behalf? For what
reason?" Again he had said, "Behold the Lamb of God, which takes away the sin
of the world"; yet not even so did he touch their insensibility. Therefore, after
this he is compelled to repeat the same words again, as if softening by tillage
some hard and stubborn soil, and by his word as by a plow, disturbing the mind
which had hardened into clods, so as to put in the seed deep. For this reason he
does not make his discourse a long one either; because he desired one thing only,
to bring them over and join them to Christ. He knew that as soon as they had
received this saying, and had been persuaded, they would not afterwards need
one to bear witness unto Him. As also it came to pass. For, if the Samaritans
could say to the woman after hearing Him, "Now we believe, not because of your
saying, for we know that this is indeed the Christ, the Saviour of the world," the
disciples would be much more quickly subdued, as was the case. For when they
had come and heard Him but one evening, they returned no more to John, but
were so nailed to Him, that they took upon them the ministry of John, and
themselves proclaimed Him. For, says the Evangelist, "He finds his own brother
Simon, and says unto him, We have found the Messias, which is, being
interpreted, the Christ." And observe, I pray you, this, how, when he said, "He
that comes after me is preferred before me"; and that, "I am not worthy to
unloose the lachet of His shoe"; he caught no one, but when he spoke of the
Dispensation, and lowered his discourse to a humbler tone, then the disciples
followed Him.

And we may remark this, not only in the instance of the disciples, but that
the many are not so much attracted when some great and sublime thing is said
concerning God, as when some act of graciousness and lovingkindness,
something pertaining to the salvation of the hearers, is spoken of. They heard
that "He takes away the sin of the world," and straightway they ran to Him. For,
said they, "if it is possible to wash away the charges that lie against us, why do
we delay? Here is One who will deliver us without labor of ours. Is it not
extreme folly to put off accepting the Gift?" Let those hear who are
Catechumens, and are putting off their salvation to their latest breath.
"Again," says the Evangelist, "John stood, and says, Behold, the Lamb of
God." Christ utters no word, His messenger says all. So it is with a bridegroom.
He says not for a while anything to the bride, but is there in silence, while some
show him to the bride, and others give her into his hands; she merely appears,
and he departs not having taken her himself, but when he has received her from
another who gives her to him. And when he has received her thus given, he so
disposes her, that she no more remembers those who betrothed her. So it was
with Christ. He came to join to Himself the Church; He said nothing, but merely
came. It was His friend, John, who put into His the bride's right hand, when by
his discourses he gave into His hand the souls of men. He having received them,
afterwards so disposed them, that they departed no more to John who had
committed them to Him.
2. And here we may remark, not this only, but something besides. As at a
marriage the maiden goes not to the bridegroom, but he hastens to her, though he
be a king's son, and though he be about to espouse some poor and abject person,
or even a servant, so it was here. Man's nature did not go up, but contemptible
and poor as it was, He came to it, and when the marriage had taken place, He
suffered it no longer to tarry here, but having taken it to Himself, transported it
to the house of His Father.
"Why then does not John take his disciples apart, and converse with them
on these matters, and so deliver them over to Christ, instead of saying publicly to