FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.5.

distinct from others in some point of excellence. Hence too it is
customary among men for kings and princes, who ought to be
reverenced by their subjects, to be clothed in more precious
garments, and to possess vaster and more beautiful abodes. And for
this reason it behooved special times, a special abode, special
vessels, and special ministers to be appointed for the divine
worship, so that thereby the soul of man might be brought to greater
reverence for God.
In like manner the state of the Old Law, as observed above (Article 2;
Question 100, Article 12; Question 101, Article 2), was instituted that
it might foreshadow the mystery of Christ. Now that which
foreshadows something should be determinate, so that it may
present some likeness thereto. Consequently, certain special points
had to be observed in matters pertaining to the worship of God.
Reply to Objection 1: The divine worship regards two things: namely,
God Who is worshipped; and men, who worship Him. Accordingly
God, Who is worshipped, is confined to no bodily place: wherefore
there was no need, on His part, for a tabernacle or temple to be set
up. But men, who worship Him, are corporeal beings: and for their
sake there was need for a special tabernacle or temple to be set up
for the worship of God, for two reasons. First, that through coming
together with the thought that the place was set aside for the
worship of God, they might approach thither with greater reverence.
Secondly, that certain things relating to the excellence of Christ's
Divine or human nature might be signified by the arrangement of
various details in such temple or tabernacle.
To this Solomon refers (3 Kgs. 8:27) when he says: "If heaven and
the heavens of heavens cannot contain Thee, how much less this
house which I have built" for Thee? And further on (3 Kgs. 8:29,20)
he adds: "That Thy eyes may be open upon this house . . . of which
Thou hast said: My name shall be there; . . . that Thou mayest
hearken to the supplication of Thy servant and of Thy people Israel."
From this it is evident that the house of the sanctuary was set up,
not in order to contain God, as abiding therein locally, but that God
might be made known there by means of things done and said there;
and that those who prayed there might, through reverence for the
place, pray more devoutly, so as to be heard more readily.
Reply to Objection 2: Before the coming of Christ, the state of the
Old Law was not changed as regards the fulfilment of the Law, which

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.5.

was effected in Christ alone: but it was changed as regards the
condition of the people that were under the Law. Because, at first,
the people were in the desert, having no fixed abode: afterwards they
were engaged in various wars with the neighboring nations; and
lastly, at the time of David and Solomon, the state of that people was
one of great peace. And then for the first time the temple was built in
the place which Abraham, instructed by God, had chosen for the
purpose of sacrifice. For it is written (Gn. 22:2) that the Lord
commanded Abraham to "offer" his son "for a holocaust upon one of
the mountains which I will show thee": and it is related further on
(Gn. 22:14) that "he calleth the name of that place, The Lord seeth,"
as though, according to the Divine prevision, that place were chosen
for the worship of God. Hence it is written (Dt. 12:5,6): "You shall
come to the place which the Lord your God shall choose . . . and you
shall offer . . . your holocausts and victims."
Now it was not meet for that place to be pointed out by the building
of the temple before the aforesaid time; for three reasons assigned
by Rabbi Moses. First, lest the Gentiles might seize hold of that
place. Secondly, lest the Gentiles might destroy it. The third reason
is lest each tribe might wish that place to fall to their lot, and strifes
and quarrels be the result. Hence the temple was not built until they
had a king who would be able to quell such quarrels. Until that time a
portable tabernacle was employed for divine worship, no place being
as yet fixed for the worship of God. This is the literal reason for the
distinction between the tabernacle and the temple.
The figurative reason may be assigned to the fact that they signify a
twofold state. For the tabernacle, which was changeable, signifies
the state of the present changeable life: whereas the temple, which
was fixed and stable, signifies the state of future life which is
altogether unchangeable. For this reason it is said that in the
building of the temple no sound was heard of hammer or saw, to
signify that all movements of disturbance will be far removed from
the future state. Or else the tabernacle signifies the state of the Old
Law; while the temple built by Solomon betokens the state of the
New Law. Hence the Jews alone worked at the building of the
tabernacle; whereas the temple was built with the cooperation of the
Gentiles, viz. the Tyrians and Sidonians.
Reply to Objection 3: The reason for the unity of the temple or
tabernacle may be either literal or figurative. The literal reason was
the exclusion of idolatry. For the Gentiles put up various times to