saying, "Forgive them, for they know not what they do?" [Luke 23:34] What
marvel, then, if we also should forgive our fellow-servants! And that these words
were not a pretence was proved by all that followed. And not the least, that
particular circumstance which I am now about to mention; for this our priest,
when he would have remained there, and celebrated the feast together with
himself, he urged, though contrary to what he would have wished—to use all
speed, and diligence, to present himself to his fellow citizens. "I know," said he,
"that their souls are still agitated; and that there are many relics of the calamity
left. Go, give them consolation! If they see the helmsman, they will no longer
remember the storm that has passed away; but all recollection of these sorrowful
events will be effaced!" And when the Priest was urgent, entreating him to send
his own son, he, wishing to give the most satisfactory proof of his having
entirely blotted out from his soul every wrathful feeling, answered; "Pray that
these hindrances may be taken out of the way; that these wars may be put an end
to; and then I will certainly come myself."
19. What could be gentler than such a soul? Let the Gentiles henceforward
be ashamed; or rather, instead of being ashamed, let them be instructed; and
leaving their native error, let them come back to the strength of Christianity,
having learned what our philosophy is, from the example of the Emperor and of
the Priest! For our most pious Emperor stayed not at this point; but when the
Bishop had left the city, and come over the sea, he dispatched there also certain
persons, being most solicitous and painstaking to prevent any waste of time lest
the city should be thus deprived of half its pleasure, while the bishop was
celebrating the feast beyond its walls. Where is the gracious father that would
have so busied himself on behalf of those who had insulted him? But I must
mention another circumstance that redounds to the praise of the just man. For
when he had accomplished this, he did not make it his endeavour, as any one
else might have done, who was fond of glory, to deliver those letters himself,
which were to set us free from the state of dejection in which we were; but since
he was journeying at too slow a rate for this, he thought proper to send forward

another person in his stead; one among those who were skilled in horsemanship,
to be the bearer of the good news to the city; lest its sadness should be prolonged
by the tardiness of his arrival. For the only thing he earnestly coveted was this;
not that he might come himself, bringing these favourable tidings, so full of all
that is delightful, but that our country might as soon as possible breathe freely
again.
20. What therefore ye then did, in decking the forum with garlands; lighting
lamps, spreading couches of green leaves before the shops, and keeping high
festival, as if the city had just come into being, this do ye, although in another
manner, throughout all time;— being crowned, not with flowers, but with virtue
—kindling in your souls the light which comes from good works; rejoicing with
a spiritual gladness. And let us never fail to give God thanks continually for all
these things, not only that he has freed us from these calamities, but that he also
permitted them to happen; and let us acknowledge his abundant goodness! For
by both these has He adorned our city. Now all these things according to the
prophetic saying, "Declare ye to your children; and let your children tell their
children; and their children again another generation." [Joel 1:3] So that all
who shall be hereafter, even to the consummation, learning this act of God's
lovingkindness towards the city, may call us blessed, in having enjoyed such a
favour—may marvel at our Sovereign, who raised up the city when it was so
grievously falling—and may themselves be profited, being stimulated to piety by
means of all which has happened! For the history of what has lately happened to
us, will have power to profit not only ourselves, if we constantly remember it,
but also those who shall come after us. All these things then being considered,
let us always give thanks to God who loves man; not merely for our deliverance
from these fearful evils, but for their being permitted to overtake us—learning
this from the divine Scriptures, as well as from the late events that have befallen
us; that He ever disposes all things for our advantage, with that lovingkindness
which is His attribute, which God grant, that we may continually enjoy, and so
may obtain the kingdom of heaven, in Christ Jesus our Lord; to whom be glory