He received of the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, and shed forth
the Holy Spirit: seeing that He received as man, and shed forth as God.
And we indeed can receive that gift according to our small measure, but
assuredly we cannot shed it forth upon others; but, that this may be done,
we invoke over them God, by whom this is accomplished.
47. Are we therefore able to ask whether the Holy Spirit had already
proceeded from the Father when the Son was born, or had not yet
proceeded; and when He was born, proceeded from both, wherein there
is no such thing as distinct times: just as we have been able to ask, in a
case where we do find times, that the will proceeds from the human mind
first, in order that that may be sought which, when found, may be called
offspring; which offspring being already brought forth or born, that will is
made perfect, resting in this end, so that what had been its desire when
seeking, is its love when enjoying; which love now proceeds from both,
i.e. from the mind that begets, and from the notion that is begotten, as if
from parent and offspring? These things it is absolutely impossible to ask
in this case, where nothing is begun in time, so as to be perfected in a
time following. Wherefore let him who can understand the generation of
the Son from the Father without time, understand also the procession of
the Holy Spirit from both without time. And let him who can understand,
in that which the Son says, "As the Father hath life in Himself, so hath He
given to the Son to have life in Himself," not that the Father gave life to
the Son already existing without life, but that He so begat Him apart from
time, that the life which the Father gave to the Son by begetting Him is
co-eternal with the life of the Father who gave it:2 let him, I say,
understand, that as the Father has in Himself that the Holy Spirit should
proceed from Him, so has He given to the Son that the same Holy Spirit
should proceed from Him, and be both apart from time: and that the
Holy Spirit is so said to proceed from the Father as that it be understood
that His proceeding also from the Son, is a property derived by the Son
from the Father. For if the Son has of the Father whatever He has, then
certainly He has of the Father, that the Holy Spirit proceeds also from
Him. But let no one think of any times therein which imply a sooner and
a later; because these things are not there at all. How, then, would it not
be most absurd to call Him the Son of both: when, just as generation
from the Father, without any changeableness of nature, gives to the Son

essence, without beginning of time; so procession from both, without any
changeableness of nature, gives to the Holy Spirit essence without
beginning of time? For while we do not say that the Holy Spirit is
begotten, yet we do not therefore dare to say that He is unbegotten, lest
any one suspect in this word either two Fathers in that Trinity, or two
who are not from another. For the Father alone is not from another, and
therefore He alone is called unbegotten, not indeed in the Scriptures, but
in the usage of disputants, who employ such language as they can on so
great a subject. And the Son is born of the Father; and the Holy Spirit
proceeds from the Father principally, the Father giving the procession
without any interval of time, yet in common from both .4 But He would be called the Son of the Father and of the Son, if—a
thing abhorrent to the feeling of all sound minds—both had begotten
Him. Therefore the Spirit of both is not begotten of both, but proceeds
from both.