off bodily uncleanness; and there is the Jewish laver, more honorable than the
other, but far inferior to that of grace; and it too wipes off bodily uncleanness but
not simply uncleanness of body, since it even reaches to the weak conscience.
For there are many matters, which by nature indeed are not unclean, but which
become unclean from the weakness of the conscience. And as in the case of little
children, masks, and other bugbears are not in themselves alarming, but seem to
little children to be alarming, by reason of the weakness of their nature, so it is in
the case of those things of which I was speaking; just as to touch dead bodies is
not naturally unclean, but when this comes into contact with a weak conscience,
it makes him who touches them unclean. For that the thing in question is not
unclean naturally, Moses himself who ordained this law showed, when he bore
off the entire corpse of Joseph, and yet remained clean. On this account Paul
also, discoursing to us about this uncleanness which does not come naturally but
by reason of the weakness of the conscience, speaks somewhat in this way,
"Nothing is common of itself save to him who accounts anything to be common."
[Romans 14:14] Do you not see that uncleanness does not arise from the nature
of the thing, but from the weakness of the reasoning about it? And again: "All
things indeed are clean, howbeit it is evil to that man who eats with offense."
[Romans 14:20] Do you see that it is not to eat, but to eat with offense, that is the
cause of uncleanness?
3. Such is the defilement from which the laver of the Jews cleansed. But the
laver of grace, not such, but the real uncleanness which has introduced
defilement into the soul as well as into the body. For it does not make those who
have touched dead bodies clean, but those who have set their hand to dead
works: and if any man be effeminate, or a fornicator, or an idolator, or a doer of
whatever ill you please, or if he be full of all the wickedness there is among
men: should he fall into this pool of waters, he comes up again from the divine
fountain purer than the sun's rays. And in order that you may not think that what
is said is mere vain boasting, hear Paul speaking of the power of the laver, "Be
not deceived: neither idolators, nor fornicators, nor adulterers, nor effeminate,

nor abusers of themselves with men, nor covetous, not drunkards, not revilers,
not extortioners shall inherit the kingdom of God." [1 Corinthians 6:9-10] And
what has this to do with what has been spoken? Says one, "for prove the question
whether the power of the laver thoroughly cleanses all these things." Hear
therefore what follows: "And such were some of you, but you were washed, but
you were sanctified, but you were justified in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ,
and in the spirit of our God." We promise to show you that they who approach
the laver become clean from all fornication: but the word has shown more, that
they have become not only clean, but both holy and just, for it does not say only
"you were washed," but also "you were sanctified and were justified." What
could be more strange than this, when without toil, and exertion, and good
works, righteousness is produced? For such is the lovingkindness of the Divine
gift that it makes men just without this exertion. For if a letter of the Emperor, a
few words being added, sets free those who are liable to countless accusations,
and brings others to the highest honors; much rather will the Holy Spirit of God,
who is able to do all things, free us from all evil and grant us much
righteousness, and fill us with much assurance, and as a spark falling into the
wide sea would straightway be quenched, or would become invisible, being
overwhelmed by the multitude of the waters, so also all human wickedness,
when it falls into the pool of the divine fountain, is more swiftly and easily
overwhelmed, and made invisible, than that spark. And for what reason, says
one, if the laver take away all our sins, is it called, not a laver of remission of
sins, nor a laver of cleansing, but a laver of regeneration? Because it does not
simply take away our sins, nor simply cleanse us from our faults, but so as if we
were born again. For it creates and fashions us anew not forming us again out of
earth, but creating us out of another element, namely, of the nature of water. For
it does not simply wipe the vessel clean, but entirely remoulds it again. For that
which is wiped clean, even if it be cleaned with care, has traces of its former
condition, and bears the remains of its defilement, but that which falls into the
new mould, and is renewed by means of the flames, laying aside all uncleanness,