this latter giving zeal to be well-pleasing unto Him. Wherefore they who say that
all things are ruled and governed of themselves, and do not expect a reward, are
not well-pleasing; as neither are the heathen. For "He becomes a rewarder of
them that diligently seek Him" by works and by knowledge.
6. Since then we have "a rewarder," let us do all things that we may not be
deprived of the rewards of virtue. For indeed the neglecting such a recompense,
the scorning such a reward, is worthy of many tears. For as to "those who
diligently seek Him," He is a rewarder, so to those who seek Him not, the
contrary.
"Seek" (He says) "and you shall find" [Matthew 7:7]: but how can we find
the Lord? Consider how gold is found; with much labor. ["I sought the Lord]
with my hands" (it is said) "by night before Him, and I was not deceived" [Psalm
76:2], that is, just as we seek what is lost, so let us seek God. Do we not
concentrate our mind thereon? Do we not enquire of every one? Do we not travel
from home? Do we not promise money?
For instance, suppose that any among us has lost his son, what do we not
do? What land, what sea do we not make the circuit of? Do we not reckon
money, and houses, and everything else as secondary to the finding him? And
should we find him, we cling to him, we hold him fast, we do not let him go.
And when we are going to seek anything whatever, we busy ourselves in all
ways to find what is sought. How much more ought we to do this in regard to
God, as seeking what is indispensable; nay rather, not in the same way, but much
more! But since we are weak, at least seek God as you seek your money or your
son. Will you not leave your home for Him? Have you never left your home for
money? Do you not busy yourself in all ways? When you have found [it], are
you not full of confidence?
7. "Seek" (He says) "and you shall find." For things sought after need much
care, especially in regard of God. For many are the hindrances, many the things
that darken, many that impede our perception. For as the sun is manifest, and set
forth publicly before all, and we have no need to seek it; but if on the other hand

we bury ourselves and turn everything upside down, we need much labor to look
at the sun; so truly here also, if we bury ourselves in the depth of evil desires, in
the darkness of passions and of the affairs of this life, with difficulty do we look
up, with difficulty do we raise our heads, with difficulty do we see clearly. He
that is buried underground, in whatever degree he sees upwards, in that degree
does he come towards the sun. Let us therefore shake off the earth, let us break
through the mist which lies upon us. It is thick, and close, and does not allow us
to see clearly.
And how, you say, is this cloud broken through? If we draw to ourselves the
beams of "the sun of righteousness." "The lifting up of my hands" (it is said) "is
an evening sacrifice." [Psalm 141:2] With our hands let us also lift up our mind:
ye who have been initiated know what I mean, perhaps too ye recognize the
expression, and see at a glance what I have hinted at. Let us raise up our
thoughts on high.
I myself know many men almost suspended apart from the earth, and
beyond measure stretching up their hands, and out of heart because it is not
possible to be lifted into the air, and thus praying with earnestness. Thus I would
have you always, and if not always, at least very often; and if not very often, at
least now and then, at least in the morning, at least in the evening prayers. For,
tell me, can you not stretch forth the hands? Stretch forth the will, stretch forth
as far as you will, yea even to heaven itself. Even should you wish to touch the
very summit, even if you would ascend higher and walk thereon, it is open to
you. For our mind is lighter, and higher than any winged creature. And when it
receives grace from the Spirit, O! How swift is it! How quick is it! How does it
compass all things! How does it never sink down or fall to the ground! These
wings let us provide for ourselves: by means of them shall we be able to fly even
across the tempestuous sea of this present life. The swiftest birds fly unhurt over
mountains, and woods, and seas, and rocks, in a brief moment of time. Such also
is the mind; when it is winged, when it is separated from the things of this life,
nothing can lay hold of it, it is higher than all things, even than the fiery darts of