SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.31, C.8.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether one may give alms out of ill-gotten

goods?
Objection 1: It would seem that one may give alms out of ill-gotten
goods. For it is written (Lk. 16:9): "Make unto you friends of the
mammon of iniquity." Now mammon signifies riches. Therefore it is
lawful to make unto oneself spiritual friends by giving alms out of illgotten riches.
Objection 2: Further, all filthy lucre seems to be ill-gotten. But the
profits from whoredom are filthy lucre; wherefore it was forbidden
(Dt. 23:18) to offer therefrom sacrifices or oblations to God: "Thou
shalt not offer the hire of a strumpet . . . in the house of . . . thy God."
In like manner gains from games of chance are ill-gotten, for, as the
Philosopher says (Ethic. iv, 1), "we take such like gains from our
friends to whom we ought rather to give." And most of all are the
profits from simony ill-gotten, since thereby the Holy Ghost is
wronged. Nevertheless out of such gains it is lawful to give alms.
Therefore one may give alms out of ill-gotten goods.
Objection 3: Further, greater evils should be avoided more than
lesser evils. Now it is less sinful to keep back another's property
than to commit murder, of which a man is guilty if he fails to succor
one who is in extreme need, as appears from the words of Ambrose
who says (Cf. Canon Pasce dist. lxxxvi, whence the words, as
quoted, are taken): "Feed him that dies of hunger, if thou hast not fed
him, thou hast slain him". Therefore, in certain cases, it is lawful to
give alms of ill-gotten goods.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Verb. Dom. xxxv, 2): "Give alms
from your just labors. For you will not bribe Christ your judge, not to
hear you with the poor whom you rob . . . Give not alms from interest
and usury: I speak to the faithful to whom we dispense the Body of
Christ."
I answer that, A thing may be ill-gotten in three ways. In the first
place a thing is ill-gotten if it be due to the person from whom it is
gotten, and may not be kept by the person who has obtained
possession of it; as in the case of rapine, theft and usury, and of
such things a man may not give alms since he is bound to restore
them.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.31, C.8.

Secondly, a thing is ill-gotten, when he that has it may not keep it,
and yet he may not return it to the person from whom he received it,
because he received it unjustly, while the latter gave it unjustly. This
happens in simony, wherein both giver and receiver contravene the
justice of the Divine Law, so that restitution is to be made not to the
giver, but by giving alms. The same applies to all similar cases of
illegal giving and receiving.
Thirdly, a thing is ill-gotten, not because the taking was unlawful, but
because it is the outcome of something unlawful, as in the case of a
woman's profits from whoredom. This is filthy lucre properly so
called, because the practice of whoredom is filthy and against the
Law of God, yet the woman does not act unjustly or unlawfully in
taking the money. Consequently it is lawful to keep and to give in
alms what is thus acquired by an unlawful action.
Reply to Objection 1: As Augustine says (De Verb. Dom. 2), "Some
have misunderstood this saying of Our Lord, so as to take another's
property and give thereof to the poor, thinking that they are fulfilling
the commandment by so doing. This interpretation must be
amended. Yet all riches are called riches of iniquity, as stated in De
Quaest. Ev. ii, 34, because "riches are not unjust save for those who
are themselves unjust, and put all their trust in them. Or, according
to Ambrose in his commentary on Lk. 16:9, "Make unto yourselves
friends," etc., "He calls mammon unjust, because it draws our
affections by the various allurements of wealth." Or, because
"among the many ancestors whose property you inherit, there is one
who took the property of others unjustly, although you know nothing
about it," as Basil says in a homily (Hom. super Luc. A, 5). Or, all
riches are styled riches "of iniquity," i.e., of "inequality," because
they are not distributed equally among all, one being in need, and
another in affluence.
Reply to Objection 2: We have already explained how alms may be
given out of the profits of whoredom. Yet sacrifices and oblations
were not made therefrom at the altar, both on account of the scandal,
and through reverence for sacred things. It is also lawful to give
alms out of the profits of simony, because they are not due to him
who paid, indeed he deserves to lose them. But as to the profits from
games of chance, there would seem to be something unlawful as
being contrary to the Divine Law, when a man wins from one who
cannot alienate his property, such as minors, lunatics and so forth,