a meet vehicle for the soul, that the helmsman may be securely seated over the
rudder, and the soldier handle his arms with ease, you must make all parts to be
fitly framed together. For it is not the having much, but requiring little, that
keeps us from being injured. For the one man is afraid even if he is not wronged:
this other, even if he be wronged, is in better case than those that have not been
wronged, and even for this very thing is in the better spirits. Let the object of our
search be then, not how we can keep any one from using us spitefully, but how
even if he wish to do it, he may be without the power. And this there is no other
source whence to obtain, save by keeping to necessaries, and not coveting
anything more. For in this way we shall be able to enjoy ourselves here, and
shall attain to the good things to come, by the grace and love toward man, etc.

## Homily 25 on Romans

Romans XIV. 1, 2
"Him that is weak in the faith receive ye, but not to doubtful disputations.
For one believes that he may eat all things; another, who is weak, eats herbs."
I Am aware that to most what is here said is a difficulty. And therefore I
must first give the subject of the whole of this passage, and what he wishes to
correct in writing this. What does he wish to correct then? There were many of
the Jews which believed, who adhered of conscience to the Law, and after their
believing, still kept to the observance of meats, as not having courage yet to quit
the service of the Law entirely. Then that they might not be observed if they kept
from swine's flesh only, they abstained in consequence from all flesh, and ate
herbs only, that what they were doing might have more the appearance of a fast
than of observance of the Law. Others again were farther advanced,
([τελειότεροι]) and kept up no one thing of the kind, who became to those, who
did keep them, distressing and offensive, by reproaching them, accusing them,
driving them to despondency. Therefore the blessed Paul, out of fear lest, from a
wish to be right about a trifle, they should overthrow the whole, and from a wish
to bring them to indifferency about what they ate, should put them in a fair way
for deserting the faith, and out of a zeal to put everything right at once, before
the fit opportunity had come, should do mischief on vital points, so by this
continual rebuking setting them adrift from their agreement in ([ὁ] [μολογίας
εἰς]) Christ, and so they should remain not righted in either respect: observe
what great judgment he uses and how he concerns himself with both interests
with his customary wisdom. For neither does he venture to say to those who
rebuke, You are doing amiss, that he may not seem to be confirming the other in
their observances; nor again, You are doing right, lest he should make them the
more vehement accusers: but he makes his rebuke to square with each. And in