## Homily 8 on Ephesians

Chapter IV. Verses 1, 2
"I therefore, the prisoner in the Lord, beseech you to walk worthily of the
calling wherewith you were called, with all lowliness and meekness."
It is the virtue of teachers to aim not at praise, nor at esteem from those
under their authority, but at their salvation, and to do every thing with this
object; since the man who should make the other end his aim, would not be a
teacher but a tyrant. Surely it is not for this that God set you over them, that you
should enjoy greater court and service, but that your own interests should be
disregarded, and every one of theirs built up. This is a teacher's duty: such an
one was the blessed Paul, a man who was free from all manner of vanity, and
was contented to be one of the many, nay more, to be the very least even of
them. Hence he even calls himself their servant, and so generally speaks in a
tone of supplication. Observe him then even now writing nothing dictatorial,
nothing imperious, but all chastened and subdued.
"I therefore," says he, "the prisoner in the Lord, beseech you to walk
worthily of the calling wherewith you were called." What is it, tell me, you are
beseeching? Is it that you may gain any end for yourself? No, says he, in no
wise; it is that I may save others. And yet surely they who beseech, do so for
things which are of importance to themselves. True; and this, says he, is of
importance to myself, according to what he says also elsewhere in his writings,
"Now we live, if you stand fast in the Lord;" [1 Thessalonians 3:8] for he ever
earnestly desired the salvation of those whom he was instructing.
"I, the prisoner in the Lord." Great and mighty dignity! Greater than that of
king or of consul, or of any other. Hence it is the very title he uses in writing to
Philemon, "As Paul the aged, and now a prisoner also of Jesus Christ."
[Philemon 9] For nothing is so glorious as a bond for Christ's sake, as the chains

that were bound around those holy hands; more glorious is it to be a prisoner for
Christ's sake than to be an Apostle, than to be a Teacher, than to be an
Evangelist. Is there any that loves Christ, he will understand what I am saying. Is
any transported and fired with devotion for the Lord, he knows the power of
these bonds. Such an one would rather choose to be a prisoner for Christ's sake,
than to have the Heavens for his dwelling. More glorious than any gold were the
hands he was showing to them, yea, than any royal diadem. Yes, no jewelled
tiara bound around the head invests it with such glory, as an iron chain for
Christ's sake. Then was the prison more glorious than palaces, yea, than heaven
itself. Why say I than palaces? Because it contained a prisoner of Christ. Is there
any that loves Christ, he knows the dignity of this title, he knows what a virtue is
this, he knows how great a boon he bestowed upon mankind, even this, to be
bound for His sake. More glorious this, perhaps to be bound for His sake, than
"to sit at His right hand," [Matthew 20:21] more august this, than to "sit upon
the twelve thrones." [Matthew 19:28]
And why speak I of human glories? I am ashamed to compare earthly riches
and golden attire to these bonds. But forbearing to speak of those great and
heavenly glories, even were the thing attended with no reward at all, this alone
were a great reward, this an ample recompense, to suffer these hardships for the
sake of the Beloved. They that love, even though it be not God, but man, they
know what I am saying, since they are more delighted to suffer for, than to be
honored by those they love. But to fully understand these things belongs to the
holy company, the Apostles, I mean, and them alone. For hearken to what the
blessed Luke says, [Acts 5:11] "that they departed from the presence of the
council, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer dishonor for the
Name." To all others indeed it seems to be foolishness, that to suffer dishonor is
to be counted worthy, that to suffer dishonor is to rejoice. But to them that
understand the love of Christ, this is esteemed of all things the most blessed.
Were any to offer me my choice, the whole Heaven or that chain, that chain I
would prefer. Were any to ask whether he should place me on high with the