But when our Lord and Saviour was instructing the faith of His disciples by questioning them, "Who," says He, "do men say that I, the Son of Man, am?" and when they had related diverse opinions of others, but "ye," says He, "who do ye say that I am?" — I who am a son of man, and whom ye see in the form of a servant, and in the verity of flesh — "who do ye say that I am?" On which blessed Peter, divinely inspired, and by his confession about to confer a benefit on all nations, answers, "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God" (Mt 16:16). Deservedly, therefore, was he pronounced "blessed" by the Lord, and drew the solidity both of his virtue and of his name from the archetypal rock, who by the revelation of the Father confessed the same Person both the Son of God and the Christ, seeing that one of these received without the other availed not for salvation; and it was equally perilous to believe the Lord Jesus Christ either God only and not man also, or man only and not God also.

But after the resurrection of the Lord (which assuredly was that of a true body, because no other was raised but the person who had been crucified and dead) what else was done in the forty days' interval than to cleanse the soundness of our faith from all obscurity. For conversing with His disciples, and abiding with them, eating with them, and permitting those who doubted to touch Him with careful and curious touch, He both entered in to the disciples, the doors being shut, and breathing on them gave them the Holy Spirit, and enlightening their understanding, opened to them the Holy Scriptures, and again — still the same — He shewed the wound in His side, the prints of the nails, and all the tokens of His recent passion, saying, "Behold My hands and My feet, that it is I Myself. Handle Me and see, for a spirit hath not flesh and bones as ye see Me have" (Lk 24:39), that the properties of both natures, the Divine and the human, might be recognised in Him continuing inseparable, and that while we understand that the Word is not the same as the flesh, we may confess one Son of God both Word and flesh.

Of which mystery of the faith this Eutyches must be regarded as plainly void, who acknowledges our nature in the only-begotten Son of God, neither through the humility of His mortality, nor through the glory of his resurrection, having no fear of the sentence of the blessed Apostle and Evangelist John, who says, "Every spirit which confesseth that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God; and every spirit which disuniteth Jesus is not of God: and this is antichrist" (1 Jn 4:2-3). What indeed is to "disunite Jesus" but to separate His human nature from Him, and to make void the mystery, by which alone we have been saved, by most impudent figments?

But being blinded concerning the nature of Christ's body, he must needs be blinded with the same blindness in the matter of His passion. For if he does not esteem the Lord's cross to be unreal, and does not doubt the truth of the punishment which was undergone for the salvation of the world, let him acknowledge the flesh of Him whose death he believes; and let him not deny Him to have been man with a body such as ours, whom he knows to have been passible; since the denial of very flesh is the denial also of bodily suffering. If, therefore, he holds the Christian faith, and does not turn a deaf ear to the preaching of the Gospel, let him consider what nature it was that was pierced with nails and hanged upon the cross, and let him understand whence it was, that when the side of the crucified was pierced by the soldier's spear, blood and water issued, that the Church of God might be bedewed both with the Laver and with the Cup.