SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.154, C.2.

something of virtue, and somewhat falls short of virtue.
If, however, we take virtue in a broad sense, for any principle of
commendable actions, we may say that continence is a virtue.
Reply to Objection 1: The Philosopher includes continence in the
same division with virtue in so far as the former falls short of virtue.
Reply to Objection 2: Properly speaking, man is that which is
according to reason. Wherefore from the very fact that a man holds
[tenet se] to that which is in accord with reason, he is said to contain
himself. Now whatever pertains to perversion of reason is not
according to reason. Hence he alone is truly said to be continent
who stands to that which is in accord with right reason, and not to
that which is in accord with perverse reason. Now evil desires are
opposed to right reason, even as good desires are opposed to
perverse reason. Wherefore he is properly and truly continent who
holds to right reason, by abstaining from evil desires, and not he
who holds to perverse reason, by abstaining from good desires:
indeed, the latter should rather be said to be obstinate in evil.
Reply to Objection 3: The gloss quoted takes continence in the first
sense, as denoting a perfect virtue, which refrains not merely from
unlawful goods, but also from certain lawful things that are lesser
goods, in order to give its whole attention to the more perfect goods.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.154, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether desires for pleasures of touch are the

matter of continence?
Objection 1: It would seem that desires for pleasures of touch are
not the matter of continence. For Ambrose says (De Offic. i, 46):
"General decorum by its consistent form and the perfection of what
is virtuous is restrained in its every action."
Objection 2: Further, continence takes its name from a man standing
for the good of right reason, as stated above (Article 1, ad 2). Now
other passions lead men astray from right reason with greater
vehemence than the desire for pleasures of touch: for instance, the
fear of mortal dangers, which stupefies a man, and anger which
makes him behave like a madman, as Seneca remarks [De Ira i, 1].
Therefore continence does not properly regard the desires for
pleasures of touch.
Objection 3: Further, Tully says (De Invent. Rhet. ii, 54): "It is
continence that restrains cupidity with the guiding hand of counsel."
Now cupidity is generally used to denote the desire for riches rather
than the desire for pleasures of touch, according to 1 Tim. 6:10,
"Cupidity (philargyria), is the root of all evils." Therefore continence
is not properly about the desires for pleasures of touch
Objection 4: Further, there are pleasures of touch not only in
venereal matters but also in eating. But continence is wont to be
applied only to the use of venereal matters. Therefore the desire for
pleasures of touch is not its proper matter.
Objection 5: Further, among pleasures of touch some are not human
but bestial, both as regards food---for instance, the pleasure of
eating human flesh; and as regards venereal matters---for instance
the abuse of animals or boys. But continence is not about such like
things, as stated in Ethic. vii, 5. Therefore desires for pleasures of
touch are not the proper matter of continence.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. vii, 4) that "continence
and incontinence are about the same things as temperance and
intemperance." Now temperance and intemperance are about the
desires for pleasures of touch, as stated above (Question 141, Article
4). Therefore continence and incontinence are also about that same