25:24,25, "Thou shalt make . . . another little golden crown [coronam
aureolam]," says: "This crown denotes the new hymn which the
virgins alone sing in the presence of the Lamb." Wherefore
apparently the aureole is a crown awarded, not to all, but especially
to some: whereas the aurea is awarded to all the blessed. Therefore
the aureole is distinct from the "aurea."
Further, a crown is due to the fight which is followed by victory:
"He . . . is not crowned except he strive lawfully" (2 Tim. 2:5). Hence
where there is a special kind of conflict, there should be a special
crown. Now in certain works there is a special kind of conflict.
Therefore they deserve a special kind of crown, which we call an
aureole.
Further, the Church militant comes down from the Church
triumphant: "I saw the Holy City," etc. (Apoc. 21:2). Now in the
Church militant special rewards are given to those who perform
special deeds, for instance a crown to the conqueror, a prize to the
runner. Therefore the same should obtain in the Church triumphant.
I answer that, Man's essential reward, which is his beatitude,
consists in the perfect union of the soul with God, inasmuch as it
enjoys God perfectly as seen and loved perfectly. Now this reward is
called a "crown" or "aurea" metaphorically, both with reference to
merit which is gained by a kind of conflict---since "the life of man
upon earth is a warfare" (Job 7:1)---and with reference to the reward
whereby in a way man is made a participator of the Godhead, and
consequently endowed with regal power: "Thou hast made us to our
God a kingdom," etc. (Apoc. 5:10); for a crown is the proper sign of
regal power.
In like manner the accidental reward which is added to the essential
has the character of a crown. For a crown signifies some kind of
perfection, on account of its circular shape, so that for this very
reason it is becoming to the perfection of the blessed. Since,
however, nothing can be added to the essential, but what is less than
it, the additional reward is called an "aureole." Now something may
be added in two ways to this essential reward which we call the
"aurea." First, in consequence of a condition attaching to the nature
of the one rewarded: thus the glory of the body is added to the
beatitude of the soul, wherefore this same glory of the body is
sometimes called an "aureole." Thus a gloss of Bede on Ex. 25:25,
"Thou . . . shalt make another little golden crown," says that "finally

the aureole is added, when it is stated in the Scriptures that a higher
degree of glory is in store for us when our bodies are resumed." But
it is not in this sense that we speak of an aureole now. Secondly, in
consequence of the nature of the meritorious act. Now this has the
character of merit on two counts, whence also it has the character of
good. First, to wit, from its root which is charity, since it is referred
to the last end, and thus there is due to it the essential reward,
namely the attainment of the end, and this is the "aurea." Secondly,
from the very genus of the act which derives a certain
praiseworthiness from its due circumstances, from the habit eliciting
it and from its proximate end, and thus is due to it a kind of
accidental reward which we call an "aureole": and it is in this sense
that we regard the aureole now. Accordingly it must be said that an
"aureole" denotes something added to the "aurea," a kind of joy, to
wit, in the works one has done, in that they have the character of a
signal victory: for this joy is distinct from the joy in being united to
God, which is called the "aurea." Some, however, affirm that the
common reward, which is the "aurea," receives the name of
"aureole," according as it is given to virgins, martyrs, or doctors:
even as money receives the name of debt through being due to some
one, though the money and the debt are altogether the same. And
that nevertheless this does not imply that the essential reward is any
greater when it is called an "aureole"; but that it corresponds to a
more excellent act, more excellent not in intensity of merit but in the
manner of meriting; so that although two persons may have the
Divine vision with equal clearness, it is called an "aureole" in one
and not in the other in so far as it corresponds to higher merit as
regards the way of meriting. But this would seem contrary to the
meaning of the gloss quoted above. For if "aurea" and "aureole"
were the same, the "aureole" would not be described as added to the
"aurea." Moreover, since reward corresponds to merit, a more
excellent reward must needs correspond to this more excellent way
of meriting: and it is this excellence that we call an "aureole." Hence
it follows that an "aureole" differs from the "aurea."
Reply to Objection 1: Beatitude includes all the goods necessary for
man's perfect life consisting in his perfect operation. Yet some
things can be added, not as being necessary for that perfect
operation as though it were impossible without them, but as adding
to the glory of beatitude. Hence they regard the well-being of
beatitude and a certain fitness thereto. Even so civic happiness is
embellished by nobility and bodily beauty and so forth, and yet it is
possible without them as stated in Ethic. i, 8: and thus is the aureole