say, for no one to be injured when many are committing injury? In the way
which I indicated just now. For Joseph's brethren did indeed injure him, yet he
himself was not injured: and Cain laid snares for Abel, yet he himself was not
ensnared. This is the reason why there are penalties and punishments. For God
does not abolish penalties on account of the virtue of those who suffer; but he
ordains punishments on account of the malice of those who do wickedly. For
although they who are evil entreated become more illustrious in consequence of
the designs formed against them, this is not due to the intention of those who
plan the designs, but to the courage of those who are the victims of them.
Wherefore for the latter the rewards of philosophy are made ready and prepared,
for the former the penalties of wickedness. Have you been deprived of your
money? Read the word "Naked came I out of my mother's womb, and naked
shall I return there." [Job 1:21] And add to this the apostolic saying "for we
brought nothing into this world; it is certain we can carry nothing out."
[1 Timothy 6:7] Are you evil reported of, and have some men loaded you with
countless abuse? Remember that passage where it is said "Woe unto you when all
men shall speak well of you" [Luke 6:26] and "rejoice ye and leap for joy when
they shall cast upon you an evil name." Have you been transported into the land
of exile? Consider that you have not here a fatherland, but that if you will be
wise you are bidden to regard the whole world as a strange country. Or have you
been given over to a sore disease? Quote the apostolic saying "the more our
outward man decays, so much the more is the inward man renewed day by day."
[2 Corinthians 4:16] Has any one suffered a violent death? Consider the case of
John, his head cut off in prison, carried in a charger, and made the reward of a
harlot's dancing. Consider the recompense which is derived from these things:
for all these sufferings when they are unjustly inflicted by any one on another,
expiate sins, and work righteousness. So great is the advantage of them in the
case of those who bear them bravely.
5. When then neither loss of money, nor slander, nor railing, nor
banishment, nor diseases, nor tortures, nor that which seems more formidable

than all, namely death, harms those who suffer them, but rather adds to their
profit, whence can you prove to me that any one is injured when he is not injured
at all from any of these things? For I will endeavour to prove the reverse,
showing that they who are most injured and insulted, and suffer the most
incurable evils are the persons who do these things. For what could be more
miserable than the condition of Cain, who dealt with his brother in this fashion?
What more pitiable than that of Phillip's wife who beheaded John? Or the
brethren of Joseph who sold him away, and transported him into the land of
exile? Or the devil who tortured Job with such great calamities? For not only on
account of his other iniquities, but at the same time also for this assault he will
pay no trifling penalty. Do you see how here the argument has proved even more
than was proposed, showing that those who are insulted not only sustain no harm
from these assaults, but that the whole mischief recoils on the head of those who
contrive them? For since neither wealth nor freedom, nor life in our native land
nor the other things which I have mentioned, but only right actions of the soul,
constitute the virtue of man, naturally when the harm is directed against these
things, human virtue itself is no wise harmed. What then? Supposing some one
does harm the moral condition of the soul? Even then if a man suffers damage,
the damage does not come from another but proceeds from within, and from the
man himself. "How so," do you say? When any one having been beaten by
another, or deprived of his goods, or having endured some other grievous insult,
utters a blasphemous speech, he certainly sustains a damage thereby, and a very
great one, nevertheless it does not proceed from him who has inflicted the insult,
but from his own littleness of soul. For what I said before I will now repeat, no
man if he be infinitely wicked could attack any one more wickedly or more
bitterly than that revengeful demon who is implacably hostile to us, the devil:
but yet this cruel demon had not power to upset or overthrow him who lived
before the law, and before the time of grace, although he discharged so many and
such bitter weapons against him from all quarters. Such is the force of nobility of
soul. And what shall I say of Paul? Did he not suffer so many distresses that