the contrary, considering that "one" which is the principle of
number, added a reality to the substance of "being" (otherwise
number made of unities would not be a species of quantity), thought
that the "one" convertible with "being" added a reality to the
substance of beings; as "white" to "man." This, however, is
manifestly false, inasmuch as each thing is "one" by its substance.
For if a thing were "one" by anything else but by its substance, since
this again would be "one," supposing it were again "one" by another
thing, we should be driven on to infinity. Hence we must adhere to
the former statement; therefore we must say that the "one" which is
convertible with "being," does not add a reality to being; but that the
"one" which is the principle of number, does add a reality to "being,"
belonging to the genus of quantity.
Reply to Objection 2: There is nothing to prevent a thing which in
one way is divided, from being another way undivided; as what is
divided in number, may be undivided in species; thus it may be that
a thing is in one way "one," and in another way "many." Still, if it is
absolutely undivided, either because it is so according to what
belongs to its essence, though it may be divided as regards what is
outside its essence, as what is one in subject may have many
accidents; or because it is undivided actually, and divided
potentially, as what is "one" in the whole, and is "many" in parts; in
such a case a thing will be "one" absolutely and "many"
accidentally. On the other hand, if it be undivided accidentally, and
divided absolutely, as if it were divided in essence and undivided in
idea or in principle or cause, it will be "many" absolutely and "one"
accidentally; as what are "many" in number and "one" in species or
"one" in principle. Hence in that way, being is divided by "one" and
by "many"; as it were by "one" absolutely and by "many"
accidentally. For multitude itself would not be contained under
"being," unless it were in some way contained under "one." Thus
Dionysius says (Div. Nom. cap. ult.) that "there is no kind of
multitude that is not in a way one. But what are many in their parts,
are one in their whole; and what are many in accidents, are one in
subject; and what are many in number, are one in species; and what
are many in species, are one in genus; and what are many in
processions, are one in principle."
Reply to Objection 3: It does not follow that it is nugatory to say
"being" is "one"; forasmuch as "one" adds an idea to "being."

### ARTICLE 2. Whether "one" and "many" are opposed to each

other?
Objection 1: It seems that "one" and "many" are not mutually
opposed. For no opposite thing is predicated of its opposite. But
every "multitude" is in a certain way "one," as appears from the
preceding article. Therefore "one" is not opposed to "multitude."
Objection 2: Further, no opposite thing is constituted by its opposite.
But "multitude" is constituted by "one." Therefore it is not opposed
to "multitude."
Objection 3: Further, "one" is opposed to "one." But the idea of
"few" is opposed to "many." Therefore "one" is not opposed to
"many."
Objection 4: Further, if "one" is opposed to "multitude," it is
opposed as the undivided is to the divided; and is thus opposed to it
as privation is to habit. But this appears to be incongruous; because
it would follow that "one" comes after "multitude," and is defined by
it; whereas, on the contrary, "multitude" is defined by "one." Hence
there would be a vicious circle in the definition; which is
inadmissible. Therefore "one" and "many" are not opposed.
On the contrary, Things which are opposed in idea, are themselves
opposed to each other. But the idea of "one" consists in
indivisibility; and the idea of "multitude" contains division. Therefore
"one" and "many" are opposed to each other.
I answer that, "One" is opposed to "many," but in various ways. The
"one" which is the principle of number is opposed to "multitude"
which is number, as the measure is to the thing measured. For "one"
implies the idea of a primary measure; and number is "multitude"
measured by "one," as is clear from Metaph. x. But the "one" which
convertible with "being" is opposed to "multitude" by way of
privation; as the undivided is to the thing divided.
Reply to Objection 1: No privation entirely takes away the being of a
thing, inasmuch as privation means "negation in the subject,"
according to the Philosopher (Categor. viii). Nevertheless every
privation takes away some being; and so in being, by reason of its