our own will. Wherefore that you may know and see that not only those which
exceed our power, but not even these which are "common to man" is it possible
without assistance from God easily to bear, he added,
"But will with the temptation also make the way of escape, that you may be
able to endure it."
For, says he, not even those moderate temptations, as I was remarking, may
we bear by our own power: but even in them we require aid from Him in our
warfare that we may pass through them, and until we have passed, bear them.
For He gives patience and brings on a speedy release; so that in this way also the
temptation becomes bearable. This he covertly intimates, saying, "will also make
the way of escape, that you may be able to bear it:" and all things he refers to
Him.

1 Corinthians 10:14
2. "Wherefore, my brethren , flee from idolatry."
Again he courts them by the name of kindred, and urges them to be rid of
this sin with all speed. For he did not say, simply, depart, but "flee;" and he calls
the matter "idolatry," and no longer bids them quit it merely on account of the
injury to their neighbor, but signifies that the very thing of itself is sufficient to
bring a great destruction.

1 Corinthians 10:15
"I speak as to wise men: judge ye what I say."
Because he has cried out aloud and heightened the accusation, calling it
idolatry; that he might not seem to exasperate them and to make his speech
disgusting, in what follows he refers the decision to them, and sets his judges
down on their tribunal with an encomium. "For I speak as to wise men," says he:
which is the mark of one very confident of his own rights, that he should make
the accused himself the judge of his allegations.
Thus also he more elevates the hearer, when he discourses not as
commanding nor as laying down the law, but as advising with them and as
actually pleading before them. For with the Jews, as more foolishly and
childishly disposed, God did not so discourse, nor did He in every instance
acquaint them with the reasons of the commands, but merely enjoined them; but
here, because we have the privilege of great liberty, we are even admitted to be
counsellors. And he discourses as with friends, and says, "I need no other
judges, do ye yourselves pass this sentence upon me, I take you for arbiters."

1 Corinthians 10:16
3. "The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not a communion of the Blood
of Christ?"
What do you say, O blessed Paul? When you would appeal to the hearer's
reverence, when you are making mention of awful mysteries, do you give the
title of "cup of blessing" to that fearful and most tremendous cup? "Yea," says
he; "and no mean title is that which was spoken. For when I call it 'blessing,' I
mean thanksgiving, and when I call it thanksgiving I unfold all the treasure of
God's goodness, and call to mind those mighty gifts." Since we too, recounting
over the cup the unspeakable mercies of God and all that we have been made
partakers of, so draw near to Him, and communicate; giving Him thanks that He
has delivered from error the whole race of mankind ; that being afar off, He
made them near; that when they had no hope and were without God in the world,
He constituted them His own brethren and fellow-heirs. For these and all such
things, giving thanks, thus we approach. "How then are not your doings
inconsistent," says he, "O you Corinthians; blessing God for delivering you from
idols, yet running again to their tables?"
"The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not a communion of the Blood of
Christ?" Very persuasively spoke he, and awfully. For what he says is this: "This
which is in the cup is that which flowed from His side, and of that do we
partake." But he called it a cup of blessing, because holding it in our hands, we
so exalt Him in our hymn, wondering, astonished at His unspeakable gift,
blessing Him, among other things, for the pouring out of this self-same draught
that we might not abide in error: and not only for the pouring it out, but also for
the imparting thereof to us all. "Wherefore if you desire blood," says He, "redden
not the altar of idols with the slaughter of brute beasts, but My altar with My
blood." Tell me, What can be more tremendous than this? What more tenderly