FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.40, C.2.

presuppose the passions of the concupiscible faculty, as stated
above (Question 25, Article 1).
Reply to Objection 1: Augustine mentions desire instead of hope,
because each regards future good; and because the good which is
not arduous is reckoned as nothing: thus implying that desire seems
to tend chiefly to the arduous good, to which hope tends likewise.
Reply to Objection 1: The object of hope is the future good
considered, not absolutely, but as arduous and difficult of
attainment, as stated above.
Reply to Objection 3: The object of hope adds not only possibility to
the object of desire, but also difficulty: and this makes hope belong
to another power, viz. the irascible, which regards something
difficult, as stated in the FP, Question 81, Article 2. Moreover,
possibility and impossibility are not altogether accidental to the
object of the appetitive power: because the appetite is a principle of
movement; and nothing is moved to anything except under the
aspect of being possible; for no one is moved to that which he
reckons impossible to get. Consequently hope differs from despair
according to the difference of possible and impossible.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.40, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether hope is in the apprehensive or in the

appetitive power?
Objection 1: It would seem that hope belongs to the cognitive power.
Because hope, seemingly, is a kind of awaiting; for the Apostle says
(Rm. 8:25): "If we hope for that which we see not; we wait for it with
patience." But awaiting seems to belong to the cognitive power,
which we exercise by "looking out." Therefore hope belongs to the
cognitive power.
Objection 2: Further, apparently hope is the same as confidence;
hence when a man hopes he is said to be confident, as though to
hope and to be confident were the same thing. But confidence, like
faith, seems to belong to the cognitive power. Therefore hope does
too.
Objection 3: Further, certainty is a property of the cognitive power.
But certainty is ascribed to hope. Therefore hope belongs to the
cognitive power.
On the contrary, Hope regards good, as stated above (Article 1). Now
good, as such, is not the object of the cognitive, but of the appetitive
power. Therefore hope belongs, not to the cognitive, but to the
appetitive power.
I answer that, Since hope denotes a certain stretching out of the
appetite towards good, it evidently belongs to the appetitive power;
since movement towards things belongs properly to the appetite:
whereas the action of the cognitive power is accomplished not by
the movement of the knower towards things, but rather according as
the things known are in the knower. But since the cognitive power
moves the appetite, by presenting its object to it; there arise in the
appetite various movements according to various aspects of the
apprehended object. For the apprehension of good gives rise to one
kind of movement in the appetite, while the apprehension of evil
gives rise to another: in like manner various movements arise from
the apprehension of something present and of something future; of
something considered absolutely, and of something considered as
arduous; of something possible, and of something impossible. And
accordingly hope is a movement of the appetitive power ensuing
from the apprehension of a future good, difficult but possible to