those persons who have to live together lest, as Rabbi Moses
observes (Doc. Perp. iii, 49), if it were lawful for them to have carnal
intercourse, there should be more room for concupiscence to the
repression of which marriage is directed. And since the adopted
child dwells in the house of his adopted father like one that is
begotten naturally human laws forbid the contracting of marriage
between the like, and this prohibition is approved by the Church.
Hence it is that legal adoption is an impediment to marriage. This
suffices for the Replies to the first three Objections, because none of
those things entails such a cohabitation as might be an incentive to
concupiscence. Therefore they do not cause a relationship that is an
impediment to marriage.
Reply to Objection 4: The prohibition of a human law would not
suffice to make an impediment to marriage, unless the authority of
the Church intervenes by issuing the same prohibition.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether legal relationship is contracted only

between the adopting father and the adopted child?
Objection 1: It would seem that a relationship of this kind is
contracted only between the adopting father and the adopted child.
For it would seem that it ought above all to be contracted between
the adopting father and the natural mother of the adopted, as
happens in spiritual relationship. Yet there is no legal relationship
between them. Therefore it is not contracted between any other
persons besides the adopter and adopted.
Objection 2: Further, the relationship that impedes marriage is a
perpetual impediment. But there is not a perpetual impediment
between the adopted son and the naturally begotten daughter of the
adopted; because when the adoption terminates at the death of the
adopter, or when the adopted comes of age, the latter can marry her.
Therefore he was not related to her in such a way as to prevent him
from marrying her.
Objection 3: Further, spiritual relationship passes to no person
incapable of being a god-parent; wherefore it does not pass to one
who is not baptized. Now a woman cannot adopt, as stated above
(Article 1, ad 2). Therefore legal relationship does not pass from
husband to wife.
Objection 4: Further, spiritual relationship is stronger than legal. But
spiritual relationship does not pass to a grandchild. Neither,
therefore, does legal relationship.
On the contrary, Legal relationship is more in agreement with carnal
union or procreation than spiritual relationship is. But spiritual
relationship passes to another person. Therefore legal relationship
does so also.
Further, the same is proved by the authorities quoted in the text
(Sent. iv, D, 42).
I answer that, Legal relationship is of three kinds. The first is in the
descending order as it were, and is contracted between the adoptive
father and the adopted child, the latter's child grandchild and so on;
the second is between the adopted child and the naturally begotten