that defileth a man." In one sentence He has comprised two diverse
mouths of the man, one of the body, one of the heart. For assuredly, that
from which they thought the man to be defiled, enters into the mouth of
the body; but that from which the Lord said the man was defiled,
proceedeth out of the mouth of the heart. So certainly He Himself
explained what He had said. For a little after, He says also to His disciples
concerning the same thing: "Are ye also yet without understanding? Do
ye not understand, that whatsoever entereth in at the mouth goeth into
the belly, and is east out into the draught?" Here He most certainly
pointed to the mouth of the body. But in that which follows He plainly
speaks of the mouth of the heart, where He says, "But those things which
proceed out of the mouth come forth from the heart; and they defile the
man. For out of the heart proceed evil thoughts," etc. What is clearer than
this explanation? And yet, when we call thoughts speeches of' the heart, it
does not follow that they are not also acts of sight, arising from the sight
of knowledge, when they are true. For when these things are done
outwardly by means of the body, then speech and sight are different
things; but when we think inwardly, the two are one,—just as sight and
hearing are two things mutually distinct in the bodily senses, but to see
and hear are the same thing in the mind; and hence, while speech is not
seen but rather heard outwardly, yet the inward speeches, i.e. thoughts,
are said by the holy Gospel to have been seen, not heard, by the Lord.
"They said within themselves, This man blasphemeth," says the Gospel;
and then subjoined, "And when Jesus saw their thoughts." Therefore He
saw, what they said. For by His own thought He saw their thoughts,
which they supposed no one saw but themselves.
19. Whoever, then, is able to understand a word, not only before it is
uttered in sound, but also before the images of its sounds are considered
in thought,—for this it is which belongs to no tongue, to wit, of those
which are called the tongues of nations, of which our Latin tongue is one;
—whoever, I say, is able to understand this, is able now to see through
this glass and in this enigma some likeness of that Word of whom it is
said, "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and
the Word was God." For of necessity, when we speak what is true, i.e.
speak what we know, there is born from the knowledge itself which the
memory retains, a word that is altogether of the same kind with that

knowledge from which it is born. For the thought that is formed by the
thing which we know, is the word which we speak in the heart: which
word is neither Greek nor Latin, nor of any other tongue. But when it is
needful to convey this to the knowledge of those to whom we speak, then
some sign is assumed whereby to signify it. And generally a sound,
sometimes a nod, is exhibited, the former to the ears, the latter to the
eyes, that the word which we bear in our mind may become known also
by bodily signs to the bodily senses. For what is to nod or beckon, except
to speak in some way to the sight? And Holy Scripture gives its testimony
to this; for we read in the Gospel according to John: "Verily, verily, I say
unto you, that one of you shall betray me. Then the disciples looked one
upon another, doubting of whom He spake. Now there was leaning on
Jesus' breast one of His disciples whom Jesus loved. Simon Peter
therefore beckons to him, and says to him, Who is it of whom He
speaks?" Here he spoke by beckoning what he did not venture to speak by
sounds. But whereas we exhibit these and the like bodily signs either to
ears or eyes of persons present to whom we speak, letters have been
invented that we might be able to converse also with the absent; but these
are signs of words, as words themselves are signs in our conversation of
those things which we think.