he neglects the secondary element yet preserves it by means of saving the
primary one. Which also Christ signified to us when He said, "Fear not them
which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul; but rather fear Him who is
able to destroy both soul and body in Hell." [Matthew 10:28]
Well, do I convince you, that one ought never to despair of the disorders of
the soul as incurable? Or must I again set other arguments in motion? For even if
you should despair of yourself ten thousand times, I will never despair of you,
and I will never myself be guilty of that for which I reproach others; and yet it is
not the same thing for a man to renounce hope of himself, as for another to
renounce hope of him. For he who has this suspicion concerning another may
readily obtain pardon; but he who has it of himself will not. Why so pray?
Because the one has no controlling power over the zeal and repentance of the
other, but over his own zeal and repentance a man has sole authority.
Nevertheless even so I will not despair of you; though you should any number of
times be affected in this way; for it may be, that there will be some return to
virtue, and to restoration to your former manner of life. And now hear what
follows: The Ninevites when they heard the prophet vehemently declaring, and
plainly threatening; "yet three days and Nineveh shall be overthrown," even then
did not lose heart, but, although they had no confidence that they should be able
to move the mind of God, or rather had reason to suspect the contrary from the
divine message (for the utterance was not accompanied by any qualification, but
was a simple declaration), even then they manifested repentance saying: "Who
knows whether God will repent and be entreated, and turn from the fierceness of
His wrath, and that we perish not? And God saw their works that they turned
from their evil ways, and God repented of the evil which He said He would do
unto them and He did it not." [Jonah 3:9-10] Now if barbarian, and unreasoning
men could perceive so much, much more ought we to do this who have been
trained in the divine doctrines and have seen such a crowd of examples of this
kind both in history and actual experience. "For my counsels" we read "are not
as your counsels nor my ways as your ways; but far as is the Heaven from the

earth, so far are my thoughts from your mind, and my counsels from your
counsels." Now if we admit to our favour household slaves when they have often
offended against us, on their promising to become better, and place them again
in their former portion, and sometimes even grant them greater freedom of
speech than before; much more does God act thus. For if God had made us in
order to punish us, you might well have despaired, and questioned the possibility
of your own salvation; but if He created us for no reason than His own good
will, and with a view to our enjoying everlasting blessings, and if He does and
contrives everything for this end, from the first day until the present time, what
is there which can ever cause you to doubt? Have we provoked Him severely, so
as no other man ever did? This is just the reason why we ought specially to
abstain from our present deeds and to repent for the past, and exhibit a great
change. For the evils we have once perpetrated cannot provoke Him so much as
our being unwilling to make any change in the future. For to sin may be a merely
human failing, but to continue in the same sin ceases to be human, and becomes
altogether devilish. For observe how God by the mouth of His prophet blames
this more than the other. "For," we read, "I said unto her after she had done all
these deeds of fornication, return unto me, and yet she returned not."
[Jeremiah 3:7] And again: from another quarter, when wishing to show the great
longing which He has for our salvation, having heard how the people promised,
after many transgressions, to tread the right way He said: "Who will grant unto
them to have such an heart as to fear me, and to keep my commandments all
their days, that it may be well with them and with their children forever?"
[Deuteronomy 5:29] And Moses when reasoning with them said, "And now, O
Israel, what does the Lord your God require of you, but to fear the Lord your
God, and to walk in all His ways, and to love Him?" [Deuteronomy 10:12] He
then who is so anxious to be loved by us, and does everything for this end, and
did not spare even His only begotten Son on account of His love towards us, and
who counts it a desirable thing if at any time we become reconciled to Himself,
how shall He not welcome and love us when we repent? Hear at least what He