The text is here defective, but the above meaning seems to be indicated by Epiphanius.

They affirm that for this reason Jesus spoke the following parable:—"Whilst thou art with thine
adversary in the way, give all diligence, that thou mayest be delivered from him, lest he give thee
up to the judge, and the judge surrender thee to the officer, and he cast thee into prison. Verily, I
say unto thee, thou shalt not go out thence until thou pay the very last farthing." They also declare
the "adversary" is one of those angels who are in the world, whom they call the Devil, maintaining
that he was formed for this purpose, that he might lead those souls which have perished from the
world to the Supreme Ruler. They describe him also as being chief among the makers of the world,
and maintain that he delivers such souls [as have been mentioned] to another angel, who ministers
to him, that he may shut them up in other bodies; for they declare that the body is "the prison."
Again, they interpret these expressions, "Thou shalt not go out thence until thou pay the very last
farthing," as meaning that no one can escape from the power of those angels who made the world,
but that he must pass from body to body, until he has experience of every kind of action which can
be practised in this world, and when nothing is longer wanting to him, then his liberated soul should
soar upwards to that God who is above the angels, the makers of the world. In this way also all
souls are saved, whether their own which, guarding against all delay, participate in all sorts of
actions during one incarnation, or those, again, who, by passing from body to body, are set free,
on fulfilling and accomplishing what is requisite in every form of life into which they are sent, so
that at length they shall no longer be [shut up] in the body.
5. And thus, if ungodly, unlawful, and forbidden actions are committed among them, I can no
longer find ground for believing them to be such. And in their writings we read as follows, the
interpretation which they give [of their views], declaring that Jesus spoke in a mystery to His
disciples and apostles privately, and that they requested and obtained permission to hand down the
things thus taught them, to others who should be worthy and believing. We are saved, indeed, by
means of faith and love; but all other things, while in their nature indifferent, are reckoned by the
opinion of men—some good and some evil, there being nothing really evil by nature.
6. Others of them employ outward marks, branding their disciples inside the lobe of the right
ear. From among these also arose Marcellina, who came to Rome under [the episcopate of] Anicetus,
and, holding these doctrines, she led multitudes astray. They style themselves Gnostics. They also
possess images, some of them painted, and others formed from different kinds of material; while
they maintain that a likeness of Christ was made by Pilate at that time when Jesus lived among
them. They crown these images, and set them up along with the images of the philosophers of
the world that is to say, with the images of Pythagoras, and Plato, and Aristotle, and the rest. They
have also other modes of honouring these images, after the same manner of the Gentiles.