FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.94, C.3.

education of offspring and so forth. Thirdly, there is in man an
inclination to good, according to the nature of his reason, which
nature is proper to him: thus man has a natural inclination to know
the truth about God, and to live in society: and in this respect,
whatever pertains to this inclination belongs to the natural law; for
instance, to shun ignorance, to avoid offending those among whom
one has to live, and other such things regarding the above
inclination.
Reply to Objection 1: All these precepts of the law of nature have the
character of one natural law, inasmuch as they flow from one first
precept.
Reply to Objection 2: All the inclinations of any parts whatsoever of
human nature, e.g. of the concupiscible and irascible parts, in so far
as they are ruled by reason, belong to the natural law, and are
reduced to one first precept, as stated above: so that the precepts of
the natural law are many in themselves, but are based on one
common foundation.
Reply to Objection 3: Although reason is one in itself, yet it directs
all things regarding man; so that whatever can be ruled by reason, is
contained under the law of reason.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.94, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether all acts of virtue are prescribed by the

natural law?
Objection 1: It would seem that not all acts of virtue are prescribed
by the natural law. Because, as stated above (Question 90, Article 2)
it is essential to a law that it be ordained to the common good. But
some acts of virtue are ordained to the private good of the individual,
as is evident especially in regards to acts of temperance. Therefore
not all acts of virtue are the subject of natural law.
Objection 2: Further, every sin is opposed to some virtuous act. If
therefore all acts of virtue are prescribed by the natural law, it seems
to follow that all sins are against nature: whereas this applies to
certain special sins.
Objection 3: Further, those things which are according to nature are
common to all. But acts of virtue are not common to all: since a thing
is virtuous in one, and vicious in another. Therefore not all acts of
virtue are prescribed by the natural law.
On the contrary, Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii, 4) that "virtues
are natural." Therefore virtuous acts also are a subject of the natural
law.
I answer that, We may speak of virtuous acts in two ways: first,
under the aspect of virtuous; secondly, as such and such acts
considered in their proper species. If then we speak of acts of virtue,
considered as virtuous, thus all virtuous acts belong to the natural
law. For it has been stated (Article 2) that to the natural law belongs
everything to which a man is inclined according to his nature. Now
each thing is inclined naturally to an operation that is suitable to it
according to its form: thus fire is inclined to give heat. Wherefore,
since the rational soul is the proper form of man, there is in every
man a natural inclination to act according to reason: and this is to
act according to virtue. Consequently, considered thus, all acts of
virtue are prescribed by the natural law: since each one's reason
naturally dictates to him to act virtuously. But if we speak of virtuous
acts, considered in themselves, i.e. in their proper species, thus not
all virtuous acts are prescribed by the natural law: for many things
are done virtuously, to which nature does not incline at first; but
which, through the inquiry of reason, have been found by men to be