reputation ([ὑ] [πσλήψεως]), did not even get the better of a single king, but
came off so wretchedly, as even to have lost his liberty. But this tentmaker ran
over not Sicily alone or Italy, but the whole world; and while preaching too he
desisted not from his art, but even then sewed skins, and superintended the
workshop. And even this did not give offense to those who were born of consuls,
and with very good reason, for it is not their trades and occupations, but
falsehood and forged doctrines, which usually render teachers easy subjects of
contempt. And for this reason, even Athenians still laugh at the former. But this
man even barbarians attend to, and even foolish and ignorant men. For his
preaching is set forth to all alike, it knows no distinction of rank, no preëminence
of nation, no other thing of the sort; for faith alone does it require, and not
reasonings. Wherefore it is most worthy of admiration, not only because it is
profitable and saving, but that it is readily admissible and easy (Sav. "lovable"),
and comprehensible to all: which is a main object in the Providence of God, who
sets forth His blessings to all in common.
For what He did in respect of the sun and the moon and the earth and the
sea and other things, not giving the rich and the wise a greater share of the
benefits of these, and a less to the poor, but setting forth the enjoyment of them
to all alike, this also did He with regard to the preaching, and even in a much
greater degree, by how much this is more indispensable than they. Wherefore
Paul repeatedly says, "among all the Gentiles," to show that he in no respect
favors them, but is fulfilling his Master's command, and sending them away to
thanksgiving to the God of all, he says;
Ver. 14. "I am a debtor to the Greeks and to the Barbarians, both to the
wise and to the unwise."
Which also he said when writing to the Corinthians. And he says it, to
ascribe the whole to God. [1 Corinthians 9:16]
Ver. 15. "So, as much as in me is, I am ready to preach the Gospel to you
that are at Rome also."
Oh, noble soul! Having taken on him a task laden of so great dangers, a

voyage across the sea, temptations, plottings, risings— for it was likely, that one
who was going to address so great a city which was under the tyrannic sway of
impiety, should undergo temptations thick as snowflakes; and it was in this way
that he lost his life in this city, being cut off by the tyrant of it— yet still
expecting to undergo so great troubles, for none of these did he become less
energetic, but was in haste and was in travail and was ready-minded. Wherefore
he says, "So, as much as in me is, I am ready to preach the Gospel to you that
are at Rome also."
Ver. 16. "For I am not ashamed of the Gospel."
"What do you say, O, Paul? When it were fitting to say, that I boast, and am
proud, and luxuriate in it; you say not this, but what is less than this, that you are
"not ashamed," which is not what we usually say of things very glorious. What
then is this which he says, and why does he thus speak? While yet he exults over
it more than over heaven. At least, in writing to the Galatians, he said, "God
forbid that I should glory, save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ." [Galatians
6:14] How then comes he here to say, not that I even glory, but that "I am not
ashamed?" The Romans were most anxiously eager about the things of the
world, owing to their riches, their empire, their victories; and their kings they
reckoned to be equal to the gods, and so they even called them. And for this
cause too, they worshipped them with temples and with altars and with
sacrifices. Since then they were thus puffed up, but Paul was going to preach
Jesus, who was thought to be the carpenter's son, who was brought up in Judea,
and that in the house of a mean woman, who had no body guards, who was not
encircled in wealth, but even died as a culprit with robbers, and endured many
other inglorious things; and it was likely that they were concealing themselves as
not as yet knowing any of the unspeakable and great things: for this reason he
says, "I am not ashamed," having still to teach them not to be ashamed. For he
knew that if they succeeded in this, they would speedily go on and come to
glorying also: and do you then, if you hear any one saying, Do you worship the
Crucified? Be not ashamed, and do not look down, but luxuriate in it, be bright-