Homily 5 on the Gospel of John
John 1:3
"All things were made by Him; and without Him was not anything made that was
made."
1. Moses in the beginning of the history and writings of the Old Testament
speaks to us of the objects of sense, and enumerates them to us at length. For, "In
the beginning," he says, "God made the heaven and the earth," and then he adds,
that light was created, and a second heaven and the stars, the various kinds of
living creatures, and, that we may not delay by going through particulars,
everything else. But this Evangelist, cutting all short, includes both these things
and the things which are above these in a single sentence; with reason, because
they were known to his hearers, and because he is hastening to a greater subject,
and has instituted all his treatise, that he might speak not of the works but of the
Creator, and Him who produced them all. And therefore Moses, though he has
selected the smaller portion of the creation, (for he has spoken nothing to us
concerning the invisible powers,) dwells on these things; while John, as
hastening to ascend to the Creator Himself, runs by both these things, and those
on which Moses was silent, having comprised them in one little saying, "All
things were made by Him." And that you may not think that he merely speaks of
all the things mentioned by Moses, he adds, that "without Him was not anything
made that was made." That is to say, that of created things, not one, whether it
be visible or intelligible was brought into being without the power of the Son.
For we will not put the full stop after "not anything," as the heretics do.
They, because they wish to make the Spirit created, say, "What was made, in
Him was Life"; yet so what is said becomes unintelligible. First, it was not the
time here to make mention of the Spirit, and if he desired to do so, why did he

state it so indistinctly? For how is it clear that this saying relates to the Spirit?
Besides, we shall find by this argument, not that the Spirit, but that the Son
Himself, is created by Himself. But rouse yourselves, that what is said may not
escape you; and come, let us read for a while after their fashion, for so its
absurdity will be clearer to us. "What was made, in Him was Life." They say that
the Spirit is called "Life." But this "Life" is found to be also "Light," for he adds,
"And the Life was the Light of men." [John 1:4] Therefore, according to them the
"Light of men" here means the Spirit. Well, but when he goes on to say, that
"There was a man sent from God, to bear witness of that Light" [vers. 6, 7], they
needs must assert, that this too is spoken of the Spirit; for whom he above called
"Word," Him as he proceeds he calls "God," and "Life," and "Light." This
"Word" he says was "Life," and this "Life" was "Light." If now this Word was
Life, and if this Word and this Life became flesh, then the Life, that is to say, the
Word, "was made flesh, and we beheld" Its "glory, the glory as of the OnlyBegotten of the Father." If then they say that the Spirit is here called "Life,"
consider what strange consequences will follow. It will be the Spirit, not the Son,
that was made flesh; the Spirit will be the Only-Begotten Son.
And those who read the passage so will fall, if not into this, yet in avoiding
this into another most strange conclusion. If they allow that the words are spoken
of the Son, and yet do not stop or read as we do, then they will assert that the
Son is created by Himself. Since, if "the Word was Life," and "what was made in
Him was Life"; according to this reading He is created in Himself and through
Himself. Then after some words between, he has added, "And we beheld His
glory, the glory as of the Only-Begotten of the Father." [John 1:14] See, the Holy
Spirit is found, according to the reading of those who assert these things, to be
also an only-begotten Son, for it is concerning Him that all this declaration is
uttered by him. See when the word has swerved from the truth, whither it is
perverted, and what strange consequences it produces!
What then, says one, is not the Spirit "Light"? It is Light: but in this place
there is no mention of the Spirit. Since even God (the Father) is called "Spirit,"