SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.117, C.5.

by reason of imperfection of the act, as stated above (Question 66,
Article 6, ad 3), when we were treating of theft.
In another way covetousness may be take as opposed to liberality: in
which sense it denotes inordinate love of riches. Accordingly if the
love of riches becomes so great as to be preferred to charity, in such
wise that a man, through love of riches, fear not to act counter to the
love of God and his neighbor, covetousness will then be a mortal
sin. If, on the other hand, the inordinate nature of his love stops
short of this, so that although he love riches too much, yet he does
not prefer the love of them to the love of God, and is unwilling for the
sake of riches to do anything in opposition to God or his neighbor,
then covetousness is a venial sin.
Reply to Objection 1: Covetousness is numbered together with
mortal sins, by reason of the aspect under which it is a mortal sin.
Reply to Objection 2: Basil is speaking of a case wherein a man is
bound by a legal debt to give of his goods to the poor, either through
fear of their want or on account of his having too much.
Reply to Objection 3: Lust for riches, properly speaking, brings
darkness on the soul, when it puts out the light of charity, by
preferring the love of riches to the love of God.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.117, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether covetousness is the greatest of sins?

Objection 1: It seems that covetousness is the greatest of sins. For it
is written (Ecclus. 10:9): "Nothing is more wicked than a covetous
man," and the text continues: "There is not a more wicked thing than
to love money: for such a one setteth even his own soul to sale."
Tully also says (De Offic. i, under the heading, 'True magnanimity is
based chiefly on two things'): "Nothing is so narrow or little minded
as to love money." But this pertains to covetousness. Therefore
covetousness is the most grievous of sins.
Objection 2: Further, the more a sin is opposed to charity, the more
grievous it is. Now covetousness is most opposed to charity: for
Augustine says (Questions 83, qu. 36) that "greed is the bane of
charity." Therefore covetousness is the greatest of sins.
Objection 3: Further, the gravity of a sin is indicated by its being
incurable: wherefore the sin against the Holy Ghost is said to be
most grievous, because it is irremissible. But covetousness is an
incurable sin: hence the Philosopher says (Ethic. iv, 1) that "old age
and helplessness of any kind make men illiberal." Therefore
covetousness is the most grievous of sins.
Objection 4: Further, the Apostle says (Eph. 5:5) that covetousness
is "a serving of idols." Now idolatry is reckoned among the most
grievous sins. Therefore covetousness is also.
On the contrary, Adultery is a more grievous sin than theft,
according to Prov. 6:30. But theft pertains to covetousness.
Therefore covetousness is not the most grievous of sins.
I answer that, Every sin, from the very fact that it is an evil, consists
in the corruption or privation of some good: while, in so far as it is
voluntary, it consists in the desire of some good. Consequently the
order of sins may be considered in two ways. First, on the part of the
good that is despised or corrupted by sin, and then the greater the
good the graver the sin. From this point of view a sin that is against
God is most grievous; after this comes a sin that is committed
against a man's person, and after this comes a sin against external
things, which are deputed to man's use, and this seems to belong to
covetousness. Secondly, the degrees of sin may be considered on