John 4:49
"Sir, come down ere my child die."
As though He could not raise him after death, as though He knew not what
state the child was in. It is for this that Christ rebukes him and touches his
conscience, to show that His miracles were wrought principally for the sake of
the soul. For here He heals the father, sick in mind, no less than the son, in order
to persuade us to give heed to Him, not by reason of His miracles, but of His
teaching. For miracles are not for the faithful, but for the unbelieving and the
grosser sort.
3. At that time then, owing to his emotion, the nobleman gave no great heed
to the words, or to those only which related to his son, yet he would afterwards
recollect what had been said, and draw from thence the greatest advantage. As
indeed was the case.
But what can be the reason why in the case of the centurion He by a free
offer undertook to come, while here though invited, He goes not? Because in the
former case faith had been perfected, and therefore He undertook to go, that we
might learn the rightmindedness of the man; but here the nobleman was
imperfect. When therefore he continually urged Him, saying, "Come down," and
knew not yet clearly that even when absent He could heal, He shows that even
this was possible unto Him in order that this man might gain from Jesus not
going, that knowledge which the centurion had of himself. And so when He
says," Unless you see signs and wonders, you will not believe," His meaning is,
"You have not yet the right faith, but still feel towards Me as towards a Prophet."
Therefore to reveal Himself and to show that he ought to have believed even
without miracles, He said what He said also to Philip, "Believest thou that the
Father is in Me and I in the Father? Or if not, believe Me for the very works'
sake." [c. xiv. 10, 11]

John 4:51-53
"And as he was now going down, his servants met him, and told him, saying,
Your son lives. Then enquired he of them the hour when he began to amend. And
they said unto him, Yesterday at the seventh hour the fever left him. So the father
knew that it was at the same hour in the which Jesus said unto him, Your son
lives; and himself believed, and his whole house."
Do you see how evident the miracle was? Not simply nor in a common way
was the child freed from danger, but all at once, so that what took place was seen
to be the consequence not of nature, but the working of Christ. For when he had
reached the very gates of death, as his father showed by saying, "Come down ere
my child die"; he was all at once freed from the disease. A fact which roused the
servants also, for they perhaps came to meet their master, not only to bring him
the good news, but also deeming that the coming of Jesus was now superfluous,
(for they knew that their master had gone there,) and so they met him even in the
way. The man released from his fear, thenceforth escaped into faith, being
desirous to show that what had been done was the result of his journey, and
thenceforth he is ambitious of appearing not to have exerted himself to no
purpose; so he ascertained all things exactly, and "himself believed and his whole
house." For the evidence was after this unquestionable. For they who had not
been present nor had heard Christ speak nor known the time, when they had
heard from their master that such and such was the time, had incontrovertible
demonstration of His power. Wherefore they also believed.
What now are we taught by these things? Not to wait for miracles, nor to
seek pledges of the Power of God. I see many persons even now become more
pious, when during the sufferings of a child or the sickness of a wife they enjoy
any comfort, yet they ought even if they obtain it not, to persist just the same in
giving thanks, in glorifying God. Because it is the part of right-minded servants,
and of those who feel such affection and love as they ought for their Master, not
only when pardoned, but also when scourged, to run to Him. For these also are