trusted; saying "For the work of the Lord he works." That is; "look not," says he,
"to this, his not being rich, namely, nor highly educated, nor old: but what
commands are laid upon him, what work he is doing. 'For the work of the Lord
he works.'" And this serves him instead of all nobility and wealth and age and
wisdom.
And he is not content with this, but adds, "Even as I also." And some way
above, "Who is my beloved son and faithful in the Lord; he shall put you in
remembrance of my ways in Christ." Seeing then that he was both young, and
had been singly entrusted with the improvement of so numerous a people, both
of which things tended to bring him into contempt, he adds, as we might expect,

1 Corinthians 16:11
"Let no one therefore despise him." And not this only does he demand of
them, but also greater honor; wherefore also he says, "but set him forward in
peace;" that is, without fear; causing no fightings or contentions, no enmities or
hatreds, but rendering all subjection as to a teacher.
"That he may come unto me: for I expect him with the brethren." This also
was the language of one that would alarm them. That is, in order that they might
become more considerate, as knowing that all would be told him whatever
Timothy's treatment might be, he adds therefore, "for I expect him." And besides,
hereby he both shows that Timothy is worthy of their confidence; since being on
the point of departing he waits for him; and also signifies the love which he has
towards them, it appearing that for their sakes he sent away one so useful to him.

1 Corinthians 16:12
"But as touching Apollos the brother, I besought him much to come unto
you with the brethren."
This man appears to have been both well-educated and also older than
Timothy. Lest they should say then, "For what possible reason did he not send
the man grown, but the youth instead of him?" observe how he softens down this
point also, both calling him a brother, and saying that he had besought him
much. For lest he should seem to have held Timothy in higher honor than him
and to have exalted him more, and on this account not to have sent him, and
cause their envy to burst out more abundantly, he adds, "I besought him much to
come." What then: did not the other yield nor consent? Did he resist and show
himself contentious? He says not this, but that he might not excite prejudice
against him, and also might make excuse for himself, he says, "and it was not at
all his will to come now." Then to prevent their saying that all this was an excuse
and pretence, he added, "but he will come to you when he shall have
opportunity." This was both an excuse for him, and a refreshment to them who
desired to see him, by the hope which it gave of his coming.
2. Afterwards indicating that not in the teachers but in themselves they
ought to have their hopes of salvation, he says,