"In the grace of God we behaved ourselves." For we showed both signs and
wonders among you, and greater strictness , and a life unblameable; for he calls
these too the grace of God, ascribing his own good works also unto it. For in
Corinth he even overleapt the goal , making the Gospel without charge, because
he spared their weakness.

2 Corinthians 1:13
"For we write none other things unto you, than what ye read or even
acknowledge."
For since he spoke great things of himself and seemed to be bearing witness
to himself, an odious thing, he again appeals to them as witnesses of what he
says. For, he says, let no one think that what I say is a boastful flourish of
writing; for we declare unto you what yourselves know; and that we lie not ye
more than all others can bear us witness. For, when you read, you acknowledge
that what ye know that we perform in our actions, this we say also in our
writings, and your testimony does not contradict our epistles; but the knowledge
which you had before of us is in harmony with your reading.

2 Corinthians 1:14
"As also ye did acknowledge us in part."
For your knowledge of us, he says, is not from hearsay but from actual
experience. The words "in part" he added from humility. For this is his wont,
when necessity constrains him to say any highsounding thing, (for he never does
so otherwise,) as desiring quickly to repress again the elation arising from what
he had said.
"And I hope you will acknowledge even to the end."
2. Do you see again how from the past he draws pledges for the future; and
not from the past only, but also from the power of God? For he affirmed not
absolutely, but cast the whole upon God and his hope in Him.
"That we are your glorying, even as you also are our's, in the day of our
Lord Jesus Christ. "
Here he cuts at the root of the envy that his speech might occasion, by
making them sharers and partners in the glory of his good works. 'For these stick
not with us, but pass over unto you also, and again from you to us.' For seeing he
had extolled himself, and produced proof of the past and given security for the
future ; lest his hearers should reflect on him for talking proudly, or, as I have
said, be hurried to enviousness, he makes the rejoicing a common one and
declares that this crown of praises is theirs. For if, he says, we have shown
ourselves to be such, our praise is your glory: even as when you also are
approved, we rejoice and leap for joy and are crowned. Here also again he
displays his great humility by what he says. For he so levels his expressions, not
as a master discoursing to disciples, but as a disciple unto fellow disciples of his
own rank. And observe how he lifts them on high and fills them with philosophy,
sending them on to That Day. For, he says, tell me not of the present things, that
is, the reproaches, the revilings, the scoffings of the many, for the things here are