so ought we to reckon on heaven and confidence towards God. And if the getting
more seem a pleasant thing, think that Christ wills it not, and straightway it will
appear displeasing. And if it be grievous to you to give to the poor, stay not your
reckoning at the expense, but straightway transport your thoughts to the harvest
which results from the sowing; and when it is hard to despise the love of a
strange woman, think of the crown which comes after the struggle, and you shall
easily bear the struggle. For if fear diverts a man from unseemly things, much
more should the love of Christ. Difficult is virtue; but let us cast around her form
the greatness of the promise of things to come. Indeed those who are virtuous,
even apart from these promises, see her beautiful in herself, and on this account
go after her, and work because it seems good to God, not for hire; and they think
it a great thing to be sober-minded, not in order that they may not be punished,
but because God has commanded it. But if any one is too weak for this, let him
think of the prizes. So let us do in respect of alms-doing, let us pity our fellowmen, let us not, I entreat, neglect them when perishing with hunger. How can it
be otherwise than an unseemly thing, that we should sit at the table laughing and
enjoying ourselves, and when we hear others wailing as they pass through the
street, should not even turn at their cries, but be angry with them, and call them
"cheat"? "What do you mean, man? Does any one plan a cheat for a single loaf
of bread?" "Yes," says some one. Then in this case above all let him be pitied; in
this case above all let him be delivered from his need. Or if you are not minded
to give, do not insult either; if you will not save the wreck, do not thrust it into
the gulf. For consider, when you push away the poor man who comes to you,
who you will be when you call upon God. "With what measure ye mete, it shall
be measured to you again." [Matthew 7:2] Consider how he departs, crushed,
bowed down, lamenting; besides his poverty having received also the blow from
your insolence. For if you count the begging a curse, think what a tempest it
makes, begging to get nothing, but to go away insulted. How long shall we be
like wild beasts, and know not nature itself through greediness? Many groan at
these words; but I desire them not now, but always, to have this feeling of

compassion. Think, I pray you, of that day when we shall stand before the
judgment-seat of Christ, when we shall beg for mercy, and Christ, bringing them
forward, shall say, "For the sake of a single loaf, of a single obol, so great a
surge did ye raise in these souls!" What shall we reply? What defense shall we
make? To show that He will bring them forward, hear what He says; "Inasmuch
as you did it not to one of these, you did it not to Me." [Matthew 25:45] They
will no more say anything to us, but God on their behalf will upbraid us. Since
the rich man saw Lazarus too, and Lazarus said nothing to him, but Abraham
spoke for him; and thus it will be in the case of the poor who are now despised
by us. We shall not see them stretching out their hands in pitiful state, but being
in rest; and we shall take the state which was theirs (and would that it were that
state only, and not one much more grievous) as a punishment. For neither did the
rich man desire to be filled with crumbs "there," but was scorched and tormented
sharply, and was told, "You in your lifetime received your good things, and
likewise Lazarus evil things." [Luke 16:25] Let us not then deem wealth any
great thing; it will help us on our way to punishment, if we take not heed, just as,
if we take heed, poverty also becomes to us an addition of enjoyment and rest.
For we both put off our sins if we bear it with thankfulness, and gain great
boldness before God.
5. Let us then not be ever seeking security here, in order that we may enjoy
security there; but let us accept the labors which are in behalf of virtue, and cut
off superfluities, and seek nothing more than we need, and spend all our
substance on those who want. Since what excuse can we have, when God
promises heaven to us, and we will not even give Him bread? When He indeed
for you makes the sun to rise, and supplies all the ministry of the Creation, but
thou dost not even give Him a garment, nor allow Him to share your roof? But
why speak I of sun and moon? He has set His Body before you, He has given
you His Precious Blood; and do you not even impart to Him of your cup? But
have you done so for once? This is not mercy; as long as, having the means, you
help not, you have not yet fulfilled the whole duty. Thus the virgins who had the