destruction. And we never take into consideration the offenses we have
committed, but if our servants do amiss, we call them to a rigorous account for
everything, even to the least misdemeanor. I say not this to make servants
remiss, but to chide our supineness, to rouse us from our sloth, that we may
serve our God with as much zeal as servants do their master; our Maker, as
faithfully as our fellow-creatures serve us, from whom they have received no
such gift. For they too are free by nature. To them also it was said, "Let them
have dominion over the fishes." [Genesis 1:26] For this slavery is not from
nature: it is the result of some particular cause, or circumstances. Yet,
notwithstanding, they pay us great honor; and we with great strictness exact
services from them, while to God we hardly render the smallest portion, though
the advantage of it would redound to ourselves. For the more zealously we serve
God, the greater gainers we shall be. Let us not then deprive ourselves of such
important benefits. For God is self-sufficient, and wants nothing; the recompense
and the advantage reverts altogether to us. Let us therefore, I beseech you, be so
affected, as serving not God but ourselves, and with fear and trembling let us
serve Him, that we may obtain the promised blessings, through Jesus Christ our
Lord, with whom, etc.

## Homily 17 on First Timothy

1 Timothy 6:2-7
"These things teach and exhort. If any man teach otherwise, and consent
not to wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the
doctrine which is according to godliness; he is proud, knowing nothing, but
doting about questions and strifes of words, whereof comes envy, strife, railings,
evil surmisings, perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the
truth, supposing that gain is godliness: from such withdraw yourself. But
godliness with contentment is great gain. For we brought nothing into this
world, and it is certain we can carry nothing out."
A teacher has need not only of authority, but of gentleness, and not only of
gentleness, but of authority. And all these the blessed Paul teaches, at one time
saying, "These things command and teach" [1 Timothy 4:11]; at another, "These
things teach and exhort." For if physicians entreat the sick, not for the benefit of
their own health, but that they may relieve their sickness, and restore their
prostrate strength, much more ought we to observe this method, of entreating
those whom we teach. For the blessed Paul does not refuse to be their servant:
"We preach not ourselves," he says; "but Christ Jesus the Lord; and ourselves
your servants for Jesus' sake" [2 Corinthians 4:5]; and again, "All things are
yours, whether Paul or Apollos." [1 Corinthians 3:12] And in this service he
serves with alacrity, for it is not slavery, but superior to freedom. For He says,
"Whoever commits sin is the servant of sin." [John 8:34]
"If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words, even the
words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to
godliness, he is proud, knowing nothing." Presumption therefore arises not from
knowledge, but from "knowing nothing." For he that knows the doctrines of
godliness is also the most disposed to moderation. He who knows sound words,