acceptable to God than the lesser, it is sometimes profitable to pray
to the lesser; and this for five reasons. First, because sometimes one
has greater devotion for a lesser saint than for a greater, and the
effect of prayer depends very much on one's devotion. Secondly, in
order to avoid tediousness, for continual attention to one thing
makes a person weary; whereas by praying to different saints, the
fervor of our devotion is aroused anew as it were. Thirdly, because it
is granted to some saints to exercise their patronage in certain
special cases, for instance to Saint Anthony against the fire of hell.
Fourthly, that due honor be given by us to all. Fifthly, because the
prayers of several sometimes obtain that which would not have been
obtained by the prayers of one.
Reply to Objection 3: Prayer is an act, and acts belong to particular
persons [supposita]. Hence, were we to say: "Christ, pray for us,"
except we added something, this would seem to refer to Christ's
person, and consequently to agree with the error either of Nestorius,
who distinguished in Christ the person of the son of man from the
person of the Son of God, or of Arius, who asserted that the person
of the Son is less than the Father. Wherefore to avoid these errors
the Church says not: "Christ, pray for us," but "Christ, hear us," or
"have mercy on us."
Reply to Objection 4: As we shall state further on (Article 3) the
saints are said to present our prayers to God, not as though they
notified things unknown to Him, but because they ask God to grant
those prayers a gracious hearing, or because they seek the Divine
truth about them, namely what ought to be done according to His
providence.
Reply to Objection 5: A person is rendered worthy of a saint's
prayers for him by the very fact that in his need he has recourse to
him with pure devotion. Hence it is not unnecessary to pray to the
saints.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the prayers which the saints pour forth to

God for us are always granted?
Objection 1: It would seem that the prayers which the saints pour
forth to God for us are not always granted. For if they were always
granted, the saints would be heard especially in regard to matters
concerning themselves. But they are not heard in reference to these
things; wherefore it is stated in the Apocalypse (6:11) that on the
martyrs beseeching vengeance on them that dwell on earth, "it was
said to them that they should rest for a little while till the number of
their brethren should be filled up." Much less therefore, are they
heard in reference to matters concerning others.
Objection 2: Further, it is written (Jer. 15:1): "If Moses and Samuel
shall stand before Me, My soul is not towards this people."
Therefore, the saints are not always heard when they pray God for
us.
Objection 3: Further, the saints in heaven are stated to be equal to
the angels of God (Mt. 22:30). But the angels are not always heard in
the prayers which they offer up to God. This is evident from Dan.
10:12,13, where it is written: "I am come for thy words: but the prince
of the kingdom of the Persians resisted me one-and-twenty days."
But the angel who spoke had not come to Daniel's aid except by
asking of God to be set free; and yet the fulfillment of his prayer was
hindered. Therefore neither are other saints always heard by God
when they pray for us.
Objection 4: Further, whosoever obtains something by prayer merits
it in a sense. But the saints in heaven are not in the state of meriting.
Therefore they cannot obtain anything for us from God by their
prayers.
Objection 5: Further, the saints, in all things, conform their will to the
will of God. Therefore they will nothing but what they know God to
will. But no one prays save for what he wills. Therefore they pray not
save for what they know God to will. Now that which God wills would
be done even without their praying for it. Therefore their prayers are
not efficacious for obtaining anything.
Objection 6: Further, the prayers of the whole heavenly court, if they