Jews as should also themselves believe, shall be one, although the difference
between them had been so great before.
Then, that they might learn that nothing was opposed to God's will of the
things doing, but that the event was even highly acceptable, and beyond
expectation, and amazing every one of the beholders (for indeed the miracle was
far beyond words), He added and said, "It is the Lord's doing." And by the stone
He means Himself, and by builders the teachers of the Jews; as Ezekiel also
says, "They that build the wall, and daub it with untempered mortar."
[Ezekiel 13:10] But how did they reject Him? By saying, "This man is not of
God; [John 9:16] This man deceives the people;" [John 7:12] and again, "You
are a Samaritan, and hast a devil." [John 8:48]
Then, that they might know that the penalty is not limited to their being cast
out, He added the punishments also, saying, "Every one that falls on this stone,
shall be broken; but upon whomsoever it shall fall, it shall grind him to powder."
He speaks here of two ways of destruction, one from stumbling and being
offended; for this is, "Whosoever falls on this stone:" but another from their
capture, and calamity, and utter destruction, which also He clearly foretold,
saying, "It will grind him to powder." By these words He darkly intimated His
own resurrection also.
Now the Prophet Isaiah says, that He blames the vineyard, but here He
accuses in particular the rulers of the people. And there indeed He says, "What
ought I to have done to my vineyard, that I did not;" [Isaiah 5:4] and elsewhere
again, "What transgression have your fathers found in me?" [Jeremiah 2:5] And
again, "O my people, what have I done unto you? And wherein have I grieved
you?" [Micah 6:3] showing their thankless disposition, and that when in the
enjoyment of all things, they requited it by the contraries; but here He expresses
it with yet greater force. For He does not plead, Himself, saying, "What ought I
to have done that I have not done?" but brings in themselves to judge, that
nothing has been wanting, and to condemn themselves. For when they say, "He
will miserably destroy those wicked men, and will let out the vineyard to other

husbandmen," they say nothing else than this, publishing their sentence with
much greater force.
With this Stephen also upbraids them, which thing most of all stung them,
that having enjoyed always much providential care, they requited their
benefactor with the contraries, which very thing itself was a very great sign, that
not the punisher, but the punished, were the cause of the vengeance brought
upon them.
This here likewise is shown, by the parable, by the prophecy. For neither
was He satisfied with a parable only, but added also a twofold prophecy, one
David's, the others from Himself.
What then ought they to have done on hearing these things? Ought they not
to have adored, to have marvelled at the tender care, that shown before, that
afterwards? But if by none of these things they were made better, by the fear of
punishment at any rate ought they not to have been rendered more temperate?
But they did not become so, but what do they after these things? "When
they had heard it," it is said, "they perceived that He spoke of them. And when
they sought to lay hands on Him, they were afraid because of the multitudes, for
they took Him for a prophet." For they felt afterwards that they themselves were
intimated. Sometimes indeed, when being seized, He withdraws through the
midst of them, and is not seen; and sometimes while appearing to them He lays a
check upon their laboring eagerness; at which indeed men marveled, and said,
"Is not this Jesus? Lo, He speaks boldly, and they say nothing unto Him." But in
this instance, forasmuch as they were held in restraint by the fear of the
multitude, He is satisfied with this, and does not work miracles, as before,
withdrawing through the midst, and not appearing. For it was not His desire to
do all things in a superhuman way, in order that the Dispensation might be
believed.
But they, neither by the multitude, nor by what had been said, were brought
to a sound mind; they regarded not the prophet's testimony, nor their own
sentence, nor the disposition of the people; so entirely had the love of power and