FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.35, C.6.

said in the authority quoted above that intellectual contemplation
has neither "bitterness," nor "tediousness." Since, however, the
human mind, in contemplation, makes use of the sensitive powers of
apprehension, to whose acts weariness is incidental; therefore some
affliction or pain is indirectly mingled with contemplation.
Nevertheless, in neither of these ways, is the pain thus accidentally
mingled with contemplation, contrary to the pleasure thereof.
Because pain caused by a hindrance to contemplation, is not
contrary to the pleasure of contemplation, but rather is in affinity and
in harmony with it, as is evident from what has been said above
(Article 4): while pain or sorrow caused by bodily weariness, does
not belong to the same genus, wherefore it is altogether disparate.
Accordingly it is evident that no sorrow is contrary to pleasure taken
in the very act of contemplation; nor is any sorrow connected with it
save accidentally.
Reply to Objection 1: The "sorrow which is according to God," is not
caused by the very act of intellectual contemplation, but by
something which the mind contemplates: viz. by sin, which the mind
considers as contrary to the love of God.
Reply to Objection 2: Things which are contrary according to nature
are not contrary according as they exist in the mind: for things that
are contrary in reality are not contrary in the order of thought; indeed
rather is one contrary the reason for knowing the other. Hence one
and the same science considers contraries.
Reply to Objection 3: Contemplation, in itself, is never evil, since it is
nothing else than the consideration of truth, which is the good of the
intellect: it can, however, be evil accidentally, i.e. in so far as the
contemplation of a less noble object hinders the contemplation of a
more noble object; or on the part of the object contemplated, to
which the appetite is inordinately attached.
Reply to Objection 4: Sorrow caused by a hindrance to
contemplation, is not contrary to the pleasure of contemplation, but
is in harmony with it, as stated above.
Reply to Objection 5: Affliction of the flesh affects contemplation
accidentally and indirectly, as stated above.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.35, C.6.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.35, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether sorrow is to be shunned more than

pleasure is to be sought?
Objection 1: It would seem that sorrow is to be shunned more than
pleasure is to be sought. For Augustine says (Questions. 83, qu. 63):
"There is nobody that does not shun sorrow more than he seeks
pleasure." Now that which all agree in doing, seems to be natural.
Therefore it is natural and right for sorrow to be shunned more than
pleasure is sought.
Objection 2: Further, the action of a contrary conduces to rapidity
and intensity of movement: for "hot water freezes quicker and
harder," as the Philosopher says (Meteor. i, 12). But the shunning of
sorrow is due to the contrariety of the cause of sorrow; whereas the
desire for pleasure does not arise from any contrariety, but rather
from the suitableness of the pleasant object. Therefore sorrow is
shunned more eagerly than pleasure is sought.
Objection 3: Further, the stronger the passion which a man resists
according to reason, the more worthy is he of praise, and the more
virtuous: since "virtue is concerned with the difficult and the
good" (Ethic. ii, 3). But the brave man who resists the movement of
shunning sorrow, is more virtuous than the temperate man, who
resists the movement of desire for pleasure: since the Philosopher
says (Rhet. ii, 4) that "the brave and the just are chiefly praised."
Therefore the movement of shunning sorrow is more eager than the
movement of seeking pleasure.
On the contrary, Good is stronger than evil, as Dionysius declares
(Div. Nom. iv). But pleasure is desirable for the sake of the good
which is its object; whereas the shunning of sorrow is on account of
evil. Therefore the desire for pleasure is more eager than the
shunning of sorrow.
I answer that, The desire for pleasure is of itself more eager than the
shunning of sorrow. The reason of this is that the cause of pleasure
is a suitable good; while the cause of pain or sorrow is an unsuitable
evil. Now it happens that a certain good is suitable without any
repugnance at all: but it is not possible for any evil to be so
unsuitable as not to be suitable in some way. Wherefore pleasure
can be entire and perfect: whereas sorrow is always partial.