burning, no vapor, no smoke exhaled, but the bodies of men perishing. For some
throw themselves among precipices, others tie the halter, others thrust the dagger
through their throat. Have you seen the cruel and inhuman sacrifices? Would you
see yet more shocking ones than these? Then I will show you no longer the
bodies of men, but the souls of men slaughtered in the other world. Yes, for it is
possible for a soul to be slain with the slaughter peculiar to the soul; for as there
is a death of the body, so is there also of the soul. "The soul that sins," says the
Prophet, "it shall die." [Ezekiel 18:4] The death of the soul, however, is not like
the death of the body; it is far more shocking. For this bodily death, separating
the soul and the body the one from the other, releases the one from many
anxieties and toils, and transmits the other into a manifest abode: then when the
body has been in time dissolved and crumbled away, it is again gathered together
in incorruption, and receives back its own proper soul. Such we see is this bodily
death. But that of the soul is awful and terrific. For this death, when dissolution
takes place, does not let it pass, as the body does, but binds it down again to an
imperishable body, and consigns it to the unquenchable fire. This then is the
death of the soul. And as therefore there is a death of the soul, so is there also a
slaughter of the soul. What is the slaughter of the body? It is the being turned
into a corpse, the being stripped of the energy derived from the soul. What is the
slaughter of the soul? It is its being made a corpse also. And how is the soul
made a corpse? Because as the body then becomes a corpse when the soul leaves
it destitute of its own vital energy, so also does the soul then become a corpse,
when the Holy Spirit leaves it destitute of His spiritual energy.
Such for the most part are the slaughters made at the altar of covetousness.
They are not satisfied, they do not stop at men's blood; no, the altar of
covetousness is not glutted, unless it sacrifice the very soul itself also, unless it
receive the souls of both, the sacrificer and the sacrificed. For he who sacrifices
must first be sacrificed, and then he sacrifices; and the dead sacrifices him who
is yet living. For when he utters blasphemies, when he reviles, when he is
irritated, are not these so many incurable wounds of the soul?

You have seen that the expression is no hyperbole. Would you hear again
another argument, to teach you how covetousness is idolatry, and more shocking
than idolatry? Idolaters worship the creatures of God ("for they worshipped," it
is said, "and served the creature rather than the Creator") [Romans 1:25]; but
you are worshiping a creature of your own. For God made not covetousness but
your own insatiable appetite invented it. And look at the madness and folly. They
that worship idols, honor also the idols they worship; and if any one speak of
them with disrespect or ridicule, they stand up in their defense; whereas thou, as
if in a sort of intoxication, art worshiping an object, which is so far from being
free from accusation, that it is even full of impiety. So that thou, even more than
they, excellest in wickedness. You can never have it to say as an excuse, that it is
no evil. If even they are in the highest degree without excuse, yet are you in a far
higher, who art forever censuring covetousness, and reviling those who devote
themselves to it, and who yet does serve and obey it.
We will examine, if you please, whence idolatry took its rise. A certain wise
man [Wisdom 14:16] tells us, that a certain rich man afflicted with untimely
mourning for his son, and having no consolation for his sorrow, consoled his
passion in this way: having made a lifeless image of the dead, and constantly
gazing at it, he seemed through the image to have his departed one still; while
certain flatterers, "whose God was their belly" [Philippians 3:19], treating the
image with reverence in order to do him honor, carried on the custom into
idolatry. So then it took its rise from weakness of soul, from a senseless custom,
from extravagance. But not so covetousness: from weakness of soul indeed it is,
only that it is from a worse weakness. It is not that any one has lost a son, nor
that he is seeking for consolation in sorrow, nor that he is drawn on by flatterers.
But how is it? I will tell you. Cain in covetousness overreached God; what ought
to have been given to Him, he kept to himself; what he should have kept himself,
this he offered to Him; and thus the evil began even from God. For if we are
God's, much more are the first-fruits of our possessions. Again, men's violent
passion for women arose from covetousness. "They saw the daughters of men"