FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.17, C.7.

consequently, properly speaking, is not subject to our command.
But some things which are apprehended do not convince the
intellect to such an extent as not to leave it free to assent or dissent,
or at least suspend its assent or dissent, on account of some cause
or other; and in such things assent or dissent is in our power, and is
subject to our command.
Reply to Objection 1: Reason commands itself, just as the will moves
itself, as stated above (Question 9, Article 3), that is to say, in so far
as each power reacts on its own acts, and from one thing tends to
another.
Reply to Objection 2: On account of the diversity of objects subject
to the act of the reason, nothing prevents the reason from
participating in itself: thus the knowledge of principles is
participated in the knowledge of the conclusions.
The reply to the third object is evident from what has been said.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.17, C.8.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether the act of the sensitive appetite is

commanded?
Objection 1: It would seem that the act of the sensitive appetite is not
commanded. For the Apostle says (Rm. 7:15): "For I do not that good
which I will": and a gloss explains this by saying that man lusts,
although he wills not to lust. But to lust is an act of the sensitive
appetite. Therefore the act of the sensitive appetite is not subject to
our command.
Objection 2: Further, corporeal matter obeys God alone, to the effect
of formal transmutation, as was shown in the FP, Question 65,
Article 4; FP, Question 91, Article 2; FP, Question 110, Article 2. But
the act of the sensitive appetite is accompanied by a formal
transmutation of the body, consisting in heat or cold. Therefore the
act of the sensitive appetite is not subject to man's command.
Objection 3: Further, the proper motive principle of the sensitive
appetite is something apprehended by sense or imagination. But it is
not always in our power to apprehend something by sense or
imagination. Therefore the act of the sensitive appetite is not subject
to our command.
On the contrary, Gregory of Nyssa [Nemesius, De Nat. Hom. xvi.]
says: "That which obeys reason is twofold, the concupiscible and
the irascible," which belong to the sensitive appetite. Therefore the
act of the sensitive appetite is subject to the command of reason.
I answer that, An act is subject to our command, in so far as it is in
our power, as stated above (Article 5). Consequently in order to
understand in what manner the act of the sensitive appetite is
subject to the command of reason, we must consider in what manner
it is in our power. Now it must be observed that the sensitive
appetite differs from the intellective appetite, which is called the will,
in the fact that the sensitive appetite is a power of a corporeal organ,
whereas the will is not. Again, every act of a power that uses a
corporeal organ, depends not only on a power of the soul, but also
on the disposition of that corporeal organ: thus the act of vision
depends on the power of sight, and on the condition of the eye,
which condition is a help or a hindrance to that act. Consequently
the act of the sensitive appetite depends not only on the appetitive