31. If one considers all this well, he will easily see why the Church demands that future priests be
instructed in philosophy "according to the method, doctrine, and principles of the Angelic Doctor,"
since, as we well know from the experience of centuries, the method of Aquinas is singularly
preeminent both of teaching students and for bringing truth to light; his doctrine is in harmony with
Divine Revelation, and is most effective both for safeguarding the foundation of the faith and for
reaping, safely and usefully, the fruits of sound progress.

32. How deplorable it is then that this philosophy, received and honored by the Church, is scorned by
some, who shamelessly call it outmoded in form and rationalistic, as they say, in its method of
thought. They say that this philosophy upholds the erroneous notion that there can be a metaphysic
that is absolutely true; whereas in fact, they say, reality, especially transcendent reality, cannot better
be expressed than by disparate teachings, which mutually complete each other, although they are in a
way mutually opposed. Our traditional philosophy, then, with its clear exposition and solution of
questions, its accurate definition of terms, its clear-cut distinctions, can be, they concede, useful as a
preparation for scholastic theology, a preparation quite in accord with medieval mentality; but this
philosophy hardly offers a method of philosophizing suited to the needs of our modern culture. They
allege, finally, that our perennial philosophy is only a philosophy of immutable essences, while the
contemporary mind must look to the existence of things and to life, which is ever in flux. While scorning our philosophy, they extol other philosophies of all kinds, ancient and modern, oriental and
occidental, by which they seem to imply that any kind of philosophy or theory, with a few additions
and corrections if need be, can be reconciled with Catholic dogma. No Catholic can doubt how false
this is, especially where there is question of those fictitious theories they call immanentism, or
idealism or materialism, whether historic or dialectic, or even existentialism, whether atheistic or
simply the type that denies the validity of the reason in the field of metaphysics.

33. Finally, they reproach this philosophy taught in our schools for regarding only the intellect in the
process of cognition, while neglecting the function of the will and the emotions. This is simply not
true. Never has Christian philosophy denied the usefulness and efficacy of good dispositions of soul
for perceiving and embracing moral and religious truths. In fact, it has always taught that the lack of
these dispositions of good will can be the reason why the intellect, influenced by the passions and evil
inclinations, can be so obscured that it cannot see clearly. Indeed St. Thomas holds that the intellect
can in some way perceive higher goods of the moral order, whether natural or supernatural, inasmuch
as it experiences a certain "connaturality" with these goods, whether this "connaturality" be purely
natural, or the result of grace; and it is clear how much even this somewhat obscure perception
can help the reason in its investigations. However it is one thing to admit the power of the
dispositions of the will in helping reason to gain a more certain and firm knowledge of moral truths; it
is quite another thing to say, as these innovators do, indiscriminately mingling cognition and act of
will, that the appetitive and affective faculties have a certain power of understanding, and that man,
since he cannot by using his reason decide with certainty what is true and is to be accepted, turns to
his will, by which he freely chooses among opposite opinions.