How many sorrows, how many anxieties, how many disappointments, how
many dangers, how many plots and wars, daily spring up from these gains? How
many troubles and disturbances? For as one can never see the sea without waves,
so neither such a soul without anxiety, and despondency, and fear, and
disturbance; yea, the second overtakes the first, and again others come up, and
when these are not yet ceased, others come to a head.
Or would you see the souls of the revilers, and of the passionate? Why,
what is worse than this torture? What, than the wounds they have within? What,
than the furnace that is continually burning, and the flame that is never
quenched?
Or of the sensual, and of such as cleave unto this present life? Why, what
more grievous than this bondage? They live the life of Cain, dwelling in
continual trembling and fear at every death that happens; the kinsmen of the
dead mourn not so much, as these do for their own end.
What again fuller of turmoil, and more frantic, than such as are puffed up
with pride? "For learn," says He, "of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, and
you shall find rest unto your souls." Because long-suffering is the mother of all
good things.
Fear thou not therefore, neither start away from the yoke that lightens you
of all these things, but put yourself under it with all forwardness, and then you
shall know well the pleasure thereof. For it does not at all bruise your neck, but
is put on you for good order's sake only, and to persuade you to walk seemly, and
to lead you unto the royal road, and to deliver you from the precipices on either
side, and to make you walk with ease in the narrow way.
Since then so great are its benefits, so great its security, so great its
gladness, let us with all our soul, with all our diligence, draw this yoke; that we
may both here "find rest unto our souls," and attain unto the good things to
come, by the grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be
glory and might, now and ever, and world without end. Amen.

## Homily 39 on Matthew

Matt. XII. 1.
" At that time Jesus went on the Sabbath day through the grain; and His
disciples were a hungered, and began to pluck the ears of grain, and to eat."
But Luke says, "On a double Sabbath." Now what is a double Sabbath?
When the cessation from toil is twofold, both that of the regular Sabbath, and
that of another feast coming upon it. For they call every cessation from toil, a
sabbath.
But why could He have led them away from it, who foreknew all, unless it
had been His will that the Sabbath should be broken? It was His will indeed, but
not simply so; wherefore He never breaks it without a cause, but giving
reasonable excuses: that He might at once bring the law to an end, and not startle
them. But there are occasions on which He even repeals it directly, and not with
circumstance: as when He anoints with the clay the eyes of the blind man;
[John 9:6, 14] as when He says, "My Father works hitherto, and I work." And
He does so, by this to glorify His own Father, by the other to soothe the infirmity
of the Jews. At which last He is laboring here, putting forward as a plea the
necessity of nature; although in the case of acknowledged sins, that could not of
course ever be an excuse. For neither may the murderer make his anger a plea,
nor the adulterer allege his lust, no, nor any other excuse; but here, by
mentioning their hunger, He freed them from all blame.
But do thou, I pray you, admire the disciples, how entirely they control
themselves, and make no account of the things of the body, but esteem the table
of the flesh a secondary thing, and though they have to struggle with continual
hunger, do not even so withdraw themselves. For except hunger had sorely
constrained them, they would not have done so much as this.
What then do the Pharisees? "When they saw it," it is said, "they said unto