"Standing on the stairs." Then there was the additional facility afforded by the
locality, that he should have a high place to harangue them from— in chains too!
What spectacle could be equal to this, to see Paul, bound with two chains, and
haranguing the people! (To see him,) how he was not a whit perturbed, not a
whit confused; how, seeing as he did so great a multitude all hostility against
him, the ruler standing by, he first of all made them desist from their anger: then,
how prudently (he does this). Just what he does in his Epistle to the Hebrews, the
same he does here: first he attracts them by the sound of their common mother
tongue: then by his mildness itself. "He spoke unto them," it says, "in the
Hebrew tongue, saying, Men, brethren, and fathers, hear ye my defence which I
make now unto you." [Acts 22:1] Mark his address, at once so free from all
flattery, and so expressive of meekness. For he says not, "Masters," nor "Lords,"
but, "Brethren," just the word they most liked: "I am no alien from. you," he
says, nor "against you." "Men," he says, "brethren, and fathers:" this, a term of
honor, that of kindred. "Hear ye," says he, "my"— he says not, "teaching," nor
"harangue," but, "my defence which I now make unto you." He puts himself in
the posture of a suppliant. "And when they heard that he spoke in the Hebrew
tongue to them, they kept the more silence." [Acts 22:2] Do you observe how the
using the same tongue subdued them? In fact, they had a sort of awe for that
language. Observe also how he prepares the way for his discourse, beginning
thus: "I am verily a man which am a Jew, born in Tarsus, a city in Cilicia, yet
brought up in this city at the feet of Gamaliel, and taught according to the
perfect manner of the law of the fathers, and was zealous toward God, as you all
are this day." [Acts 22:3] "I am a man," he says, "which am a Jew:" which thing
they liked most of all to hear; "born in Tarsus, a city of Cilicia." That they may
not again think him to be of another nation, he adds his religion: "but brought up
in this city." (p. 282, note 4.) He shows how great was his zeal for the worship,
inasmuch as having left his native city, which was so great and so remote too, he
chose to be brought up here for the Law's sake. See how from the beginning he
attached himself to the law. But this he says, not only to defend himself to them,

but to show that not by human intent was he led to the preaching of the Gospel,
but by a Divine power: else, having been so educated, he would not have
suddenly changed. For if indeed he had been one of the common order of men, it
might have been reasonable to suspect this: but if he was of the number of those
who were most of all bound by the law, it was not likely that he should change
lightly, and without strong necessity. But perhaps some one may say: "To have
been brought up here proves nothing: for what if you came here for the purpose
of trading, or for some other cause?" Therefore he says, "at the feet of
Gamaliel:" and not simply, "by Gamaliel," but "at his feet," showing his
perseverance, his assiduity, his zeal for the hearing, and his great reverence for
the man. "Taught according to the perfect manner of the law of the fathers." Not
simply, "the law," but "the law of the fathers;" showing that he was such from
the beginning, and not merely one that knew the Law. All this seems indeed to
be spoken on their side, but in fact it told against them, since he, knowing the
law, forsook it. "Yes: but what if you indeed knew the law accurately, but did not
vindicate it, no, nor love it?" "Being a zealot," he adds: not simply (one that
knew it). Then, since it was a high encomium he had passed upon himself, he
makes it theirs as well as his, adding, "As ye all are this day." For he shows that
they act not from any human object, but from zeal for God; gratifying them, and
preoccupying their minds, and getting a hold upon them in a way that did no
harm. Then he brings forward proofs also, saying, "and I persecuted this way
unto the death, binding and delivering into prisons both men and women. As
also the high priest does bear me witness, and all the estate of the elders" (v. 4,
5): "How does this appear." As witnesses he brings forward the high-priest
himself and the elders. He says indeed, "Being a zealot, as you" (Hom. xix. p.
123): but he shows by his actions, that he went beyond them. For I did not wait
for an opportunity of seizing them: I both stirred up the priests, and undertook
journeys: I did not confine my attacks, as you did, to men, I extended them to
women also: "both binding, and casting into prisons both men and women."
This testimony is incontrovertible; the (unbelief) of the Jews (is left)