because though not needing a single thing that we have, and often not knowing
who they should be that should enjoy the help afforded by their written laws,
they still took care for the good ordering of our lives, rewarding those who live
virtuously, and checking by punishments the intemperate, and those who would
mar the repose of others. And if we admire and love these men, ought we not
much more to marvel at and love God on account of His so great care? For the
difference between their and His forethought regarding us is infinite.
Unspeakable of a truth are the riches of the goodness of God, and passing all
excess. Consider; "He came to His own," not for His personal need, (for, as I
said, the Divinity is without wants,) but to do good unto His own people. Yet not
even so did His own receive Him, when He came to His own for their advantage,
but repelled Him, and not this only, but they even cast Him out of the vineyard,
and slew Him. Yet not for this even did He shut them out from repentance, but
granted them, if they had been willing, after such wickedness as this, to wash off
all their transgressions by faith in Him, and to be made equal to those who had
done no such thing, but are His special friends. And that I say not this at random,
or for persuasion's sake, all the history of the blessed Paul loudly declares. For
when he, who after the Cross persecuted Christ, and had stoned His martyr
Stephen by those many hands, repented, and condemned his former sins, and ran
to Him whom he had persecuted, He immediately enrolled him among His
friends, and the chiefest of them, having appointed him a herald and teacher of
all the world, who had been "a blasphemer, and persecutor, and injurious." [1
Timothy 1:13] Even as he rejoicing at the lovingkindness of God, has
proclaimed aloud, and has not been ashamed, but having recorded in his
writings, as on a pillar, the deeds formerly dared by him, has exhibited them to
all; thinking it better that his former life should be placarded in sight of all, so
that the greatness of the free gift of God might appear, than that he should
obscure His ineffable and indescribable lovingkindness by hesitating to parade
before all men his own error. Wherefore continually he treats of his persecution,
his plottings, his wars against the Church, at one time saying, "I am not meet to

be called an Apostle, because I persecuted the Church of God" [1 Corinthians
15:9]; at another, "Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am
chief." [1 Timothy 1:15] And again, "You have heard of my conversation in time
past in the Jews' religion, how that beyond measure I persecuted the church of
God, and wasted it." [Galatians 1:13]
2. For making as it were a kind of return to Christ for His longsuffering
towards him, by showing who it was, what a hater and enemy that He saved, he
declared with much openness the warfare which at the first with all zeal he
warred against Christ; and with this he holds forth good hopes to those who
despaired of their condition. For he says, that Christ accepted him, in order that
in him first He "might show forth all longsuffering" [1 Timothy 1:16], and the
abundant riches of His goodness, "for a pattern to them that should hereafter
believe in Him to life everlasting." Because the things which they had dared
were too great for any pardon which the Evangelist declaring, said,
"He came to His own, and His own received Him not." Whence came He,
who fills all things, and who is everywhere present? What place did He empty of
His presence, who holds and grasps all things in His hand? He exchanged not
one place for another; how should He? But by His coming down to us He
effected this. For since, though being in the world, He did not seem to be there,
because He was not yet known, but afterwards manifested Himself by deigning
to take upon Him our flesh, he (St. John) calls this manifestation and descent "a
coming." One might wonder at the disciple who is not ashamed of the dishonor
of his Teacher, but even records the insolence which was used towards Him: yet
this is no small proof of his truth-loving disposition. And besides, he who feels
shame should feel it for those who have offered an insult, not for the person
outraged. Indeed He by this very thing shone the brighter, as taking, even after
the insult, so much care for those who had offered it; while they appeared
ungrateful and accursed in the eyes of all men, for having rejected Him who
came to bring them so great goods, as hateful to them, and an enemy. And not
only in this were they hurt, but also in not obtaining what they obtained who