accomplish even worldly business, not to say spiritual. By sleeping, not even
from friends can anything be received, far less from God. Not even fathers honor
them who sleep, far less does God. Let us labor for a little time, that we may
have rest for ever. We must at all events be afflicted. If we are not afflicted here,
it awaits us there. Why choose we not to be afflicted here, that there we may
have rest, and obtain the unspeakable blessings, in Christ Jesus, with whom, to
the Father together with the Holy Spirit, be glory, power, and honor, now and
ever, world without end. Amen.

## Homily 14 on Philippians

[Philippians 4:4-7]
"Rejoice in the Lord always: again I will say, Rejoice. Let your forbearance
be known unto all men. The Lord is at hand. In nothing be anxious; but in
everything by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving let your requests be
made known unto God. And the peace of God, which passes all understanding,
shall guard your hearts and your thoughts through Christ Jesus."
"[Blessed ] are they that mourn," and "woe unto them that laugh" [Matthew
5:4; Luke 6:25], says Christ. How then says Paul, "Rejoice in the Lord always"?
"Woe to them that laugh," said Christ, the laughter of this world which arises
from the things which are present. He blessed also those that mourn, not simply
for the loss of relatives, but those who are pricked at heart, who mourn their own
faults, and take count of their own sins, or even those of others. This joy is not
contrary to that grief, but from that grief it too is born. For he who grieves for his
own faults, and confesses them, rejoices. Moreover, it is possible to grieve for
our own sins, and yet to rejoice in Christ. Since then they were afflicted by their
sufferings, "for to you it is given not only to believe in him, but also to suffer for
him" [Philippians 1:29], therefore he says, "Rejoice in the Lord." For this can but
mean, If you exhibit such a life that you may rejoice. Or when your communion
with God is not hindered, rejoice. Or else the word "in" may stand for "with": as
if he had said, with the Lord. "Alway; again I will say, Rejoice." These are the
words of one who brings comfort; as, for example, he who is in God rejoices
always. Yea though he be afflicted, yea whatever he may suffer, such a man
always rejoices. Hear what Luke says, that "they returned from the presence of
the Council, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to be scourged for His
name." [Acts 5:41] If scourging and bonds, which seem to be the most grievous
of all things, bring forth joy, what else will be able to produce grief in us?

"Again I will say, Rejoice." Well has he repeated. For since the nature of the
things brought forth grief, he shows by repeating, that they should by all means
rejoice.
"Let your forbearance be known unto all men." He said above, "Whose god
is the belly, and whose glory is in their shame," and that they "mind earthly
things." [Philippians 3:19] It was probable that they would be at enmity with the
wicked; he therefore exhorted them to have nothing in common with them, but
to use them with all forbearance, and that not only their brethren, but also their
enemies and opposers. "The Lord is at hand, in nothing be anxious." For why,
tell me? Do they ever rise in opposition? And if you see them living in luxury,
why are you in affliction? Already the judgment is near; shortly will they give
account of their actions. Are ye in affliction, and they in luxury? But these things
shall shortly receive their end. Do they plot against you, and threaten you? "In
nothing be anxious." The judgment is already at hand, when these things shall be
reversed. "In nothing be anxious." If you are kindly affected toward those who
prepare evil against you, yet it shall not at last turn out to their profit. Already
the recompense is at hand, if poverty, if death, if anything else that is terrible be
upon you. "But in everything, by prayer and supplication, with thanksgiving, let
your requests be made known unto God." There is this for one consolation, "the
Lord is at hand." And again, "I will be with you always, even unto the end of the
world." [Matthew 28:20] Behold another consolation, a medicine which heals
grief, and distress, and all that is painful. And what is this? Prayer, thanksgiving
in all things. And so He wills that our prayers should not simply be requests, but
thanksgivings too for what we have. For how should he ask for future things,
who is not thankful for the past? "But in everything by prayer and supplication."
Wherefore we ought to give thanks for all things, even for those which seem to
be grievous, for this is the part of the truly thankful man. In the other case the
nature of the things demands it; but this springs from a grateful soul, and one
earnestly affected toward God. God acknowledges these prayers, but others He
knows not. Offer up such prayers as may be acknowledged; for He disposes all