Hebrews 6:4-5
5. "For it is impossible for those who were once enlightened and have
tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have
tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come, if they shall
fall away, to renew them again unto repentance, crucifying to themselves the Son
of God afresh, and putting Him to an open shame."
And see how putting them to shame, and forbiddingly he begins.
"Impossible." No longer (he says) expect that which is not possible; (For he said
not, It is not seemly, or, It is not expedient, or, It is not lawful, but "impossible,"
so as to cast [them] into despair), if you have once been altogether enlightened.

Hebrews 6:6
Then he adds, "and have tasted of the heavenly gift. If you have tasted" (he
says) "of the heavenly gift," that is, of forgiveness. "And been made partakers of
the Holy Ghost, and tasted the good word of God" (he is speaking here of the
doctrine) "and the powers of the world to come" (what powers is he speaking of?
Either the working of miracles, or "the earnest of the Spirit" [2 Corinthians
1:22]) "and have fallen away, to renew them again unto repentance, seeing they
crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh and put Him to an open shame."
"Renew them," he says, "unto repentance," that is, by repentance, for unto
repentance is by repentance. What then, is repentance excluded? Not repentance,
far from it! But the renewing again by the laver. For he did not say, "impossible"
to be renewed "unto repentance," and stop, but added how "impossible, [by]
crucifying afresh."
To "be renewed," that is, to be made new, for to make men new is [the
work] of the laver only: for (it is said) "your youth shall be renewed as the
eagle's." [Psalm 103:5] But it is [the work of] repentance, when those who have
been made new, have afterwards become old through sins, to set them free from
this old age, and to make them strong. To bring them to that former brightness
however, is not possible; for there the whole was Grace.
6. "Crucifying to themselves," he says, "the Son of God afresh, and putting
Him to an open shame." What he means is this. Baptism is a Cross, and "our old
man was crucified with [Him]" [Romans 6:6], for we were "made conformable
to the likeness of His death" [Romans 6:5; Philippians 3:10], and again, "we
were buried therefore with Him by baptism into death." [Romans 6:4]
Wherefore, as it is not possible that Christ should be crucified a second time, for
that is to "put Him to an open shame." For "if death shall no more have
dominion over Him" [Romans 6:9], if He rose again, by His resurrection

becoming superior to death; if by death He wrestled with and overcame death,
and then is crucified again, all those things become a fable and a mockery. He
then that baptizes a second time, crucifies Him again.
But what is "crucifying afresh"? [It is] crucifying over again. For as Christ
died on the cross, so do we in baptism, not as to the flesh, but as to sin. Behold
two deaths. He died as to the flesh; in our case the old man was buried, and the
new man arose, made conformable to the likeness of His death. If therefore it is
necessary to be baptized [again ], it is necessary that this same [Christ] should
die again. For baptism is nothing else than the putting to death of the baptized,
and his rising again.
And he well said, "crucifying afresh unto themselves." For he that does this,
as having forgotten the former grace, and ordering his own life carelessly, acts in
all respects as if there were another baptism. It behooves us therefore to take
heed and to make ourselves safe.
7. What is, "having tasted of the heavenly gift"? It is, "of the remission of
sins": for this is of God alone to bestow, and the grace is a grace once for all.
"What then? Shall we continue in sin that grace may abound? Far from it!"
[Romans 6:1-2] But if we should be always going to be saved by grace we shall
never be good. For where there is but one grace, and we are yet so indolent,
should we then cease sinning if we knew that it is possible again to have our sins
washed away? For my part I think not.
He here shows that the gifts are many: and to explain it, You were counted
worthy (he says) of so great forgiveness; for he that was sitting in darkness, he
that was at enmity, he that was at open war, that was alienated, that was hated of
God, that was lost, he having been suddenly enlightened, counted worthy of the
Spirit, of the heavenly gift, of adoption as a son, of the kingdom of heaven, of
those other good things, the unspeakable mysteries; and who does not even thus
become better, but while indeed worthy of perdition, obtained salvation and
honor, as if he had successfully accomplished great things; how could he be
again baptized?