prayer, he might justly be blamed if he took to flight: but if any one should lack
such excellence as much as I do, he would deserve to be hated, not if he avoided
the office, but if he accepted it. For if an election to a military dignity was the
business in hand, and they who had the right of conferring the honor were to
drag forward a brazier, or a shoemaker, or some such artisan, and entrust the
army to his hands, I should not praise the wretched man if he did not take to
flight, and do all in his power to avoid plunging into such manifest trouble. If,
indeed, it be sufficient to bear the name of pastor, and to take the work in hand
hap-hazard, and there be no danger in this, then let whoso pleases accuse me of
vainglory; but if it behooves one who undertakes this care to have much
understanding, and, before understanding, great grace from God, and uprightness
of conduct, and purity of life and superhuman virtue, do not deprive me of
forgiveness if I am unwilling to perish in vain without a cause.
Moreover, if any one in charge of a full-sized merchant ship, full of rowers,
and laden with a costly freight, were to station me at the helm and bid me cross
the Ægean or the Tyrrhene sea, I should recoil from the proposal at once: and if
any one asked me why? I should say, "Lest I should sink the ship." Well, where
the loss concerns material wealth, and the danger extends only to bodily death,
no one will blame those who exercise great prudence; but where the shipwrecked
are destined to fall, not into the ocean, but into the abyss of fire, and the death
which awaits them is not that which severs the soul from the body, but one
which together with this dismisses it to eternal punishment, shall I incur your
wrath and hate because I did not plunge headlong into so great an evil?
8. Do not thus, I pray and beseech you. I know my own soul, how feeble
and puny it is: I know the magnitude of this ministry, and the great difficulty of
the work; for more stormy billows vex the soul of the priest than the gales which
disturb the sea.
9. And first of all is that most terrible rock of vainglory, more dangerous
than that of the Sirens, of which the fable-mongers tell such marvellous tales: for
many were able to sail past that and escape unscathed; but this is to me so

dangerous that even now, when no necessity of any kind impels me into that
abyss, I am unable to keep clear of the snare: but if any one were to commit this
charge to me, it would be all the same as if he tied my hands behind my back,
and delivered me to the wild beasts dwelling on that rock to rend me in pieces
day by day. Do you ask what those wild beasts are? They are wrath,
despondency, envy, strife, slanders, accusations, falsehood, hypocrisy, intrigues,
anger against those who have done no harm, pleasure at the indecorous acts of
fellow ministers, sorrow at their prosperity, love of praise, desire of honor
(which indeed most of all drives the human soul headlong to perdition),
doctrines devised to please, servile flatteries, ignoble fawning, contempt of the
poor, paying court to the rich, senseless and mischievous honors, favors attended
with danger both to those who offer and those who accept them, sordid fear
suited only to the basest of slaves, the abolition of plain speaking, a great
affectation of humility, but banishment of truth, the suppression of convictions
and reproofs, or rather the excessive use of them against the poor, while against
those who are invested with power no one dare open his lips.
For all these wild beasts, and more than these, are bred upon that rock of
which I have spoken, and those whom they have once captured are inevitably
dragged down into such a depth of servitude that even to please women they
often do many things which it is well not to mention. The divine law indeed has
excluded women from the ministry, but they endeavor to thrust themselves into
it; and since they can effect nothing of themselves, they do all through the
agency of others; and they have become invested with so much power that they
can appoint or eject priests at their will: things in fact are turned upside down,
and the proverbial saying may be seen realized— "The ruled lead the rulers:"
and would that it were men who do this instead of women, who have not
received a commission to teach. Why do I say teach? For the blessed Paul did
not suffer them even to speak in the Church. But I have heard some one say that
they have obtained such a large privilege of free speech, as even to rebuke the
prelates of the Churches, and censure them more severely than masters do their