grace and mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father and the Holy
Ghost together be glory, might, honor, now and ever, world without end. Amen.

Homily 30 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts XIII. 42
"And as they were going out (text rec. 'from the syn. of the Jews,') they
besought (the Gentiles) that these words might be spoken unto them on the
following sabbath."
Do you mark Paul's wisdom? He not only gained admiration at the time, but
put into them a longing desire for a second hearing, while in what he said he
dropped some seeds ([εἰπών τινα σπέρματα]) as it were, and forbore to solve (the
questions raised), or to follow out the subject to its conclusion, his plan being to
interest them and engage their good-will to himself, and not make (people)
listless and indifferent by casting all at once into the minds of those (who first
heard him). He told them the fact, that "through this Man is remission of sins
announced unto you," but the how, he did not declare. "And when the
congregation was broken up, many of the Jews and worshipping proselytes
followed Paul and Barnabas"— after this point he puts Paul first — "who,
speaking unto them, persuaded them to continue in the grace of God." [Acts
13:43] Do you observe the eagerness, how great it is? They "followed" them, it
says. Why did they not baptize them immediately? It was not the proper time:
there was need to persuade them in order to their steadfast abiding therein. "And
the next sabbath day came almost the whole city together to hear the word of
God." [Acts 13:44] "But when the Jews saw the multitudes, they were filled with
envy, and contradicted the things spoken by Paul, contradicting and
blaspheming." [Acts 13:45] See malice wounded in wounding others: this made
the Apostles more conspicuous— the contradiction which those offered. In the
first instance then they of their own accord besought them to speak (and now
they opposed them): "contradicting," it says, "and blaspheming." O
recklessness! "Then Paul and Barnabas waxed bold, and said, It was necessary

that the word of God should first have been spoken to you: but seeing ye put it
from you, and judge yourselves unworthy of everlasting life, lo, we turn to the
Gentiles." [Acts 13:46] Do you mark how by their contentious behavior they the
more extended the preaching, and (how the Apostles here) gave themselves the
more to the Gentiles, having (by this very thing) pleaded their justification, and
made themselves clear of all blame with their own people (at Jerusalem)? (c) See
how by their "envy" they bring about great things, other (than they looked for):
they brought it about that the Apostles spoke out boldly, and came to the
Gentiles! For this is why he says, "And speaking out boldly, Paul and Barnabas
said." They were to go out to the Gentiles: but observe the boldness coming with
measure: for if Peter pleaded in his justification, much more these needed a plea,
none having called them there. [Acts 11:4] But by saying "To you first," he
showed that to those also it was their duty (to preach), and in saying
"Necessary," he showed that it was necessary to be preached to them also. "But
since you turn away from it"— he does not say, "Woe unto you," and "You are
punished," but "We turn unto the Gentiles." With great gentleness is the boldness
fraught! (a) Also he does not say, "You are unworthy," but "Have judged
yourselves unworthy. Lo, we turn unto the Gentiles. For so has the Lord
commanded us, saying, I have sent you to be a light of the Gentiles, that you
should be for salvation unto the ends of the earth." [Acts 13:47] For that the
Gentiles might not be hurt at hearing this, as if the case were so that, had the
Jews been in earnest, they themselves would not have obtained the blessings,
therefore he brings in the prophecy, saying, "A light of the Gentiles," and, "for
salvation unto the ends of the earth. And hearing" (this) "the Gentiles" [Acts
13:48]— this, while it was more cheering to them, seeing the case was this, that
whereas those were of right to hear first, they themselves enjoy the blessing, was
at the same time more stinging to those— "and the Gentiles," it says, "hearing"
(this) "were glad, and glorified the word of the Lord: and believed, as many as
were ordained unto eternal life": i.e., set apart for God. Observe how he shows
the speediness of the benefit: "And the word of the Lord was borne through all