must be such as was that of Christ, for He was the first fruits, the first born of the
dead. But if the Resurrection is this, a purifying of the soul, a deliverance from
sin, and if Christ sinned not, how did He rise again? And how have we been
delivered from the curse, if so be that He also sinned? And now says He, "The
prince of this world comes, and had nothing in Me"? [John 14:30] They are the
words of One declaring His sinlessness. According to them therefore He either
did not rise again; or that He might rise, He sinned before His Resurrection. But
He both rose again, and did no sin. Therefore He rose in the Body, and these
wicked doctrines are nothing else than the offspring of vainglory. Let us then fly
this malady. For, It is says, "evil communications corrupt good manners." [1
Corinthians 15:33] These are not the doctrines of the Apostles; Marcion and
Valentius have newly invented them. Let us then flee them, beloved, for a pure
life profits nothing when doctrines are corrupt; as on the other hand neither do
sound doctrines, if the life be corrupt. The heathen were the parents of these
notions, and those heretics reared them, having received them from Gentile
philosophers, asserting that matter is uncreated, and many such like things. As
then they asserted that there could be no Artificer unless there were some
uncreated subject matter, so also they disallowed the Resurrection. But let us not
heed them, as knowing that the power of God is all sufficient. Let us not heed
them. To you I say this; for we will not decline the battle with them. But the man
who is unarmed and naked, though he fall among the weak, though he be the
stronger, will easily be vanquished. Had you given heed to the Scriptures, had
you sharpened yourselves each day, I would not have advised you to flee the
combat with them, but would have counseled you to grapple with them; for
strong is truth. But since you know not how to use the Scriptures, I fear the
struggle, lest they take you unarmed and cast you down. For there is nothing,
there is nothing weaker than those who are bereft of the aid of the Spirit. If these
heretics employ the wisdom of the Gentiles, we must not admire, but laugh at
them, because they employ foolish teachers. For those men were not able to find
out anything sound, either concerning God or the creation, and things which the

widow among us is acquainted with, Pythagoras did not yet know, but said that
the soul becomes a bush, or a fish, or a dog. To these, tell me, ought you to give
heed? And how could it be reasonable to do so? They are great men in their
district, grow beautiful curls, and are enfolded in cloaks; thus far goes their
philosophy; but if you look within there is dust and ashes and nothing sound, but
"their throat is an open sepulcher" [Psalm 5:9], having all things full of impurity
and corruption, and all their doctrines (full) of worms. For instance, the first of
them said that water was God, his successor fire, another one air, and they
descended to things corporeal; ought we then, tell me, to admire these, who
never even had the thought of the incorporeal God? And if they did ever gain it
afterwards, it was after conversing in Egypt with our people. But, that we bring
not upon you much confusion, let us here close our discourse. For should we
begin to set before you their doctrine, and what they have said about God, what
about matter, what about the soul, what about the body, much ridicule will
follow. And they will not even require to be accused by us, for they have
attacked each other; and he who wrote against us the book concerning matter,
made away with himself. Therefore that we may not vainly delay you, nor wind
together a labyrinth of words, leaving these things we will bid you keep fast hold
of the listening to the Holy Scriptures, and not fight with words to no purpose; as
also Paul exhorts Timothy [2 Timothy 2:14], filled though he was with much
wisdom, and possessing the power of miracles. Let us now obey him, and
leaving trifling; let us hold fast to real works, I mean to brotherly-kindness and
hospitality; and let us make much account of almsgiving, that we may obtain the
promised good things, through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus
Christ, to whom be glory for endless ages. Amen.