SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.184, C.2.

carried on in an arbitrary fashion, but chiefly according to the
appointment and disposition of God, and in the second place
according to the appointment of the higher prelates, in whose
person it is said (1 Cor. 4:1): "Let a man so account of us as of the
ministers of Christ, and the dispensers of the mysteries of God."
Wherefore a man is not deemed to hide spiritual corn if he avoids
governing or correcting others, and is not competent to do so,
neither in virtue of his office nor of his superior's command; thus
alone is he deemed to hide it, when he neglects to dispense it while
under obligation to do so in virtue of his office, or obstinately
refuses to accept the office when it is imposed on him. Hence
Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xix, 19): "The love of truth seeks a holy
leisure, the demands of charity undertake an honest labor. If no one
imposes this burden upon us, we must devote ourselves to the
research and contemplation of truth, but if it be imposed on us, we
must bear it because charity demands it of us."
Reply to Objection 4: As Gregory says (Pastor. i, 7), "Isaias, who
wishing to be sent, knew himself to be already cleansed by the live
coal taken from the altar, shows us that no one should dare
uncleansed to approach the sacred ministry. Since, then, it is very
difficult for anyone to be able to know that he is cleansed, it is safer
to decline the office of preacher."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.184, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether it is lawful for a man to refuse absolutely

an appointment to the episcopate?
Objection 1: It would seem that it is lawful to refuse absolutely an
appointment to the episcopate. For as Gregory says (Pastor. i, 7),
"Isaias wishing to be of profit to his neighbor by means of the active
life, desired the office of preaching, whereas Jeremias who was fain
to hold fast to the love of his Creator by contemplation exclaimed
against being sent to preach." Now no man sins by being unwilling
to forgo better things in order to adhere to things that are not so
good. Since then the love of God surpasses the love of our neighbor,
and the contemplative life is preferable to the active, as shown above
(Question 25, Article 1; Question 26, Article 2; Question 182, Article
1) it would seem that a man sins not if he refuse absolutely the
episcopal office.
Objection 2: Further, as Gregory says (Pastor. i, 7), "it is very difficult
for anyone to be able to know that he is cleansed: nor should anyone
uncleansed approach the sacred ministry." Therefore if a man
perceives that he is not cleansed, however urgently the episcopal
office be enjoined him, he ought not to accept it.
Objection 3: Further, Jerome (Prologue, super Marc.) says that "it is
related of the Blessed Mark that after receiving the faith he cut off his
thumb that he might be excluded from the priesthood." Likewise
some take a vow never to accept a bishopric. Now to place an
obstacle to a thing amounts to the same as refusing it altogether.
Therefore it would seem that one may, without sin, refuse the
episcopal office absolutely.
On the contrary, Augustine says (Ep. xlviii ad Eudox.): "If Mother
Church requires your service, neither accept with greedy conceit,
nor refuse with fawning indolence"; and afterwards he adds: "Nor
prefer your ease to the needs of the Church: for if no good men were
willing to assist her in her labor, you would seek in vain how we
could be born of her."
I answer that, Two things have to be considered in the acceptance of
the episcopal office: first, what a man may fittingly desire according
to his own will; secondly, what it behooves a man to do according to
the will of another. As regards his own will it becomes a man to look