FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.64, C.2.

Reply to Objection 1: Moral virtue derives goodness from the rule of
reason, while its matter consists in passions or operations. If
therefore we compare moral virtue to reason, then, if we look at that
which is has of reason, it holds the position of one extreme, viz.
conformity; while excess and defect take the position of the other
extreme, viz. deformity. But if we consider moral virtue in respect of
its matter, then it holds the position of mean, in so far as it makes
the passion conform to the rule of reason. Hence the Philosopher
says (Ethic. ii, 6) that "virtue, as to its essence, is a mean state," in
so far as the rule of virtue is imposed on its proper matter: "but it is
an extreme in reference to the 'best' and the 'excellent,'" viz. as to its
conformity with reason.
Reply to Objection 2: In actions and passions the mean and the
extremes depend on various circumstances: hence nothing hinders
something from being extreme in a particular virtue as to one
circumstance, while the same thing is a mean in respect of other
circumstances, through being in conformity with reason. This is the
case with magnanimity and magnificence. For if we look at the
absolute quantity of the respective objects of these virtues, we shall
call it an extreme and a maximum: but if we consider the quantity in
relation to other circumstances, then it has the character of a mean:
since these virtues tend to this maximum in accordance with the rule
of reason, i.e. "where" it is right, "when" it is right, and for an "end"
that is right. There will be excess, if one tends to this maximum
"when" it is not right, or "where" it is not right, or for an undue
"end"; and there will be deficiency if one fails to tend thereto
"where" one ought, and "when" one aught. This agrees with the
saying of the Philosopher (Ethic. iv, 3) that the "magnanimous man
observes the extreme in quantity, but the mean in the right mode of
his action."
Reply to Objection 3: The same is to be said of virginity and poverty
as of magnanimity. For virginity abstains from all sexual matters,
and poverty from all wealth, for a right end, and in a right manner, i.e.
according to God's word, and for the sake of eternal life. But if this
be done in an undue manner, i.e. out of unlawful superstition, or
again for vainglory, it will be in excess. And if it be not done when it
ought to be done, or as it ought to be done, it is a vice by deficiency:
for instance, in those who break their vows of virginity or poverty.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.64, C.2.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.64, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the mean of moral virtue is the real mean,

or the rational mean?
Objection 1: It would seem that the mean of moral virtue is not the
rational mean, but the real mean. For the good of moral virtue
consists in its observing the mean. Now, good, as stated in Metaph.
ii, text. 8, is in things themselves. Therefore the mean of moral virtue
is a real mean.
Objection 2: Further, the reason is a power of apprehension. But
moral virtue does not observe a mean between apprehensions, but
rather a mean between operations or passions. Therefore the mean
of moral virtue is not the rational, but the real mean.
Objection 3: Further, a mean that is observed according to
arithmetical or geometrical proportion is a real mean. Now such is
the mean of justice, as stated in Ethic. v, 3. Therefore the mean of
moral virtue is not the rational, but the real mean.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. ii, 6) that "moral virtue
observes the mean fixed, in our regard, by reason."
I answer that, The rational mean can be understood in two ways.
First, according as the mean is observed in the act itself of reason,
as though the very act of reason were made to observe the mean: in
this sense, since moral virtue perfects not the act of reason, but the
act of the appetitive power, the mean of moral virtue is not the
rational mean. Secondly, the mean of reason may be considered as
that which the reason puts into some particular matter. In this sense
every mean of moral virtue is a rational mean, since, as above stated
(Article 1), moral virtue is said to observe the mean, through
conformity with right reason.
But it happens sometimes that the rational mean is also the real
mean: in which case the mean of moral virtue is the real mean, for
instance, in justice. On the other hand, sometimes the rational mean
is not the real mean, but is considered in relation to us: and such is
the mean in all the other moral virtues. The reason for this is that
justice is about operations, which deal with external things, wherein
the right has to be established simply and absolutely, as stated
above (Question 60, Article 2): wherefore the rational mean in justice