SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.14, C.3.

certain primals and extremes, as stated in Ethic. vi, even as the
senses are cognizant of sensible objects as of certain principles of
knowledge. Now this sense which is connected with understanding,
does not perceive its object through a medium of corporeal distance,
but through certain other media, as, for instance, when it perceives a
thing's essence through a property thereof, and the cause through
its effect. Consequently a man is said to have an acute sense in
connection with his understanding, if, as soon as he apprehends a
property or effect of a thing, he understands the nature or the thing
itself, and if he can succeed in perceiving its slightest details:
whereas a man is said to have a dull sense in connection with his
understanding, if he cannot arrive at knowing the truth about a thing,
without many explanations; in which case, moreover, he is unable to
obtain a perfect perception of everything pertaining to the nature of
that thing.
Accordingly dulness of sense in connection with understanding
denotes a certain weakness of the mind as to the consideration of
spiritual goods; while blindness of mind implies the complete
privation of the knowledge of such things. Both are opposed to the
gift of understanding, whereby a man knows spiritual goods by
apprehending them, and has a subtle penetration of their inmost
nature. This dulness has the character of sin, just as blindness of
mind has, that is, in so far as it is voluntary, as evidenced in one
who, owing to his affection for carnal things, dislikes or neglects the
careful consideration of spiritual things.
This suffices for the Replies to the Objections.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.14, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether blindness of mind and dulness of sense

arise from sins of the flesh?
Objection 1: It would seem that blindness of mind and dulness of
sense do not arise from sins of the flesh. For Augustine (Retract. i, 4)
retracts what he had said in his Soliloquies i, 1, "God Who didst wish
none but the clean to know the truth," and says that one might reply
that "many, even those who are unclean, know many truths." Now
men become unclean chiefly by sins of the flesh. Therefore
blindness of mind and dulness of sense are not caused by sins of
the flesh.
Objection 2: Further, blindness of mind and dulness of sense are
defects in connection with the intellective part of the soul: whereas
carnal sins pertain to the corruption of the flesh. But the flesh does
not act on the soul, but rather the reverse. Therefore the sins of the
flesh do not cause blindness of mind and dulness of sense.
Objection 3: Further, all things are more passive to what is near them
than to what is remote. Now spiritual vices are nearer the mind than
carnal vices are. Therefore blindness of mind and dulness of sense
are caused by spiritual rather than by carnal vices.
On the contrary, Gregory says (Moral. xxxi, 45) that dulness of sense
arises from gluttony and blindness of mind from lust.
I answer that, The perfect intellectual operation in man consists in an
abstraction from sensible phantasms, wherefore the more a man's
intellect is freed from those phantasms, the more thoroughly will it
be able to consider things intelligible, and to set in order all things
sensible. Thus Anaxagoras stated that the intellect requires to be
"detached" in order to command, and that the agent must have
power over matter, in order to be able to move it. Now it is evident
that pleasure fixes a man's attention on that which he takes pleasure
in: wherefore the Philosopher says (Ethic. x, 4,5) that we all do best
that which we take pleasure in doing, while as to other things, we do
them either not at all, or in a faint-hearted fashion.
Now carnal vices, namely gluttony and lust, are concerned with
pleasures of touch in matters of food and sex; and these are the
most impetuous of all pleasures of the body. For this reason these