THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.16, C.9.

not say that the Ethiopian is white but that he is white as regards his
teeth; but we say without qualification that he is curly, since this can
only belong to him as regards his hair.
Reply to Objection 1: Sometimes, for the sake of brevity, the holy
doctors use the word "creature" of Christ, without any qualifying
term; we should however take as understood the qualification, "as
man."
Reply to Objection 2: All the properties of the human, just as of the
Divine Nature, may be predicated equally of Christ. Hence
Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii, 4) that "Christ Who God and Man,
is called created and uncreated, passible and impassible."
Nevertheless things of which we may doubt to what nature they
belong, are not to be predicated without a qualification. Hence he
afterwards adds (De Fide Orth. iv, 5) that "the one hypostasis," i.e. of
Christ, "is uncreated in its Godhead and created in its manhood":
even so conversely, we may not say without qualification, "Christ is
incorporeal" or "impassible"; in order to avoid the error of Manes,
who held that Christ had not a true body, nor truly suffered, but we
must say, with a qualification, that Christ was incorporeal and
impassible "in His Godhead."
Reply to Objection 3: There can be no doubt how the birth from the
Virgin applies to the Person of the Son of God, as there can be in the
case of creation; and hence there is no parity.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.16, C.10.

### ARTICLE 9. Whether this Man, i.e. Christ, began to be?

Objection 1: It would seem that this Man, i.e. Christ, began to be. For
Augustine says (Tract. cv in Joan.) that "before the world was,
neither were we, nor the Mediator of God and men---the Man Jesus
Christ." But what was not always, has begun to be. Therefore this
Man, i.e. Christ, began to be.
Objection 2: Further, Christ began to be Man. But to be man is to be
simply. Therefore this man began to be, simply.
Objection 3: Further, "man" implies a suppositum of human nature.
But Christ was not always a suppositum of human nature. Therefore
this Man began to be.
On the contrary, It is written (Heb. 13:8): "Jesus Christ yesterday and
today: and the same for ever."
I answer that, We must not say that "this Man"---pointing to
Christ---"began to be," unless we add something. And this for a
twofold reason. First, for this proposition is simply false, in the
judgment of the Catholic Faith, which affirms that in Christ there is
one suppositum and one hypostasis, as also one Person. For
according to this, when we say "this Man," pointing to Christ, the
eternal suppositum is necessarily meant, with Whose eternity a
beginning in time is incompatible. Hence this is false: "This Man
began to be." Nor does it matter that to begin to be refers to the
human nature, which is signified by this word "man"; because the
term placed in the subject is not taken formally so as to signify the
nature, but is taken materially so as to signify the suppositum, as
was said (Article 1, ad 4). Secondly, because even if this proposition
were true, it ought not to be made use of without qualification; in
order to avoid the heresy of Arius, who, since he pretended that the
Person of the Son of God is a creature, and less than the Father, so
he maintained that He began to be, saying "there was a time when He
was not."
Reply to Objection 1: The words quoted must be qualified, i.e. we
must say that the Man Jesus Christ was not, before the world was,
"in His humanity."