be within the touched and pervade it without let or hindrance. Thus then a subsistent
intelligence may be united with a body by virtual contact.
Elements united by such contact are not absolutely one: they are one in action and in
being acted upon, which does not involve absolute oneness of being. Such absolute
oneness may be in three ways: in the way of indivisibility, in the way of continuity, and in
the way of natural unity. Now out of a subsistent intelligence and a body there cannot be
made an indivisible unity: it must be a compound of two things. Nor again a continuous
unity, because the parts of a continuum are quantitative. It remains to be enquired
whether out of a subsistent intelligence and a body there can result such a unity as
means oneness of nature. But out of two permanent elements there results no
being one by nature except that which results of the union of substantial form with
matter: for out of substance and accident there results no being one by nature, for the
nature or essence of `man' and `whiteness' is not the same. This question then
remains to be studied, whether a subsistent intelligence can be the substantial form of
any body. Looking at the matter argumentatively, it might seem that the thing is
impossible.
Arg. 1. Of two actually existent substances no one being can be made: for the actuality
of every being is that whereby it is distinguished from another being. But a subsistent
intelligence is an actually existing substance: so likewise is a body. Apparently therefore
no one being can be made of a subsistent intelligence and a body.
Arg. 2. Form and matter are contained under the same genus: for every genus is
divided into actual and potential. But a subsistent intelligence and a body are of different
genera.
Arg. 3. All that is in matter must be material. But if subsistent intelligence is the form of a
body, the being of such intelligence must be in matter: for there is no being of the form
beyond the being of the matter. It follows that a subsistent intelligence could not be
immaterial, as supposed.
Arg. 4. It is impossible for anything having its being in a body to be apart from the body.
But intelligence is shown to be apart from the body, as it is neither the body itself nor a
bodily faculty.
Arg. 5. Whatever has being in common with the body, must also have activity in
common with the body: for the active power of a thing cannot be more exalted than its
essence. But if a subsistent intelligence is the form of a body, one being must be
common to it and the body: for out of form and matter there results absolute unity, which
is unity in being. At that rate the activity of a subsistent intelligence, united as a form to
the body, will be exerted in common with the body, and its faculty will be a bodily (or
organic) faculty: positions which we regard as impossible.
(Chap.LXIX). It is not difficult to solve the objections alleged against the aforesaid
union.