But if even after all this, virtue seem to you an irksome thing, consider that
vice is more irksome. And this very thing He was intimating, in that He said not
first, "Take my yoke upon you," but before that, "Come, you that labor and are
heavy laden;" implying that sin too has labor, and a burden that is heavy and
hard to bear. For He said not only, "You that labor," but also, "that are heavy
laden." This the prophet too was speaking of, when in that description of her
nature, "As an heavy burden they weighed heavy upon me." And Zacharias too,
describing her, says she is "A talent of lead." [Zechariah 5:7-8]
And this moreover experience itself proves. For nothing so weighs upon the
soul, and presses it down, as consciousness of sin; nothing so much gives it
wings, and raises it on high, as the attainment of righteousness and virtue.
And mark it: what is more grievous, I pray you, than to have no
possessions? To turn the cheek, and when smitten not to smite again? To die by a
violent death? Yet nevertheless, if we practise self-command, all these things are
light and easy, and pleasurable.
But be not disturbed; rather let us take up each of these, and inquire about it
accurately; and if you will, that first which many count most painful. Which then
of the two, tell me, is grievous and burdensome, to be in care for one belly, or to
be anxious about ten thousand? To be clothed with one outer garment, and seek
for nothing more; or having many in one's house, to bemoan one's self every day
and night in fear, in trembling, about the preservation of them, grieved, and
ready to choke about the loss of them; lest one should be moth-eaten, lest a
servant purloin and go off with them?
4. But whatever I may say, my speech will present no such proof as the
actual trial. Wherefore I would there were present here with us some one of
those who have attained unto that summit of self-restraint, and then you would
know assuredly the delight thereof; and that none of those that are enamored of
voluntary poverty would accept wealth, though ten thousand were to offer it.
But would these, say you, ever consent to become poor, and to cast away
the anxieties which they have? And what of that? This is but a proof of their

madness and grievous disease, not of anything very pleasurable in the thing. And
this even themselves would testify to us, who are daily lamenting over these
their anxieties, and accounting their life to be not worth living. But not so those
others; rather they laugh, leap for joy, and the wearers of the diadem do not so
glory, as they do in their poverty.
Again, to turn the cheek is, to him that gives heed, a less grievous thing
than to smite another; for from this the contest has beginning, in that
termination: and whereas by the former you have kindled the other's pile too, by
the latter you have quenched even your own flames. But that not to be burnt is a
pleasanter thing than to be burnt, is surely plain to every man. And if this hold in
regard of bodies, much more in a soul.
And whether is lighter, to contend, or to be crowned? To fight, or to have
the prize? And to endure waves, or to run into harbor? Therefore also, to die is
better than to live. For the one withdraws us from waves and dangers, while the
other adds unto them, and makes a man subject to numberless plots and
distresses, which have made life not worth living in your account.
And if you disbelieve our sayings, hearken to them that have seen the
countenances of the martyrs in the time of their conflicts, how when scourged
and flayed, they were exceeding joyful and glad, and when exposed upon hot
irons, rejoiced, and were glad of heart, more than such as lie upon a bed of roses.
Wherefore Paul also said, when he was at the point of departing hence, and
closing his life by a violent death, "I joy, and rejoice with you all; for the same
cause also do ye joy, and rejoice with me." Do you see with what exceeding
strength of language he invites the whole world to partake in his gladness? So
great a good did he know his departure hence to be, so desirable, and lovely, and
worthy of prayer, that formidable thing, death.
5. But that virtue's yoke is sweet and light, is manifest many other ways
also; but to conclude, if you please, let us look also at the burdens of sin. Let us
then bring forward the covetous, the retailers and second-hand dealers in
shameless bargains. What now could be a heavier burden than such transactions?