them about a question of words.
10. Now, in the case of all these opinions, any one who sees that the
nature of the mind is at once substance, and yet not corporeal,—that is,
that it does not occupy a less extension of place with a less part of itself,
and a greater with a greater,—must needs see at the same time that they
who are of opinion that it is corporeal, do not err from defect of
knowledge concerning mind, but because they associate with it qualities
without which they are not able to conceive any nature at all. For if you
bid them conceive of existence that is without corporeal phantasms, they
hold it merely nothing. And so the mind would not seek itself, as though
wanting to itself. For what is so present to knowledge as that which is
present to the mind? Or what is so present to the mind as the mind itself?
And hence what is called "invention," if we consider the origin of the
word, what else does it mean, unless that to find out3 is to "come into"
that which is sought? Those things accordingly which come into the mind
as it were of themselves, are not usually said to be found out, although
they may be said to be known; since we did not endeavor by seeking to
come into them, that is, to invent or find them out. And therefore, as the
mind itself really seeks those things which are sought by the eyes or by
any other sense of the body (for the mind directs even the carnal sense,
and then finds out or invents, when that sense comes to the things which
are sought); so, too, it finds out or invents other things which it ought to
know, not with the medium of corporeal sense, but through itself, when it
"comes into" them; and this, whether in the case of the higher substance
that is in God, or of the other parts of the soul; just as it does when it
judges of bodily images themselves, for it finds these within, in the soul,
impressed through the body.

### CHAP. 8.—HOW THE SOUL INQUIRES INTO ITSELF. WHENCE COMES THE ERROR OF THE SOUL CONCERNING ITSELF.

11. It is then a wonderful question, in what manner the soul seeks and
finds itself; at what it aims in order to seek, or whither it comes, that it
may come into or find out. For what is so much in the mind as she mind
itself? But because it is in those things which it thinks of with love, and is
wont to be in sensible, that is, in corporeal things with love, it is unable to
be in itself without the images of those corporeal things. And hence

shameful error arises to block its way, whilst it cannot separate from itself
the images of sensible things, so as to see itself alone. For they have
marvellously cohered with it by the close adhesion of love. And herein
consists its uncleanness; since, while it strives to think of itself alone, it
fancies itself to be that, without which it cannot think of itself. When,
therefore, it is bidden to become acquainted with itself, let it not seek
itself as though it were withdrawn from itself; but let it withdraw that
which it has added to itself. For itself lies more deeply within, not only
than those sensible things, which are clearly without, but also than the
images of them; which are indeed in some part of the soul, viz., that
which beasts also have, although these want understanding, which is
proper to the mind. As therefore the mind is within, it goes forth in some
sort from itself, when it exerts the affection of love towards these, as it
were, footprints of many acts of attention. And these footprints are, as it
were, imprinted on the memory, at the time when the corporeal things
which are without are perceived in such way, that even when those
corporeal things are absent, yet the images of them are at hand to those
who think of them. Therefore let the mind become acquainted with itself,
and not seek itself as if it were absent; but fix upon itself the act of
attention, by which it was wandering among other things, and
let it think of itself. So it will see that at no time did it ever not love itself,
at no time did it ever not know itself; but by loving another thing together
with itself it has confounded itself with it, and in some sense has grown
one with it. And so, while it embraces diverse things, as though they were
one, it has come to think those things to be one which are diverse.