Hebrews 7:28
"For this He did," he says. "This"; what? "For" (he says) "it is of necessity
that this [Man] have somewhat also to offer" [Hebrews 8:3]; not for Himself; for
how did He offer Himself? But for the people. What do you say? And is He able
to do this? Yea (he says). "For the Law makes men high priests, which have
infirmity." [Hebrews 7:28] And does He not need to offer for Himself? No, he
says. For, that you may not suppose that the [words, "this"] "He did once for
all," are said respecting Himself also, hear what he says: "For the law makes
men high priests, which have infirmity." On this account they both offer
continually, and for themselves. He however who is mighty, He that has no sin,
why should He offer for Himself, or oftentimes for others?
"But the word of the oath which was since the Law [makes] the Son who
has been consecrated for evermore." "Consecrated": what is that? Paul does not
set down the common terms of contradistinction; for after saying "having
Infirmity," he did not say "the Son" who is mighty, but "consecrated": i.e.
mighty, as one might say. You see that the name Son is used in contradistinction
to that of servant. And by "infirmity" he means either sin or death.
What is, "for evermore"? Not now only without sin but always. If then He
is perfect, if He never sins, if He lives always, why shall He offer many
sacrifices for us? But for the present he does not insist strongly on this point: but
what he does strongly insist upon is, His not offering on His own behalf.
9. Since then we have such an High Priest, let us imitate Him: let us walk in
His footsteps. There is no other sacrifice: one alone has cleansed us, and after
this, fire and hell. For indeed on this account he repeats it over and over, saying,
"one Priest," "one Sacrifice," lest any one supposing that there are many
[sacrifices] should sin without fear. Let us then, as many as have been counted
worthy of The Seal, as many as have enjoyed The Sacrifice, as many as have

partaken of the immortal Table, continue to guard our noble birth and our dignity
for falling away is not without danger.
And as many as have not yet been counted worthy these [privileges], let not
these either be confident on that account. For when a person goes on in sin, with
the view of receiving holy baptism at the last gasp, oftentimes he will not obtain
it. And, believe me, it is not to terrify you that I say what I am going to say. I
have myself known many persons, to whom this has happened, who in
expectation indeed of the enlightening sinned much, and on the day of their
death went away empty. For God gave us baptism for this cause, that He might
do away our sins, not that He might increase our sins. Whereas if any man have
employed it as a security for sinning more, it becomes a cause of negligence. For
if there had been no Washing, they would have lived more warily, as not having
[the means of] forgiveness. You see that we are the ones who cause it to be said
"Let us do evil, that good may come." [Romans 3:8]
Wherefore, I exhort you also who are uninitiated, be sober. Let no man
follow after virtue as an hireling, no man as a senseless person, no man as after a
heavy and burdensome thing. Let us pursue it then with a ready mind, and with
joy. For if there were no reward laid up, ought we not to be good? But however,
at least with a reward, let us become good. And how is this anything else than a
disgrace and a very great condemnation? Unless thou give me a reward (says
one), I do not become self-controlled. Then am I bold to say something: you will
never be self-controlled, no not even when you live with self-control, if you dost
it for a reward. Thou esteemest not virtue at all, if you dost not love it. But on
account of our great weakness, God was willing that for a time it should be
practiced even for reward, yet not even so do we pursue it.
But let us suppose, if you will, that a man dies, after having done
innumerable evil things, having also been counted worthy of baptism (which
however I think does not readily happen), tell me, how will he depart there? Not
indeed called to account for the deeds he had done, but yet without confidence;
as is reasonable. For when after living a hundred years, he has no good work to