SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.100, C.4.

God, even as God, by way of excellence, is called "Our Father."
Reply to Objection 3: Piety extends to our country in so far as the
latter is for us a principle of being: but legal justice regards the good
of our country, considered as the common good: wherefore legal
justice has more of the character of a general virtue than piety has.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.100, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the duties of piety towards one's parents

should be omitted for the sake of religion?
Objection 1: It seems that the duties of piety towards one's parents
should be omitted for the sake of religion. For Our Lord said (Lk.
14:26): "If any man come to Me, and hate not his father, and mother,
and wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea and his own
life also, he cannot be My disciple." Hence it is said in praise of
James and John (Mt. 4:22) that they left "their nets and father, and
followed" Christ. Again it is said in praise of the Levites (Dt. 33:9):
"Who hath said to his father, and to his mother: I do not know you;
and to his brethren: I know you not; and their own children they have
not known. These have kept Thy word." Now a man who knows not
his parents and other kinsmen, or who even hates them, must needs
omit the duties of piety. Therefore the duties of piety should be
omitted for the sake of religion.
Objection 2: Further, it is written (Lk. 9:59,60) that in answer to him
who said: "Suffer me first to go and bury my father," Our Lord
replied: "Let the dead bury their dead: but go thou, and preach the
kingdom of God." Now the latter pertains to religion, while it is a duty
of piety to bury one's father. Therefore a duty of piety should be
omitted for the sake of religion.
Objection 3: Further, God is called "Our Father" by excellence. Now
just as we worship our parents by paying them the duties of piety so
do we worship God by religion. Therefore the duties of piety should
be omitted for the sake of the worship of religion.
Objection 4: Further, religious are bound by a vow which they may
not break to fulfil the observances of religion. Now in accordance
with those observances they are hindered from supporting their
parents, both on the score of poverty, since they have nothing of
their own, and on the score of obedience, since they may not leave
the cloister without the permission of their superior. Therefore the
duties of piety towards one's parents should be omitted for the sake
of religion.
On the contrary, Our Lord reproved the Pharisees (Mt. 15:3-6) who
taught that for the sake of religion one ought to refrain from paying
one's parents the honor we owe them.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.100, C.5.

I answer that, Religion and piety are two virtues. Now no virtue is
opposed to another virtue, since according to the Philosopher, in his
book on the Categories (Cap. De oppos.), "good is not opposed to
good." Therefore it is impossible that religion and piety mutually
hinder one another, so that the act of one be excluded by the act of
the other. Now, as stated above (FS, Question 7, Article 2; FS,
Question 18, Article 3), the act of every virtue is limited by the
circumstances due thereto, and if it overstep them it will be an act no
longer of virtue but of vice. Hence it belongs to piety to pay duty and
homage to one's parents according to the due mode. But it is not the
due mode that man should tend to worship his father rather than
God, but, as Ambrose says on Lk. 12:52, "the piety of divine religion
takes precedence of the claims of kindred."
Accordingly, if the worship of one's parents take one away from the
worship of God it would no longer be an act of piety to pay worship
to one's parents to the prejudice of God. Hence Jerome says (Ep. ad
Heliod.): "Though thou trample upon thy father, though thou spurn
thy mother, turn not aside, but with dry eyes hasten to the standard
of the cross; it is the highest degree of piety to be cruel in this
matter." Therefore in such a case the duties of piety towards one's
parents should be omitted for the sake of the worship religion gives
to God. If, however, by paying the services due to our parents, we
are not withdrawn from the service of God, then will it be an act of
piety, and there will be no need to set piety aside for the sake of
religion.
Reply to Objection 1: Gregory expounding this saying of our Lord
says (Hom. xxxvii in Ev.) that "when we find our parents to be a
hindrance in our way to God, we must ignore them by hating and
fleeing from them." For if our parents incite us to sin, and withdraw
us from the service of God, we must, as regards this point, abandon
and hate them. It is in this sense that the Levites are said to have not
known their kindred, because they obeyed the Lord's command, and
spared not the idolaters (Ex. 32). James and John are praised for
leaving their parents and following our Lord, not that their father
incited them to evil, but because they deemed it possible for him to
find another means of livelihood, if they followed Christ.
Reply to Objection 2: Our Lord forbade the disciple to bury his father
because, according to Chrysostom (Hom. xxviii in Matth.), "Our Lord
by so doing saved him from many evils, such as the sorrows and