have any interest in them. You have given them up to another. For even they that
furnish (same word) the war-horses have no further interest in them. And thou
too hast presented your members for the war against the devil and for that dread
battle-array. Do not let them down to selfish appliances. And he shows another
thing also from this, that one must make them approved, if one means to present
them. For it is not to any mortal being that we present them, but to God, the King
of the universe; not to war only, but to have seated thereon the King Himself. For
He does not refuse even to be seated upon our members, but even greatly desires
it. And what no king who is but our fellow-servant would choose to do, that the
Lord of Angels chooses. Since then it is both to be presented (i.e. as for a King's
use) and is a sacrifice, rid it of every spot, since if it have a spot, it will no longer
be a sacrifice. For neither can the eye that looks lecherously be sacrificed, nor
the hand be presented that is grasping and rapacious, nor the feet that go lame
and go to play-houses, nor the belly that is the slave of self-indulgence, and
kindles lusts after pleasures, nor the heart that has rage in it, and harlots' love,
nor the tongue that utters filthy things. Hence we must spy out the spots on our
body upon every side. For if they that offered the sacrifices of old were bid to
look on every side, and were not permitted to offer an animal "that has anything
superfluous or lacking, or is scurvy, or scabbed" [Leviticus 22:22-23], much
more must we, who offer not senseless animals, but ourselves, exhibit more
strictness, and be pure in all respects, that we also may be able to say as did Paul,
"I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand." [2
Timothy 4:6] For he was purer than any sacrifice, and so he speaks of himself as
"ready to be offered." But this will be brought about if we kill the old man, if we
mortify our members that are upon the earth, if we crucify the world unto
ourselves. In this way we shall not need the knife any more, nor altar, nor fire, or
rather we shall want all these, but not made with the hands, but all of them will
come to us from above, fire from above, and knife also, and our altar will the
breadth of Heaven be. For if when Elijah offered the visible sacrifice, a flame,
that came down from above consumed the whole water, wood, and stones, much

more will this be done upon you. And if you have anything in you relaxed and
secular, and yet offerest the sacrifice with a good intention, the fire of the Spirit
will come down, and both wear away that worldliness, and perfect (so Field:
manuscripts "carry up") the whole sacrifice. But what is "reasonable ([λογικὴ])
service?" It means spiritual ministry, conversation according to Christ. As then
he that ministers in the house of God, and officiates, of whatever sort he may be,
then collects himself [συστέλλεται] Ezekiel 44:19, and becomes more dignified;
so we ought to be minded all our whole life as serving and ministering. And this
will be so, if every day you bring Him sacrifices (3 manuscripts "yourself as a
sacrifice"), and become the priest of your own body, and of the virtue of your
soul; as, for example, when you offer soberness, when almsgiving, when
goodness and forbearance. For in doing this you offer "a reasonable service" (or
worship, [λατρείαν]), that is, one without anything that is bodily, gross, visible.
Having then raised the hearer by the names bestowed, and having shown that
each man is a priest of his own flesh by his conversation, he mentions also the
way whereby we may compass all this. What then is the way?
Ver. 2. "And be not fashioned after this world; but be transformed by the
renewing of your mind."
For the fashion of this world is grovelling and worthless, and but for a time,
neither has ought of loftiness, or lastingness, or straightforwardness, but is
wholly perverted. If then you would walk upright (or aright [ὀ] [ρθὰ]), figure not
yourself after the fashion of this life present. For in it there is nought abiding or
stable. And this is why he calls it a fashion ([σχἥμα]); and so in another passage,
"the fashion of this world passes away." [1 Corinthians 7:31] For it has no
durability or fixedness, but all in it is but for a season; and so he calls it this age
(or world, Gr. [αἰ& 241liableness to misfortune, and by the word fashion its
unsubstantialness. For speak of riches, or of glory, or beauty of person, or of
luxury, or of whatever other of its seemingly great things you will, it is a fashion
only, not reality, a show and a mask, not any abiding substance (ὑ] [πόστασις]).
But "be not thou fashioned after this, but be transformed," he says, "by the