another way to others.
Since Paul then saw the whole Galatian people in a state of excitement, a
flame kindled against their Church, and the edifice shaken and tottering to its
fall, filled with the mixed feelings of just anger and despondency, (which he has
expressed in the words, "I could wish to be present with you now, and to change
my voice," [Galatians 4:20]) he writes the Epistle as an answer to these charges.
This is his aim from the very commencement, for the underminers of his
reputation had said, The others were disciples of Christ but this man of the
"Apostles." Wherefore he begins thus, "Paul, an Apostle not from men, neither
through man." For, these deceivers, as I was saying before, had said that this
man was the last of all the Apostles and was taught by them, for Peter, James,
and John, were both first called, and held a primacy among the disciples, and
had also received their doctrines from Christ Himself; and that it was therefore
fitting to obey them rather than this man; and that they forbad not circumcision
nor the observance of the Law. By this and similar language and by depreciating
Paul, and exalting the honor of the other Apostles, though not spoken for the
sake of praising them, but of deceiving the Galatians, they induced them to
adhere unseasonably to the Law. Hence the propriety of his commencement. As
they disparaged his doctrine, saying it came from men, while that of Peter came
from Christ, he immediately addresses himself to this point, declaring himself an
apostle "not from men, neither through man." It was Ananias who baptized him,
but it was not he who delivered him from the way of error and initiated him into
the faith; but Christ Himself sent from on high that wondrous voice, whereby He
inclosed him in his net. For Peter and his brother, and John and his brother, He
called when walking by the seaside, [Matthew 4:18] but Paul after His ascension
into heaven. [Acts 9:3-4] And just as these did not require a second call, but
straightway left their nets and all that they had, and followed Him, so this man at
his first vocation pressed vigorously forward, waging, as soon as he was
baptized, an implacable war with the Jews. In this respect he chiefly excelled the
other Apostles, as he says, "I labored more abundantly than they all;" [1

Corinthians 15:10] at present, however, he makes no such claim, but is content to
be placed on a level with them. Indeed his great object was, not to establish any
superiority for himself, but, to overthrow the foundation of their error. The not
being "from men" has reference to all alike for the Gospel's root and origin is
divine, but the not being "through man" is peculiar to the Apostles; for He called
them not by men's agency, but by His own.
But why does he not speak of his vocation rather than his apostolate, and
say, "Paul" called "not by man?" Because here lay the whole question; for they
said that the office of a teacher had been committed to him by men, namely by
the Apostles, whom therefore it behooved him to obey. But that it was not
entrusted to him by men, Luke declares in the words, "As they ministered to the
Lord, and fasted, the Holy Ghost said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul." [Acts
13:2]
From this passage it is manifest that the power of the Son and Spirit is one,
for being commissioned by the Spirit, he says that he was commissioned by
Christ. This appears in another place, from his ascription of the things of God to
the Spirit, in the words which he addresses to the elders at Miletus: "Take heed
unto yourselves, and to all the flock, in the which the Holy Ghost has made you
bishops." [Acts 20:28] Yet in another Epistle he says, "And God has set some in
the Church, first Apostles, secondly prophets, thirdly teachers." [1 Corinthians
12:28] Thus he ascribes indifferently the things of the Spirit to God, and the
things of God to the Spirit. Here too he stops the mouths of heretics, by the
words "through Jesus Christ and God the Father;" for, inasmuch as they said
this term "through" was applied to the Son as importing inferiority, see what he
does. He ascribes it to the Father, thus teaching us not to prescribe laws to the
ineffable Nature, nor define the degrees of Godhead which belong to the Father
and Son. For to the words "through Jesus Christ" he has added, "and God the
Father;" for if at the mention of the Father alone he had introduced the phrase
"through whom," they might have argued sophistically that it was peculiarly
applicable to the Father, in that the acts of the Son were to be referred to Him.