John 14:20
"At that day you shall know that am in the Father, and you in Me, and I in you."
With regard to the Father, these words refer to Essence; with regard to the
disciples, to agreement of mind and help from God. "And how, tell me, is this
reasonable?" says some one. And how, pray, is the contrary reasonable? For
great and altogether boundless is the interval between Christ and the disciples.
And if the same words are employed, marvel not; for the Scripture is often wont
to use in different senses the same words, when applied to God and to men. Thus
we are called "gods," and "sons of God," yet the word has not the same force
when applied to us and to God. And the Son is called "Image," and "Glory"; so
are we, but great is the interval between us. Again, "You are Christ's, and Christ
is God's" [1 Corinthians 3:23], but not in like manner as Christ is God's are we
Christ's. But what is it that He says? "When I am arisen," He says, you shall
know that I am not separated from the Father, but have the same power with
Him, and that I am with you continually, when facts proclaim the aid which
comes to you from Me, when your enemies are kept down, and you speak
boldly, when dangers are removed from your path, when the preaching of the
Gospel flourishes day by day, when all yield and give ground to the word of true
religion. "As the Father has sent Me, so send I you." [John 20:21] Do you see
that here also the word has not the same force? For if we take it as though it had,
the Apostles will differ in nothing from Christ. But why says He, "Then you
shall know"? Because then they saw Him risen and conversing with them, then
they learned the exact faith; for great was the power of the Spirit, which taught
them all things.

John 14:21
"He that has My commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves Me."
It is not enough merely to have them, we need also an exact keeping of
them. But why does He frequently say the same thing to them? As, "If you love
Me, you will keep My commandments" [John 14:15]; and, "He that has My
commandments and keeps them"; and, "If any one hears My word and keeps it,
he it is that loves Me— he that hears not My words, loves Me not." [John 14:24]
I think that He alluded to their despondency; for since He had uttered many wise
sayings to them concerning death, saying, "He that hates his life in this world
shall save it unto life eternal" [John 12:25]; and, "Unless a man take his cross
and follow Me, he is not worthy of Me" [Matthew 10:38]; and is about to say
other things besides, rebuking them, He says, "Think ye that you suffer sorrow
from love? The not sorrowing would be a sign of love." And because He wished
all along to establish this, as He went on He summed up His discourse in this
same point; "If you loved Me," He says, "ye would have rejoiced, because— I go
to My Father" [John 14:28], but now you are in this state through cowardice. To
be thus disposed towards death is not for those who remember My
commandments; for you ought to be crucified, if you truly loved Me, for My
word exhorts you not to be afraid of those that kill the body. Those that are such
both the Father loves and I. And I will manifest Myself unto him. Then says
Judas,