Son is not indeed less than, but equal to the Father, but yet that He is
from Him, God of God, Light of light. For we call the Son God of God; but
the Father, God only; not of God. Whence it is plain that the Son has
another of whom He is, and to whom He is Son; but that the Father has
not a Son of whom He is, but only to whom He is father. For every son is
what he is, of his father, and is son to his father; but no father is what he
is, of his son, but is father to his son.
3. Some things, then, are so put in the Scriptures concerning the Father
and the Son, as to intimate the unity and equality of their substance; as,
for instance, "I and the Father are one;" and, "Who, being in the form of
God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God;" and whatever other
texts there are of the kind. And some, again, are so put that they show the
Son as less on account of the form of a servant, that is, of His having
taken upon Him the creature of a changeable and human substance; as,
for instance, that which says, "For my Father is greater than I;" and, "The
Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment unto the Son."
For a little after he goes on to say, "And hath given Him authority to
execute judgment also, because He is the Son of man." And further, some
are so put, as to show Him at that time neither as less nor as equal, but
only to intimate that He is of the Father; as, for instance, that which says,
"For as the Father hath life in Himself, so hath He given to the Son to
have life in Himself;" and that other: "The Son can do nothing of Himself,
but what He seeth the Father do." For if we shall take this to be
therefore so said, because the Son is less in the form taken from the
creature, it will follow that the Father must have walked on the water, or
opened the eyes with clay and spittle of some other one born blind, and
have done the other things which the Son appearing in the flesh did
among men, before the Son did them; in order that He might be able to
do those things, who said that the Son was not able to do anything of
Himself, except what He hath seen the Father do. Yet who, even though
he were mad, would think this? It remains, therefore, that these texts are
so expressed, because the life of the Son is unchangeable as that of the
Father is, and yet He is of the Father; and the working of the Father and
of the Son is indivisible, and yet so to work is given to the Son from Him
of whom He Himself is, that is, from the Father; and the Son so sees the
Father, as that He is the Son in the very seeing Him. For to be of the

Father, that is, to be born of the Father, is to Him nothing else than to see
the Father; and to see Him working, is nothing else than to work with
Him: but therefore not from Himself, because He is not from Himself.
And, therefore, those things which "He sees the Father do, these also
doeth the Son likewise," because He is of the Father. For He neither does
other things in like manner, as a painter paints other pictures, in the
same way as he sees others to have been painted by another man; nor the
same things in a different manner, as the body expresses the same letters,
which the mind has thought; but "whatsoever things," saith He, "the
Father doeth, these same things also doeth the Son likewise." He has
said both "these same things," and "likewise;" and hence the working of
both the Father and the Son is indivisible and equal, but it is from the
Father to the Son. Therefore the Son cannot do anything of Himself,
except what He seeth the Father do. From this rule, then, whereby the
Scriptures so speak as to mean, not to set forth one as less than another,
but only to show which is of which, some have drawn this meaning, as if
the Son were said to be less. And some among ourselves who are more
unlearned and least instructed in these things, endeavoring to take these
texts according to the form of a servant, and so mis-interpreting them,
are troubled. And to prevent this, the rule in question is to be observed,
whereby the Son is not less, but it is simply intimated that He is of the
Father, in which words not His inequality but His birth is declared.