THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.70, C.3.

the earth be blessed" (Gn. 22:18). Moreover, he was the first to cut
himself off from the society of unbelievers, in accordance with the
commandment of the Lord, Who said to him (Gn. 13:1): "Go forth out
of thy country and from thy kindred." Therefore circumcision was
fittingly instituted in the person of Abraham.
Reply to Objection 1: Immediately after the sin of our first parent, on
account of the knowledge possessed by Adam, who was fully
instructed about Divine things, both faith and natural reason
flourished in man to such an extent, that there was no need for any
signs of faith and salvation to be prescribed to him, but each one
was wont to make protestation of his faith, by outward signs of his
profession, according as he thought best. But about the time of
Abraham faith was on the wane, many being given over to idolatry.
Moreover, by the growth of carnal concupiscence natural reason was
clouded even in regard to sins against nature. And therefore it was
fitting that then, and not before, circumcision should be instituted, as
a profession of faith and a remedy against carnal concupiscence.
Reply to Objection 2: The observance of the Law was not to be
promulgated until the people were already gathered together:
because the law is ordained to the public good, as we have stated in
the FS, Question 90, Article 2. Now it behooved the body of the
faithful to be gathered together by a sensible sign, which is
necessary in order that men be united together in any religion, as
Augustine says (Contra Faust. xix). Consequently, it was necessary
for circumcision to be instituted before the giving of the Law. Those
Fathers, however, who lived before the Law, taught their families
concerning Divine things by way of paternal admonition. Hence the
Lord said of Abraham (Gn. 18:19): "I know that he will command his
children, and his household after him to keep the way of the Lord."
Reply to Objection 3: Baptism contains in itself the perfection of
salvation, to which God calls all men, according to 1 Tim. 2:4: "Who
will have all men to be saved." Wherefore Baptism is offered to all
nations. On the other hand circumcision did not contain the
perfection of salvation, but signified it as to be achieved by Christ,
Who was to be born of the Jewish nation. For this reason
circumcision was given to that nation alone.
Reply to Objection 4: The institution of circumcision is as a sign of
Abraham's faith, who believed that himself would be the father of
Christ Who was promised to him: and for this reason it was suitable

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.70, C.3.

that it should be for males only. Again, original sin, against which
circumcision was specially ordained, is contracted from the father,
not from the mother, as was stated in the FS, Question 81, Article 5.
But Baptism contains the power of Christ, Who is the universal
cause of salvation for all, and is "The Remission of all sins" (PostCommunion, Tuesday in Whitweek).