Reply to Objection 2: The notional acts differ from the relations of
the persons only in their mode of signification; and in reality are
altogether the same. Whence the Master says that "generation and
nativity in other words are paternity and filiation" (Sent. i, D, xxvi). To
see this, we must consider that the origin of one thing from another
is firstly inferred from movement: for that anything be changed from
its disposition by movement evidently arises from some cause.
Hence action, in its primary sense, means origin of movement; for,
as movement derived from another into a mobile object, is called
"passion," so the origin of movement itself as beginning from
another and terminating in what is moved, is called "action." Hence,
if we take away movement, action implies nothing more than order of
origin, in so far as action proceeds from some cause or principle to
what is from that principle. Consequently, since in God no
movement exists, the personal action of the one producing a person
is only the habitude of the principle to the person who is from the
principle; which habitudes are the relations, or the notions.
Nevertheless we cannot speak of divine and intelligible things except
after the manner of sensible things, whence we derive our
knowledge, and wherein actions and passions, so far as these imply
movement, differ from the relations which result from action and
passion, and therefore it was necessary to signify the habitudes of
the persons separately after the manner of act, and separately after
the manner of relations. Thus it is evident that they are really the
same, differing only in their mode of signification.
Reply to Objection 3: Action, so far as it means origin of movement,
naturally involves passion; but action in that sense is not attributed
to God. Whence, passions are attributed to Him only from a
grammatical standpoint, and in accordance with our manner of
speaking, as we attribute "to beget" with the Father, and to the Son
"to be begotten."

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the notional acts are voluntary?

Objection 1: It would seem that the notional acts are voluntary. For
Hilary says (De Synod.): "Not by natural necessity was the Father led
to beget the Son."
Objection 2: Further, the Apostle says, "He transferred us to the
kingdom of the Son of His love" (Col. 1:13). But love belongs to the
will. Therefore the Son was begotten of the Father by will.
Objection 3: Further, nothing is more voluntary than love. But the
Holy Ghost proceeds as Love from the Father and the Son. Therefore
He proceeds voluntarily.
Objection 4: Further, the Son proceeds by mode of the intellect, as
the Word. But every word proceeds by the will from a speaker.
Therefore the Son proceeds from the Father by will, and not by
nature.
Objection 5: Further, what is not voluntary is necessary. Therefore if
the Father begot the Son, not by the will, it seems to follow that He
begot Him by necessity; and this is against what Augustine says (Ad
Orosium qu. vii).
On the contrary, Augustine says, in the same book, that, "the Father
begot the Son neither by will, nor by necessity."
I answer that, When anything is said to be, or to be made by the will,
this can be understood in two senses. In one sense, the ablative
designates only concomitance, as I can say that I am a man by my
will---that is, I will to be a man; and in this way it can be said that the
Father begot the Son by will; as also He is God by will, because He
wills to be God, and wills to beget the Son. In the other sense, the
ablative imports the habitude of a principle as it is said that the
workman works by his will, as the will is the principle of his work;
and thus in that sense it must be said the God the Father begot the
Son, not by His will; but that He produced the creature by His will.
Whence in the book De Synod, it is said: "If anyone say that the Son
was made by the Will of God, as a creature is said to be made, let
him be anathema." The reason of this is that will and nature differ in
their manner of causation, in such a way that nature is determined to