word "shall cleave" has in like manner reference to love. For if you shall make
her "holy and without blemish," everything else will follow. Seek the things
which are of God, and those which are of man will follow readily enough.
Govern your wife, and thus will the whole house be in harmony. Hear what Paul
says. "And if they would learn anything, let them ask their own husbands at
home." [1 Corinthians 14:35] If we thus regulate our own houses, we shall be
also fit for the management of the Church. For indeed a house is a little Church.
Thus it is possible for us by becoming good husbands and wives, to surpass all
others.
Consider Abraham, and Sarah, and Isaac, and the three hundred and
eighteen born in his house. [Genesis 14:14] How the whole house was
harmoniously knit together, how the whole was full of piety and fulfilled the
Apostolic injunction. She also "reverenced her husband"; for hear her own
words, "It has not yet happened unto me even until now, and my lord is old also."
[Genesis 18:12] And he again so loved her, that in all things he obeyed her
commands. And the young child was virtuous, and the servants born in the
house, they too were so excellent that they refused not even to hazard their lives
with their master; they delayed not, nor asked the reason. Nay, one of them, the
chief, was so admirable, that he was even entrusted with the marriage of the
only-begotten child, and with a journey into a foreign country. [Genesis 24:1-67]
For just as with a general, when his soldiery also is well organized, the enemy
has no quarter to attack; so, I say, is it also here: when husband and wife and
children and servants are all interested in the same things, great is the harmony
of the house. Since where this is not the case, the whole is oftentimes
overthrown and broken up by one bad servant; and that single one will often mar
and utterly destroy the whole.
Moral. Let us then be very thoughtful both for our wives, and children, and
servants; knowing that we shall thus be establishing for ourselves an easy
government, and shall have our accounts with them gentle and lenient, and say,
"Behold I, and the children which God has given me." [Isaiah 8:18] If the

husband command respect, and the head be honorable, then will the rest of the
body sustain no violence. Now what is the wife's fitting behavior, and what the
husband's, he states accurately, charging her to reverence him as the head, and
him to love her as a wife; but how, it may be said, can these things be? That they
ought indeed so to be, he has proved. But how they can be so, I will tell you.
They will be so, if we will despise money, if we will look but to one thing only,
excellence of soul, if we will keep the fear of God before our eyes. For what he
says in his discourse to servants, "whatsoever any man does, whether it be good
or evil, the same shall he receive of the Lord" [Ephesians 6:8]; this is also the
case here. Love her therefore not for her sake so much as for Christ's sake. This,
at least, he as much as intimates, in saying, "as unto the Lord." So then do
everything, as in obedience to the Lord, and as doing everything for His sake.
This were enough to induce and to persuade us, and not to suffer that there
should be any teasing and dissension. Let none be believed when slandering the
husband to his wife; no, nor let the husband believe anything at random against
the wife, nor let the wife be without reason inquisitive about his goings out and
his comings in. No, nor on any account let the husband ever render himself
worthy of any suspicion whatever. For what, tell me, what if you shall devote
yourself all the day to your friends, and give the evening to your wife, and not
even thus be able to content her, and place her out of reach of suspicion? Though
your wife complain, yet be not annoyed— it is her love, not her folly— they are
the complaints of fervent attachment, and burning affection, and fear. Yes, she is
afraid lest any one have stolen her marriage bed, lest any one have injured her in
that which is the summit of her blessings, lest any one have taken away from her
him who is her head, lest any one have broken through her marriage chamber.
There is also another ground of petty jealousy. Let neither claim too much
service of the servants, neither the husband from the maid-servant, nor the wife
from the man-servant. For these things also are enough to beget suspicion. For
consider, I say, that righteous household I spoke of. Sarah herself bade the
patriarch take Hagar. She herself directed it, no one compelled her, nor did the