SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.118, C.2.

observes the mean, the principal thing is giving, to which receiving
and retaining are subordinate, so, too, covetousness and prodigality
regard principally giving. Wherefore he who exceeds in giving is said
to be "prodigal," while he who is deficient in giving is said to be
"covetous." Now it happens sometimes that a man is deficient in
giving, without exceeding in receiving, as the Philosopher observes
(Ethic. iv, 1). And in like manner it happens sometimes that a man
exceeds in giving, and therefore is prodigal, and yet at the same time
exceeds in receiving. This may be due either to some kind of
necessity, since while exceeding in giving he is lacking in goods of
his own, so that he is driven to acquire unduly, and this pertains to
covetousness; or it may be due to inordinateness of the mind, for he
gives not for a good purpose, but, as though despising virtue, cares
not whence or how he receives. Wherefore he is prodigal and
covetous in different respects.
Reply to Objection 2: Prodigality regards passions in respect of
money, not as exceeding, but as deficient in them.
Reply to Objection 3: The prodigal does not always exceed in giving
for the sake of pleasures which are the matter of temperance, but
sometimes through being so disposed as not to care about riches,
and sometimes on account of something else. More frequently,
however, he inclines to intemperance, both because through
spending too much on other things he becomes fearless of spending
on objects of pleasure, to which the concupiscence of the flesh is
more prone; and because through taking no pleasure in virtuous
goods, he seeks for himself pleasures of the body. Hence the
Philosopher says (Ethic. iv, 1) "that many a prodigal ends in
becoming intemperate."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.118, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether prodigality is a sin?

Objection 1: It seems that prodigality is not a sin. For the Apostle
says (1 Tim. 6:10): "Covetousness is the root of all evils." But it is
not the root of prodigality, since this is opposed to it. Therefore
prodigality is not a sin.
Objection 2: Further, the Apostle says (1 Tim. 6:17,18): "Charge the
rich of this world . . . to give easily, to communicate to others." Now
this is especially what prodigal persons do. Therefore prodigality is
not a sin.
Objection 3: Further, it belongs to prodigality to exceed in giving and
to be deficient in solicitude about riches. But this is most becoming
to the perfect, who fulfil the words of Our Lord (Mt. 6:34), "Be not . . .
solicitous for tomorrow," and (Mt. 19:21), "Sell all thou hast, and give
to the poor." Therefore prodigality is not a sin.
On the contrary, The prodigal son is held to blame for his prodigality.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), the opposition between
prodigality and covetousness is one of excess and deficiency; either
of which destroys the mean of virtue. Now a thing is vicious and
sinful through corrupting the good of virtue. Hence it follows that
prodigality is a sin.
Reply to Objection 1: Some expound this saying of the Apostle as
referring, not to actual covetousness, but to a kind of habitual
covetousness, which is the concupiscence of the "fomes" [FS,
Question 81, Article 3, ad 2], whence all sins arise. Others say that he
is speaking of a general covetousness with regard to any kind of
good: and in this sense also it is evident that prodigality arises from
covetousness; since the prodigal seeks to acquire some temporal
good inordinately, namely, to give pleasure to others, or at least to
satisfy his own will in giving. But to one that reviews the passage
correctly, it is evident that the Apostle is speaking literally of the
desire of riches, for he had said previously (1 Tim. 6:9): "They that
will become rich," etc. In this sense covetousness is said to be "the
root of all evils," not that all evils always arise from covetousness,
but because there is no evil that does not at some time arise from
covetousness. Wherefore prodigality sometimes is born of