by Him? Any man not deprived of his senses must necessarily confess this.
There is no interval therefore between the Son and the Father; and if there be
none, then He is not after, but Co-eternal with Him. For "before" and "after" are
notions implying time, since, without age or time, no man could possibly
imagine these words; but God is above times and ages.
But if in any case you say that you have found a beginning to the Son, see
whether by the same reason and argument you are not compelled to reduce the
Father also to a beginning, earlier indeed, but still a beginning. For when you
have assigned to the Son a limit and beginning of existence, do you not proceed
upwards from that point, and say, that the Father was before it? Clearly you do.
Tell me then, what is the extent of the Father's prior subsistence? For whether
you say that the interval is little, or whether you say it is great, you equally have
brought the Father to a beginning. For it is clear, that it is by measuring the space
that you say whether it is little or great; yet it would not be possible to measure
it, unless there were a beginning on either side; so that as far as you are
concerned you have given the Father a beginning, and henceforth, according to
your argument, not even the Father will be without beginning. See you that the
word spoken by the Saviour is true, and the saying everywhere discovers its
force? And what is that word? It is "He that honors not the Son, honors not the
Father." [John 5:23]
And I know indeed that what now has been said cannot by many be
comprehended, and therefore it is that in many places we avoid agitating
questions of human reasonings, because the rest of the people cannot follow
such arguments, and if they could, still they have nothing firm or sure in them.
"For the thoughts of mortal men are miserable, and our devices are but
uncertain." [Wisdom 9:14] Still I should like to ask our objectors, what means
that which is said by the Prophet, "Before Me there was no God formed, nor is
there any after Me"? [Isaiah 43:10] For if the Son is younger than the Father,
how, says He, "Nor is there any after me"? Will you take away the being of the
Only-Begotten Himself? You either must dare this, or admit one Godhead with

distinct Persons of the Father and Son.
Finally, how could the expression, "All things were made by Him," be true?
For if there is an age older than He, how can that which was before Him have
been made by Him? Do you see to what daring the argument has carried them,
when once the truth has been unsettled? Why did not the Evangelist say, that He
was made from things that were not, as Paul declares of all things, when he says,
"Who calls those things which be not as though they were"; but says, "Was in the
beginning"? [Romans 4:17] This is contrary to that; and with good reason. For
God neither is made, nor has anything older; these are words of the Greeks. Tell
me this too: Would you not say, that the Creator beyond all comparison excels
His works? Yet since that which is from things that were not is similar to them,
where is the superiority not admitting of comparison? And what mean the
expressions, "I am the first and I am the last" [Isaiah 44:6]; and, "before Me was
no other God formed"? [Isaiah 43:10] For if the Son be not of the same Essence,
there is another God; and if He be not Co-eternal, He is after Him; and if He did
not proceed from His Essence, clear it is that He was made. But if they assert,
that these things were said to distinguish Him from idols, why do they not allow
that it is to distinguish Him from idols that he says, "the Only True God"? [John
17:3] Besides, if this was said to distinguish Him from idols, how would you
interpret the whole sentence? "After Me," He says, "is no other God." In saying
this, He does not exclude the Son, but that "After Me there is no idol God," not
that "there is no Son." Allowed, says he; what then? And the expression, "Before
Me was no other God formed," will you so understand, as that no idol God
indeed was formed before Him, but yet a Son was formed before Him? What
evil spirit would assert this? I do not suppose that even Satan himself would do
so.
Moreover, if He be not Co-eternal with the Father, how can you say that His
Life is infinite? For if it have a beginning from before, although it be endless, yet
it is not infinite; for the infinite must be infinite in both directions. As Paul also
declared, when he said, "Having neither beginning of days, nor end of life"