they have been driven, and I shall be sanctified in them in the sight of the sons of the nations: and
they shall dwell in their own land, which I gave to my servant Jacob. And they shall dwell in it in
peace; and they shall build houses, and plant vineyards, and dwell in hope, when I shall cause
judgment to fall among all who have dishonoured them, among those who encircle them round
about; and they shall know that I am the Lord their God, and the God of their fathers." Now I
have shown a short time ago that the church is the seed of Abraham; and for this reason, that we
may know that He who in the New Testament "raises up from the stones children unto Abraham,"
is He who will gather, according to the Old Testament, those that shall be saved from all the nations,
Jeremiah says: "Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that they shall no more say, The Lord liveth,
who led the children of Israel from the north, and from every region whither they had been driven;
He will restore them to their own land which He gave to their fathers."
2. That the whole creation shall, according to God's will, obtain a vast increase, that it may
bring forth and sustain fruits such [as we have mentioned], Isaiah declares: "And there shall be
upon every high mountain, and upon every prominent hill, water running everywhere in that day,
when many shall perish, when walls shall fall. And the light of the moon shall be as the light of the
sun, seven times that of the day, when He shall heal the anguish of His people, and do away with
the pain of His stroke." Now "the pain of the stroke" means that inflicted at the beginning upon
disobedient man in Adam, that is, death; which [stroke] the Lord will heal when He raises us from
the dead, and restores the inheritance of the fathers, as Isaiah again says: "And thou shall be confident
in the Lord, and He will cause thee to pass over the whole earth, and feed thee with the inheritance
of Jacob thy father." This is what the Lord declared: "Happy are those servants whom the Lord
when He cometh shall find watching. Verily I say unto you, that He shall gird Himself, and make
them to sit down [to meat], and will come forth and serve them. And if He shall come in the evening
watch, and find them so, blessed are they, because He shall make them sit down, and minister to
them; or if this be in the second, or it be in the third, blessed are they." Again John also says the
very same in the Apocalypse: "Blessed and holy is he who has part in the first resurrection."
Then, too, Isaiah has declared the time when these events shall occur; he says: "And I said, Lord,
how long? Until the cities be wasted without inhabitant, and the houses be without men, and the
earth be left a desert. And after these things the Lord shall remove us men far away (longe nos