FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.100, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether the precepts of the decalogue are

suitably set forth?
Objection 1: It would seem that the precepts of the decalogue are
unsuitably set forth. Because sin, as stated by Ambrose (De
Paradiso viii), is "a transgression of the Divine law and a
disobedience to the commandments of heaven." But sins are
distinguished according as man sins against God, or his neighbor,
or himself. Since, then, the decalogue does not include any precepts
directing man in his relations to himself, but only such as direct him
in his relations to God and himself, it seems that the precepts of the
decalogue are insufficiently enumerated.
Objection 2: Further, just as the Sabbath-day observance pertained
to the worship of God, so also did the observance of other
solemnities, and the offering of sacrifices. But the decalogue
contains a precept about the Sabbath-day observance. Therefore it
should contain others also, pertaining to the other solemnities, and
to the sacrificial rite.
Objection 3: Further, as sins against God include the sin of perjury,
so also do they include blasphemy, or other ways of lying against
the teaching of God. But there is a precept forbidding perjury, "Thou
shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain." Therefore there
should be also a precept of the decalogue forbidding blasphemy and
false doctrine.
Objection 4: Further, just as man has a natural affection for his
parents, so has he also for his children. Moreover the commandment
of charity extends to all our neighbors. Now the precepts of the
decalogue are ordained unto charity, according to 1 Tim. 1:5: "The
end of the commandment is charity." Therefore as there is a precept
referring to parents, so should there have been some precepts
referring to children and other neighbors.
Objection 5: Further, in every kind of sin, it is possible to sin in
thought or in deed. But in some kinds of sin, namely in theft and
adultery, the prohibition of sins of deed, when it is said, "Thou shalt
not commit adultery, Thou shalt not steal," is distinct from the
prohibition of the sin of thought, when it is said, "Thou shalt not
covet thy neighbor's goods," and, "Thou shalt not covet thy

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.100, C.6.

neighbor's wife." Therefore the same should have been done in
regard to the sins of homicide and false witness.
Objection 6: Further, just as sin happens through disorder of the
concupiscible faculty, so does it arise through disorder of the
irascible part. But some precepts forbid inordinate concupiscence,
when it is said, "Thou shalt not covet." Therefore the decalogue
should have included some precepts forbidding the disorders of the
irascible faculty. Therefore it seems that the ten precepts of the
decalogue are unfittingly enumerated.
On the contrary, It is written (Dt. 4:13): "He shewed you His
covenant, which He commanded you to do, and the ten words that
He wrote in two tablets of stone."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 2), just as the precepts of
human law direct man in his relations to the human community, so
the precepts of the Divine law direct man in his relations to a
community or commonwealth of men under God. Now in order that
any man may dwell aright in a community, two things are required:
the first is that he behave well to the head of the community; the
other is that he behave well to those who are his fellows and
partners in the community. It is therefore necessary that the Divine
law should contain in the first place precepts ordering man in his
relations to God; and in the second place, other precepts ordering
man in his relations to other men who are his neighbors and live with
him under God.
Now man owes three things to the head of the community: first,
fidelity; secondly, reverence; thirdly, service. Fidelity to his master
consists in his not giving sovereign honor to another: and this is the
sense of the first commandment, in the words "Thou shalt not have
strange gods." Reverence to his master requires that he should do
nothing injurious to him: and this is conveyed by the second
commandment, "Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in
vain." Service is due to the master in return for the benefits which
his subjects receive from him: and to this belongs the third
commandment of the sanctification of the Sabbath in memory of the
creation of all things.
To his neighbors a man behaves himself well both in particular and
in general. In particular, as to those to whom he is indebted, by