sorrow is also a kind of punishment, it may be so intense as to
suffice for the remission of both guilt and punishment.
Reply to Objection 1: A man cannot be sure that his contrition
suffices for the remission of both punishment and guilt: wherefore
he is bound to confess and to make satisfaction, especially since his
contrition would not be true contrition, unless he had the purpose of
confessing united thereto: which purpose must also be carried into
effect, on account of the precept given concerning confession.
Reply to Objection 2: Just as inward joy redounds into the outward
parts of the body, so does interior sorrow show itself in the exterior
members: wherefore it is written (Prov. 17:22): "A sorrowful spirit
drieth up the bones."
Reply to Objection 3: Although the sorrow of contrition is finite in its
intensity, even as the punishment due for mortal sin is finite; yet it
derives infinite power from charity, whereby it is quickened, and so it
avails for the remission of both guilt and punishment.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether slight contrition suffices to blot out great

sins?
Objection 1: It would seem that slight contrition does not suffice to
blot out great sins. For contrition is the remedy for sin. Now a bodily
remedy, that heals a lesser bodily infirmity, does not suffice to heal a
greater. Therefore the least contrition does not suffice to blot out
very great sins.
Objection 2: Further, it was stated above (Question 3, Article 3) that
for greater sins one ought to have greater contrition. Now contrition
does not blot out sin, unless it fulfills the requisite conditions.
Therefore the least contrition does not blot out all sins.
On the contrary, Every sanctifying grace blots out every mortal sin,
because it is incompatible therewith. Now every contrition is
quickened by sanctifying grace. Therefore, however slight it be, it
blots out all sins.
I answer that, As we have often said (Question 1, Article 2, ad 1;
Question 3, Article 1; Question 4, Article 1), contrition includes a
twofold sorrow. One is in the reason, and is displeasure at the sin
committed. This can be so slight as not to suffice for real contrition,
e.g. if a sin were less displeasing to a man, than separation from his
last end ought to be; just as love can be so slack as not to suffice for
real charity. The other sorrow is in the senses, and the slightness of
this is no hindrance to real contrition, because it does not, of itself,
belong essentially to contrition, but is connected with it accidentally:
nor again is it under our control. Accordingly we must say that
sorrow, however slight it be, provided it suffice for true contrition,
blots out all sin.
Reply to Objection 1: Spiritual remedies derive infinite efficacy from
the infinite power which operates in them: wherefore the remedy
which suffices for healing a slight sin, suffices also to heal a great
sin. This is seen in Baptism which looses great and small: and the
same applies to contrition provided it fulfill the necessary
conditions.
Reply to Objection 2: It follows of necessity that a man grieves more
for a greater sin than for a lesser, according as it is more repugnant