241. In her dialogue with the State and with society, the Church does not have solutions for every
particular issue. Together with the various sectors of society, she supports those programmes
which best respond to the dignity of each person and the common good. In doing this, she
proposes in a clear way the fundamental values of human life and convictions which can then find
expression in political activity.

Dialogue between faith, reason and science

242. Dialogue between science and faith also belongs to the work of evangelization at the service
of peace. Whereas positivism and scientism “refuse to admit the validity of forms of
knowledge other than those of the positive sciences”, the Church proposes another path,
which calls for a synthesis between the responsible use of methods proper to the empirical
sciences and other areas of knowledge such as philosophy, theology, as well as faith itself, which
elevates us to the mystery transcending nature and human intelligence. Faith is not fearful of
reason; on the contrary, it seeks and trusts reason, since “the light of reason and the light of faith
both come from God” and cannot contradict each other. Evangelization is attentive to
scientific advances and wishes to shed on them the light of faith and the natural law so that they
will remain respectful of the centrality and supreme value of the human person at every stage of
life. All of society can be enriched thanks to this dialogue, which opens up new horizons for
thought and expands the possibilities of reason. This too is a path of harmony and peace.

243. The Church has no wish to hold back the marvellous progress of science. On the contrary,
she rejoices and even delights in acknowledging the enormous potential that God has given to the
human mind. Whenever the sciences – rigorously focused on their specific field of inquiry – arrive
at a conclusion which reason cannot refute, faith does not contradict it. Neither can believers claim
that a scientific opinion which is attractive but not sufficiently verified has the same weight as a
dogma of faith. At times some scientists have exceeded the limits of their scientific competence by
making certain statements or claims. But here the problem is not with reason itself, but with the
promotion of a particular ideology which blocks the path to authentic, serene and productive

dialogue.

Ecumenical dialogue

244. Commitment to ecumenism responds to the prayer of the Lord Jesus that “they may all be
one” (Jn 17:21). The credibility of the Christian message would be much greater if Christians could
overcome their divisions and the Church could realize “the fullness of catholicity proper to her in
those of her children who, though joined to her by baptism, are yet separated from full communion
with her”. We must never forget that we are pilgrims journeying alongside one another. This
means that we must have sincere trust in our fellow pilgrims, putting aside all suspicion or
mistrust, and turn our gaze to what we are all seeking: the radiant peace of God’s face. Trusting
others is an art and peace is an art. Jesus told us: “Blessed are the peacemakers” (Mt 5:9). In
taking up this task, also among ourselves, we fulfil the ancient prophecy: “They shall beat their
swords into ploughshares” (Is 2:4).