reckoned among the transcendentals, as was said above (Question
30, Article 3; Question 11).
Reply to Objection 2: From the angelic nature being the nighest unto
God, it must needs have least of multitude in its composition, but not
so as to be found in few subjects.
Reply to Objection 3: This is Aristotle's argument (Metaph. xii, text
44), and it would conclude necessarily if the separate substances
were made for corporeal substances. For thus the immaterial
substances would exist to no purpose, unless some movement from
them were to appear in corporeal things. But it is not true that the
immaterial substances exist on account of the corporeal, because
the end is nobler than the means to the end. Hence Aristotle says
(Metaph. xii, text 44) that this is not a necessary argument, but a
probable one. He was forced to make use of this argument, since
only through sensible things can we come to know intelligible ones.
Reply to Objection 4: This argument comes from the opinion of such
as hold that matter is the cause of the distinction of things; but this
was refuted above (Question 47, Article 1). Accordingly, the
multiplication of the angels is not to be taken according to matter,
nor according to bodies, but according to the divine wisdom
devising the various orders of immaterial substances.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the angels differ in species?

Objection 1: It would seem that the angels do not differ in species.
For since the "difference" is nobler than the 'genus,' all things which
agree in what is noblest in them, agree likewise in their ultimate
constitutive difference; and so they are the same according to
species. But all angels agree in what is noblest in them---that is to
say, in intellectuality. Therefore all the angels are of one species.
Objection 2: Further, more and less do not change a species. But the
angels seem to differ only from one another according to more and
less---namely, as one is simpler than another, and of keener intellect.
Therefore the angels do not differ specifically.
Objection 3: Further, soul and angel are contra-distinguished
mutually from each other. But all souls are of the one species. So
therefore are the angels.
Objection 4: Further, the more perfect a thing is in nature, the more
ought it to be multiplied. But this would not be so if there were but
one individual under one species. Therefore there are many angels
of one species.
On the contrary, In things of one species there is no such thing as
"first" and "second" [prius et posterius], as the Philosopher says
(Metaph. iii, text 2). But in the angels even of the one order there are
first, middle, and last, as Dionysius says (Hier. Ang. x). Therefore the
angels are not of the same species.
I answer that, Some have said that all spiritual substances, even
souls, are of the one species. Others, again, that all the angels are of
the one species, but not souls; while others allege that all the angels
of one hierarchy, or even of one order, are of the one species.
But this is impossible. For such things as agree in species but differ
in number, agree in form, but are distinguished materially. If,
therefore, the angels be not composed of matter and form, as was
said above (Article 2), it follows that it is impossible for two angels to
be of one species; just as it would be impossible for there to be
several whitenesses apart, or several humanities, since whitenesses
are not several, except in so far as they are in several substances.