doctrines altogether; but not so did they dispute with the Jews, but many of their
doctrines they abolished, while the God who had enacted the same they bade
them worship. And affirming that men should honor the legislator, they said,
"obey not in all respects the law which is of Him;" for instance, in the keeping
the Sabbath, or observing circumcision, or offering sacrifices, or doing any other
like thing. So that not only was custom an impediment, but also the fact, that
when they bade men worship God, they bade them break many of His laws.
15. But in the case of the Greeks great was the tyranny of custom. For if it
had been a custom of ten years only, I say not of such a length of time, and if it
had preoccupied but a few men, I say not the whole world, when these persons
made their approaches; even in this case the revolution would have been hard to
effect. But now sophists, and orators, and fathers, and grandfathers, and many
more ancient than all these, had been preoccupied by the error: the very earth
and sea, and mountains and groves, and all nations of Barbarians, and all tribes
of the Greeks, and wise men and ignorant, rulers and subjects, women and men,
young and old, masters and slaves, artificers and husbandmen, dwellers in cities
and in the country; all of them. And those who were instructed would naturally
say, "What in the world is this? Have all that dwell in the world been deceived?
Both sophists and orators, philosophers and historians, the present generation
and they who were before this, Pythagoreans, Platonists, generals, consuls,
kings, they who in all cities from the beginning were citizens and colonists, both
Barbarians and Greeks? And are the twelve fishermen and tent-makers and
publicans wiser than all these? Why, who could endure such a statement?"
However, they spoke not so, nor had it in their mind, but did endure them, and
owned that they were wiser than all. Wherefore they overcame even all. And
custom was no impediment to this, though accounted invincible when she has
acquired her full swing by course of time.
And that you may learn how great is the strength of custom, it has
oftentimes prevailed over the commands of God. And why do I say, commands?
Even over very blessings. For so the Jews when they had manna, required garlic;

enjoying liberty they were mindful of their slavery; and they were continually
longing for Egypt, because they were accustomed to it. Such a tyrannical thing is
custom.
If you desire to hear of it from the heathens also; it is said that Plato,
although well aware that all about the gods was a sort of imposture,
condescended to all the feasts and all the rest of it, as being unable to contend
with custom; and as having in fact learned this from his master. For he, too,
being suspected of some such innovation, was so far from succeeding in what he
desired that he even lost his life; and this, too, after making his defence. And
how many men do we see now by prejudice held in idolatry, and having nothing
plausible to say, when they are charged with being Greeks, but alleging the
fathers, and grandfathers, and great grandfathers. For no other reason did some
of the heathens call custom, second nature. But when doctrines are the subjectmatter of the custom, it becomes yet more deeply rooted. For a man would
change all things more easily than those pertaining to religion. The feeling of
shame, too, coupled with custom, was enough to raise an obstacle; and the
seeming to learn a new lesson in extreme old age, and that of those who were not
so intelligent. And why wonder, should this happen in regard of the soul, seeing
that even in the body custom has great force?
16. In the Apostles' case, however, there was yet another obstacle, more
powerful than these; it was not merely changing custom so ancient and
primitive, but there were perils also under which the change was effected. For
they were not simply drawing men from one custom to another, but from a
custom, wherein was no fear to an undertaking which held out threats of danger.
For the believer must immediately incur confiscation, persecution, exile from his
country; must suffer the worst ills, be hated of all men, be a common enemy both
to his own people and to strangers. So that even if they had invited men to a
customary thing out of novelty, even in this case it would have been a difficult
matter. But when it was from a custom to an innovation, and with all these
terrors to boot, consider how vast was the obstacle!