the continuous; as a point in permanent things, and as a moment in
succession; and this kind of the indivisible in permanent things,
forasmuch as it has a determinate site, cannot be in many parts of
place, or in many places; likewise the indivisible of action or
movement, forasmuch as it has a determinate order in movement or
action, cannot be in many parts of time. Another kind of the
indivisible is outside of the whole genus of the continuous; and in
this way incorporeal substances, like God, angel and soul, are called
indivisible. Such a kind of indivisible does not belong to the
continuous, as a part of it, but as touching it by its power; hence,
according as its power can extend itself to one or to many, to a small
thing, or to a great one, in this way it is in one or in many places, and
in a small or large place.
Reply to Objection 3: A whole is so called with reference to its parts.
Now part is twofold: viz. a part of the essence, as the form and the
matter are called parts of the composite, while genus and difference
are called parts of species. There is also part of quantity into which
any quantity is divided. What therefore is whole in any place by
totality of quantity, cannot be outside of that place, because the
quantity of anything placed is commensurate to the quantity of the
place; and hence there is no totality of quantity without totality of
place. But totality of essence is not commensurate to the totality of
place. Hence it is not necessary for that which is whole by totality of
essence in a thing, not to be at all outside of it. This appears also in
accidental forms which have accidental quantity; as an example,
whiteness is whole in each part of the surface if we speak of its
totality of essence; because according to the perfect idea of its
species it is found to exist in every part of the surface. But if its
totality be considered according to quantity which it has
accidentally, then it is not whole in every part of the surface. On the
other hand, incorporeal substances have no totality either of
themselves or accidentally, except in reference to the perfect idea of
their essence. Hence, as the soul is whole in every part of the body,
so is God whole in all things and in each one.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether God is everywhere by essence, presence

and power?
Objection 1: It seems that the mode of God's existence in all things
is not properly described by way of essence, presence and power.
For what is by essence in anything, is in it essentially. But God is not
essentially in things; for He does not belong to the essence of
anything. Therefore it ought not to be said that God is in things by
essence, presence and power.
Objection 2: Further, to be present in anything means not to be
absent from it. Now this is the meaning of God being in things by His
essence, that He is not absent from anything. Therefore the presence
of God in all things by essence and presence means the same thing.
Therefore it is superfluous to say that God is present in things by His
essence, presence and power.
Objection 3: Further, as God by His power is the principle of all
things, so He is the same likewise by His knowledge and will. But it
is not said that He is in things by knowledge and will. Therefore
neither is He present by His power.
Objection 4: Further, as grace is a perfection added to the substance
of a thing, so many other perfections are likewise added. Therefore if
God is said to be in certain persons in a special way by grace, it
seems that according to every perfection there ought to be a special
mode of God's existence in things.
On the contrary, A gloss on the Canticle of Canticles (5) says that,
"God by a common mode is in all things by His presence, power and
substance; still He is said to be present more familiarly in some by
grace" .
I answer that, God is said to be in a thing in two ways; in one way
after the manner of an efficient cause; and thus He is in all things
created by Him; in another way he is in things as the object of
operation is in the operator; and this is proper to the operations of
the soul, according as the thing known is in the one who knows; and
the thing desired in the one desiring. In this second way God is
especially in the rational creature which knows and loves Him
actually or habitually. And because the rational creature possesses