John 6:38
"I came down from heaven not to do My own will, but the will of Him that sent
Me."
What sayest Thou? Why, is Your will one, and His another? That none may
suspect this, He explains it by what follows, saying;

John 6:40
"And this is the will of Him that sent Me, that every one which sees the Son, and
believes in Him, may have everlasting life."
Is not then this Your will? And how sayest Thou, "I have come to send fire
upon the earth, and what have I desired to see, if that be already kindled"? [Luke
12:49] For if Thou also desirest this, it is very clear that Your will and the
Father's is one. In another place also He says, "For as the Father raises up the
dead and quickens them, even so the Son quickens whom He will." [John 5:21]
But what is the will of the Father? Is it not, that not so much as one of them
should perish? This Thou willest also. [Matthew 18:14] So that the will of the
One differs not from the will of the Other. So in another place He is seen
establishing yet more firmly His equality with the Father, saying, "I and My
Father 'will come, and will make Our abode with him.'" [John 14:23] What He
says then is this; "I came not to do anything other than that which the Father
wills, I have no will of My own different from that of the Father, for all that is the
Father's is Mine, and all that is Mine is the Father's." If now the things of the
Father and the Son are in common, He says with reason, "Not that I might do My
own will." But here He speaks not so, but reserves this for the end. For, as I have
said, He conceals and veils for a while high matters, and desires to prove that
had He even said, "This is My will," they would have despised Him. He therefore
says, that "I co-operate with that Will," desiring thus to startle them more; as
though He had said, "What do you think? Do ye anger Me by your disbelief?
Nay, you provoke My Father." "For this is the will of Him that sent Me, that of
all which He has given Me I should lose nothing." [John 6:39] Here He shows
that He needs not their service, that He came not for His own advantage, but for
their salvation; and not to get honor from them. Which indeed He declared in a
former address, saying, "I receive not honor from men" [John 5:41]; and again,
"These things I say that you may be saved." [John 5:34] Since He everywhere

labors to persuade them that He came for their salvation. And He says, that He
obtains honor to the Father, in order that He may not be suspected by them. And
that it is for this reason He thus speaks, He has more clearly revealed by what
follows. For He says, "He that seeks his own will seeks his own glory; but He
that seeks His glory that sent Him is true, and there is no unrighteousness in
Him." [John 7:18] "And this is the will of the Father, that every one which sees
the Son, and believes in Him, may have everlasting life." [John 6:40]
"And I will raise him up at the last day." Why does He continually dwell
upon the Resurrection? Is it that men may not judge of God's providence by
present things alone; that if they enjoy not results here, they become not on that
account desponding, but wait for the things that are to come, and that they may
not, because their sins are not punished for the present, despise Him, but look for
another life.
Now those men gained nothing, but let us take pains to gain by having the
Resurrection continually sounded in our ears; and if we desire to be grasping, or
to steal, or to do any wrong thing, let us straightway take into our thoughts that
Day, let us picture to ourselves the Judgment-seat, for such reflections will check
the evil impulse more strongly than any bit. Let us continually say to others, and
to ourselves, "There is a resurrection, and a fearful tribunal awaits us." If we see
any man insolent and puffed up with the good things of his world, let us make
the same remark to him, and show him that all those things abide here: and if we
observe another grieving and impatient, let us say the same to him, and point out
to him that his sorrows shall have an end; if we see one careless and dissipated,
let us say the same charm over him, and show that for his carelessness he must
render account. This saying is able more than any other remedy to heal our souls.
For there is a Resurrection, and that Resurrection is at our doors, not afar off, nor
at a distance. "For yet a little while, and He that shall come will come, and will
not tarry." [Hebrews 10:37] And again, "We must all appear before the
judgment-seat of Christ" [2 Corinthians 5:10]; that is, both bad and good, the one
to be shamed in sight of all, the other in sight of all to be made more glorious.