they hold that He preached [only] for one year after His baptism. They maintain also that the same
thing was clearly set forth in the case of her who suffered from the issue of blood. For the woman
suffered during twelve years, and through touching the hem of the Saviour's garment she was
made whole by that power which went forth from the Saviour, and which, they affirm, had a previous
existence. For that Power who suffered was stretching herself outwards and flowing into immensity,
so that she was in danger of being dissolved into the general substance [of the Æons]; but then,
touching the primary Tetrad, which is typified by the hem of the garment, she was arrested, and
ceased from her passion.
2. Then, again, as to their assertion that the passion of the twelfth Æon was proved through the
conduct of Judas, how is it possible that Judas can be compared [with this Æon] as being an emblem
of her—he who was expelled from the number of the twelve, and never restored to his place?
For that Æon, whose type they declare Judas to be, after being separated from her Enthymesis, was
restored or recalled [to her former position]; but Judas was deprived [of his office], and cast out,
while Matthias was ordained in his place, according to what is written, "And his bishopric let
another take." They ought therefore to maintain that the twelfth Æon was cast out of the Pleroma,
and that another was produced, or sent forth to fill her place; if, that is to say, she is pointed at in
Judas. Moreover, they tell us that it was the Æon herself who suffered, but Judas was the betrayer,
[and not the sufferer.] Even they themselves acknowledge that it was the suffering Christ, and not
Judas, who came to [the endurance of] passion. How, then, could Judas, the betrayer of Him who
had to suffer for our salvation, be the type and image of that Æon who suffered?
3. But, in truth, the passion of Christ was neither similar to the passion of the Æon, nor did it
take place in similar circumstances. For the Æon underwent a passion of dissolution and destruction,
so that she who suffered was in danger also of being destroyed. But the Lord, our Christ, underwent
a valid, and not a merely accidental passion; not only was He Himself not in danger of being
destroyed, but He also established fallen man by His own strength, and recalled him to
incorruption. The Æon, again, underwent passion while she was seeking after the Father, and was
not able to find Him; but the Lord suffered that He might bring those who have wandered from the
Father, back to knowledge and to His fellowship. The search into the greatness of the Father became
to her a passion leading to destruction; but the Lord, having suffered, and bestowing the knowledge
of the Father, conferred on us salvation. Her passion, as they declare, gave origin to a female
offspring, weak, infirm, unformed, and ineffective; but His passion gave rise to strength and power.
For the Lord, through means of suffering, "ascending into the lofty place, led captivity captive,