4. Let us learn therefore ourselves also to wait upon Jesus; but not for His
bounty in things sensible, lest we be upbraided like the Jews. For "ye seek me,"
says He, "not because ye saw the miracles, but because ye did eat of the loaves,
and were filled." [John 6:26] Therefore neither does He work this miracle
continually, but a second time only; that they might be taught not to be slaves to
their belly, but to cling incessantly to the things of the Spirit.
To these then let us also cling, and let us seek the heavenly bread, and
having received it, let us cast away all worldly care. For if those men left houses,
and cities, and kinsmen, and all, and abode in the wilderness, and when hunger
was pressing, withdrew not; much more ought we, when approaching such a
table, to show forth a more abundant self-command, and to set our love on the
things of the Spirit, and to seek the things of sense as secondary to these.
Since even they were blamed, not because they sought Him for the bread,
but because it was for this only they sought Him, and for this primarily. For
should any one despise the great gifts, but cling to the small, and to those which
the giver would have him despise, he loses these latter too: as on the other hand,
if we love those, He adds these also. For these are but an appendage to the
others; so vile are they and trifling, compared with those, although they be great.
Let us not therefore spend our diligence on them, but account both the
acquisition and loss of them alike indifferent, even as Job also neither clung to
them when present, nor sought them absent. For on this account, they are called
[χρματα], not that we should bury them in the earth, but that we should use them
aright.
And as of artisans every one has his peculiar skill, even so the rich man, as
he knows not how to work in brass, nor to frame ships, nor to weave, nor to
build houses, nor any such thing—let him learn then to use his wealth aright, and
to pity the poor; so shall he know a better art than all those.
For indeed this is above all those arts. Its workshop is built in Heaven. It
has its tools not of iron and brass, but of goodness and of a right will. Of this art
Christ is the Teacher, and His Father. "For be ye merciful," says He, "as your

Father which is in Heaven." [Luke 6:36]
And what is indeed marvellous, being so much superior to the rest, it needs
no labor, no time for its perfection; it is enough to have willed, and the whole is
accomplished.
But let us see also the end thereof, what it is. What then is the end of it?
Heaven, the good things in the heavens, that unspeakable glory, the spiritual
bride-chambers, the bright lamps, the abiding with the Bridegroom; the other
things, which no speech, nor even understanding, is able to set forth.
So that herein likewise great is its difference from all others. For most of
the arts profit us for the present life, but this for the life to come also.
5. But if it so far excels the arts that are necessary to us for the present, as
medicine, for instance, and house-building, and all others like them: much more
the rest, which if any one were nicely to examine, he would not even allow them
to be arts. Wherefore I at least would not call those others, as they are
unnecessary, so much as arts at all. For wherein is delicate cookery and making
sauces profitable to us? Nowhere: yea, they are greatly unprofitable and hurtful,
doing harm both to body and soul, by bringing upon us the parent of all diseases
and sufferings, luxury, together with great extravagance.
But not these only, but not even painting, or embroidery, would I for one
allow to be an art, for they do but throw men into useless expense. But the arts
ought to be concerned with things necessary and important to our life, to supply
and work them up. For to this end God gave us skill at all, that we might invent
methods, whereby to furnish out our life. But that there should be figures either
on walls, or on garments, wherein is it useful, I pray you? For this same cause
the sandal-makers too, and the weavers, should have great retrenchments made
in their art. For most things in it they have carried into vulgar ostentation, having
corrupted its necessary use, and mixed with an honest art an evil craft; which has
been the case with the art of building also. But even as to this, so long as it
builds houses and not theatres, and labors upon things necessary, and not
superfluous, I give the name of an art; so the business of weaving too, as long as