FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.108, C.4.

and whatever a man does for the worship of God, comes under the
head of prayer. And He mentions these three specifically, as they
hold the principal place, and are most often used by men in order to
gain glory. In the second place He taught us that we must not place
our end in riches, when He said: "Lay not up to yourselves treasures
on earth" (Mt. 6:19).
Reply to Objection 5: Our Lord forbade, not necessary, but
inordinate solicitude. Now there is a fourfold solicitude to be avoided
in temporal matters. First, we must not place our end in them, nor
serve God for the sake of the necessities of food and raiment.
Wherefore He says: "Lay not up for yourselves," etc. Secondly, we
must not be so anxious about temporal things, as to despair of
God's help: wherefore Our Lord says (Mt. 6:32): "Your Father
knoweth that you have need of all these things." Thirdly, we must not
add presumption to our solicitude; in other words, we must not be
confident of getting the necessaries of life by our own efforts without
God's help: such solicitude Our Lord sets aside by saying that a man
cannot add anything to his stature (Mt. 6:27). We must not anticipate
the time for anxiety; namely, by being solicitous now, for the needs,
not of the present, but of a future time: wherefore He says (Mt. 6:34):
"Be not . . . solicitous for tomorrow."
Reply to Objection 6: Our Lord did not forbid the judgment of justice,
without which holy things could not be withdrawn from the
unworthy. But he forbade inordinate judgment, as stated above.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.108, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether certain definite counsels are fittingly

proposed in the New Law?
Objection 1: It would seem that certain definite counsels are not
fittingly proposed in the New Law. For counsels are given about that
which is expedient for an end, as we stated above, when treating of
counsel (Question 14, Article 2). But the same things are not
expedient for all. Therefore certain definite counsels should not be
proposed to all.
Objection 2: Further, counsels regard a greater good. But there are
no definite degrees to the greater good. Therefore definite counsels
should not be given.
Objection 3: Further, counsels pertain to the life of perfection. But
obedience pertains to the life of perfection. Therefore it was unfitting
that no counsel of obedience should be contained in the Gospel.
Objection 4: Further, many matters pertaining to the life of perfection
are found among the commandments, as, for instance, "Love your
enemies" (Mt. 5:44), and those precepts which Our Lord gave His
apostles (Mt. 10). Therefore the counsels are unfittingly given in the
New Law: both because they are not all mentioned; and because
they are not distinguished from the commandments.
On the contrary, The counsels of a wise friend are of great use,
according to Prov. (27:9): "Ointment and perfumes rejoice the heart:
and the good counsels of a friend rejoice the soul." But Christ is our
wisest and greatest friend. Therefore His counsels are supremely
useful and becoming.
I answer that, The difference between a counsel and a
commandment is that a commandment implies obligation, whereas a
counsel is left to the option of the one to whom it is given.
Consequently in the New Law, which is the law of liberty, counsels
are added to the commandments, and not in the Old Law, which is
the law of bondage. We must therefore understand the
commandments of the New Law to have been given about matters
that are necessary to gain the end of eternal bliss, to which end the
New Law brings us forthwith: but that the counsels are about matters
that render the gaining of this end more assured and expeditious.