Why! Have I been your benefactor? Why! Did I redeem you, that you look
to me? It is another who has bestowed these things on you. Why do you let go
your Master, and look unto your fellow-servant? Heardest thou not Him saying,
"Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart?" [Matthew 11:29] And again,
"He that would be first among you, let him be servant of all:" and again, "Even
as the Son of Man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister."
[Matthew 20:27-28] And after these things again, lest taking offense at them
who are remiss among your fellow-servants, thou continue in contemptuousness;
to draw you off from that, He says, "I have made myself an example to you, that
as I have done, you should do also." [John 13:15] But have you no teacher of
virtue among those persons that are with you, neither such a one as to lead you
on to these things? More abundant then will be the praise, the commendation
greater, when not even being supplied with teachers you have become one to be
marvelled at.
For this is possible, nay very easy, if we be willing: and this they show, who
first duly performed these things, as for instance, Noah, Abraham,
Melchizedeck, Job, and all the men like them. To them it is needful to look every
day, and not unto these, whom you never cease emulating, and passing about
their names in your assemblies. For nothing else do I hear you saying
everywhere, but such words as these; "Such a one has bought so many acres of
land; such a one is rich, he is building." Why do you stare, O man, at what is
without? Why do you look to others? If you are minded to look to others, look to
them that do their duty, to them that approve themselves, to them that carefully
fulfill the law, not to those that have become offenders, and are in dishonor. For
if you look to these, you will gather hence many evil things, falling into
remissness, into pride, into condemnation of others; but if you reckon over them
that do right, you will lead yourself on unto humility, unto diligence, unto
compunction, unto the blessings that are beyond number.
Hear what the Pharisee suffered, because he let pass them that do right, and
looked to him that had offended; hear and fear.

See how David became one to be marvelled at, because he looked to his
ancestors that were noted for virtue. "For I am a stranger," says he, "and a
sojourner, as all my fathers were." For this man, and all that are like him, let pass
them that had sinned, and thought of those who had approved themselves.
This do thou also. For you are not set to judge of the negligences of which
others have been guilty, nor to inquire into the sins which others are committing;
you are required to do judgment on yourself, not on others. "For if we judged
ourselves," it is said, "we should not be judged, but when we are judged, we are
chastened of the Lord." [1 Corinthians 11:31-32] But you have reversed the
order, of yourself requiring no account of offenses great or small, but being strict
and curious about the offenses of others.
Let us no more do this, but leaving off this disorderly way, let us set up a
tribunal in ourselves for the sins committed by ourselves, becoming ourselves
accusers, and judges, and executioners for our offenses.
But if it be your will to be busy about the things of other men also, busy
yourself about their good works, not their sins, that both by the memory of our
negligences and by our emulation for the good works they have done, and by
setting before ourselves the judgment-seat from which no prayers can deliver,
wounded each day by our conscience as by a kind of goad, we may lead
ourselves on to humility, and a greater diligence, and attain unto the good things
to come, by the grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ; with
whom be to the Father, together with the Holy Ghost, glory, might, honor, now
and always, and world without end. Amen.