THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.75, C.4.

changed into another form; but one form succeeds another in the
subject; and therefore the first form remains only in the potentiality
of matter. But here the substance of the bread is changed into the
body of Christ, as stated above. Hence the conclusion does not
follow.
Reply to Objection 3: Although after the consecration this
proposition is false: "The substance of the breed is something," still
that into which the substance of the bread is changed, is something,
and consequently the substance of the bread is not annihilated.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.75, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether bread can be converted into the body of

Christ?
Objection 1: It seems that bread cannot be converted into the body
of Christ. For conversion is a kind of change. But in every change
there must be some subject, which from being previously in
potentiality is now in act. because as is said in Phys. iii: "motion is
the act of a thing existing in potentiality." But no subject can be
assigned for the substance of the bread and of the body of Christ,
because it is of the very nature of substance for it "not to be in a
subject," as it is said in Praedic. iii. Therefore it is not possible for
the whole substance of the bread to be converted into the body of
Christ.
Objection 2: Further, the form of the thing into which another is
converted, begins anew to inhere in the matter of the thing converted
into it: as when air is changed into fire not already existing, the form
of fire begins anew to be in the matter of the air; and in like manner
when food is converted into non-pre-existing man, the form of the
man begins to be anew in the matter of the food. Therefore, if bread
be changed into the body of Christ, the form of Christ's body must
necessarily begin to be in the matter of the bread, which is false.
Consequently, the bread is not changed into the substance of
Christ's body.
Objection 3: Further, when two things are diverse, one never
becomes the other, as whiteness never becomes blackness, as is
stated in Phys. i. But since two contrary forms are of themselves
diverse, as being the principles of formal difference, so two signate
matters are of themselves diverse, as being the principles of material
distinction. Consequently, it is not possible for this matter of bread
to become this matter whereby Christ's body is individuated, and so
it is not possible for this substance of bread to be changed into the
substance of Christ's body.
On the contrary, Eusebius Emesenus says: "To thee it ought neither
to be a novelty nor an impossibility that earthly and mortal things be
changed into the substance of Christ."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 2), since Christ's true body is
in this sacrament, and since it does not begin to be there by local