John 1:32-34
"And John bare record, saying, I saw the Spirit descending from the heaven like
a dove, and It abode upon Him. And I knew Him not: but He that sent me to
baptize with water, the Same said unto me, Upon whom you shall see the Spirit
descending, and remaining on Him, the same is He which baptizes with the Holy
Ghost. And I saw, and bare record that this is the Son of God."
He puts the "I knew Him not" repeatedly. On what account, and wherefore?
He was His kinsman according to the flesh. "Behold," says the angel, "your
cousin Elisabeth, she also has received a son." [Luke 1:36] That therefore he
might not seem to favor Him because of the relationship, he repeats the "I knew
Him not." And this happened with good reason; for he had passed all his time in
the wilderness away from his father's house.
How then, if he knew Him not before the descent of the Spirit, and if he
then for the first time recognized Him, did he forbid Him before baptism, saying,
"I have need to be baptized by You, and You come to me?" [Matthew 3:14], since
this was a proof that he knew Him very well. Yet he knew Him not before or for
a long time, and with good cause; for the marvels which took place when He was
a child, as the circumstances of the Magi and others the like, had happened long
before, while John himself was very young, and since much time had elapsed in
the interval, He was naturally unknown to all. For had He been known, John
would not have said, "That He should be made manifest to Israel, therefore am I
come baptizing."
3. Hence it remains clear to us, that the miracles which they say belong to
Christ's childhood, are false, and the inventions of certain who bring them into
notice. For if He had begun from His early age to work wonders, neither could
John have been ignorant of Him, nor would the multitude have needed a teacher
to make Him known. But now he says, that for this he has come, "that He might
be made manifest to Israel"; and for this reason he said again, "I have need to be
baptized by You." Afterwards, as having gained more exact knowledge of Him,

he proclaimed Him to the multitude, saying, "This is He of whom I said, After me
comes a Man which is preferred before me." For "He who sent me to baptize with
water," and sent me for this end, "that He should be made manifest to Israel,"
Himself revealed Him even before the descent of the Spirit. Wherefore even
before He came, John said, "One comes after me who is preferred before me."
He knew Him not before he came to Jordan and baptized all men, but when He
was about to be baptized, then he knew Him; and this from the Father revealing
Him to the Prophet, and the Spirit showing Him when He was being baptized to
the Jews, for whose sake indeed the descent of the Spirit took place. For that the
witness of John might not be despised who said, that "He was before me," and
that "He baptizes with the Spirit," and that "He judges the world," the Father
utters a Voice proclaiming the Son, and the Spirit descends, directing that Voice
to the Head of Jesus. For since one was baptizing, the other receiving baptism,
the Spirit comes to correct the idea which some of those present might form, that
the words were spoken of John. So that when he says, "I knew Him not," he
speaks of former time, not that near to His baptism. Otherwise how could he
have forbidden Him, saying, "I have need to be baptized by You"? How could he
have said such words concerning Him?
"But," says one, "how then did not the Jews believe? For it was not John
only that saw the Spirit in the likeness of a dove." It was, because, even if they
did see, such things require not only the eyes of the body, but more than these,
the vision of the understanding, to prevent men from supposing the whole to be a
vain illusion. For if when they saw Him working wonders, touching with His
own hands the sick and the dead, and so bringing them back to life and health,
they were so drunk with malice as to declare the contrary of what they saw; how
could they shake off their unbelief by the descent of the Spirit only? And some
say, that they did not all see it, but only John and those of them who were better
disposed. Because even though it were possible with fleshly eyes to see the
Spirit descending as in the likeness of a dove, still not for this was it absolutely
necessary that the circumstance should be visible to all. For Zacharias saw many