would have no power, while love existed. For sooner would grass endure the
application of fire than the devil the flame of love. She is stronger than any wall,
she is firmer than any adamant; or if you can name any material stronger than
this the firmness of love transcends them all. Her, neither wealth nor poverty
overcomes: nay, rather there would be no poverty, no unbounded wealth, if there
were love, but the good parts only from each estate. For from the one we should
reap its abundance, and from the other its freedom from care: and should neither
have to undergo the anxieties of riches, nor the dread of poverty.
12. And why do I mention the advantages arising from it? Yea, rather
consider how great a blessing it is of itself to exercise love; what cheerfulness it
produces, in how great grace it establishes the soul; a thing which above all is a
choice quality of it. For the other parts of virtue have each their troubles yoked
with them; as fasting, temperance, watching, have envy, concupiscence, and
contempt. But love along with the gain has great pleasure, too, and no trouble,
and like an industrious bee, gathering the sweets from every flower, deposits
them in the soul of him who loves. Though any one be a slave, it renders slavery
sweeter that liberty. For he who loves rejoices not so much in commanding, as in
being commanded, although to command is sweet: but love changes the nature
of things and presents herself with all blessings in her hands, gentler than any
mother, wealthier than any queen, and makes difficulties light and easy, causing
our virtues to be facile, but vice very bitter to us. As thus: to expend seems
grievous, yet love makes it pleasant: to receive other men's goods, pleasant, but
love suffers it not to appear pleasant, but frames our minds to avoid it as an evil.
Again, to speak evil seems to be pleasant to all; but love, while she makes this
out to be bitter, causes speaking well to be pleasant; for nothing is so sweet to us
as to be praising one whom we love. Again, anger has a kind of pleasure; but in
this case no longer, rather all its sinews are taken away. Though he that is
beloved should grieve him who loves him, anger no where shows itself; but tears
and exhortations, and supplications; so far is love from being exasperated: and
should she behold one in error, she mourns and is in pain; yet even this pain

itself brings pleasure. For the very tears and the grief of love, are sweeter than
any mirth and joy. For instance: they that laugh are not so refreshed as they that
weep for their friends. And if you doubt it, stop their tears; and they repine at it
not otherwise than as persons intolerably ill-used. "But there is," said one, "an
unbecoming pleasure in love. " Go away, and hold your peace, whoever you are.
For nothing is so pure from such pleasure as genuine love.
For tell me not of this ordinary sort, the vulgar and low-minded, and a
disease rather than love, but of this which Paul seeks after, which considers the
profit of them that are loved; and you shall see that no fathers are so affectionate
as persons of this stamp. And even as they who love money cannot endure to
spend money, but would with more pleasure be in straits than see their wealth
diminishing: so too, he that is kindly affected towards any one, would choose to
suffer ten thousand evils than see his beloved one injured.
13. "How then," says one, "did the Egyptian woman who loved Joseph wish
to injure him?" Because she loved with this diabolical love. Joseph however not
with this, but with that which Paul requires. Consider then how great a love his
words were tokens of, and the action which she was speaking of. "Insult me and
make me an adulteress, and wrong my husband, and overthrow all my house,
and cast yourself out from your confidence towards God:" which were
expressions of one who so far from loving him did not even love herself. But
because he truly loved, he sought to avert her from all these. And to convince
you that it was in anxiety for her, learn the nature of it from his advice. For he
not only thrust her away, but also introduced an exhortation capable of
quenching every flame: namely "if on my account, my master," says he, "knows
not any thing which is in his house." He at once reminds her of her husband that
he might put her to shame. And he said not, "your husband," but "my master,"
which was more apt to restrain her and induce her to consider who she was, and
of whom she was enamored—a mistress, of a slave. "For if he be lord, then are
you mistress. Be ashamed then of familiarity with a servant, and consider whose
wife you are, and with whom you would be connected, and towards whom you