Euroclydon. And when the ship was caught, and could not bear up into the wind,
we let her drive" (R.V. "were driven.") [Acts 27:10-15] Paul therefore advised
them to remain, and he foretells what would come of it: but they, being in a
hurry, and being prevented by the place, wished to winter at Phenice. Mark then
the providential ordering of the events: first indeed, "when the south wind blew
softly, supposing they had obtained their purpose," they loosed the vessel, and
came forth; then when the wind bore down upon them, they gave way to it
driving them, and were with difficulty saved. "And running under a certain
island which is called Clauda, we had much work to come by the boat: which
when they had taken up, they used helps, undergirding the ship; and, fearing lest
they should fall into the quicksands, strake sail, and so were driven. And we
being exceedingly tossed with a tempest, the next day they lightened the ship;
and the third day we cast out with our own hands the tackling of the ship. And
when neither sun nor stars in many days appeared, and no small tempest lay on
us, all hope that we should be saved was then taken away. But after long
abstinence Paul stood forth in the midst of them, and said, Sirs, you should have
hearkened unto me, and not have loosed from Crete, and to have gained this
harm and loss." [Acts 27:16-21] Then after so great a storm he does not speak as
insultingly over them, but as wishing that at any rate he might be believed for the
future. Wherefore also he alleges what had taken place for a testimony of the
truth of what was about to be said by him. "And now I exhort you to be of good
cheer: for there shall be no loss of any man's life among you, but of the ship. For
there stood by me this night the angel of God, whose I am, and whom I serve,
saying, Fear not, Paul; you must be brought before Cæsar: and, lo God has
given you all them that sail with you. Wherefore, sirs, be of good cheer, for I
believe God, that it shall be even as it was told me. Howbeit we must be cast
upon a certain island." [Acts 27:22-26] And he foretells two things; both that
they must be cast upon an island, and that though the ship would be lost, those
who were in it should be saved— which thing he spoke not of conjecture, but of
prophecy— and that he "must be brought before Cæsar." But this that he says,

"God has given you all," is not spoken boastfully, but in the wish to win those
who were sailing in the ship: for (he spoke thus), not that they might feel
themselves bound to him, but that they might believe what he was saying. "God
has given you;" as much (as to say), They are worthy indeed of death, since they
would not listen to you: however, this is done out of favor to you. "But when the
fourteenth night had come, as we were driven up and down in Adria, about
midnight the shipmen deemed that they drew near to some country; and sounded,
and found it twenty fathoms; and when they had gone a little further, they
sounded again, and found it fifteen fathoms. Then fearing lest they should have
fallen upon rocks, they cast four anchors out of the stern, and wished for the day.
And as the shipmen were about to flee out of the ship, when they had let down
the boat into the sea, under color as though they would have cast anchors out of
the foreship, Paul said to the centurion and to the soldiers, Except these abide in
the ship, you cannot be saved. Then the soldiers cut off the ropes of the boat, and
let her fall off." [Acts 27:27-32] The sailors however, were about to escape,
having no faith in what was said: but the centurion does believe Paul, For he
says, If these flee, "ye cannot be saved:" so saying, not on this account, but that
he might restrain them, and the prophecy might not fall to the ground. See how
as in a church they are instructed by the calmness of Paul's behavior, how he
saved them out of the very midst of the dangers. And it is of providential
ordering that Paul is disbelieved, that after proof of the facts, he might be
believed: which accordingly was the case. And he exhorts them again to take
some meat, and they do as he bids them, and he takes some first, to persuade
them not by word, but also by act, that the storm did them no harm, but rather
was a benefit to their souls. "And while the day was coming on, Paul besought
them all to take meat, saying, This day is the fourteenth day that you have
tarried and continued fasting having taken nothing." [Acts 27:33] (b) And how,
say you, did they go without food, having taken nothing? How did they bear it?
Their fear possessed them, and did not let them fall into a desire of food, being,
as they were, at the point of extreme jeopardy; (f) but they had no care for food.