however, that he was forbidden, but he does it as a subordinate matter. And how
could he fail to write to those, for whom he was willing even to become
accursed? Accordingly he said, 'Know ye that our brother Timothy is set at
liberty; with whom, if he come shortly, I will see you.'
For as yet he was not arrested. Two years then he passed bound, in Rome;
then he was set free; then, having gone into Spain, he saw Jews also in like
manner; and then he returned to Rome, where also he was slain by Nero. The
Epistle to Timothy then was later than this Epistle. For there he says, 'For I am
now ready to be offered'; there also he says, 'In my first answer no man stood
with me.' In many places they [the Hebrew Christians] had to contend with
persecution, as also he says, writing to the Thessalonians, 'You became followers
of the churches of Judaea': and writing to these very persons he says, 'You took
joyfully the spoiling of your goods.' Do you see them contending? And if men
had thus treated the Apostles, not only in Judaea, but also wherever they were
among the Gentiles, what would they not have done to the believers? On this
account, you see, he was very careful for them. For when he says, 'I go unto
Jerusalem to minister unto the saints'; and again, when he exhorts the
Corinthians to beneficence, and says that the Macedonians had already made
their contribution, and says, 'If it be meet that I go also,' --he means this. And
when he says, 'Only that we should remember the poor; the same which I also
was forward to do,'--he declares this. And when he says, 'They gave to me and
Barnabas the right hands of fellowship; that we should go unto the heathen, and
they unto the circumcision,'--he declares this.
But this was not for the sake of the poor who were there, but that by this we
might be partakers in the beneficence. For not as the preaching did we apportion
the care for the poor to each other (we indeed to the Gentiles, but they to the
circumcision). And everywhere you see him using great care for them: as was
reasonable.
Among the other nations indeed, when there were both Jews and Greeks,
such was not the case; but then, while they still seemed to have authority and

independence and to order many things by their own laws, the government not
being yet established nor brought perfectly under the Romans, they naturally
exercised great tyranny. For if in other cities, as in Corinth, they beat the Ruler
of the synagogue before the Deputy's judgment seat, and Gallio 'cared for none
of these things,' but it was not so in Judaea. Thou see indeed, that while in other
cities they bring them to the magistrates, and need help from them. and from the
Gentiles, here they took no thought of this, but assemble a Sanhedrim
themselves and slay whom they please. Thus in fact they put Stephen to death,
thus they beat the Apostles, not taking them before rulers. Thus also they were
about to put Paul to death, had not the chief captain thrown himself [upon them].
For this took place while the priests, while the temple, while the ritual, the
sacrifices were vet standing. Look indeed at Paul himself being tried before the
High Priest, and saying,' I knew not that he was the High Priest,' and this in the
presence of the Ruler. For they had then great power. Consider then what things
they were likely to suffer who dwelt in Jerusalem and Judaea.
He then who prays to become accursed for those who were not yet
believers, and who so ministers to the faithful, as to journey himself, if need be,
and who everywhere took great care of them;--let us not wonder if he encourage
and comfort them by letters also, and if he set them upright when tottering and
fallen. For in a word, they were worn down and despairing on account of their
manifold afflictions. And this he shows near the end, saying, 'Wherefore lift up
the hands that hang down, and the feeble knees'; and again, 'Yet a little while, he
that shall come will come, and will not tarry'; and again, 'If ye be without
chastisement, . . . then are ye bastards and not sons.'
For since they were Jews and learned from the fathers that they must expect
both their good and their evil immediately and must live accordingly, but then
[when the Gospel came] the opposite was [taught]--their good things being in
hope and after death, their evils in hand, though they had patiently endured
much, it was likely that many would be fainthearted;--hereon he discourses.
But we will unfold these things at a fit opportunity. At present: he of