gave gifts to men," and conferred on those that believe in Him the power "to tread upon serpents
and scorpions, and on all the power of the enemy," that is, of the leader of apostasy. Our Lord
also by His passion destroyed death, and dispersed error, and put an end to corruption, and destroyed
ignorance, while He manifested life and revealed truth, and bestowed the gift of incorruption. But
their Æon, when she had suffered, established ignorance, and brought forth a substance without
shape, out of which all material works have been produced—death, corruption, error, and such like.
4. Judas, then, the twelfth in order of the disciples, was not a type of the suffering Æon, nor,
again, was the passion of the Lord; for these two things have been shown to be in every respect
mutually dissimilar and inharmonious. This is the case not only as respects the points which I have
already mentioned, but with regard to the very number. For that Judas the traitor is the twelfth in
order, is agreed upon by all, there being twelve apostles mentioned by name in the Gospel. But this
Æon is not the twelfth, but the thirtieth; for, according to the views under consideration, there were
not twelve Æons only produced by the will of the Father, nor was she sent forth the twelfth in order:
they reckon her, [on the contrary,] as having been produced in the thirtieth place. How, then, can
Judas, the twelfth in order, be the type and image of that Æon who occupies the thirtieth place?
5. But if they say that Judas in perishing was the image of her Enthymesis, neither in this way
will the image bear any analogy to that truth which [by hypothesis] corresponds to it. For the
Enthymesis having been separated from the Æon, and itself afterwards receiving a shape from
Christ, then being made a partaker of intelligence by the Saviour, and having formed all things
which are outside of the Pleroma, after the image of those which are within the Pleroma, is said at
last to have been received by them into the Pleroma, and, according to [the principle of] conjunction,
to have been united to that Saviour who was formed out of all. But Judas having been once for all
cast away, never returns into the number of the disciples; otherwise a different person would not
have been chosen to fill his place. Besides, the Lord also declared regarding him, "Woe to the man
by whom the Son of man shall be betrayed;" and, "It were better for him if he had never been
born;" and he was called the "son of perdition" by Him. If, however, they say that Judas was
a type of the Enthymesis, not as separated from the Æon, but of the passion entwined with her,
neither in this way can the number twelve be regarded as a [fitting] type of the number three. For
in the one case Judas was cast away, and Matthias was ordained instead of him; but in the other