Ps. xcvi. 1.

greater [gifts]; as also the Lord said to His disciples: "Ye shall see greater things than these."
And Paul declares: "Not that I have already attained, or that I am justified, or already have been
made perfect. For we know in part, and we prophesy in part; but when that which is perfect has
come, the things which are in part shall be done away." As, therefore, when that which is perfect
is come, we shall not see another Father, but Him whom we now desire to see (for "blessed are the
pure in heart: for they shall see God"); neither shall we look for another Christ and Son of God,
but Him who [was born] of the Virgin Mary, who also suffered, in whom too we trust, and whom
we love; as Esaias says: "And they shall say in that day, Behold our Lord God, in whom we have
trusted, and we have rejoiced in our salvation;" and Peter says in his Epistle: "Whom, not seeing,
ye love; in whom, though now ye see Him not, ye have believed, ye shall rejoice with joy
unspeakable;" neither do we receive another Holy Spirit, besides Him who is with us, and who
cries, "Abba, Father;" and we shall make increase in the very same things [as now], and shall
make progress, so that no longer through a glass, or by means of enigmas, but face to face, we shall
enjoy the gifts of God;—so also now, receiving more than the temple, and more than Solomon,
that is, the advent of the Son of God, we have not been taught another God besides the Framer and
the Maker of all, who has been pointed out to us from the beginning; nor another Christ, the Son
of God, besides Him who was foretold by the prophets.
3. For the new covenant having been known and preached by the prophets, He who was to carry
it out according to the good pleasure of the Father was also preached, having been revealed to men
as God pleased; that they might always make progress through believing in Him, and by means of
the [successive] covenants, should gradually attain to perfect salvation. For there is one salvation
and one God; but the precepts which form the man are numerous, and the steps which lead man to
God are not a few. It is allowable for an earthly and temporal king, though he is [but] a man, to
grant to his subjects greater advantages at times: shall not this then be lawful for God, since He is
[ever] the same, and is always willing to confer a greater [degree of] grace upon the human race,
and to honour continually with many gifts those who please Him? But if this be to make progress,

Isa. xxv. 9.
written alike. The same word ("profectus") occurs again almost immediately, with an evident reference to and comparison with
this clause.

[namely,] to find out another Father besides Him who was preached from the beginning; and again,
besides him who is imagined to have been discovered in the second place, to find out a third other,
—then the progress of this man will consist in his also proceeding from a third to a fourth; and
from this, again, to another and another: and thus he who thinks that he is always making progress
of such a kind, will never rest in one God. For, being driven away from Him who truly is [God],
and being turned backwards, he shall be for ever seeking, yet shall never find out God; but shall
continually swim in an abyss without limits, unless, being converted by repentance, he return to
the place from which he had been cast out, confessing one God, the Father, the Creator, and believing
[in Him] who was declared by the law and the prophets, who was borne witness to by Christ, as
He did Himself declare to those who were accusing His disciples of not observing the tradition of
the elders: "Why do ye make void the law of God by reason of your tradition? For God said, Honour
thy father and mother; and, Whosoever curseth father or mother, let him die the death." And
again, He says to them a second time: "And ye have made void the word of God by reason of
your tradition;" Christ confessing in the plainest manner Him to be Father and God, who said in
the law, "Honour thy father and mother; that it may be well with thee." For the true God did
confess the commandment of the law as the word of God, and called no one else God besides His
own Father.