What then was our state? Hear Paul say; "For we ourselves also were sometime
foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving various lusts and pleasures, hateful, and
hating one another" [Titus 3:3]; and again, "We were by nature children of
wrath." [Ephesians 2:3] But God seeing us as it were confined in a prison-house,
and bound with grievous chains, far more grievous than those of iron, was not
ashamed of us, but came and entered the prison, and, though we deserved ten
thousand punishments, both brought us out from hence, and brought us to a
kingdom, and made us more glorious than the heaven, that we also might do the
same according to our power. For when He says to His disciples, "If I, your Lord
and Master, have washed your feet, you also ought to wash one another's feet;
for I have given you an example, that you should do as I have done to you" [John
13:14], He writes this law not merely for the washing the feet, but also in all the
other acts which He manifested towards us. Is it a manslayer who inhabits the
prison? Yet let not us be weary in doing Him good. Is it a tomb-breaker, or an
adulterer? Let us pity not his wickedness, but his calamity. But often, as I before
said, one will be found there worth ten thousand; and if you go continually to the
prisoners, you shall not miss so great a prize. For as Abraham, by entertaining
even common guests, once met with Angels, so shall we meet with great men
too, if we make the action a business. And if I may make a strange assertion, he
who entertains a great man is not so worthy of praise as he who receives the
wretched and miserable. For the former has, in his own life, no slight occasion of
being well treated, but the other, rejected and given up by all, has one only
harbor, the pity of his benefactor; so that this most of all is pure kindness. He,
moreover, who shows attention to an admired and illustrious man, does it often
for ostentation among men, but he who tends the abject and despairing, does it
only because of the command of God. Wherefore, if we make a feast, we are
bidden to entertain the lame and halt, and if we do works of mercy, we are
bidden to do them to the least and meanest. "For," It says, "inasmuch as you
have done it unto one of the least of these, you have done it unto Me." [Matthew
25:45] Knowing, therefore, the treasure which is laid up in that place, let us enter

continually, and make it our business, and turn there our eager feelings about
theaters. If you have nothing to contribute, contribute the comfort of your words.
For God recompenses not only him that feeds, but him also who goes in. When
you enter and arouses the trembling and fearful soul, exhorting, succoring,
promising assistance, teaching it true wisdom, you shall thence reap no small
reward. For if you should speak in such manner outside the prison, many will
even laugh, being dissipated by their excessive luxury: but those who are in
adversity, having their minds humbled, shall meekly attend to your words, and
praise them, and become better men. Since even when Paul preached, the Jews
often derided him, but the prisoners listened with much stillness. For nothing
renders the soul so fit for heavenly wisdom as calamity and temptation, and the
pressure of affliction. Considering all these things, and how much good we shall
work both to those within the prison, and to ourselves, by being continually
mixed up with them, let us there spend the time we used to spend in the marketplace, and in unseasonable occupations, that we may both win them and gladden
ourselves, and by causing God to be glorified, may obtain the everlasting
blessings, through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, by
whom and with whom, to the Father and the Holy Ghost, be glory for ever and
ever. Amen.