flame of ungodliness, He, signifying from the first that He means to correct and
amend both, and inducing men hereby to expect His bounties in regard of the
whole world likewise, sent to the one the wise men, the other He Himself visited
with His mother.
And besides what I have said, there is another lesson also, which we are
hereby taught, tending not slightly to true self-command in us. Of what kind then
is it? To look from the beginning for temptations and plots. See, for instance,
how this was the case even at once from His swaddling clothes. Thus you see at
His birth, first a tyrant raging, then flight ensuing, and departure beyond the
border; and for no crime His mother is exiled into the land of the barbarians: that
you, hearing these things (supposing you thought worthy to minister to any
spiritual matter, and then to see yourself suffering incurable ills, and enduring
countless dangers), should not be greatly troubled, nor say, "What can this be?
Yet surely I ought to be crowned and celebrated, and be glorious and illustrious
for fulfilling the Lord's commandment:" but that having this example, you might
bear all things nobly, knowing that this especially is the order of all things
spiritual, to have everywhere temptations in the same lot with them. See at least
how this is the case not only with regard to the mother of the young Child, but
also of those barbarians; since they for their part retire secretly in the condition
of fugitives; and she again, who had never passed over the threshold of her
house, is commanded to undergo so long a journey of affliction, on account of
this wonderful birth, and her spiritual travail.
And behold a wonder again. Palestine plots, and Egypt receives and
preserves Him that is the object of the plots. For, as it appears, not only in the
instance of the sons of the patriarch did types take place, but also in our Lord's
own case. In many instances, we are sure, His doings at that time were prophetic
declarations of what was to happen afterwards; as, for example, in the matter of
the ass and the colt.
4. Now the angel having thus appeared, talks not with Mary, but with
Joseph; and what says he? "Arise, and take the young Child and His mother."

Here, he says not any more, "your wife," but "His mother." For after that the
birth had taken place, and the suspicion was done away, and the husband
appeased, thenceforth the angel talks openly, calling neither child nor wife his,
but "take the young Child and His mother, and flee into Egypt;" and he mentions
the cause of the flight: "For Herod," says he, "will seek the young Child's life."
Joseph, when he had heard these things, was not offended, nether did he
say, "The thing is hard to understand: Did you not say just now, that He should
save His people?' and now He saves not even Himself: but we must fly, and go
far from home, and be a long time away: the facts are contrary to the promise."
Nay, none of these things does he say (for the man was faithful): neither is he
curious about the time of his return; and this though the angel had put it
indefinitely thus: "Be there until I tell you." But nevertheless, not even at this did
he shudder, but submits and obeys, undergoing all the trials with joy.
And this because God, who is full of love to man, did with these hardships
mingle things pleasant also; which indeed is His way with regard to all the
saints, making neither their dangers nor their refreshment continual, but weaving
the life of all righteous men, out of both the one and the other. This very thing
He did here also: for consider, Joseph saw the Virgin with child; this cast him
into agitation and the utmost trouble, for he was suspecting the damsel of
adultery. But straightway the angel was at hand to do away his suspicion, and
remove his fears; and seeing the young child born, he reaped the greatest joy.
Again, this joy no trifling danger succeeds, the city being troubled, and the king
in his madness seeking after Him that was born. But this trouble was again
succeeded by another joy; the star, and the adoration of the wise men. Again,
after this pleasure, fear and danger; "For Herod," says he, "is seeking the young
Child's life," and He must needs fly and withdraw Himself as any mortal might:
the working of miracles not being seasonable as yet. For if from His earliest
infancy He had shown forth wonders, He would not have been accounted a Man.
Because of this, let me add, neither is a temple framed at once; but a regular
conception takes place, and a time of nine months, and pangs, and a delivery,