taken you but such as man can bear." [1 Corinthians 10:13] Be then our
sufferings what they may, let us look round on what is worse; (for we shall find
such,) and thus shall we be thankful. And above all, let us give thanks for all
things continually; for so, both these things will be eased, and we shall live to
the glory of God, and obtain the promised good things, whereunto may all we
attain, through the grace and love toward man, etc.

## Homily 9 on Colossians

[Colossians 3:16, 17]
"Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom; teaching and
admonishing one another with psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing
with grace in your hearts to God. And whatsoever you do in word or in deed, do
all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God the Father through Him."
Having exhorted them to be thankful, he shows also the way, that, of which
I have lately discoursed to you. And what does he say? "Let the word of Christ
dwell in you richly"; or rather not this way alone, but another also. For I indeed
said that we ought to reckon up those who have suffered things more terrible,
and those who have undergone sufferings more grievous than ours, and to give
thanks that such have not fallen to our lot; but what does he say? "Let the word
of Christ dwell in you"; that is, the teaching, the doctrines, the exhortation,
wherein He says, that the present life is nothing, nor yet its good things. If we
know this, we shall yield to no hardships whatever. Matthew 6:25, etc./span>
"Let it dwell in you," he says, "richly," not simply dwell, but with great
abundance. Hearken ye, as many as are worldly, and have the charge of wife and
children; how to you too he commits especially the reading of the Scriptures and
that not to be done lightly, nor in any sort of way, but with much earnestness. For
as the rich in money can bear fine and damages, so he that is rich in the doctrines
of philosophy will bear not poverty only, but all calamities also easily, yea, more
easily than that one. For as for him, by discharging the fine, the man who is rich
must needs be impoverished, and found wanting, and if he should often suffer in
that way, will no longer be able to bear it, but in this case it is not so; for we do
not even expend our wholesome thoughts when it is necessary for us to bear
anything we would not choose, but they abide with us continually. And mark the
wisdom of this blessed man. He said not, "Let the word of Christ" be in you,

simply, but what? "dwell in you," and "richly."
"In all wisdom, teaching and admonishing one another." "In all," says he.
Virtue he calls wisdom, and lowliness of mind is wisdom, and almsgiving, and
other such like things, are wisdom; just as the contraries are folly, for cruelty too
comes of folly. Whence in many places it calls the whole of sin folly. "The fool,"
says one, "has said in his heart, There is no God" [Psalm 14:1]; and again, "My
wounds stink and are corrupt from the face of my foolishness." [Psalm 38:5,
Septuagint] For what is more foolish, tell me, than one who indeed wraps
himself about in his own garments, but regards not his brethren that are naked;
who feeds dogs, and cares not that the image of God is famishing; who is merely
persuaded that human things are nought, and yet clings to them as if immortal.
As then nothing is more foolish than such an one, so is nothing wiser than one
that achieves virtue. For mark; how wise he is, says one. He imparts of his
substance, he is pitiful, he is loving to men, he has well considered that he bears
a common nature with them; he has well considered the use of wealth, that it is
worthy of no estimation; that one ought to be sparing of bodies that are of kin to
one, rather than of wealth. He that is a despiser of glory is wholly wise, for he
knows human affairs; the knowledge of things divine and human, is philosophy.
So then he knows what things are divine, and what are human, and from the one
he keeps himself, on the other he bestows his pains. And he knows how to give
thanks also to God in all things, he considers the present life as nothing;
therefore he is neither delighted with prosperity, nor grieved with the opposite
condition.
Tarry not, I entreat, for another to teach you; you have the oracles of God.
No man teaches you as they; for he indeed oft grudges much for vainglory's sake
and envy. Hearken, I entreat you, all you that are careful for this life, and procure
books that will be medicines for the soul. If you will not any other, yet get you at
least the New Testament, the Apostolic Epistles, the Acts, the Gospels, for your
constant teachers. If grief befall you, dive into them as into a chest of medicines;
take thence comfort of your trouble, be it loss, or death, or bereavement of