who believes in Him should not perish." [John 3:16] And again Paul says "If
being enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of His Son."
[Romans 5:10] The cross is the impregnable wall, the invulnerable shield, the
safeguard of the rich, the resource of the poor, the defence of those who are
exposed to snares, the armour of those who are attacked, the means of
suppressing passion, and of acquiring virtue, the wonderful and marvellous sign.
"For this generation seeks after a sign: and no sign shall be given it save the
sign of Jonas;" [Matthew 12:39] and again Paul says, "for the Jews ask for a
sign and the Greeks seek wisdom, but we preach Christ crucified."
[1 Corinthians 1:22] The cross opened Paradise, it brought in the robber, it
conducted into the kingdom of Heaven the race of man which was about to
perish, and was not worthy even of earth. So great are the benefits which have
sprung and do spring from the cross, and yet does He not desire to be crucified I
ask? Who would venture to say this? And if He did not desire it who compelled
Him, who forced Him to it? And why did He send prophets beforehand
announcing that He would be crucified, if He was not to be, and did not wish to
undergo it? And for what reason does He call the cross a cup, if He did not
desire to be crucified? For that is the word of one who signifies the desire which
he has concerning the act. For as the cup is sweet to those who are thirsty so also
was crucifixion to Him: wherefore also He said "With desire have I desired to eat
this Passover with you," [Luke 22:15] and this He meant not absolutely, but
relatively, because after that evening the cross was awaiting Him.
3. He then who calls the thing glory, and rebukes the disciple because he
was trying to hinder Him, and proves that what constitutes the good shepherd is
his sacrificing himself on behalf of the sheep, and declares that he earnestly
longs for this thing, and willingly goes to meet it, how is it that He beseeches it
may not come to pass? And if He did not wish it what difficulty was there in
hindering those who came for that purpose? But in fact you behold Him
hastening towards the deed. At least when they came upon Him He said "Whom
do you seek?" and they replied "Jesus." Then He says to them "Lo! I am He: and

they went backward and fell to the ground." [John 18:6] Thus having first
crippled them and proved that He was able to escape their hands, He then
surrendered Himself, that you might learn that not by compulsion or force, or the
tyrannical power of those who attacked Him, did He unwillingly submit to this,
but willingly with purpose and desire, preparing for it a long time before.
Therefore also were prophets sent beforehand, and patriarchs foretold the events,
and by means of words and deeds the cross was prefigured. For the sacrifice of
Isaac also signified the cross to us: wherefore also Christ said "Abraham your
father rejoiced to see my glory and he saw it and was glad." [John 8:56] The
patriarch then was glad beholding the image of the cross, and does He Himself
deprecate it? Thus Moses also prevailed over Amalek when he displayed the
figure of the cross: and one may observe countless things happening in the Old
Testament descriptive by anticipation of the cross. For what reason then was this
the case if He who was to be crucified did not wish it to come to pass? And the
sentence which follows this is yet more perplexing. For having said Let this cup
pass from me He added "nevertheless not as I will but as You will."
[Matthew 26:39] For herein as far as the actual expression is concerned we find
two wills opposed to one another: if at least the Father desires Him to be
crucified, but He Himself does not desire it. And yet we everywhere behold Him
desiring and purposing the same things as the Father. For when He says "grant to
them, as I and Thou are one that they also may be one in us," [John 17:11] it is
equivalent to saying that the purpose of the Father and of the Son is one. And
when He says "The words which I speak I speak not myself, but the Father which
dwells in me, He does these works," [John 14:10] He indicates the same thing.
And when He says "I have not come of myself" [John 7:28] and "I can of my own
self do nothing" [John 5:30] he does not say this as signifying that He has been
deprived of authority, either to speak or to act (away with the thought!), but as
desiring to prove the concord of his purpose, both in words and deeds, and in
every kind of transaction, to be one and the same with the Father, as I have
already frequently demonstrated. For the expression "I speak not of myself" is