Intellectus, he mentions his having seen a thirteenth and fourteenth book of Aristotle's
Metaphysics, but declines further reference to them as being "not yet translated into our
tongue." St Thomas and the mediaeval architects had genius, the fruits of which we still
admire: but they had not at hand the manifold adminicula of the modern builder and the
modern scholar. Nor was Averroes and the Arabian school any better off for Greek than
St Thomas (Renan, p. 48). To this particular explanation of Aristotle however the
Commentator would have been at no loss for a reply. The Greek referred to is De
anima, II, i, 6, 8. Aristotle adds (n. 12), after saying that some parts of the soul are not
separable from the body: "There is nothing to prevent some parts of the soul being
separable from the body, because they are actualisations of nothing corporeal." A
conclusion seems to follow, the very opposite of that which St Thomas draws, and
exactly what Averroes wishes, namely, that the intellectual part of the soul is not the
actualisation, or form, of anything corporeal, but dwells apart from all body. In the above
quoted Opusculum, `De unitate intellectus contra Averroistas, which I take to be a later
production, St Thomas recognises the force of this reply, and re-adjusts his position
thus: "The intellect is a faculty of the soul, and the soul is the form of the body: but the
power that is called intellect is not the actualisation of any bodily organ, because the
activity of the body has nothing in common with the activity of intellect." Intellectus est
potentia animae, quae est corporis forma, licet ipsa potentia, quae est intellectus, non
est alicujus organi actus, quia nihil ipsius operationi communicat corporis operatio (De
unitate intellectus, cap. iii). So also Chap.LXVIII, last paragraph, and in Chap.

such passages as De anima, II, iii, 5; III, v, 3; and especially De gen. animal, II, iii, 10.
leipetai de ton noun monon thurathen epeisienai kai theion einai monon (the conclusion
remains, that intelligence alone comes in from without and is alone divine). Some preexistence of the intellectual soul seems necessary in the Aristotelian system, as
Aristotle nowhere recognises the notion of creation out of nothing, any more than Plato.
He differs from Plato in being opposed to the transmigration of souls (De anima, I, iii,
26); and in his reticence upon a point upon which Plato was very explicit, the
individuality of separate souls after death.

## CHAPTER LXII--Against the Opinion of Alexander concerning the Potential Intellect

when man comes to have actual intellectual cognition from having had such cognition
potentially, he needs to understand not merely by some intelligible impression
actualising his understanding, but likewise by some intellectual faculty as the principle of
such activity. Besides, an impression is not in actual understanding except so far as it is
purified from particular and material being. But this cannot happen so long as it remains
in any material faculty, that is to say, in any faculty either caused by material principles
or actualising a material organ. Therefore there must be posited in us some immaterial
intellectual faculty, and that is the potential intellect.