coming in upon them and straightway departing. Now, both his friends learn all
clearly; and the aliens also learn, if they had a mind, but they had not. The same
thing happened in the case of Christ. "Tell these things," he says, "to James, and
to the brethren." How free from all vainglory! Nor did he say, Make known these
things to people everywhere, but, "to the brethren. And he withdrew to another
place:" for he did not tempt God, nor fling himself into temptation: since, when
they were commanded to do this, then they did it. "Go," it was said, "speak in
the temple to the people." [Acts 5:20] But this the Angel said not (here); on the
contrary, by silently removing him and bringing him out by night, he gave him
free permission to withdraw— and this too is done, that we may learn that many
things are providentially brought about after the manner of men— so that he
should not again fall into peril.— For that they may not say, "It was his Angel,"
after he had gone, they say this first, and then they see himself overthrowing
their notion of the matter. Had it been the Angel, he would have knocked at the
door, would not have retired to another place. And what followed in the day,
make them sure.
"So Peter was kept in the prison," etc. [Acts 12:5] They, being at large,
were at prayer: he, bound, was in sleep. "And he knew not that it was true." [Acts
12:9] If he thought it was true that was happening, he would have been
astonished, he would not have remembered (all the circumstances): but now,
seeming to be in a dream, he was free from perturbation. "When," it says, "they
were past the first and the second ward"— see also how strong the guard was—
"they came unto the iron gate." [Acts 12:10] "Now know I that the Lord has sent
His Angel." [Acts 12:11] Why is not this effected by themselves? (I answer,) By
this also the Lord honors them, that by the ministry of His Angels he rescues
them. Then why was it not so in the case of Paul? There with good reason,
because the jailer was to be converted, whereas here, it was only that the Apostle
should be released. [Acts 16:25] And God disposes all things in various ways.
And there too, it is beautiful, that Paul sings hymns, while here Peter was asleep.
"And when he had considered, he came to the house of Mary," etc. [Acts 12:12]

Then let us not hide God's marvels, but for our own good let us study to display
these abroad for the edifying of the others. For as he deserves to be admired for
choosing to be put into bonds, so is he worthy of more admiration, that he
withdrew not until he had reported all to his friends. "And he said, Tell James
and the brethren." [Acts 12:17] That they may rejoice: that they may not be
anxious. Through these those learn, not those through him: such thought had he
for the humbler part!—
Truly, nothing better than affliction not above measure ([συμμέτρου]). What
think you must have been their state of mind— how full of delight! Where now
are those women, who sleep the whole night through? Where are those men,
who do not even turn themselves in their bed? Do you see the watchful soul?
With women, and children, and maid-servants, they sang hymns to God, made
purer than the sky by affliction. But now, if we see a little danger, we fall back.
Nothing ever was more splendid than that Church. Let us imitate these, let us
emulate them. Not for this was the night made, that we should sleep all through
it and be idle. To this bear witness the artisans, the carriers, and the merchants
(to this), the Church of God rising up in the midst of the night. Rise thou up also,
and behold the quire of the stars, the deep silence, the profound repose:
contemplate with awe the order ([οἰκονομίαν]) of your Master's household. Then
is your soul purer: it is lighter, and subtler, and soaring disengaged: the darkness
itself, the profound silence, are sufficient to lead you to compunction. And if
also thou look to the heavens studded with its stars, as with ten thousand eyes, if
you bethink you that all those multitudes who in the daytime are shouting,
laughing, frisking, leaping, wronging, grasping, threatening, inflicting wrongs
without number, lie all one as dead, you will condemn all the self-willedness of
man. Sleep has invaded and defeated ([ἡ] [λεγξεν]) nature: it is the image of
death, the image of the end of all things. If thou (look out of window and) lean
over into the street, you will not hear even a sound: if you look into the house,
you will see all lying as it were in a tomb. All this is enough to arouse the soul,
and lead it to reflect on the end of all things.