My dear Father in Christ, Master John Francis: I have read your letter to Master Andrew, and feel convinced that your good will and fervent desire to serve God have prompted you to write as you have. It is clear, however, that you have gone beyond the limits of holy obedience and her mother, humility, in thus manifesting an opinion that differs from and is even opposed to that of Father Master Salmerón, whose mind you wish to change as though he had made a mistake. And yet, if you remember that he is superior with the light of learning and prudence and experience that are his, to say nothing of the special help and light he receives from God our Lord to direct him in his duty as head of the college, you would see that it is easier for your judgment to be wrong than his, and that you ought to be more willing to submit your judgment to his than to set aside his for yours. For myself, I believe that Father Salmerón would not have forbidden these ladies to receive the sacraments in your church except for grave reasons. While he does not write me so, I fancy that the proximity of their house to the college could give rise to some suspicion. There might, of course, be a different reason known to him who has a more general view of the situation than has he who looks at it from a single point of view. It is because of this special love I bear your reverence that I wish to bring this to your attention. I commend myself to the prayers and sacrifices of your charity.

September 16, 1554.

1 Araldo was born in Cagli, near Pesaro, Italy, in 1522. He entered the Society in Rome on February 24, 1551, after serving Cardinal Rodolfo Pio di Carpi, the Society's Cardinal Protector, as secretary for seven years. In January 1552 Araldo went in the first group of Jesuits to open a college in Naples, where he was ordained on February 4, 1553. The notes he used for teaching Christian doctrine to his students were published in 1553 as Compendio della dottrina cristiana , one of the first Jesuit attempts at producing a catechism. In 1554, the year of the Feliciana affair, Araldo also initiated among the laity of Naples two successful sodalities or congregations (one for men, the other for women), whose members received the sacraments regularly, taught catechism, visited hospitals, reconciled enemies, and encouraged others to the frequent reception of the sacraments. Araldo was called to Rome in 1569, but returned to Naples in 1577, and died there on May 10, 1599. 2 When Araldo went to Naples, Oviedo was the superior of the group and the first rector of the new college. Having been named a bishop, Oviedo was in Rome waiting to set out for Lisbon, whence he would embark for Ethiopia.

# 37. TO BARTOLOMEO ROMANO

On the Need for Interior Change

Rome, January 26, 1555

Bartolomeo 1 was a scholastic at the college in Ferrara, and from various reports sent to Rome it appears that he was discontented, and had complained about the school and the Jesuits in his community. Ignatius took no action until he had a chance to hear from Bartolomeo himself, and so he had Polanco write to him on November 24, 1554 [ Ep . 8:96]. Bartolomeo answered Ignatius toward the end of December or early January, but his letter has not survived. From Ignatius' response, however, we conclude that Bartolomeo was attributing his internal disquiet to his work at the college, his superiors, and those with whom he was living and, consequently, he requested a change of residence. In answering him Ignatius tells him that it is his conduct that must change and not his place of residence. Bartolomeo's disquiet was coming from within him; unless that part of him changes, he will not be happy anywhere. Ignatius, therefore, exhorts him to practice humility, obedience, and self-denial. Finally, showing his interest in the young man, Ignatius asks him to write every month describing his progress in virtue and in studies. Ignatius' letter was written in Italian [ Ep . 8:328-329].