when thou hear what Christ there declares concerning oaths, shudder and desist!
What then does He there say concerning oaths? "But I say unto you, Swear not at
all." [Matthew 5:34] And do you convert the Law which forbids swearing into
an oath. Oh, what contempt! Oh, what outrage! For you do just the same thing as
if any one should bid the lawgiver, who prohibits murder, become himself a
party to the murder. Not so much do I lament and weep, when I hear that some
persons are slain upon the highway, as I groan, and shed tears, and am horrified,
when I see any one coming near this Table, placing his hands upon it, and
touching the Gospels, and swearing! Are you in doubt, I ask, concerning money,
and would you slay a soul? What do you gain to match the injury you do to your
own soul, and to your neighbour? If you believe that the man is true, do not
impose the obligation of the oath; but if you know him to be a liar, do not force
him to commit perjury. "But that I may have a full assurance:" says one. Verily,
when you have not sworn him, then you will receive a good and full assurance.
15. For now, when you have returned home, you will be continually the
prey of conscience, while reasoning thus with yourself; "Was it to no purpose,
then, that I put him upon his oath? Was he not really perjured? Have I not
become the cause of the sin?" But if you dost not put him upon his oath, you will
receive much consolation on returning home, rendering thanks to God, and
saying, "Blessed be God, that I restrained myself, and did not compel him to
swear vainly, and to no purpose. Away with gold! Perish the money!" for that
which specially gives us assurance is, that we did not transgress the law, nor
compel another to do it. Consider, for Whose sake thou did not put any one on
his oath; and this will suffice you for refreshment and consolation. Often, indeed,
when a fight takes place, we bear being insulted with fortitude, and we say to the
insulter, "What shall I do with you? Such an one hinders me, who is your patron;
he keeps back my hands." And this is sufficient to console us. So when you are
about to put any one on his oath, restrain yourself; and stop; and say to him who
is about to swear, "What shall I do with you? God has forbidden me to put any
one on oath. He now holds me back." This suffices both for the honour of the

Lawgiver, and for your safety, and for keeping him in fear who is ready to swear.
For when he sees that we are thus afraid to put others on oath, much more will
he himself be afraid to swear rashly. Would you say thus, your return to your
own home would be with much fullness of assurance. Hear God, therefore, in
His Commandments, that He may Himself hear you in your prayers! This word
shall be written in heaven, and shall stand by you on the Day of Judgment, and
shall discharge many sins.
16. This also let us consider not only with respect to an oath, but to every
thing. And when we are about to do any good action for God's sake, and it is
found to bring loss with it, let us look not merely at the loss connected with the
matter, but at the gain which we shall reap by doing it for God. That is to say,
Hath any one insulted you? Bear it nobly! And you will do so, if you think not of
the insult merely, but of the dignity of Him who commands you to bear it, and
you bear it meekly. Have you given an alms? Think not of the outlay, but of the
produce which arises from the outlay. Have you been mulcted of money? Give
thanks, and regard not only the pain which is the result of the loss, but the gain
which comes of thanksgiving. If we thus regulate ourselves, none of those heavy
events which may befal us will give us pain; but from those things which may
seem to be grievous, we shall be even gainers, and loss will be sweeter and more
desired than wealth, pain than pleasure, and mirth and insult than honour. Thus
all things adverse will turn to our gain. And here we shall enjoy much
tranquillity, and there we shall attain the kingdom of heaven; which God grant
that we may all be deemed worthy to obtain, by the grace and lovingkindness of
our Lord Jesus Christ, through Whom and with Whom, to the Father with the
Holy Spirit, be glory, dominion, and honour, now and ever, and world without
end. Amen.