It is as yet, he means, hidden, but not so to the faithful.
"And," again, "what is the riches of the glory of His inheritance in the
saints."
This too is as yet hidden.
But what is clear? That through His power we have believed that He has
raised Christ. For to persuade souls, is a thing far more miraculous than to raise a
dead body. I will endeavor to make this clear. Hearken then. Christ said to the
dead, "Lazarus, come forth," [John 11:43] and straightway he obeyed. Peter said,
"Tabitha, arise," [Acts 9:40] and she did not refuse. He Himself shall speak the
word at the last day, and all shall rise, and that so quickly, that "they which are
yet alive, shall in no wise precede them that are fallen asleep," [1 Thessalonians
4:15] and all shall come to pass, all run together "in a moment, in the twinkling
of an eye." [1 Corinthians 15:52] But in the matter of believing, it is not thus, but
how is it? Hearken then to Him again, how He says, "How often would I have
gathered your children together, and you would not." [Matthew 23:37] You
perceive that this last is the more difficult. Accordingly, it is upon this that he
builds up the whole argument; because by human calculations it is far more
difficult to influence the choice, than to work upon nature. And the reason is this,
it is because He would thus have us become good of our own will. Thus with
good reason does he say,
"The exceeding greatness of His power to us-ward who believe."
Yes, when Prophets had availed nothing, nor Angels, nor Archangels, when
the whole creation, both visible and invisible, had failed, (the visible lying
before us, and without any power to guide us, and much also which is invisible,)
then He ordered His own coming, to show us that it was a matter which required
Divine power.
"The riches of the glory,"
That is, the unutterable glory; for what language shall be adequate to
express that glory of which the saints shall then be partakers? None. But verily
there is need of grace in order that the understanding may perceive it, and admit

even so much as at least one little ray. Some things indeed they knew even
before; now he was desirous that they should learn more, and know it more
clearly. Do you see how great things He has wrought? He has raised up Christ. Is
this a small thing? But look again. He has set Him at His right hand. And shall
any language then be able to represent this? Him that is of the earth, more mute
than the fishes, and made the sport of devils, He has in a moment raised up on
high. Truly this is indeed the "exceeding greatness of His power." And behold,
whither He has raised Him.
"In the heavenly places;"
He has made Him far above all created nature, far above all rule and
authority.
"Far above all rule," he says.
Need then indeed is there of the Spirit, of an understanding wise in the
knowledge of Him. Need then is there indeed of revelation. Reflect, how vast is
the distance between the nature of man and of God. Yet from this vile estate has
He exalted Him to that high dignity. Nor does He mount by degrees, first one
step, then another, then a third. Amazing! He does not simply say, "above," but,
"far above;" for God is above those powers which are above. And there then has
He raised Him, Him that is one of us, brought Him from the lowest point to the
supremest sovereignty, to that beyond which there is no other honor. Above "all"
principality, he says, not, i.e., over one and not over another, but over all,
"Rule and authority and power, and dominion, and every name that is
named."
Whatever there be in Heaven, He has become above all. And this is said of
Him that was raised from the dead which is worthy of our admiration; for of God
the Word, it cannot possibly be, because what insects are in comparison of man,
this the whole creation is in comparison of God. If all mankind are to be counted
as spittle and were counted as the turn of a balance, consider the invisible
powers as insects. But of Him that was one of us, this is great and surprising
indeed. For He raised Him up from the very lowest parts of the earth. If all the