Him, then it will be one spirit, as the apostle testifies, saying, "But he who
cleaves to the Lord is one spirit." And this by its drawing near to partake
of His nature, truth, and blessedness, yet not by His increasing in His
own nature, truth and blessedness. In that nature, then, when it happily
has cleaved to it, it will live unchangeably, and will see as unchangeable
all that it does see. Then, as divine Scripture promises, "His desire will be
satisfied with good things," good things unchangeable,—the very Trinity
itself, its own God, whose image it is. And that it may not ever
thenceforward suffer wrong, it will be in the hidden place of His presence,
filled with so great fullness of Him, that sin thenceforth will never delight
it. But now, when it sees itself, it sees something not unchangeable.

### CHAP. 15.—ALTHOUGH THE SOUL HOPES FOR BLESSEDNESS, YET IT DOES NOT REMEMBER LOST BLESSEDNESS, BUT REMEMBERS GOD AND THE RULES OF RIGHTEOUSNESS. THE UNCHANGEABLE RULES OF RIGHT LIVING ARE KNOWN EVEN TO THE UNGODLY.

21. And of this certainly it feels no doubt, that it is wretched, and longs to
be blessed; nor can it hope for the possibility of this on any other ground
than its own changeableness; for if it were not changeable, then, as it
could not become wretched after being blessed, so neither could it
become blessed after being wretched. And what could have made it
wretched under an omnipotent and good God, except its own sin and the
righteousness of its Lord? And what will make it blessed, unless its own
merit, and its Lord's reward? But its merit, too, is His grace, whose
reward will be its blessedness; for it cannot give itself the righteousness it
has lost, and so has not. For this it received when man was created, and
assuredly lost it by sinning. Therefore it receives righteousness, that on
account of this it may deserve to receive blessedness; and hence the
apostle truly says to it, when beginning to be proud as it were of its own
good, "For what hast thou that thou didst not receive? Now if thou didst
receive it, why dost thou glory as if thou hadst not received it?" But when
it rightly remembers its own Lord, having received His Spirit, then,
because it is so taught by an inward teaching, it feels wholly that it cannot
rise save by His affection freely given, nor has been able to fall save by its
own defection freely chosen. Certainly it does not remember its own
blessedness; since that has been, but is not, and it has utterly forgotten it,

and therefore cannot even be reminded of it.5 But it believes what the
trustworthy Scriptures of its God tell of that blessedness, which were
written by His prophet, and tell of the blessedness of Paradise, and hand
down to us historical information of that first both good and ill of man.
And it remembers the Lord its God; for He always is, nor has been and is
not, nor is but has not been; but as He never will not be, so He never was
not. And He is whole everywhere. And hence it both lives, and is moved,
and is in Him; and so it can remember Him. Not because it recollects the
having known Him in Adam or anywhere else before the life of this
present body, or when it was first made in order to be implanted in this
body; for it remembers nothing at all of all this. Whatever there is of this,
it has been blotted out by forgetfulness. But it is reminded, that it may be
turned to God, as though to that light by which it was in some way
touched, even when turned away from Him. For hence it is that even the
ungodly think of eternity, and rightly blame and rightly praise many
things in the morals of men. And by what rules do they thus judge, except
by those where in they see how men ought to live, even though they
themselves do not so live? And where do they see these rules? For they do
not see them in their own  nature; since no doubt these things are
to be seen by the mind, and their minds are confessedly changeable, but
these rules are seen as unchangeable by him who can see them at all; nor
yet in the character of their own mind, since these rules are rules of
righteousness, and their minds are confessedly unrighteous. Where
indeed are these rules written, wherein even the unrighteous recognizes
what is righteous, wherein he discerns that he ought to have what he
himself has not? Where, then, are they written, unless in the book of that
Light which is called Truth? whence every righteous law is copied and
transferred (not by migrating to it, but by being as it were impressed
upon it) to the heart of the man that worketh righteousness; as the
impression from a ring passes into the wax, yet does not leave the ring.
But he who worketh not, and yet sees how he ought to work, he is the
man that is turned away from that light, which yet touches him. But he
who does not even see how he ought to live, sins indeed with more
excuse, because he is not a transgressor of a law that he knows; but even
he too is just touched sometimes by the splendor of the everywhere
present truth, when upon admonition he confesses.