left them not a word to say for themselves. "There being no cause," he says, "for
this concourse, for which" (matter) "we shall not be able to give the account."
[Acts 19:40] See how prudently, how cleverly, the unbelievers (act). Thus he
extinguished their wrath. For as it is easily kindled, so also is it easily
extinguished. "And when he had thus spoken," it says, "he dismissed the
assembly." [Acts 19:41]
Do you see how God permits trials, and by them stirs up and awakens the
disciples, and makes them more energetic? Then let us not sink down under
trials: for He Himself will "also make the way of escape, that we may be able to
bear them." [1 Corinthians 10:13] Nothing so makes friends, and rivets them so
firmly, as affliction: nothing so fastens and compacts the souls of believers:
nothing is so seasonable for us teachers in order that the things said by us may be
heard. For the hearer when he is in ease is listless and indolent, and seems to
suffer annoyance from the speaker: but when he is in affliction and distress, he
falls into a great longing for the hearing. For when distressed in his soul, he
seeks on all sides to find comfort for his affliction: and the preaching brings no
small comfort. "What then," you will say, "of the Jews? How was it that in
consequence of their weakheartedness, they did not hear?" Why, they were
Jews, those ever weak and miserable creatures: and besides, the affliction in their
case was great, but we speak of affliction in moderation. For observe: they
expected to be freed from the evils that encompassed them, and they fell into
numberless greater evils: now this is no common distress to the soul. Afflictions
cut us off from the sympathy we have for the present world, as appears in this,
that we wish for death immediately, and cease to be loving of the body: which
very thing is the greatest part of wisdom, to have no hankering, no ties to the
present life. The soul which is afflicted does not wish to be concerned about
many things: repose and stillness are all it desired, content for its part to have
done with the things present, even though there be nothing else to follow. As the
body when wearied and distressed does not wish to indulge in amours, or
gormandizing, but only to repose and lie down in quiet; so the soul, harassed by

numberless evils, is urgent to be at rest and quiet. The soul which is at ease is
(apt to be) fluttered, alarmed, unsettled: whereas in this there is no vacuity, no
running to waste: and the one is more manly, the other more childish; the one has
more gravity, in the other more levity. And as some light substance, when it falls
upon deep water, is tossed to and fro, just so is the soul when it falls into great
rejoicing. Moreover, that our greatest faults arise out of overmuch pleasure, any
one may see. Come, if you will, let us represent to ourselves two houses, the one
where people are marrying, the other where they are mourning: let us enter in
imagination into each: let us see which is better than the other. Why, that of the
mourner will be found full of seriousness ([φιλοσοφίας]); that of the marrying
person, full of indecency. For look, (here are) shameful words, unrestrained
laughter, more unrestrained motions, both dress and gait full of indecency, words
fraught with mere nonsense and foolery: in short, all is ridicule there, all
ridiculous. I do not say the marriage is this; God forbid; but the accompaniments
of the marriage. Then nature is beside itself in excess of riot. Instead of human
beings, those present become brute creatures, some neighing like horses, others
kicking like asses: such utter license, such dissolute unrestraint: nothing serious,
nothing noble: (it is) the devil's pomp, cymbals, and pipes, and songs teeming
with fornication and adultery. But not so in that house where there is mourning;
all is well-ordered there: such silence, such repose, such composure; nothing
disorderly, nothing extravagant: and if any one does speak, every word he utters
is fraught with true philosophy: and then the wonderful circumstance is, that at
such times not men only, but even servants and women speak like philosophers
— for such is the nature of sorrow— and while they seem to be consoling the
mourner, they in fact utter numberless truths full of sound philosophy. Prayers
are there to begin with, that the affliction may stop there, and go no further:
many a one comforting the sufferer, and recitals without number of the many
who have the like cause for mourning. "For what is man?" (they ask) (and
thereupon) a serious examination of our nature— "aye, then, what is man!" (and
upon this) an impeachment of the life (present) and its worthlessness, a