observe his good sense, how he immediately begins to admonish.
"Now concerning things sacrificed to idols, we know that we all have
knowledge." Leaving alone the weak, which he always does, he discourses with
the strong first. And this is what he did also in the Epistle to the Romans, saying,
[Romans 14:10] "But you, why do you judge your brother?" for this is the sort of
person that is able to receive rebuke also with readiness. Exactly the same then
he does here also.
And first he makes void their conceit by declaring that this very thing
which they considered as peculiar to themselves, the having perfect knowledge,
was common to all. Thus, "we know," says he, "that we all have knowledge." For
if allowing them to have high thoughts, he had first pointed out how hurtful the
thing was to others, he would not have done them so much good as harm. For the
ambitious soul when it plumes itself upon any thing, even though the same do
harm to others, yet strongly adheres to it because of the tyranny of vain-glory.
Wherefore Paul first examines the matter itself by itself: just as he had done
before in the case of the wisdom from without, demolishing it with a high hand.
But in that case he did it as we might have expected: for the whole thing was
altogether blameworthy and his task was very easy. Wherefore he signifies it to
be not only useless, but even contrary to the Gospel. But in the present case it
was not possible to do this. For what was done was of knowledge, and perfect
knowledge. Nor was it safe to overthrow it, and yet in no other way was it
possible to cast out the conceit which had resulted from it. What then does he?
First, by signifying that it was common, he curbs that swelling pride of theirs.
For they who possess something great and excellent are more elated, when they
alone have it; but if it be made out that they possess it in common with others,
they no longer have so much of this feeling. First then he makes it common
property, because they considered it to belong to themselves alone.
Next, having made it common, he does not make himself singly a sharer in
it with them; for in this way too he would have rather set them up; for as to be
the only possessor elates, so to have one partner or two perhaps among leading

persons has this effect just as much. For this reason he does not mention himself
but all: he said not, "I too have knowledge," but, "we know that we all have
knowledge."
2. This then is one way, and the first, by which he cast down their pride; the
next has greater force. What then is this? In that he shows that not even this
thing itself was in all points complete, but imperfect, and extremely so. And not
only imperfect, but also injurious, unless there were another thing joined
together with it. For having said that "we have knowledge," he added,
"Knowledge puffs up, but love edifies:" so that when it is without love, it lifts
men up to absolute arrogance.
"And yet not even love," you will say, "without knowledge has any
advantage." Well: this he did not say; but omitting it as a thing allowed by all, he
signifies that knowledge stands in extreme need of love. For he who loves,
inasmuch as he fulfils the commandment which is most absolute of all, even
though he have some defects, will quickly be blest with knowledge because of
his love; as Cornelius and many others. But he that has knowledge but has not
love, not only shall gain nothing more, but shall also be cast out of that which he
has, in many cases falling into arrogance. It seems then that knowledge is not
productive of love, but on the contrary debars from it him that is not on his
guard, puffing him up and elating him. For arrogance is wont to cause divisions:
but love both draws together and leads to knowledge. And to make this plain he
says, "But if any man loves God, the same is known of Him." So that "I forbid
not this," says he, "namely, your having perfect knowledge; but your having it
with love, that I enjoin; else is it no gain, but rather loss."
Do you see how he already sounds the first note of his discourse concerning
love? For since all these evils were springing from the following root, i.e., not
from perfect knowledge, but from their not greatly loving nor sparing their
neighbors; whence ensued both their variance and their self-satisfaction, and all
the rest which he had charged them with; both before this and after he is
continually providing for love; so correcting the fountain of all good things.