But the evil which consists in the subtraction of the due operation in
voluntary things has the nature of a fault; for this is imputed to
anyone as a fault to fail as regards perfect action, of which he is
master by the will. Therefore every evil in voluntary things is to be
looked upon as a pain or a fault.
Reply to Objection 1: Because evil is the privation of good, and not a
mere negation, as was said above (Article 3), therefore not every
defect of good is an evil, but the defect of the good which is naturally
due. For the want of sight is not an evil in a stone, but it is an evil in
an animal; since it is against the nature of a stone to see. So,
likewise, it is against the nature of a creature to be preserved in
existence by itself, because existence and conservation come from
one and the same source. Hence this kind of defect is not an evil as
regards a creature.
Reply to Objection 2: Pain and fault do not divide evil absolutely
considered, but evil that is found in voluntary things.
Reply to Objection 3: Temptation, as importing provocation to evil, is
always an evil of fault in the tempter; but in the one tempted it is not,
properly speaking, a fault; unless through the temptation some
change is wrought in the one who is tempted; for thus is the action
of the agent in the patient. And if the tempted is changed to evil by
the tempter he falls into fault.
Reply to Objection 4: In answer to the opposite argument, it must be
said that the very nature of pain includes the idea of injury to the
agent in himself, whereas the idea of fault includes the idea of injury
to the agent in his operation; and thus both are contained in evil, as
including the idea of injury.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether pain has the nature of evil more than

fault has?
Objection 1: It would seem that pain has more of evil than fault. For
fault is to pain what merit is to reward. But reward has more good
than merit, as its end. Therefore pain has more evil in it than fault
has.
Objection 2: Further, that is the greater evil which is opposed to the
greater good. But pain, as was said above (Article 5), is opposed to
the good of the agent, while fault is opposed to the good of the
action. Therefore, since the agent is better than the action, it seems
that pain is worse than fault.
Objection 3: Further, the privation of the end is a pain consisting in
forfeiting the vision of God; whereas the evil of fault is privation of
the order to the end. Therefore pain is a greater evil than fault.
On the contrary, A wise workman chooses a less evil in order to
prevent a greater, as the surgeon cuts off a limb to save the whole
body. But divine wisdom inflicts pain to prevent fault. Therefore fault
is a greater evil than pain.
I answer that, Fault has the nature of evil more than pain has; not
only more than pain of sense, consisting in the privation of corporeal
goods, which kind of pain appeals to most men; but also more than
any kind of pain, thus taking pain in its most general meaning, so as
to include privation of grace or glory.
There is a twofold reason for this. The first is that one becomes evil
by the evil of fault, but not by the evil of pain, as Dionysius says (Div.
Nom. iv): "To be punished is not an evil; but it is an evil to be made
worthy of punishment." And this because, since good absolutely
considered consists in act, and not in potentiality, and the ultimate
act is operation, or the use of something possessed, it follows that
the absolute good of man consists in good operation, or the good
use of something possessed. Now we use all things by the act of the
will. Hence from a good will, which makes a man use well what he
has, man is called good, and from a bad will he is called bad. For a
man who has a bad will can use ill even the good he has, as when a
grammarian of his own will speaks incorrectly. Therefore, because