not so much as the law of nations, that an ambassador never suffers any hurt.
"But, however, I am an ambassador in bonds. The chain lies like a bridle upon
me, restraining my boldness, but your prayer shall open my mouth" in order that
I may speak all things I was sent to speak.
"But that you also may know my affairs, how I do, Tychicus, the beloved
brother, and faithful minister in the Lord, shall make known to you all things." If
"faithful," he will tell no falsehood, he will in everything speak the truth:—
"whom I have sent unto you for this very purpose, that you might know our state,
and that he may comfort your hearts." Amazing, transcendent affection! "that it
may not be in the power," he means, "of them that would, to affright you." For it
is probable that they were in tribulation; for the expression, "may comfort your
hearts," intimates as much; that is, "may not suffer you to sink under it."
Ver. 23. "Peace be to the brethren and love with faith from God the Father,
and the Lord Jesus Christ."
He invokes upon them, "peace and love with faith." He says well: for he
would not that they should have regard to love by itself, and mingle themselves
with those of a different faith. Either he means this, or that above described,
namely, that they should have faith also, so as to have a cheerful confidence of
the good things to come. The "peace" which is towards God, and the "love." And
if there be peace, there will also be love; if love, there will be peace also. "With
faith," because without faith, love amounts to nothing; or rather love could not
exist at all without it.
Ver. 24. "Grace be with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in
uncorruptness."
Why does he separate the two here, placing "peace" by itself, and "grace"
by itself?
"In uncorruptness," he concludes.
What is this, "in uncorruptness"? It either means, "in purity"; or else, "for
the sake of those things which are incorruptible," as, for example, not in riches,
nor in glory, but in those treasures which are incorruptible. The "in" means,

"through." "Through uncorruptness," that is, "through virtue." Because all sin is
corruption. And in the same way as we say a virgin is corrupted, so also do we
speak of the soul. Hence Paul says, "Lest by any means your minds should be
corrupted." [2 Corinthians 11:3] And again elsewhere, he says, "In doctrine,
showing uncorruptness." For what, tell me, is corruption of the body? Is it not
the dissolution of the whole frame, and of its union? This then is what takes
place also in the soul when sin enters. The beauty of the soul is temperance, and
righteousness; the health of the soul is courage, and prudence; for the base man
is hideous in our eyes, so is the covetous, so is the man who gives himself up to
evil practices, and so the coward and unmanly man is sick, and the foolish man
is out of health. Now that sins work corruption, is evident from this, that they
render men base, and weak, and cause them to be sick and diseased. Nay, and
when we say that a virgin is corrupted, we say so, strictly speaking, on this
account also, not only because the body is defiled, but because of the
transgression. For the mere act is natural; and if in that consisted the
"corruption," then were marriage corruption. Hence is it not the act that is
corruption, but the sin, for it dishonors and puts her to shame. And again, what
would be corruption in the case of a house? Its dissolution. And so, universally,
corruption is a change which takes place for the worse, a change into another
state, to the utter extinction of the former one. For hear what the Scripture says,
"All flesh had corrupted his way" [Genesis 6:12]; and again, "In intolerable
corruption" [Exodus 18:18]; and again, "Men corrupted in mind." [2 Timothy
3:8] Our body is corruptible, but our soul is incorruptible. Oh then, let us not
make that corruptible also. This, the corruption of the body, was the work of
former sin; but sin which is after the Laver, has the power also to render the soul
corruptible, and to make it an easy prey to "the worm that dies not." For never
had that worm touched it, had it not found the soul corruptible. The worm
touches not adamant, and even if he touches it, he can do it no harm. Oh then,
corrupt not the soul; for that which is corrupted is full of foul stench; for hearken
to the Prophet who says, "My wounds stink and are corrupt because of my