FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.52, C.3.

addition, this could only be either in the form itself or in the subject.
If it be understood of the form itself, it has already been stated
(Article 1) that such an addition or subtraction would change the
species; even as the species of color is changed when a thing from
being pale becomes white. If, on the other hand, this addition be
understood as applying to the subject, this could only be either
because one part of the subject receives a form which it had not
previously (thus we may say cold increases in a man who, after
being cold in one part of his body, is cold in several parts), or
because some other subject is added sharing in the same form (as
when a hot thing is added to another, or one white thing to another).
But in either of these two ways we have not a more white or a more
hot thing, but a greater white or hot thing.
Since, however, as stated above (Article 1), certain accidents are of
themselves susceptible of more or less, in some of these we may
find increase by addition. For movement increases by an addition
either to the time it lasts, or to the course it follows: and yet the
species remains the same on account of the oneness of the term. Yet
movement increases the intensity as to participation in its subject: i.
e. in so far as the same movement can be executed more or less
speedily or readily. In like manner, science can increase in itself by
addition; thus when anyone learns several conclusions of geometry,
the same specific habit of science increases in that man. Yet a man's
science increases, as to the subject's participation thereof, in
intensity, in so far as one man is quicker and readier than another in
considering the same conclusions.
As to bodily habits, it does not seem very probable that they receive
increase by way of addition. For an animal is not said to be simply
healthy or beautiful, unless it be such in all its parts. And if it be
brought to a more perfect measure, this is the result of a change in
the simple qualities, which are not susceptible of increase save in
intensity on the part of the subject partaking of them.
How this question affects virtues we shall state further on (Question
66, Article 1).
Reply to Objection 1: Even in bodily bulk increase is twofold. First,
by addition of one subject to another; such is the increase of living
things. Secondly, by mere intensity, without any addition at all; such
is the case with things subject to rarefaction, as is stated in Phys. iv,
text. 63.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.52, C.3.

Reply to Objection 2: The cause that increases a habit, always
effects something in the subject, but not a new form. But it causes
the subject to partake more perfectly of a pre-existing form, or it
makes the form to extend further.
Reply to Objection 3: What is not already white, is potentially white,
as not yet possessing the form of whiteness: hence the agent
causes a new form in the subject. But that which is less hot or white,
is not in potentiality to those forms, since it has them already
actually: but it is in potentiality to a perfect mode of participation;
and this it receives through the agent's action.