repeated, when they crowned Him with thorns, then arrayed Him in a gorgeous
robe, then put a reed in His hand, then fell down and worshipped Him, setting in
motion every species of ribaldry and derision? How many think you were
offended, how many bewildered, how many perplexed when they smote Him on
the cheek and said "prophesy unto us you Christ, who is He that smote you?"
[Matthew 26:28] and when they led Him hither and there, and spent the whole
day in scoffs and abuse, and ribaldry and derision in the midst of the Jewish
assembly? And when the servant of the High-Priest dealt Him a blow; and when
the soldiers parted His garments among them and when He was led up to the
cross, having the marks of the scourge upon His back, and was fastened to the
wood, how many think you were offended? For not even then were those savage
beasts softened, but became more furious than before, and the tragedy became
more intense, and the ribaldry increased. For some said "Ah! Thou that
destroyest the temple, and in three days buildest it up;" [Matthew 27:40] and
some, "He saved others, Himself He cannot save." [Matthew 27:42]
And others said "If you are the Son of God come down from the cross and
we will believe you." [Matthew 27:40]
Again when they insulted Him by offering Him gall and vinegar on the
sponge how many think you were offended? Or when the robbers reviled Him?
Or when as I have already said, they made that dreadful and monstrous assertion
that the robber and housebreaker, the man laden with the crime of murder
deserved to be released rather than Jesus, and having received permission from
the judge to make their choice preferred Barabbas, desiring not only to crucify
Christ, but also to involve Him in infamy? For they thought that by these means
they should be able to manufacture the belief that He was worse than the robber,
and such a great transgressor that neither on the plea of mercy, nor of the
privilege of the Festival was it possible to save Him. For they did everything
with a view to slander His fame; which also was the reason why they crucified
the two robbers with Him. Nevertheless the truth was not obscured, but shone
forth all the more clearly. And they accused Him of usurping kingly power

saying "Every one who makes himself a king is not a friend of Cæsar" bringing
this charge of usurpation against one who had not where to lay his head.
Moreover they brought a calumnious accusation of blasphemy against Him. For
the High Priest rent his clothes saying "He has spoken blasphemy; what further
need have we of witnesses?" [Matthew 26:65] And what was the nature of his
death? Was it not a violent one? Was it not the death of capital offenders? Of
execrable criminals? Was it not of the vilest kind? Was it not the death of those
who have perpetrated the worst offenses, and are not worthy to draw even their
last breath upon the earth? And then as to the manner of his burial, was it not
accomplished as a matter of favour? For a certain one came and begged for his
body. Thus not even he who buried Him belonged to his own friends, to those
whom He had benefited, to his disciples, to those who had enjoyed such free and
salutary intercourse with Him, for all had taken to flight, all had hurried away
from Him. And that base suspicion which his enemies contrived in consequence
of the resurrection when they said "His disciples came and stole Him"
[Matthew 28:13] how many think you were offended, how many for a time upset
by that? For the story prevailed at that time, although it was a fabrication, and
was bought for money; nevertheless it held its ground among some people, after
the seals (of the sepulchre were broken) after the manifest appearance of the
truth. For the multitude did not know the prediction of the resurrection (and no
wonder), inasmuch as even his disciples did not understand it; for we read "they
did not know that He must rise again from the dead." [John 20:9] How many
therefore think you were offended in those days? And yet the long-suffering God
patiently endured, ordering all things according to His own inscrutable wisdom.
5. Then again after those days the disciples continued to live in hiding and
secrecy, being fugitives full of fear and trembling, continually shifting from
place to place, and even when they began to appear after fifty days, and to work
miracles, they did not enjoy perfect security; but even after those events there
were innumerable stumbling-blocks to offend the weaker brethren, when they
were scourged, when the Church was distressed, when they themselves were