John 20:31
"That believing ye might have life in His Name."
Speaking generally to mankind, and showing that not on Him who is
believed on, but on ourselves, he bestows a very great favor. "In His Name," that
is, "through Him"; for He is the Life.

John 21:1
"After these things, Jesus showed Himself again to the disciples at the sea of
Tiberias."
Do you see that He remains not with them continually, nor as before? He
appeared, for instance, in the evening, and flew away; then after eight days again
once, and again flew away; then after these things by the sea, and again with
great terror. But what is the, "showed"? From this it is clear that He was not seen
unless He condescended, because His body was henceforth incorruptible, and of
unmixed purity. But wherefore has the writer mentioned the place? To show that
he had now taken away the greater part of their fear, so that they now ventured
forth from their dwelling, and went about everywhere. For they were no longer
shut up at home, but had gone into Galilee, avoiding the danger from the Jews.
Simon, therefore, comes to fish. For since neither was He with them continually,
nor was the Spirit yet given, nor they at that time yet entrusted with anything,
having nothing to do, they went after their trade.

John 21:2
"There were together Simon Peter, and Thomas, and Nathanael," (he that was
called by Philip,) "and the sons of Zebedee, and two others."
Having then nothing to do, they went to their fishing, and this same they did
by night, because they were greatly afraid. This Luke also mentions; but this is
not the same occasion, but a different one. And the other disciples followed,
because they were henceforth bound to one another, and at the same time desired
to see the fishing, and to bestow their leisure well. As they then were laboring
and wearied, Jesus presents Himself before them, and does not at once reveal
Himself, so that they enter into converse with Him. He therefore says to them,

John 21:5
"Have ye any meat ?"
For a time He speaks rather after a human manner, as if about to buy
somewhat of them. But when they made signs that they had none, He bade them
cast their nets to the right; and on casting they obtained a haul. But when they
recognized Him, the disciples Peter and John again exhibited the peculiarities of
their several tempers. The one was more fervent, the other more lofty; the one
more keen, the other more clear-sighted. On this account John first recognized
Jesus, Peter first came to Him. For no ordinary signs were they which had taken
place. What were they? First, that so many fish were caught; then, that the net
did not break; then, that before they landed, the coals had been found, and fish
laid thereon, and bread. For He no longer made things out of matter already
subsisting, as, through a certain dispensation, He did before the Crucifixion.
When therefore Peter knew Him, he threw down all, both fish and nets, and
girded himself. Do you see his respect and love? Yet they were only two hundred
cubits off; but not even so could Peter wait to go to Him in the boat, but reached
the shore by swimming. What then does Jesus?