The Latin is, "character corporis."
which has come down to us by being preserved ("custoditione' being read instead of "custodita') without falsification."

i.e., the heretics.

reproach of the name (as if he too [the heretic] had obtained mercy), and have been led forth with
them [to death], being, as it were, a sort of retinue granted unto them. For the Church alone sustains
with purity the reproach of those who suffer persecution for righteousness' sake, and endure all
sorts of punishments, and are put to death because of the love which they bear to God, and their
confession of His Son; often weakened indeed, yet immediately increasing her members, and
becoming whole again, after the same manner as her type, Lot's wife, who became a pillar of
salt. Thus, too, [she passes through an experience] similar to that of the ancient prophets, as the
Lord declares, "For so persecuted they the prophets who were before you;" inasmuch as she
does indeed, in a new fashion, suffer persecution from those who do not receive the word of God,
while the self-same spirit rests upon her [as upon these ancient prophets].
10. And indeed the prophets, along with other things which they predicted, also foretold this,
that all those on whom the Spirit of God should rest, and who would obey the word of the Father,
and serve Him according to their ability, should suffer persecution, and be stoned and slain. For
the prophets prefigured in themselves all these things, because of their love to God, and on account
of His word. For since they themselves were members of Christ, each one of them in his place as
a member did, in accordance with this, set forth the prophecy [assigned him]; all of them, although
many, prefiguring only one, and proclaiming the things which pertain to one. For just as the working
of the whole body is exhibited through means of our members, while the figure of a complete man
is not displayed by one member, but through means of all taken together, so also did all the prophets
prefigure the one [Christ]; while every one of them, in his special place as a member, did, in
accordance with this, fill up the [established] dispensation, and shadowed forth beforehand that
particular working of Christ which was connected with that member.
11. For some of them, beholding Him in glory, saw His glorious life (conversationem) at the
Father's right hand; others beheld Him coming on the clouds as the Son of man; and those
who declared regarding Him, "They shall look on Him whom they have pierced," indicated His
[second] advent, concerning which He Himself says, "Thinkest thou that when the Son of man
cometh, He shall find faith on the earth?" Paul also refers to this event when he says, "If, however,
it is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you, and to you that
are troubled rest with us, at the revelation of the Lord Jesus from heaven, with His mighty angels,
and in a flame of fire." Others again, speaking of Him as a judge, and [referring], as if it were a