Reply to Objection 2: In the Old Testament the Levites had a right to
their paternal inheritance; and the reason why they did not receive a
portion with the other tribes was because they were scattered
throughout all the tribes, which would have been impossible if, like
the other tribes, they had received one fixed portion of the soil.
Reply to Objection 3: Clerics promoted to holy orders, if they be
poor, must be provided for by the bishop who ordained them;
otherwise he is not so bound. And they are bound to minister to the
Church in the Order they have received. The words of Hugh refer to
those who have no means of livelihood.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether above the priestly Order there ought to

be an episcopal power?
Objection 1: It would seem that there ought not to be an episcopal
power above the priestly Order. For as stated in the text (Sent. iv, D,
24) "the priestly Order originated from Aaron." Now in the Old Law
there was no one above Aaron. Therefore neither in the New Law
ought there to be any power above that of the priests.
Objection 2: Further, powers rank according to acts. Now no sacred
act can be greater than to consecrate the body of Christ, whereunto
the priestly power is directed. Therefore there should not be an
episcopal above the priestly power.
Objection 3: Further, the priest, in offering, represents Christ in the
Church, Who offered Himself for us to the Father. Now no one is
above Christ in the Church, since He is the Head of the Church.
Therefore there should not be an episcopal above the priestly power.
On the contrary, A power is so much the higher according as it
extends to more things. Now the priestly power, according to
Dionysius (Eccl. Hier. v), extends only to cleansing and enlightening,
whereas the episcopal power extends both to this and to perfecting.
Therefore the episcopal should be above the priestly power.
Further, the Divine ministries should be more orderly than human
ministries. Now the order of human ministries requires that in each
office there should be one person to preside, just as a general is
placed over soldiers. Therefore there should also be appointed over
priests one who is the chief priest, and this is the bishop. Therefore
the episcopal should be above the priestly power.
I answer that, A priest has two acts: one is the principal, namely to
consecrate the body of Christ. the other is secondary, namely to
prepare God's people for the reception of this sacrament, as stated
above (Question 37, Articles 2,4). As regards the first act, the priest's
power does not depend on a higher power save God's; but as to the
second, it depends on a higher and that a human power. For every
power that cannot exercise its act without certain ordinances,
depends on the power that makes those ordinances. Now a priest
cannot loose and bind, except we presuppose him to have the