THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.84, C.6.

(Tract. lxxii in Joan. [Serm. xv de verb Apost.]), "He Who created thee
without thee, will not justify thee without thee." Therefore it is
evident that after sin the sacrament of Penance is necessary for
salvation, even as bodily medicine after man has contracted a
dangerous disease.
Reply to Objection 1: This gloss should apparently be understood as
referring to the man who has a good will unimpaired by sin, for such
a man has no cause for sorrow: but as soon as the good will is
forfeited through sin, it cannot be restored without that sorrow
whereby a man sorrows for his past sin, and which belongs to
Penance.
Reply to Objection 2: As soon as a man falls into sin, charity, faith,
and mercy do not deliver him from sin, without Penance. Because
charity demands that a man should grieve for the offense committed
against his friend, and that he should be anxious to make
satisfaction to his friend; faith requires that he should seek to be
justified from his sins through the power of Christ's Passion which
operates in the sacraments of the Church; and well-ordered pity
necessitates that man should succor himself by repenting of the
pitiful condition into which sin has brought him, according to Prov.
14:34: "Sin maketh nations miserable"; wherefore it is written
(Ecclus. 30:24): "Have pity on thy own soul, pleasing God."
Reply to Objection 3: It was due to His power of "excellence," which
He alone had, as stated above (Question 64, Article 3), that Christ
bestowed on the adulterous woman the effect of the sacrament of
Penance, viz. the forgiveness of sins, without the sacrament of
Penance, although not without internal repentance, which He
operated in her by grace.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.84, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether Penance is a second plank after

shipwreck?
Objection 1: It would seem that Penance is not a second plank after
shipwreck. Because on Is. 3:9, "They have proclaimed abroad their
sin as Sodom," a gloss says: "The second plank after shipwreck is
to hide one's sins." Now Penance does not hide sins, but reveals
them. Therefore Penance is not a second plank.
Objection 2: Further, in a building the foundation takes the first, not
the second place. Now in the spiritual edifice, Penance is the
foundation, according to Heb. 6:1: "Not laying again the foundation
of Penance from dead works"; wherefore it precedes even Baptism,
according to Acts 2:38: "Do penance, and be baptized every one of
you." Therefore Penance should not be called a second plank.
Objection 3: Further, all the sacraments are planks, i.e. helps against
sin. Now Penance holds, not the second but the fourth, place among
the sacraments, as is clear from what has been said above (Question
65, Articles 1,2). Therefore Penance should not be called a second
plank after shipwreck.
On the contrary, Jerome says (Ep. cxxx) that "Penance is a second
plank after shipwreck."
I answer that, That which is of itself precedes naturally that which is
accidental, as substance precedes accident. Now some sacraments
are, of themselves, ordained to man's salvation, e.g. Baptism, which
is the spiritual birth, Confirmation which is the spiritual growth, the
Eucharist which is the spiritual food; whereas Penance is ordained
to man's salvation accidentally as it were, and on something being
supposed, viz. sin: for unless man were to sin actually, he would not
stand in need of Penance and yet he would need Baptism,
Confirmation, and the Eucharist; even as in the life of the body, man
would need no medical treatment, unless he were ill, and yet life,
birth, growth, and food are, of themselves, necessary to man.
Consequently Penance holds the second place with regard to the
state of integrity which is bestowed and safeguarded by the
aforesaid sacraments, so that it is called metaphorically "a second
plank after shipwreck." For just as the first help for those who cross