obtain pardon? Is not the rest enough, although even it is not bearable, chairs and
footstools all of silver? Although even these come of senselessness. But
everywhere is excessive pride; everywhere is vainglory. Nowhere is it use, but
everywhere excess.
I am afraid lest, under the impulse of this madness, the race of woman
should go on to assume some portentous form: for it is likely that they will wish
to have even their hair of gold. Else declare that you were not at all affected by
what was said, nor were excited greatly, and fell a longing, and had not shame
withheld you, would not have refused. For if they dare to do what is even more
absurd than this, much more, I think, will they long for their hair, and lips, and
eyebrows, and every part to be overlaid with molten gold.
But if you are incredulous, and think I am speaking in jest, I will relate
what I have heard, or rather what is now existing. The king of the Persians wears
his beard golden; those who are adepts at such work winding leaf of gold about
his hairs as about the woof, and it is laid up as a prodigy.
Glory to You, O Christ; with how many good things have You filled us!
How have You provided for our health! From how great monstrousness, from
how great unreasonableness, have You set us free! Mark! I forewarn you, I
advise no longer; but I command and charge; let him that wills, obey, and him
that wills not, be disobedient; that if you women do continue thus to act, I will
not suffer it, nor receive you, nor permit you to pass across this threshold. For
what need have I of a crowd of distempered people? And what if, in my training
of you, I do not forbid what is not excessive? And yet Paul forbade both gold
and pearls. [1 Timothy 2:9] We are laughed at by the Greeks, our religion
appears a fable.
And to the men I give this advice: Are you come to school to be instructed
in spiritual philosophy? Divest yourself of that pride! This is my advice both to
men and women; and if any act otherwise, henceforward I will not suffer it. The
disciples were but twelve, and hear what Christ says unto them, "Would ye also
go away?" [John 6:67] For if we go on for ever flattering you, when shall we

reclaim you? When shall we do you service? "But," says one, "there are other
sects, and people go over." This is a cold argument, "Better is one that does the
will of the Lord, than ten thousand transgressors." [Sirach 16:3] For, what would
you choose yourself, tell me; to have ten thousand servants that were runaways
and thieves, or a single one that loved you? Lo! I admonish and command you to
break up both those gay deckings for the face, and such vessels as I have
described, and give to the poor, and not to be so mad.
Let him that likes quit me at once; let him that likes accuse me, I will not
suffer it in any one. When I am about to be judged at the Tribunal of Christ, you
stand afar off, and your favor, while I am giving in my account. "Those words
have ruined all! He says, 'let him not go and transfer himself to another sect!'
Nay! He is weak! condescend to him!" To what point? Till when? Once, and
twice, and thrice, but not perpetually.
Lo! I charge you again, and protest after the pattern of the blessed Paul,
"that if I come again I will not spare." [2 Corinthians 13:2] But when you have
done as you ought, then you will know how great the gain is, how great the
advantage. Yes! I entreat and beseech you, and would not refuse to clasp your
knees and supplicate you in this behalf. What softness is it! What luxury, what
wantonness! This is not luxury, but wantonness. What senselessness is it! What
madness! So many poor stand around the Church; and though the Church has so
many children, and so wealthy, she is unable to give relief to even one poor
person; "but one is hungry, and another is drunken" [1 Corinthians 11:21]; one
voids his excrement even into silver, another has not so much as bread! What
madness! What brutishness so great as this? May we never come to the proof,
whether we will prosecute the disobedient, nor to the indignation which allowing
these practices would cause us; but that willingly and with patience we may
avoid all this, that we may live to God's glory, and be delivered from the
punishment in the other world, and may obtain the good things promised to those
who love Him, through the grace and love toward man, etc.