us:" and yet it was (Christ) Himself that elected them; but this also he refers to
God. "To the before-ordained," he says, "even to us, who ate and drank with Him
after that He was risen from the dead." (v. 39, 41.) See whence he fetches his
assurance of the resurrection. What is the reason that being risen he did no sign,
but only ate and drank? Because the Resurrection itself was a great sign, and of
this nothing was so much a sign as the eating and drinking. "To testify," says he
— in a manner calculated to alarm— that they may not have it in their power to
fall back upon the excuse of ignorance: and he does not say, "that He is the Son
of God," but, what would most alarm them, "that it is He which is ordained of
God, to be the Judge of quick and dead." [Acts 10:42] "To him give all the
Prophets witness," etc. [Acts 10:43] When by the terror he has agitated them,
then he brings in the pardon, not spoken from himself but from the Prophets.
And what is terrifying is from him, what is mild from the Prophets.
All you that have received this forgiveness, all you to whom it has been
vouchsafed to attain unto faith, learn, I beseech you, the greatness of the Gift,
and study not to be insolent to your Benefactor. For we obtained forgiveness, not
that we should become worse, but to make us far better and more excellent. Let
none say that God is the cause of our evil doings, in that He did not punish, nor
take vengeance. If (as it is said) a ruler having taken a murderer, lets him go, say,
is he (not) judged to be the cause of the murders afterwards committed? See
then, how we expose God to the tongues of the wicked. For what do they not
say, what leave unuttered? "(God) Himself," say they, "allowed them; for he
ought to have punished them as they deserved, not to honor them, nor crown
them, nor admit them to the foremost privileges, but to punish and take
vengeance upon them: but he that, instead of this, honors them, has made them
to be such as they are." Do not, I beseech and implore you, do not let any man
utter such speech as far as we are concerned. Better to be buried ten thousand
times over, than that God through us should be so spoken of! The Jews, we read,
said to (Christ) Himself, "Thou that destroyest the Temple, and in three days
buildest it up, come down from the Cross" [Matthew 27:40]: and again, "If Thou

be the Son of God:" but the reproaches here are more grievous than those, that
through us He should be called a teacher of wickedness! Let us cause the very
opposite to be said, by having our conversation worthy of Him that calls us, and
(worthily) approaching to the baptism of adoption. For great indeed is the might
of baptism ([φωτίσματου]): it makes them quite other men than they were, that
partake of the gift; it does not let the men be men (and nothing more). Make thou
the Gentile ([τὸν slave, like a malefactor, as though it were not your duty to live
unto God? Why do you stand affected to Him, as if you had in Him a ruthless,
cruel Master? What can be more heartless (ψυχρότερον]), what more miserable,
than those who make that the time to receive baptism? God made you a friend,
and vouchsafed you all His good things, that you may act the part of a friend.
Suppose you had done some man the greatest of wrongs, had insulted him, and
brought upon him disgraces without end, suppose you had fallen into the hands
of the person wronged, and he, in return for all this, had honored you, made you
partaker of all that he had, and in the assembly of his friends, of those in whose
presence he was insulted, had crowned you, and declared that he would hold you
as his own begotten son, and then straightway had died: say, would you not have
bewailed him? Would you not have deemed his death a calamity? Would you not
have said, Would that he were alive, that I might have it in my power to make
the fit return, that I might requite him, that I might show myself not base to my
benefactor? So then, where it is but man, this is how you would act; and where it
is God, are you eager to be gone, that you may not requite your benefactor for so
great gifts? Nay rather, choose the time for coming to Him so that you shall have
it in your power to requite Him like for like. True, say you, but I cannot keep
(the gift). Has God commanded impossibilities? Hence it is that all is clean
reversed, hence that, all the world over, every thing is marred— because nobody
makes it his mark to live after God. Thus those who are yet Catechumens,
because they make this their object, (how they may defer baptism to the last,)
give themselves no concern about leading an upright life: and those who have
been baptized ([φωτισθεντες]), whether it be because they received it as