could protect it when it had done thus amiss, but all these privileges are taken
away; much more with the Lord of angels will its dignity fail to protect it? For at
that Day, it will nought avail us, that we have dwelt in a metropolis, that has
many spacious porticoes, and other dignities of this kind! And why do I say, at
That Day? For as regards the present life, what can it benefit you that this your
city is a metropolis? Pray, has any one restored a distressed family by means of
this? Or received any revenue from this dignity? Or dispelled sadness? Or got rid
of any bodily infirmity? Or put away a vice of the soul? Beloved! let us not
trifle, nor regard the opinions of the multitude, but understand what is indeed the
dignity of a city; what it is that makes a city truly a metropolis?
14. I say all this, though I expect that the city will again regain even this
outward distinction, and appear in its own proper place of precedence. For the
Emperor is both philanthropic and godly. But I am desirous that if it should be
restored, you may not think too much of this; nor be boastful of it; nor place the
honour of our city to that account. When you wish to pronounce an encomium
on the city, tell me not of the suburb of Daphne, nor of the height and multitude
of its cypresses, nor of its fountains of waters, nor of the great population who
inhabit the city, nor of the great freedom with which its market-place is
frequented even to midnight, nor of the abundance of its wares! All these are
things of the outward sense, and remain only as long as the present life. But if
you are able to mention virtue, meekness, almsgiving, nocturnal vigils, prayers,
sobriety, true wisdom of soul; commend the city for these things! To those who
inhabit the desert, the presence of these things makes it more illustrious than any
city; and again the vilest of all places, should these things not be found with its
citizens. Let us make this estimate not in the case of cities only, but also of men.
And if you see a big man, who has been brought into good condition, tall, and
surpassing others in length of limb, do not admire him, until you have
ascertained what the man's soul is. Not from the outward comeliness, but from
the beauty that. appertains to the soul, should we pronounce any persons blessed!
David was little, and short of stature; nevertheless, one so short and little, and

bare of all arms, brought down at one blow so large an army, and that tower of
flesh; and this without hurling spear, or letting fly arrow, or unsheathing sword,
but doing all with a small pebble! For this reason a certain one exhorts, saying,
"Commend not a man for his beauty, neither abhor a man for his outward
appearance. The bee is little among such as fly, but her fruit is the chief of sweet
things." [Sirach 11:2-3]
15. Thus also let us speak both of a city, and of men, and utter such wisdom
one to another, and be continually thankful to God, as well for present as for past
mercies; and call upon Him in common with all our might, that those who now
dwell in prison may be discharged, and that those who are about to be sent into
exile may return back again. They too are our members. With us they have
buffetted the waves, with us they have withstood the storm! Let us, then, beseech
the merciful God, that with us they may enjoy the calm! Let no one say, "What
farther concerns me? I am freed from danger; such an one may perish; such
another may be destroyed!" Let us not provoke God by this indifference; but
lament, as if we ourselves were in the same peril. So let us supplicate God with
intense earnestness, fulfilling that saying of Paul, "Remember them that are in
bonds, as bound with them; and them which suffer adversity, as being yourselves
also in the body. [Hebrews 13:3] Weeping also with them that weep;
condescending to men of low estate." [Romans 12:15-16] This will also be of the
greatest advantage to ourselves; for nothing uses so much to delight God, as that
we should be very ready to mourn for our own members. Him therefore let us
supplicate in common, both for things present, and for things to come; in order
that He may deliver us from punishment hereafter. For the things present,
whatever they are, are endurable, and have an end; but the torments there are
immortal, and interminable! And while we are consoled, let us also ourselves
endeavour to fall no more into such sins, knowing that hereafter we shall enjoy
no pardon! Let us, then, all in common prostrate ourselves before God; and both
while we are here, and when we are at home, let us say, "You, O Lord, art
righteous in all things which You have done towards us; for You have brought