who entrusted me with it. For what reason, then, did I wish that thou were not
mistaken in this opinion of yours? truly for the sake of those wretched and
unhappy beings (for so must I call them, who have not found out how to
discharge the duties of this office well, though thou were to say ten thousand
times over that they had been driven to undertake it, and that, therefore, their
errors therein are sins of ignorance)— for the sake, I say, of such that they might
succeed in escaping that unquenchable fire, and the outer darkness
[Matthew 25:30] and the worm that dies not [Mark 9:44] and the punishment of
being cut asunder, and perishing together with the hypocrites.
But what am I to do for you? It is not as you say, no, by no means. And if
you will, I will give you a proof of what I maintain, from the case of a kingdom,
which is not of such account with God as the priesthood. Saul, that son of Kish,
was not himself at all ambitious of becoming a king, but was going in quest of
his asses, and came to ask the prophet about them. The prophet, however,
proceeded to speak to him of the kingdom, but not even then did he run greedily
after it, though he heard about it from a prophet, but drew back and deprecated
it, saying, "Who am I, and what is my father's house." [1 Samuel 9:21] What
then? When he made a bad use of the honor which had been given him by God,
were those words of his able to rescue him from the wrath of Him who had made
him king? And was he able to say to Samuel, when rebuked by him: "Did I
greedily run and rush after the kingdom and sovereign power? I wished to lead
the undisturbed and peaceful life of ordinary men, but thou dragged me to this
post of honor. Had I remained in my low estate I should easily have escaped all
these stumbling blocks, for were I one of the obscure multitude, I should never
have been sent forth on this expedition, nor would God have committed to my
hands the war against the Amalekites, and if I had not had it committed to me, I
should not have sinned this sin." But all such arguments are weak as excuses,
and not only weak, but perilous, inasmuch as they rather kindle the wrath of
God. For he who has been promoted to great honor by God, must not advance
the greatness of his honor as an excuse for his errors, but should make God's

special favor towards him the motive for further improvement; whereas he who
thinks himself at liberty to sin because he has obtained some uncommon dignity,
what does he but study to show that the lovingkindness of God is the cause of his
personal transgression, which is always the argument of those who lead godless
and careless lives. But we ought to be on no account thus minded, nor to fall
away into the insane folly of such people, but be ambitious at all times to make
the most of such powers as we have, and to be reverent both in speech and
thought.
For (to leave the kingdom and to come to the priesthood, which is the more
immediate subject of our discourse) neither was Eli ambitious of obtaining his
high office, yet what advantage was this to him when he sinned therein? But why
do I say obtain it? Not even had he wished could he have avoided it, because he
was under a legal necessity to accept it. For he was of the tribe of Levi, and was
bound to undertake that high office which descended to him from his forefathers,
notwithstanding which even he paid no small penalty for the lawlessness of his
sons. And the very first High Priest of the Jews, concerning whom God spoke so
many words to Moses, when he was unable to withstand alone the frenzy of so
great a multitude, was he not very nearly being destroyed, but for the
intercession of his brother, which averted the wrath of God? [Exodus 32:10-11]
And since we have mentioned Moses, it will be well to show the truth of what
we are saying from what happened to him. For this same saintly Moses was so
far from grasping at the leadership of the Jews as to deprecate the offer,
[Exodus 4:13] and to decline it when God commanded him to take it, and so to
provoke the wrath of Him who appointed him; and not only then, but afterwards
when he entered upon his rule, he would gladly have died to have been set free
from it: "Kill me," says he, "if you are going to deal thus with me." But what
then? When he sinned at the waters of strife, [Numbers 20:12] could these
repeated refusals be pleaded in excuse for him? Could they prevail with God to
grant him pardon? And wherefore was he deprived of the promised land? For no
other reason, as we all know, than for this sin of his, for which that wondrous