exploded. He taught a threefold providence. First, one which belongs
to the supreme Deity, Who first and foremost has provision over
spiritual things, and thus over the whole world as regards genus,
species, and universal causes. The second providence, which is
over the individuals of all that can be generated and corrupted, he
attributed to the divinities who circulate in the heavens; that is,
certain separate substances, which move corporeal things in a
circular direction. The third providence, over human affairs, he
assigned to demons, whom the Platonic philosophers placed
between us and the gods, as Augustine tells us (De Civ. Dei, 1, 2: viii,
14).
Reply to Objection 1: It pertains to a king's dignity to have ministers
who execute his providence. But the fact that he has not the plan of
those things which are done by them arises from a deficiency in
himself. For every operative science is the more perfect, the more it
considers the particular things with which its action is concerned.
Reply to Objection 2: God's immediate provision over everything
does not exclude the action of secondary causes; which are the
executors of His order, as was said above (Question 19, Articles 5,8).
Reply to Objection 3: It is better for us not to know low and vile
things, because by them we are impeded in our knowledge of what is
better and higher; for we cannot understand many things
simultaneously; because the thought of evil sometimes perverts the
will towards evil. This does not hold with God, Who sees everything
simultaneously at one glance, and whose will cannot turn in the
direction of evil.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether providence imposes any necessity on

things foreseen?
Objection 1: It seems that divine providence imposes necessity upon
things foreseen. For every effect that has a "per se" cause, either
present or past, which it necessarily follows, happens from
necessity; as the Philosopher proves (Metaph. vi, 7). But the
providence of God, since it is eternal, pre-exists; and the effect flows
from it of necessity, for divine providence cannot be frustrated.
Therefore divine providence imposes a necessity upon things
foreseen.
Objection 2: Further, every provider makes his work as stable as he
can, lest it should fail. But God is most powerful. Therefore He
assigns the stability of necessity to things provided.
Objection 3: Further, Boethius says (De Consol. iv, 6): "Fate from the
immutable source of providence binds together human acts and
fortunes by the indissoluble connection of causes." It seems
therefore that providence imposes necessity upon things foreseen.
On the contrary, Dionysius says that (Div. Nom. iv, 23) "to corrupt
nature is not the work of providence." But it is in the nature of some
things to be contingent. Divine providence does not therefore
impose any necessity upon things so as to destroy their
contingency.
I answer that, Divine providence imposes necessity upon some
things; not upon all, as some formerly believed. For to providence it
belongs to order things towards an end. Now after the divine
goodness, which is an extrinsic end to all things, the principal good
in things themselves is the perfection of the universe; which would
not be, were not all grades of being found in things. Whence it
pertains to divine providence to produce every grade of being. And
thus it has prepared for some things necessary causes, so that they
happen of necessity; for others contingent causes, that they may
happen by contingency, according to the nature of their proximate
causes.
Reply to Objection 1: The effect of divine providence is not only that
things should happen somehow; but that they should happen either