soul,2 which is in the beast as well. If, then, we seek anything that is
above this nature, and seek truly, it is God,—namely, a nature not
created, but creating. And whether this is the Trinity, it is now our
business to demonstrate not only to believers, by authority of divine
Scripture, but also to such as understand, by some kind of reason, if we
can. And why I say, if we can, the thing itself will show better when we
have begun to argue about it in our inquiry.

### CHAP. 2.—GOD, ALTHOUGH INCOMPREHENSIBLE, IS EVER TO BE SOUGHT. THE TRACES OF THE TRINITY ARE NOT VAINLY SOUGHT IN THE CREATURE.

2. For God Himself, whom we seek, will, as I hope, help our labors, that
they may not be unfruitful, and that we may understand how it is said in
the holy Psalm, "Let the heart of them rejoice that seek the Lord. Seek the
Lord, and be strengthened: seek His face evermore." For that which is
always being sought seems as though it were never found; and how then
will the heart of them that seek rejoice, and not rather be made sad, if
they cannot find what they seek? For it is not said, The heart shall rejoice
of them that find, but of them that seek, the Lord. And yet the prophet
Isaiah testifies, that the Lord God can be found when He is sought, when
he says: "Seek ye the Lord; and as soon as ye have found Him, call upon
Him: and when He has drawn near to you, let the wicked man forsake his
ways, and the unrighteous man his thoughts." If, then, when sought, He
can be found, why is it said, "Seek ye His face evermore?" Is He perhaps
to be sought even when found? For things incomprehensible must so be
investigated, as that no one may think he has found nothing, when he has
been able to find how incomprehensible that is which he was seeking.
Why then does he so seek, if he comprehends that which he seeks to be
incomprehensible, unless because he may not give over seeking so long as
he makes progress in the inquiry itself into things incomprehensible, and
becomes ever better and better while seeking so great a good, which is
both sought in order to be found, and found in order to be sought? For it
is both sought in order that it may be found more sweetly, and found in
order that it may be sought more eagerly. The words of Wisdom in the
book of Ecclesiasticus may be taken in this meaning: "They who eat me
shall still be hungry, and they who drink me shall still be thirsty." For

they eat and drink because they find; and they still continue seeking
because they are hungry and thirst. Faith seeks, understanding finds;
whence the prophet says, "Unless ye believe, ye shall not understand."
And yet, again, understanding still seeks Him, whom it finds for "God
looked down upon the sons of men," as it is sung in the holy Psalm, "to
see if there were any that would understand, and seek after God." And
man, therefore, ought for this purpose to have understanding, that he
may seek after God.
3. We shall have tarried then long enough among those things that God
has made, in order that by them He Himself may be known that made
them. "For the invisible things of Him from the creation of the world are
clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made." And hence
they are rebuked in the book of Wisdom, "who could not out of the good
things that are seen know Him that is: neither by considering the works,
did they acknowledge the workmaster; but deemed either fire, or wind, or
the swift air, or the circle of the stars, or the violent water, or the lights of
heaven, to be the gods which govern the world: with whose beauty if they,
being delighted, took them to be gods, let them know how much better
the Lord of them is; for the first Author of beauty hath created them. But
if they were astonished at their power and virtue, let them understand by
them how much mightier He is that made them. For by the greatness and
beauty of the creatures proportionably the Maker of them is seen" I have
quoted these words from the book of Wisdom for this reason, that no one
of the faithful may think me vainly and emptily to have sought first in the
creature, step by step through certain trinities, each of their own
appropriate kind, until I came at last to the mind of man, traces of that
highest Trinity which we seek when we seek God.