violent efforts, and give ourselves up to shadow painting, and because we cannot
in reality produce bodily beauty, cunningly devise imitations by means of paints,
and dyes, and dressing of hair, and arrangement of garments, and pencilling of
eyebrows, and many other contrivances: what leisure should we have set apart
for the soul and serious matters, if we had it in our power to transfigure the body
into a really symmetrical shape? For probably, if this were our business, we
should not have any other, but should spend all our time upon it: decking the
bondmaid with countess decorations, but letting her who is the mistress of this
bond-maid lie perpetually in a state of deformity and neglect. For this reason
God, having delivered us from this vain occupation, implanted in us the power
of working upon the nobler element, and he who cannot turn an ugly body into a
comely one, can raise the soul, even when it has been reduced to the extremity of
ugliness, to the very acme of grace, and make it so amiable and desirable that not
only are good men brought to long after it but even He who is the sovereign and
God of all, even as the Psalmist also when discoursing concerning this beauty,
said "And the king shall have desire of your beauty." Do you see not also that in
the houses of prostitutes the women who are ugly and shameless would hardly
be accepted by prize-fighters, and runaway slaves, and gladiators: but should any
comely, well-born and modest woman, owing to some mischance, have been
reduced to this necessity, no man, even among those who are very illustrious and
great, would be ashamed of marriage with her? Now if there is so much pity
among men, and so much disdain of glory as to release from that bondage the
women who have often been disgraced in the brothel, and to place them in the
position of wives, much more is this the case with God, and those souls which,
owing to the usurpation of the devil, have fallen from their original noble
condition into the harlotry of this present life. And you will find the prophets
filled with examples of this kind, when they address Jerusalem; for she fell into
fornication, and a novel form of it, even as Ezekiel says: "To all harlots wages
are given, but you have given wages to your lovers, and there has been
perversion in you beyond all other women," and again another says "You sat

waiting for them like a deserted bird." [Jeremiah 3:2] This one then who has
committed fornication in this fashion God calls back again. For the captivity
which took place was not so much by way of vengeance as for the purpose of
conversion and amendment since if God had wished to punish them outright, He
would not again have brought them back to their home. He would not have
established their city and their temple in greater splendour than before: "For the
final glory of this house" He said "shall exceed the former." [Haggai 2:10] Now
if God did not exclude from repentance her who had many times committed
fornication, much more will He embrace your soul, which has now fallen for the
first time. For certainly there is no lover of corporeal beauty, even if he be very
frantic, who is so inflamed with the love of his mistress as God longs after the
salvation of our souls; and this we may perceive both from the things which
happen every day and from the divine Scriptures. See at least, both in the
introduction of Jeremiah, and many other places of the prophets, when He is
despised and contemned, how He again hastens forward and pursues the
friendship of those who turn away from him; which also He Himself made clear
in the Gospels saying, "O Jerusalem! Jerusalem! You that kill the prophets and
stone them that are sent unto you, how often would I have gathered your children
together even as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and you would
not?" [Matthew 23:37] And Paul writing to the Corinthians said "that God was
in Christ reconciling the world unto Himself, not reckoning their trespasses unto
them, and having committed unto us the word of reconciliation. We are
ambassadors therefore on behalf of Christ, as though God were entreating by us;
we beseech you on behalf of Christ be ye reconciled to God."
[2 Corinthians 5:19-20] Consider that this has now been said to us. For it is not
merely want of faith, but also an unclean life which is sufficient to work this
abominate enmity. "For the carnal mind" we read "is enmity against God."
[Romans 8:7] Let us then break down the barrier, and hew it in pieces, and
destroy it, that we may enjoy the blessed reconciliation, that we may become
again the fondly beloved of God.