the poor man from his hunger. Why do you rivet fast the chains of your sins?
Some one says, How? When you wear gold while another is perishing, when
thou, to get you vainglory, takest so much gold, while another hast not even what
to eat, have you not wedged fast your sins? Put Christ about you, and not gold;
where Mammon is, there Christ is not, where Christ is, there Mammon is not.
Would you not put on the King of all Himself? If one had offered you the purple,
and the diadem, would you not have taken them before all the gold in the world?
I give you not the regal ornaments, but I offer you to put on the King Himself.
And how can one put Christ on, does any say? Hear Paul saying, "As many of
you as were baptized into Christ, did put on Christ." [Galatians 3:27] Hear the
Apostolical precept, "Make not provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof."
[Romans 13:14] Thus does one put on Christ, if one provide not for the flesh
unto its lusts. If you have put on Christ, even the demons will fear you; but if
gold, even men will laugh you to scorn: if you have put on Christ, men also will
reverence you.
Would you appear fair and comely? Be content with the Creator's
fashioning. Why do you overlay these bits of gold, as if about to put to rights
God's creation? Would you appear comely? Clothe you in alms; clothe you in
benevolence; clothe you in modesty, humbleness. These are all more precious
than gold; these make even the beautiful yet more comely; these make even the
ill formed to be well formed. For when any one looks upon a countenance with
good will, he gives his judgment from love; but an evil woman, even though she
be beautiful, none can call beautiful; for the mind being confounded pronounces
not its sentence aright.
That Egyptian woman of old was adorned; Joseph too was adorned; which
of them was the more beautiful? I say not when she was in the palace, and he in
the prison. He was naked, but clothed in the garments of chastity; she was
clothed, but more unseemly than if she had been naked; for she had not modesty.
When you have excessively adorned you, O woman, then you have become
more unseemly than a naked one; for you have stripped you of your fair

adorning. Eve also was naked; but when she had clothed herself, then was she
more unseemly, for when she was naked indeed, she was adorned with the glory
of God; but when she had clothed herself with the garment of sin, then was she
unseemly. And thou, when arraying yourself in the garment of studied finery,
dost then appear more unseemly. For that costliness avails not to make any
appear beautiful, but that it is possible even for one dressed out to be even more
unseemly than if naked, tell me now; if you had ever put on the dresses of a
piper or a flute-player, would it not have been unseemliness? And yet those
dresses are of gold; but for this very reason it were unseemliness, because they
are of gold. For the costliness suits well with people on the stage, tragedians,
players, mimes, dancers, fighters with wild beasts; but to a woman that is a
believer, there are given other robes from God, the Only-Begotten Son of God
Himself. "For," he says, "as many as were baptized into Christ, did put on
Christ." [Galatians 3:27] Tell me, if one had given you kingly apparel, and you
had taken a beggar's dress, and put this on above it, would you not, besides the
unseemliness, have also been punished for it? You have put on the Lord of
Heaven, and of the Angels, and are you still busied about earth?
I have spoken thus, because love of ornament is of itself a great evil, even
were no other gendered by it, and it were possible to hold it without peril, (for it
incites to vainglory and to pride,) but now many other evils are gendered by
finery, evil suspicions, unseasonable expenses, evil speakings, occasions of
rapacity. For why do you adorn yourself? Tell me. Is it that you may please your
husband? Then do it at home. But here the reverse is the case. For if you would
please your own husband, please not others; but if you please others, you will
not be able to please your own. So that you should put away all your ornaments,
when you go to the forum or proceedest to the church. Besides, please not your
husband by those means which harlots use, but by those rather which wives that
are free employ. For wherein, tell me, does a wife differ from a harlot? In that
the one regards one thing only, namely, that by the beauty of her person she may
attract to herself him whom she loves; while the other both rules the house, and