have been many times crucified. "For then," he says, "He must often have
suffered since the foundation of the world."
In this place he has also veiled over something. "But now once more in the
end of the world." Why "at the end of the world"? After the many sins. If
therefore, it had taken place at the beginning, then no one would have believed;
and He must not die a second time, all would have been useless. But since later,
there were many transgressions, with reason He then appeared: which he
expresses in another place also, "Where sin abounded, grace did much more
abound. But now once in the end of the world, has He appeared to put away sin
by the sacrifice of Himself." [Romans 5:20]

Hebrews 9:27
4. [Hebrews 9:27] "And as it is appointed unto men once to die, but after
this, the Judgment." He next says also why He died once [only]: because He
became a ransom by one death. "It had been appointed" (he says) "unto men
once to die." This then is [the meaning of] "He died once," for all. (What then?
Do we no longer die that death? We do indeed die, but we do not continue in it:
which is not to die at all. For the tyranny of death, and death indeed, is when he
who dies is never more allowed to return to life. But when after dying is living,
and that a better life, this is not death, but sleep.) Since then death was to have
possession of all, therefore He died that He might deliver us.

Hebrews 9:28
"So Christ was once offered." By whom offered? Evidently by Himself.
Here he says that He is not Priest only, but Victim also, and what is sacrificed.
On this account are [the words] "was offered." "Was once offered" (he says) "to
bear the sins of many." Why "of many," and not "of all"? Because not all
believed. For He died indeed for all, that is His part: for that death was a
counterbalance against the destruction of all men. But He did not bear the sins of
all men, because they were not willing.
And what is [the meaning of] "He bare the sins"? Just as in the Oblation we
bear up our sins and say, "Whether we have sinned voluntarily or involuntarily,
do Thou forgive," that is, we make mention of them first, and then ask for their
forgiveness. So also was it done here. Where has Christ done this? Hear Himself
saying, "And for their sakes I sanctify Myself." [John 17:19] Lo! He bore the
sins. He took them from men, and bore them to the Father; not that He might
determine anything against them [mankind], but that He might forgive them.
"Unto them that look for Him shall He appear" (he says) "the second time
without sin unto salvation." What is "without sin"? It is as much as to say, He
sins not. For neither did He die as owing the debt of death, nor yet because of
sin. But how "shall He appear"? To punish, you say. He did not however say
this, but what was cheering; "shall He appear unto them that look for Him,
without sin unto salvation." So that for the time to come they no longer need
sacrifices to save themselves, but to do this by deeds.