FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.105, C.5.

the Lord." Moreover, they are commanded to teach them the rules of
right conduct: wherefore it is written (Dt. 21:20) that the parents had
to say: "He slighteth hearing our admonitions, he giveth himself to
revelling and to debauchery."
Reply to Objection 1: As the children of Israel had been delivered by
the Lord from slavery, and for this reason were bound to the service
of God, He did not wish them to be slaves in perpetuity. Hence it is
written (Lev. 25:39, seqq.): "If thy brother, constrained by poverty,
sell himself to thee, thou shalt not oppress him with the service of
bondservants: but he shall be as a hireling and a sojourner . . . for
they are My servants, and I brought them out of the land of Egypt: let
them not be sold as bondmen": and consequently, since they were
slaves, not absolutely but in a restricted sense, after a lapse of time
they were set free.
Reply to Objection 2: This commandment is to be understood as
referring to a servant whom his master seeks to kill, or to help him in
committing some sin.
Reply to Objection 3: With regard to the ill-treatment of servants, the
Law seems to have taken into consideration whether it was certain
or not: since if it were certain, the Law fixed a penalty: for maiming,
the penalty was forfeiture of the servant, who was ordered to be
given his liberty: while for slaying, the punishment was that of a
murderer, when the slave died under the blow of his master. If,
however, the hurt was not certain, but only probable, the Law did not
impose any penalty as regards a man's own servant: for instance if
the servant did not die at once after being struck, but after some
days: for it would be uncertain whether he died as a result of the
blows he received. For when a man struck a free man, yet so that he
did not die at once, but "walked abroad again upon his staff," he that
struck him was quit of murder, even though afterwards he died.
Nevertheless he was bound to pay the doctor's fees incurred by the
victim of his assault. But this was not the case if a man killed his
own servant: because whatever the servant had, even his very
person, was the property of his master. Hence the reason for his not
being subject to a pecuniary penalty is set down as being "because
it is his money."
Reply to Objection 4: As stated above (ad 1), no Jew could own a
Jew as a slave absolutely: but only in a restricted sense, as a
hireling for a fixed time. And in this way the Law permitted that

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.105, C.5.

through stress of poverty a man might sell his son or daughter. This
is shown by the very words of the Law, where we read: "If any man
sell his daughter to be a servant, she shall not go out as bondwomen
are wont to go out." Moreover, in this way a man might sell not only
his son, but even himself, rather as a hireling than as a slave,
according to Lev. 25:39,40: "If thy brother, constrained by poverty,
sell himself to thee, thou shalt not oppress him with the service of
bondservants: but he shall be as a hireling and a sojourner."
Reply to Objection 5: As the Philosopher says (Ethic. x, 9), the
paternal authority has the power only of admonition; but not that of
coercion, whereby rebellious and headstrong persons can be
compelled. Hence in this case the Lord commanded the stubborn
son to be punished by the rulers of the city.
Reply to Objection 6: The Lord forbade them to marry strange
women on account of the danger of seduction, lest they should be
led astray into idolatry. And specially did this prohibition apply with
respect to those nations who dwelt near them, because it was more
probable that they would adopt their religious practices. When,
however, the woman was willing to renounce idolatry, and become
an adherent of the Law, it was lawful to take her in marriage: as was
the case with Ruth whom Booz married. Wherefore she said to her
mother-in-law (Ruth 1:16): "Thy people shall be my people, and thy
God my God." Accordingly it was not permitted to marry a captive
woman unless she first shaved her hair, and pared her nails, and put
off the raiment wherein she was taken, and mourned for her father
and mother, in token that she renounced idolatry for ever.
Reply to Objection 7: As Chrysostom says (Hom. xlviii super Matth.),
"because death was an unmitigated evil for the Jews, who did
everything with a view to the present life, it was ordained that
children should be born to the dead man through his brother: thus
affording a certain mitigation to his death. It was not, however,
ordained that any other than his brother or one next of kin should
marry the wife of the deceased, because" the offspring of this union
"would not be looked upon as that of the deceased: and moreover, a
stranger would not be under the obligation to support the household
of the deceased, as his brother would be bound to do from motives
of justice on account of his relationship." Hence it is evident that in
marrying the wife of his dead brother, he took his dead brother's
place.