to express Himself thus: "But I say unto you." The servants, again, [who came] as from their
Lord, spake after the manner of servants, [delivering a message]; and they therefore used to say,
"Thus saith the Lord."
2. Whom these men did therefore preach to the unbelievers as Lord, Him did Christ teach to
those who obey Him; and the God who had called those of the former dispensation, is the same as
He who has received those of the latter. In other words, He who at first used that law which entails
bondage, is also He who did in after times [call His people] by means of adoption. For God planted
the vineyard of the human race when at the first He formed Adam and chose the fathers; then He
let it out to husbandmen when He established the Mosaic dispensation: He hedged it round about,
that is, He gave particular instructions with regard to their worship: He built a tower, [that is], He
chose Jerusalem: He digged a winepress, that is, He prepared a receptacle of the prophetic Spirit.
And thus did He send prophets prior to the transmigration to Babylon, and after that event others
again in greater number than the former, to seek the fruits, saying thus to them (the Jews): "Thus
saith the Lord, Cleanse your ways and your doings, execute just judgment, and look each one with
pity and compassion on his brother: oppress not the widow nor the orphan, the proselyte nor the
poor, and let none of you treasure up evil against his brother in your hearts, and love not false
swearing. Wash you, make you clean, put away evil from your hearts, learn to do well, seek
judgment, protect the oppressed, judge the fatherless (pupillo), plead for the widow; and come, let
us reason together, saith the Lord." And again: "Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips that
they speak no guile; depart from evil, and do good; seek peace, and pursue it." In preaching
these things, the prophets sought the fruits of righteousness. But last of all He sent to those
unbelievers His own Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, whom the wicked husbandmen cast out of the
vineyard when they had slain Him. Wherefore the Lord God did even give it up (no longer hedged
around, but thrown open throughout all the world) to other husbandmen, who render the fruits in
their seasons,—the beautiful elect tower being also raised everywhere. For the illustrious Church
is [now] everywhere, and everywhere is the winepress digged: because those who do receive the
Spirit are everywhere. For inasmuch as the former have rejected the Son of God, and cast Him out
of the vineyard when they slew Him, God has justly rejected them, and given to the Gentiles outside
the vineyard the fruits of its cultivation. This is in accordance with what Jeremiah says, "The Lord
hath rejected and cast off the nation which does these things; for the children of Judah have done
evil in my sight, saith the Lord." And again in like manner does Jeremiah speak: "I set watchmen
over you; hearken to the sound of the trumpet; and they said, We will not hearken. Therefore have
the Gentiles heard, and they who feed the flocks in them." It is therefore one and the same Father