resisted, saying that he was far from such confidence as that; for he ever had his
sin before his eyes, as if it had only just taken place; but when they related all
which had happened to them they then induced him to pray; and having prayed
he put an end to the drought. And what happened to that young man who was at
first a disciple of John the son of Zebedee, but afterwards for a long time became
a robber chief, and then again, having been captured by the holy hands of the
blessed Apostle returned from the robber dens and lairs to his former virtue, you
are not ignorant, but know it all as accurately as I do: and I have often heard you
admiring the great condescension of the saint, and how he first of all kissed the
blood-stained hand of the young man, embracing him, and so brought him back
to his former condition.
18. Moreover also the blessed Paul not only welcomes Onesimus the
unprofitable runaway thief, because he was converted, but also asks his master to
treat him who had repented, on equal terms of honour with his teacher, thus
saying: "I beseech you for my son Onesimus, whom I have begotten in my bonds,
who was aforetime unprofitable to you, but now is profitable to you and to me,
whom I have sent back to you; thou therefore receive him, that is my very heart,
whom I would fain have kept with me, that in your behalf he might minister unto
me in the bonds of the Gospel; but without your mind I would do nothing that
your goodness should not be as of necessity, but of free will. For perhaps he was
therefore parted from you for a season that you should have him back for ever;
no longer as a servant, but above a servant, a brother beloved, specially unto
me; but how much rather to you both in the flesh and in the Lord? If then you
hold me as a partner, receive him as myself." And the same apostle, in writing to
the Corinthians, said, "Lest when I come I should mourn over many of those who
have sinned beforehand and have not repented;" and again, "as I have said
beforehand, so do I again declare beforehand, that if I come again I will not
spare." Do you see who they are whom he mourns, and whom he does not
spare? Not those who have sinned, but those who have not repented, and not
simply those who have not repented, but those who have been called once and

again to this work, and would not be persuaded. For the expression "I have said
beforehand and do now say beforehand, as if I were present the second time, and
being absent I write," implies exactly that which we are afraid may take place
now in our case. For although Paul is not present who then threatened the
Corinthians, yet Christ is present, who was then speaking through his mouth; and
if we continue obdurate, He will not spare us, but will smite us with a mighty
blow, both in this world and the next. "Let us then anticipate His countenance by
our confession," let us pour out our hearts before Him. For "you have sinned,"
we read, "do not add thereto any more, and pray on behalf of your former
deeds;" [Sirach 21:1] and again "a righteous man is his own accuser in the first
instance." Let us not then tarry for the accuser, but let us seize his place
beforehand, and so let us make our judge more merciful by means of our
candour. Now I know indeed that you confess your sins, and call yourself
miserable above measure; but this is not the only thing I wish, but I long for you
to be persuaded that it can justify you. For as long as you make this confession
unprofitable, even if you accuse yourself, you will not be able to desist from the
sins which follow it. For no one will be able to do anything with zeal and the
proper method, unless he has first of all persuaded himself that he does it to
advantage. For even the sower, after he has scattered his seed, unless he expects
the harvest, will never reap. For who would choose to fatigue himself in vain, if
he was not to gain any good from his labor? So then he also who sows words,
and tears, and confession, unless he does this with a good hope, will not be able
to desist from sinning, being still held down by the evil of despair; but just as
that husbandman who despairs of any crop of fruit will not in future hinder any
of those things which damage the seeds, so also he who sows his confession with
tears, but does not expect any advantage for this, will not be able to overthrow
those things which spoil repentance. And what does spoil repentance is being
again entangled in the same evils. "For there is one" we read, "who builds, and
one who pulls down, what have they gained more than toil? He who is dipped in
water because of contact with a dead body, and then touches it again, what has