THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.40, C.4.

wholly free from care of worldly matters: which is impossible for
those who are possessed of wealth. Wherefore the Lord Himself,
when sending the apostles to preach, said to them (Mt. 10:9): "Do not
possess gold nor silver." And the apostles (Acts 6:2) say: "It is not
reasonable that we should leave the word of God and serve tables."
Secondly, because just as He took upon Himself the death of the
body in order to bestow spiritual life on us, so did He bear bodily
poverty, in order to enrich us spiritually, according to 2 Cor. 8:9:
"You know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ: that . . . He became
poor for our sakes that through His poverty we might be rich."
Thirdly, lest if He were rich His preaching might be ascribed to
cupidity. Wherefore Jerome says on Mt. 10:9, that if the disciples had
been possessed of wealth, "they had seemed to preach for gain, not
for the salvation of mankind." And the same reason applies to Christ.
Fourthly, that the more lowly He seemed by reason of His poverty,
the greater might the power of His Godhead be shown to be. Hence
in a sermon of the Council of Ephesus (P. iii, c. ix) we read: "He
chose all that was poor and despicable, all that was of small account
and hidden from the majority, that we might recognize His Godhead
to have transformed the terrestrial sphere. For this reason did He
choose a poor maid for His Mother, a poorer birthplace; for this
reason did He live in want. Learn this from the manger."
Reply to Objection 1: Those who wish to live virtuously need to
avoid abundance of riches and beggary, in as far as these are
occasions of sin: since abundance of riches is an occasion for being
proud; and beggary is an occasion of thieving and lying, or even of
perjury. But forasmuch as Christ was incapable of sin, He had not
the same motive as Solomon for avoiding these things. Yet neither is
every kind of beggary an occasion of theft and perjury, as Solomon
seems to add (Prov. 30:8); but only that which is involuntary, in order
to avoid which, a man is guilty of theft and perjury. But voluntary
poverty is not open to this danger: and such was the poverty chosen
by Christ.
Reply to Objection 2: A man may feed and clothe himself in
conformity with others, not only by possessing riches, but also by
receiving the necessaries of life from those who are rich. This is
what happened in regard to Christ: for it is written (Lk. 8:2,3) that

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.40, C.4.

certain women followed Christ and "ministered unto Him of their
substance." For, as Jerome says on Mt. 27:55, "It was a Jewish
custom, nor was it thought wrong for women, following the ancient
tradition of their nation, out of their private means to provide their
instructors with food and clothing. But as this might give scandal to
the heathens, Paul says that he gave it up": thus it was possible for
them to be fed out of a common fund, but not to possess wealth,
without their duty of preaching being hindered by anxiety.
Reply to Objection 3: Humility is not much to be praised in one who
is poor of necessity. But in one who, like Christ, is poor willingly,
poverty itself is a sign of very great humility.