individuals of the genus substance should have a special name of
their own; for they are called "hypostases," or first substances.
Further still, in a more special and perfect way, the particular and the
individual are found in the rational substances which have dominion
over their own actions; and which are not only made to act, like
others; but which can act of themselves; for actions belong to
singulars. Therefore also the individuals of the rational nature have a
special name even among other substances; and this name is
"person."
Thus the term "individual substance" is placed in the definition of
person, as signifying the singular in the genus of substance; and the
term "rational nature" is added, as signifying the singular in rational
substances.
Reply to Objection 1: Although this or that singular may not be
definable, yet what belongs to the general idea of singularity can be
defined; and so the Philosopher (De Praedic., cap. De substantia)
gives a definition of first substance; and in this way Boethius defines
person.
Reply to Objection 2: In the opinion of some, the term "substance" in
the definition of person stands for first substance, which is the
hypostasis; nor is the term "individual" superfluously added,
forasmuch as by the name of hypostasis or first substance the idea
of universality and of part is excluded. For we do not say that man in
general is an hypostasis, nor that the hand is since it is only a part.
But where "individual" is added, the idea of assumptibility is
excluded from person; for the human nature in Christ is not a
person, since it is assumed by a greater---that is, by the Word of
God. It is, however, better to say that substance is here taken in a
general sense, as divided into first and second, and when
"individual" is added, it is restricted to first substance.
Reply to Objection 3: Substantial differences being unknown to us,
or at least unnamed by us, it is sometimes necessary to use
accidental differences in the place of substantial; as, for example, we
may say that fire is a simple, hot, and dry body: for proper accidents
are the effects of substantial forms, and make them known. Likewise,
terms expressive of intention can be used in defining realities if used
to signify things which are unnamed. And so the term "individual" is

placed in the definition of person to signify the mode of subsistence
which belongs to particular substances.
Reply to Objection 4: According to the Philosopher (Metaph. v, 5),
the word "nature" was first used to signify the generation of living
things, which is called nativity. And because this kind of generation
comes from an intrinsic principle, this term is extended to signify the
intrinsic principle of any kind of movement. In this sense he defines
"nature" (Phys. ii, 3). And since this kind of principle is either formal
or material, both matter and form are commonly called nature. And
as the essence of anything is completed by the form; so the essence
of anything, signified by the definition, is commonly called nature.
And here nature is taken in that sense. Hence Boethius says (De
Duab. Nat.) that, "nature is the specific difference giving its form to
each thing," for the specific difference completes the definition, and
is derived from the special form of a thing. So in the definition of
"person," which means the singular in a determined "genus," it is
more correct to use the term "nature" than "essence," because the
latter is taken from being, which is most common.
Reply to Objection 5: The soul is a part of the human species; and
so, although it may exist in a separate state, yet since it ever retains
its nature of unibility, it cannot be called an individual substance,
which is the hypostasis or first substance, as neither can the hand
nor any other part of man; thus neither the definition nor the name of
person belongs to it.