FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.59, C.4.

that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves." A third reason is
because a virtuous man, though not actually in a state of sin, may
have been so in the past. And he is to be commended if he sorrow
for that sin, according to 2 Cor. 7:10: "The sorrow that is according
to God worketh penance steadfast unto salvation." Fourthly,
because he may praiseworthily sorrow for another's sin. Therefore
sorrow is compatible with moral virtue in the same way as the other
passions are when moderated by reason.
Their second reason for holding this opinion was that sorrow is
about evil present, whereas fear is for evil to come: even as pleasure
is about a present good, while desire is for a future good. Now the
enjoyment of a good possessed, or the desire to have good that one
possesses not, may be consistent with virtue: but depression of the
mind resulting from sorrow for a present evil, is altogether contrary
to reason: wherefore it is incompatible with virtue. But this is
unreasonable. For there is an evil which can be present to the
virtuous man, as we have just stated; which evil is rejected by
reason. Wherefore the sensitive appetite follows reason's rejection
by sorrowing for that evil; yet moderately, according as reason
dictates. Now it pertains to virtue that the sensitive appetite be
conformed to reason, as stated above (Article 1, ad 2). Wherefore
moderated sorrow for an object which ought to make us sorrowful, is
a mark of virtue; as also the Philosopher says (Ethic. ii, 6,7).
Moreover, this proves useful for avoiding evil: since, just as good is
more readily sought for the sake of pleasure, so is evil more
undauntedly shunned on account of sorrow.
Accordingly we must allow that sorrow for things pertaining to virtue
is incompatible with virtue: since virtue rejoices in its own. On the
other hand, virtue sorrows moderately for all that thwarts virtue, no
matter how.
Reply to Objection 1: The passage quoted proves that the wise man
is not made sorrowful by wisdom. Yet he sorrows for anything that
hinders wisdom. Consequently there is no room for sorrow in the
blessed, in whom there can be no hindrance to wisdom.
Reply to Objection 2: Sorrow hinders the work that makes us
sorrowful: but it helps us to do more readily whatever banishes
sorrow.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.59, C.4.

Reply to Objection 3: Immoderate sorrow is a disease of the mind:
but moderate sorrow is the mark of a well-conditioned mind,
according to the present state of life.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.59, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether all the moral virtues are about the

passions?
Objection 1: It would seem that all the moral virtues are about the
passions. For the Philosopher says (Ethic. ii, 3) that "moral virtue is
about objects of pleasure and sorrow." But pleasure and sorrow are
passions, as stated above (Question 23, Article 4; Question 31,
Article 1; Question 35, Articles 1, 2). Therefore all the moral virtues
are about the passions.
Objection 2: Further, the subject of the moral virtues is a faculty
which is rational by participation, as the Philosopher states (Ethic. i,
13). But the passions are in this part of the soul, as stated above
(Question 22, Article 3). Therefore every moral virtue is about the
passions.
Objection 3: Further, some passion is to be found in every moral
virtue: and so either all are about the passions, or none are. But
some are about the passions, as fortitude and temperance, as stated
in Ethic. iii, 6,10. Therefore all the moral virtues are about the
passions.
On the contrary, Justice, which is a moral virtue, is not about the
passions; as stated in Ethic. v, 1, seqq.
I answer that, Moral virtue perfects the appetitive part of the soul by
directing it to good as defined by reason. Now good as defined by
reason is that which is moderated or directed by reason.
Consequently there are moral virtues about all matters that are
subject to reason's direction and moderation. Now reason directs,
not only the passions of the sensitive appetite, but also the
operations of the intellective appetite, i.e. the will, which is not the
subject of a passion, as stated above (Question 22, Article 3).
Therefore not all the moral virtues are about passions, but some are
about passions, some about operations.
Reply to Objection 1: The moral virtues are not all about pleasures
and sorrows, as being their proper matter; but as being something
resulting from their proper acts. For every virtuous man rejoices in
acts of virtue, and sorrows for the contrary. Hence the Philosopher,
after the words quoted, adds, "if virtues are about actions and