[1 Cor. xiv. 16.]

By this Achamoth is denoted, who was said to give rise to the material elements, after the image of the Divine.

the elements which He also terms Æons, [the power] of each one uttering its own enunciation,
because no one of them was capable by itself of uttering the whole.
3. Moreover, the Tetrad, explaining these things to him more fully, said:—I wish to show thee
Aletheia (Truth) herself; for I have brought her down from the dwellings above, that thou mayest
see her without a veil, and understand her beauty —that thou mayest also hear her speaking, and
admire her wisdom. Behold, then, her head on high, Alpha and Omega; her neck, Beta and Psi; her
shoulders with her hands, Gamma and Chi; her breast, Delta and Phi; her diaphragm, Epsilon and
Upsilon; her back, Zeta and Tau; her belly, Eta and Sigma; her thighs, Theta and Rho; her knees,
Iota and Pi; her legs, Kappa and Omicron; her ankles, Lambda and Xi; her feet, Mu and Nu. Such
is the body of Truth, according to this magician, such the figure of the element, such the character
of the letter. And he calls this element Anthropos (Man), and says that is the fountain of all speech,
and the beginning of all sound, and the expression of all that is unspeakable, and the mouth of the
silent Sige. This indeed is the body of Truth. But do thou, elevating the thoughts of thy mind on
high, listen from the mouth of Truth to the self-begotten Word, who is also the dispenser of the
bounty of the Father.
4. When she (the Tetrad) had spoken these things, Aletheia looked at him, opened her mouth,
and uttered a word. That word was a name, and the name was this one which we do know and speak
of, viz., Christ Jesus. When she had uttered this name, she at once relapsed into silence. And as
Marcus waited in the expectation that she would say something more, the Tetrad again came forward
and said:—Thou hast reckoned as contemptible that word which thou hast heard from the mouth
of Aletheia. This which thou knowest and seemest to possess, is not an ancient name. For thou
possessest the sound of it merely, whilst thou art ignorant of its power. For Jesus (!"#$%&') is a
name arithmetically symbolical, consisting of six letters, and is known by all those that belong
to the called. But that which is among the Æons of the Pleroma consists of many parts, and is of
another form and shape, and is known by those [angels] who are joined in affinity with Him, and
whose figures (mightinesses) are always present with Him.
5. Know, then, that the four-and-twenty letters which you possess are symbolical emanations
of the three powers that contain the entire number of the elements above. For you are to reckon
thus —that the nine mute letters are [the images] of Pater and Aletheia, because they are without
voice, that is, of such a nature as cannot be uttered or pronounced. But the semi-vowels represent
Logos and Zoe, because they are, as it were, midway between the consonants and the vowels,
of the mystic number of 888 formed (10+8+200+70+400+200) by the numerical value of the letters in the word !"#$%&'.