dead works, never; and, again, spending much zeal in the pursuit of riches, and
yet supposing the whole is undone by the crowing of a single cock. "So darkened
are they in their understanding." Their soul is filled with all sorts of terrors. For
instance: "Such a person," one will say, "was the first who met me, as I was
going out of the house"; of course ten thousand evils must certainly ensue. At
another time, "the wretch of a servant in giving me my shoes, held out the left
shoe first,"— terrible mishaps and mischiefs! "I myself in coming out set forth
with the left foot foremost"; and this too is a token of misfortune. And these are
the evils that occur about the house. Then, as I go out, my right eye shoots up
from beneath. This is a sure sign of tears. Again the women, when the reeds
strike against the standards, and ring, or when they themselves are scratched by
the shuttle, turn this also into a sign. And again, when they strike the web with
the shuttle, and do it with some vehemence, and then the reeds on the top from
the intensity of the blow strike against the standards and ring, this again they
make a sign, and ten thousand things besides, deserving of ridicule. And so if an
ass should bray, or a cock should crow, or a man should sneeze, or whatever else
may happen, like men bound with ten thousand chains, or, as I was saying, like
men confined in the dark, they suspect everything, and are more slavish than all
the slaves in the world.
But let it not be so with us. But scorning all these things, as men living in
the light, and having our citizenship in Heaven, and having nothing in common
with earth, let us regard but one thing as terrible, that is, sin, and offending
against God. And if there be not this, let us scorn all the rest, and him that
brought them in, the Devil. For these things let us give thanks to God. Let us be
diligent, not only that we ourselves be never caught by this slavery, but if any of
those who are dear to us have been caught, let us break his bonds asunder, let us
release him from this most bitter and contemptible captivity, let us make him
free and unshackled for his course toward Heaven, let us raise up his flagging
wings, and teach him to be wise for life and doctrine's sake. Let us give thanks to
God for all things. Let us beseech Him that He will not declare us unworthy of

the gifts offered to us, and let us ourselves withal endeavor to contribute our own
part, that we may teach not only by speaking, but by acting also. For thus shall
we be able to attain His unnumbered blessings, of which God grant we may all
be counted worthy, in Christ Jesus our Lord with whom, to the Father and the
Holy Ghost together, be glory, might, and honor, now, henceforth, and for ever
and ever. Amen.

## Homily 13 on Ephesians

Ephesians 4:17-19
"This I say therefore, and testify in the Lord, that you no longer walk as the
Gentiles also walk, in the vanity of their mind, being darkened in their
understanding, alienated from the life of God, because of the ignorance that is in
them, because of the hardening of their heart: who being past feeling, gave
themselves up to lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with greediness."
These words are not addressed to the Ephesians only, but are now addressed
also to you; and that, not from me, but from Paul; or rather, neither from me nor
from Paul, but from the grace of the Spirit. And we then ought so to feel, as
though that grace itself were uttering them. And now hear what it says. "This I
say therefore, and testify in the Lord, that you no longer walk as the Gentiles
also walk, in the vanity of their mind, being darkened in their understanding,
alienated from the life of God because of the ignorance that is in them, because
of the hardening of their heart." If then it is ignorance, if it is hardening, why
blame it? if a man is ignorant, it were just, not that he should be ill-treated for it,
nor be blamed, but that he should be informed of those things of which he is
ignorant. But mark how at once he cuts them off from all excuse. "Who being
past feeling," says he, "gave themselves up to lasciviousness, to work all
uncleanness with greediness; but you did not so learn Christ." Here he shows us,
that the cause of their hardening was their way of life, and that their life was the
consequence of their own indolence and want of feeling.
"Who being past feeling," says he, "gave themselves up."
Whenever then ye hear, that "God gave them up unto a reprobate mind"
[Romans 1:28], remember this expression, that "they gave themselves up." If
then they gave themselves over, how did God give them over? And if again God
gave them over, how did they give themselves over? You see the seeming