THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.81, C.3.

I answer that, Hilary, in commenting on Mt. 26:17, held that Christ did
not give His body and blood to Judas. And this would have been
quite proper, if the malice of Judas be considered. But since Christ
was to serve us as a pattern of justice, it was not in keeping with His
teaching authority to sever Judas, a hidden sinner, from Communion
with the others without an accuser and evident proof. lest the
Church's prelates might have an example for doing the like, and lest
Judas himself being exasperated might take occasion of sinning.
Therefore, it remains to be said that Judas received our Lord's body
and blood with the other disciples, as Dionysius says (Eccl. Hier. iii),
and Augustine (Tract. lxii in Joan.).
Reply to Objection 1: This is Hilary's argument, to show that Judas
did not receive Christ's body. But it is not cogent; because Christ is
speaking to the disciples, from whose company Judas separated
himself: and it was not Christ that excluded him. Therefore Christ for
His part drinks the wine even with Judas in the kingdom of God; but
Judas himself repudiated this banquet.
Reply to Objection 2: The wickedness of Judas was known to Christ
as God; but it was unknown to Him, after the manner in which men
know it. Consequently, Christ did not repel Judas from Communion;
so as to furnish an example that such secret sinners are not to be
repelled by other priests.
Reply to Objection 3: Without any doubt Judas did not receive
Christ's body in the dipped bread; he received mere bread. Yet as
Augustine observes (Tract. lxii in Joan.), "perchance the feigning of
Judas is denoted by the dipping of the bread; just as some things
are dipped to be dyed. If, however, the dipping signifies here
anything good" (for instance, the sweetness of the Divine goodness,
since bread is rendered more savory by being dipped), "then, not
undeservedly, did condemnation follow his ingratitude for that same
good." And owing to that ingratitude, "what is good became evil to
him, as happens to them who receive Christ's body unworthily."
And as Augustine says (Tract. lxii in Joan.), "it must be understood
that our Lord had already distributed the sacrament of His body and
blood to all His disciples, among whom was Judas also, as Luke
narrates: and after that, we came to this, where, according to the
relation of John, our Lord, by dipping and handing the morsel, does
most openly declare His betrayer."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.81, C.3.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.81, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether Christ received and gave to the disciples

His impassible body?
Objection 1: It seems that Christ both received and gave to the
disciples His impassible body. Because on Mt. 17:2, "He was
transfigured before them," the gloss says: "He gave to the disciples
at the supper that body which He had through nature, but neither
mortal nor passible." And again, on Lev. 2:5, "if thy oblation be from
the frying-pan," the gloss says: "The Cross mightier than all things
made Christ's flesh fit for being eaten, which before the Passion did
not seem so suited." But Christ gave His body as suited for eating.
Therefore He gave it just as it was after the Passion, that is,
impassible and immortal.
Objection 2: Further, every passible body suffers by contact and by
being eaten. Consequently, if Christ's body was passible, it would
have suffered both from contact and from being eaten by the
disciples.
Objection 3: Further, the sacramental words now spoken by the
priest in the person of Christ are not more powerful than when
uttered by Christ Himself. But now by virtue of the sacramental
words it is Christ's impassible and immortal body which is
consecrated upon the altar. Therefore, much more so was it then.
On the contrary, As Innocent III says (De Sacr. Alt. Myst. iv), "He
bestowed on the disciples His body such as it was." But then He had
a passible and a mortal body. Therefore, He gave a passible and
mortal body to the disciples.
I answer that, Hugh of Saint Victor (Innocent III, De Sacr. Alt. Myst.
iv), maintained, that before the Passion, Christ assumed at various
times the four properties of a glorified body ---namely, subtlety in His
birth, when He came forth from the closed womb of the Virgin;
agility, when He walked dryshod upon the sea; clarity, in the
Transfiguration; and impassibility at the Last Supper, when He gave
His body to the disciples to be eaten. And according to this He gave
His body in an impassible and immortal condition to His disciples.
But whatever may be the case touching the other qualities,
concerning which we have already stated what should be held