wondrous laws, casts out that which was sure to be harboring there. And what
was it that was harboring there, and making an obstacle?
2. They thought that He, thus speaking, did so with a view to the abrogation
of the ancient institutions. This suspicion therefore He heals; nor here only does
He so, but elsewhere also again. Thus, since they accounted Him no less than an
adversary of God, from this sort of reason, namely, His not keeping the sabbath;
He, to heal such their suspicion, there also again sets forth His pleas, of which
some indeed were proper to Himself; as when He says, "My Father works, and I
work;" [John 5:17] but some had in them much condescension, as when He
brings forward the sheep lost on the sabbath day, [Matthew 12:11] and points out
that the law is disturbed for its preservation, and makes mention again of
circumcision, as having this same effect. [John 7:23]
Wherefore we see also that He often speaks words somewhat beneath Him,
to remove the semblance of His being an adversary of God.
For this cause He who had raised thousands of the dead with a word only,
when He was calling Lazarus, added also a prayer; and then, lest this should
make Him appear less than Him that begot Him, He, to correct this suspicion,
added, "I said these things, because of the people which stands by, that they may
believe that you have sent me." And neither does He work all things as one who
acted by His own power, that He might thoroughly correct their weakness; nor
does He all things with prayer, lest He should leave matter of evil suspicion to
them that should follow, as though He were without strength or power: but He
mingles the latter with the former, and those again with these. Neither does He
this indiscriminately, but with His own proper wisdom. For while He does the
greater works authoritatively, in the less He looks up unto Heaven. Thus, when
absolving sins, and revealing His secrets, and opening Paradise, and driving
away devils, and cleansing lepers, and bridling death, and raising the dead by
thousands, He did all by way of command: but when, what was much less than
these, He was causing many loaves to spring forth out of few, then He looked up
to Heaven: signifying that not through weakness He does this. For He who could

do the greater with authority, how in the lesser could He need prayer? But as I
was saying, He does this to silence their shamelessness. The same reckoning,
then, I bid you make of His words also, when you hear Him speak lowly things.
For many in truth are the causes both for words and for actions of that cast: as,
for instance, that He might not be supposed alien from God; His instructing and
waiting on all men; His teaching humility; His being encompassed with flesh;
the Jews' inability to hear all at once; His teaching us to utter no high word of
ourselves. For this cause many times, having in His own person said much that is
lowly of Himself, the great things He leaves to be said by others. Thus He
Himself indeed, reasoning with the Jews, said, "Before Abraham was, I Am:"
[John 8:58] but His disciple not thus, but, "In the beginning was the Word, and
the Word was with God, and the Word was God." [John 1:1]
Again, that He Himself made Heaven, and earth, and sea, and all things
visible and invisible, in His own person He nowhere expressly said: but His
disciple, speaking plainly out, and suppressing nothing, affirms this once, twice,
yea often: writing that "all things were made by Him;" and, "without Him was
not one thing made;" and, He was in the world, and the world was made by Him.
And why marvel, if others have said greater things of Him than He of
Himself; since (what is more) in many cases, what He showed forth by His
deeds, by His words He uttered not openly? Thus that it was Himself who made
mankind He showed clearly even by that blind man; but when He was speaking
of our formation at the beginning, He said not, "I made," but "He who made
them, made them male and female." [Matthew 19:4] Again, that He created the
world and all things therein, He demonstrated by the fishes, by the wine, by the
loaves, by the calm in the sea, by the sunbeam which He averted on the Cross;
and by very many things besides: but in words He has nowhere said this plainly,
though His disciples are continually declaring it, both John, and Paul, and Peter.
For if they who night and day hear Him discourse, and see Him work
marvels; to whom He explained many things in private, and gave so great power
as even to raise the dead; whom He made so perfect, as to forsake all things for