I say, not boldness nor courage, for these are congenial. But these are one thing,
and that another; so too humility is one thing, and meanness, flattery, and
adulation another.
I will now, if you wish, give you examples of all these qualities. For these
things which are contraries, seem in some way to be placed near together, as the
tares to the wheat, and the thorns to the rose. But while babes might easily be
deceived, they who are men in truth, and are skilled in spiritual husbandry, know
how to separate what is really good from the bad. Let me then lay before you
examples of these qualities from the Scriptures. What is flattery, and meanness,
and adulation? Ziba flattered David out of season, and falsely slandered his
master. [2 Samuel 16:1-3] Much more did Ahitophel flatter Absalom. [2 Samuel
17:1-4] But David was not so, but he was humble. For the deceitful are flatterers,
as when they say, "O king, live for ever." [Daniel 2:4] Again, what flatterers the
magicians are.
We shall find much to exemplify this in the case of Paul in the Acts. When
he disputed with the Jews he did not flatter them, but was humble-minded (for
he knew how to speak boldly), as when he says, "I, brethren, though I had done
nothing against the people, or the customs of our fathers, yet was delivered
prisoner from Jerusalem." [Acts 28:17]
That these were the words of humility, listen how he rebukes them in what
follows, "Well spoke the Holy Ghost, By hearing you shall hear, and shall in
nowise understand, and seeing you shall see, and in nowise perceive." [Acts
28:25]
Do you see his courage? Behold also the courage of John the Baptist, which
he used before Herod; when he said, "It is not lawful for you to have your
brother Philip's wife." [Mark 6:18] This was boldness, this was courage. Not so
the words of Shimei, when he said, "Begone, thou man of blood" [2 Samuel
16:7], and yet he too spoke with boldness; but this is not courage, but audacity,
and insolence, and an unbridled tongue. Jezebel too reproached Jehu, when she
said, "The slayer of his master" [2 Kings 9:31], but this was audacity, not

boldness. Elias too reproached, but this was boldness and courage; "I do not
trouble Israel, but you and your father's house." [1 Kings 18:18] Again, Elias
spoke with boldness to the whole people, saying, "How long will you go lame on
both your thighs?" [1 Kings 18:21, Septuagint] Thus to rebuke was boldness and
courage. This too the prophets did, but that other was audacity.
Would you see words both of humility and not of flattery, listen to Paul,
saying, "But with me it is a very small thing that I should be judged of you, or of
man's judgment; yea, I judge not my own self. For I know nothing against
myself, yet am I not hereby justified." [1 Corinthians 4:3-4] This is of a spirit that
becomes a Christian; and again, "Dare any of you, having a matter against his
neighbor, go to law before the unrighteous, and not before the saints"? [1
Corinthians 6:1]
Would you see the flattery of the foolish Jews? Listen to them, saying, "We
have no king but Cæsar." [John 19:15] Would you see humility? Listen to Paul
again, when he says, "For we preach not ourselves, but Christ Jesus as Lord,
and ourselves as your servants for Jesus' sake." [2 Corinthians 4:5] Would you
see both flattery and audacity? "Audacity" [1 Samuel 25:10] in the case of Nabal,
and "flattery" [1 Samuel 23:20] in that of the Ziphites? For in their purpose they
betrayed David. Would you see "wisdom" [1 Samuel 26:5-12] and not flattery,
that of David, how he gat Saul into his power, and yet spared him? Would you
see the flattery of those who murdered Mephibosheth, whom also David slew?
In fine, and as it were in outline, to sum up all, audacity is shown when one is
enraged, and insults another for no just cause, either to avenge himself, or in
some unjust way is audacious; but boldness and courage are when we dare to
face perils and deaths, and despise friendships and enmities for the sake of what
is pleasing to God. Again, flattery and meanness are when one courts another not
for any right end, but hunting after some of the things of this life; but humility,
when one does this for the sake of things pleasing to God, and descends from his
own proper station that he may perform something great and admirable. If we
know these things, happy are we if we do them. For to know them is not enough.