labors of the victory and the trophies, but bringing the crowns to him, assayed to
slay him?
6. Such is the nature of envy, it is ever plotting against its own honors, and
wasting him that has it, and encompassing him with countless calamities. And
that miserable man, for instance, until David departed, burst not forth into that
piteous cry, bewail ing himself and saying, "I am sore distressed, and the
Philistines make war against me, and the Lord is departed from me."
[1 Samuel 28:15] Until he was separated from David, he fell not in war, but was
both in safety and in glory; for indeed unto the king passed the glory of the
captain. For neither was the man disposed to usurpation, nor did he assay to
depose the other from his throne, but for him did he achieve all things, and was
earnestly attached to him, and this is evident even from what followed
afterwards. For when indeed he was set under him, any one of them who do not
search carefully might perhaps suppose these things to be by the usual custom of
a subject; but after he had withdrawn himself out of Saul's kingdom, what then
was there to restrain him, and to him even to slay? Had not the other been evil
towards him once, twice, and often? Was it not after having received benefits
from him? Was it not having nothing whereof to accuse him? Was not Saul's
kingdom and safety danger and insecurity to himself? Must he not needs wander
and be a fugitive, and be in trembling for fear of the utmost ills, while the other
is alive, and reigning? Nevertheless none of these things constrained him to stain
his sword with blood, but when he saw him asleep, and bound, and alone, and in
the midst of his own men, and had touched his head, and when there were many
rousing him to it, and saying the opportunity thus favorable was a judgment of
God, he at once rebuked those who were urging him on, and refrained from the
murder, and sent him away both safe and well; and as though he had been rather
a body guard of his, and a shield-bearer, not an enemy, so did he chide the host
for their treachery towards the king. [1 Samuel 26:16]
What could be equal to this soul? What to that mildness? For this it is
possible to see even by the things that have been mentioned but much more by

what are done now. For when we have considered our vileness, then we shall
know more perfectly the virtue of those saints. Wherefore I entreat you to hasten
towards the emulation of them.
For indeed if you love glory, and for this cause art plotting against your
neighbor, then shall you enjoy it more largely, when having spurned it, you will
abstain from the plotting. For like as to become rich is contrary to covetousness,
so is the loving of glory to the obtaining of glory. And if you be minded, let us
inquire into each. For since we have no fear of hell, nor much regard for the
kingdom, come and even from the things present let us lead you on.
For who are they that are ridiculous? Tell me. Is it not they that are doing
anything for the sake of glory from the multitude? And who are the objects of
praise? Is it not they who spurn the praise of the multitude? Therefore if the love
of vainglory be matter of reproach, and it cannot be concealed that the
vainglorious man loves it, he will assuredly be an object of reproach, and the
love of glory has become to him a cause of dishonor. And not in this respect only
does he disgrace himself, but also in that he is compelled to do many things
shameful, and teeming with the utmost disgrace. And like as with respect to their
gains men are wont to suffer harm more than anything from the disease of
covetousness (they become at least the subjects of many tricks, and of small
gains make great losses, wherefore this saying has prevailed even to be a
proverb); and as to the voluptuous man likewise, his passion becomes a
hindrance to the enjoyment of his pleasure. These at least that are exceedingly
given up thereto, and are the slaves of women these above all do women carry
about as servants, and will never vouchsafe to treat them as men, buffeting,
spurning them, leading, and taking them about everywhere, and giving
themselves airs, and in everything merely giving them orders.
Even so also than him that is arrogant and mad about glory, and accounts
himself to be high, nothing is more base and dishonored. For the race of man is
fond of contention, and against nothing else does it set itself so much, as against
a boaster, and a contemptuous man, and a slave of glory.