God! How unsearchable are His judgments!"
Here after going back to former times, and looking back to God's original
dispensation of things whereby the world has existed up to the present time, and
having considered what special provision He had made for all occurrences, he is
stricken with awe, and cries aloud, so making his hearers feel confident that
certainly that will come to pass which he says. For he would not have cried
aloud and been awe-struck, unless this was quite sure to come to pass. That it is
a depth then, he knows: but how great, he knows not. For the language is that of
a person wondering, not of one that knew the whole. But admiring and being
awe-struck at the goodliness, so far forth as in him lay, he heralds it forth by two
intensitive words, riches and depth, and then is awestruck at His having had both
the will and the power to do all this, and by opposites effecting opposites. "How
unsearchable are His judgments." For they are not only impossible to be
comprehended, but even to be searched. "And His ways past finding out;" that is,
His dispensations for these also are not only impossible to be known, but even to
be sought into. For even I, he means, have not found out the whole, but a little
part, not all. For He alone knows His own clearly. Wherefore he proceeds:
Ver. 34, 35. "For who has known the mind of the Lord? Or who has been
His counsellor? Or who has first given to Him, and it shall be recompensed unto
him again?"
What he means is nearly this: that though He is so wise, yet He has not His
Wisdom from any other, but is Himself the Fountain of good things. And though
He has done so great things, and made us so great presents, yet it was not by
borrowing from any other that He gave them, but by making them spring forth
from Himself; nor as owing any a return for having received from him, but as
always being Himself the first to do the benefits; for this is a chief mark of
riches, to overflow abundantly, and yet need no aid. Wherefore he proceeds to
say, "For of Him, and through Him, and to Him, are all things." Himself
devised, Himself created, Himself works together (Vulg. [συγκρατεἵ],
manuscripts [συγκροτεἵ]). For He is rich, and needs not to receive from another.

And wise, and needs no counsellor. Why speak I of a counsellor? To know the
things of Him is no one able, save Himself alone, the Rich and Wise One. For it
is proof of much riches that He should make them of the Gentiles thus well
supplied; and of much wisdom that He should constitute the inferiors of the Jews
their teachers. Then as he was awe-struck he offers up thanksgiving also in the
word, "To Whom be glory forever. Amen."
For when he tells of any great and unutterable thing of this kind, he ends in
wonder with a doxology. And this he does in regard to the Son also. For in that
passage also he went on to the very same thing that he does here. Of whom is
Christ according to the flesh, Who is over all God blessed forever. Amen.
[Romans 9:5]
Him then let us also imitate, and let us glorify God in all things, by a
heedful way of life, and let us not feel confidence in the virtues of our ancestry,
knowing the example that has been made of the Jews. For this is not, certainly it
is not, the relationship of Christians, for theirs is the kinsmanship of the Spirit.
So the Scythian becomes Abraham's son: and his son on the other hand more of
an alien to him than the Scythian. Let us not then feel confidence in the welldoings of our fathers (most manuscripts "of others"), but if you have a parent
who is a marvel even, fancy not that this will be enough to save you, or to get
you honor and glory, unless you have the relationship of character to him. So too
if you have a bad one, do not think that you will be condemned on this account,
or be put to shame if at least you order your own doings aright. For what can be
less honorable than the Gentiles? Still in faith they soon became related to the
Saints. Or what more nearly connected than the Jews? Yet still by unbelief they
were made aliens. For that relationship is of nature and necessity, after which we
are all relations. For of Adam we all sprung, and none can be more a relation
than another, both as regards Adam and as regards Noah, and as regards the
earth, the common mother of all. But the relationship worthy of honors, is that
which does distinguish us from the wicked. For it is not possible for all to be
relations in this way, but those of the same character only. Nor do we call them