FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.32, C.3.

continued action of an agent increases its effect: thus the longer a
person remains near the fire, the more he is warmed and dried. Now
the natural mode of being consists in a certain measure; and
therefore when the continued presence of a pleasant object exceeds
the measure of one's natural mode of being, the removal of that
object becomes pleasant. On the part of the knowledge itself
(change becomes pleasant), because man desires to know
something whole and perfect: when therefore a thing cannot be
apprehended all at once as a whole, change in such a thing is
pleasant, so that one part may pass and another succeed, and thus
the whole be perceived. Hence Augustine says (Confess. iv, 11):
"Thou wouldst not have the syllables stay, but fly away, that others
may come, and thou hear the whole. And so whenever any one thing
is made up of many, all of which do not exist together, all would
please collectively more than they do severally, if all could be
perceived collectively."
If therefore there be any thing, whose nature is unchangeable; the
natural mode of whose being cannot be exceeded by the
continuation of any pleasing object; and which can behold the whole
object of its delight at once---to such a one change will afford no
delight. And the more any pleasures approach to this, the more are
they capable of being continual.
Reply to Objection 1: Although the subject of movement has not yet
perfectly that to which it is moved, nevertheless it is beginning to
have something thereof: and in this respect movement itself has
something of pleasure. But it falls short of the perfection of pleasure;
because the more perfect pleasures regard things that are
unchangeable. Moreover movement becomes the cause of pleasure,
in so far as thereby something which previously was unsuitable,
becomes suitable or ceases to be, as stated above.
Reply to Objection 2: Movement causes toil and fatigue, when it
exceeds our natural aptitude. It is not thus that it causes pleasure,
but by removing the obstacles to our natural aptitude.
Reply to Objection 3: What is customary becomes pleasant, in so far
as it becomes natural: because custom is like a second nature. But
the movement which gives pleasure is not that which departs from
custom, but rather that which prevents the corruption of the natural
mode of being, that might result from continued operation. And thus
from the same cause of connaturalness, both custom and movement

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.32, C.3.

become pleasant.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.32, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether hope and memory causes pleasure?

Objection 1: It would seem that memory and hope do not cause
pleasure. Because pleasure is caused by present good, as
Damascene says (De Fide Orth. ii, 12). But hope and memory regard
what is absent: since memory is of the past, and hope of the future.
Therefore memory and hope do not cause pleasure.
Objection 2: Further, the same thing is not the cause of contraries.
But hope causes affliction, according to Prov. 13:12: "Hope that is
deferred afflicteth the soul." Therefore hope does not cause
pleasure.
Objection 3: Further, just as hope agrees with pleasure in regarding
good, so also do desire and love. Therefore hope should not be
assigned as a cause of pleasure, any more than desire or love.
On the contrary, It is written (Rm. 12:12): "Rejoicing in hope"; and
(Ps. 76:4): "I remembered God, and was delighted."
I answer that, Pleasure is caused by the presence of suitable good,
in so far as it is felt, or perceived in any way. Now a thing is present
to us in two ways. First, in knowledge---i.e. according as the thing
known is in the knower by its likeness; secondly, in reality---i.e.
according as one thing is in real conjunction of any kind with
another, either actually or potentially. And since real conjunction is
greater than conjunction by likeness, which is the conjunction of
knowledge; and again, since actual is greater than potential
conjunction: therefore the greatest pleasure is that which arises
from sensation which requires the presence of the sensible object.
The second place belongs to the pleasure of hope, wherein there is
pleasurable conjunction, not only in respect of apprehension, but
also in respect of the faculty or power of obtaining the pleasurable
object. The third place belongs to the pleasure of memory, which has
only the conjunction of apprehension.
Reply to Objection 1: Hope and memory are indeed of things which,
absolutely speaking, are absent: and yet those are, after a fashion,
present, i.e. either according to apprehension only; or according to
apprehension and possibility, at least supposed, of attainment.