words of sound doctrine," first receives the benefit of it himself. From
admonishing others, he is touched with compunction himself. For these things
are not said to Timothy only, but to all. And if such advice is addressed to him,
who raised the dead, what shall be said to us? Christ also shows the duty of
teachers, when He says, "The kingdom of heaven is like an householder, who
brings forth out of his treasure things new and old." [Matthew 13:52] And the
blessed Paul gives the same advice, that "we through patience and comfort of the
Scriptures might have hope." [Romans 15:4] This he practiced above all men,
being brought up in the law of his fathers, at the feet of Gamaliel, whence he
would afterwards naturally apply to reading: for he who exhorted others would
himself first follow the advice he gave. Hence we find him continually appealing
to the testimony of the prophets, and searching into their writings. Paul then
applies to reading, for it is no slight advantage that is to be reaped from the
Scriptures. But we are indolent, and we hear with carelessness and indifference.
What punishment do we not deserve!
"That your profiting may appear," he says, "to all."
Thus he would have him appear great and admirable in this respect also,
showing that this was still necessary for him, for he wished that his "profiting
should appear" not only in his life, but in the word of doctrine.
Chap. v. ver. 1. "Rebuke not an elder."
Is he now speaking of the order? I think not, but of any elderly man. What
then if he should need correction? Do not rebuke him, but address him as you
would a father offending.
Ver. 1. "The elder women as mothers, the younger men as brethren; the
younger women as sisters, with all purity."
Rebuke is in its own nature offensive, particularly when it is addressed to
an old man, and when it proceeds from a young man too, there is a threefold
show of forwardness. By the manner and the mildness of it, therefore, he would
soften it. For it is possible to reprove without offense, if one will only make a
point of this: it requires great discretion, but it may be done.

"The younger men as brethren." Why does he recommend this too here?
With a view to the high spirit natural to young men, whence it is proper to soften
reproof to them also with moderation.
"The younger women as sisters"; he adds, "with all purity." Tell me not, he
means, of merely avoiding sinful intercourse with them. There should not be
even a suspicion. For since intimacy with young women is always suspicious,
and yet a Bishop cannot always avoid it, he shows by adding these words, that
"all purity" is required in such intimacy. But does Paul give this advice to
Timothy? Yes, he says, for I am speaking to the world through him. But if
Timothy was thus advised, let others consider what sort of conduct is required of
them, that they should give no ground for suspicion, no shadow of pretext, to
those who wish to calumniate.
Ver. 3. "Honor widows, that are widows indeed."
Why does he say nothing of virginity, nor command us to honor virgins?
Perhaps there were not yet any professing that state, or they might have fallen
from it. "For some," he says, "are already turned aside after Satan." [1 Timothy
5:15] For a woman may have lost her husband, and yet not be truly a widow. As
in order to be a virgin, it is not enough to be a stranger to marriage, but many
other things are necessary, as blamelessness and perseverance; so the loss of a
husband does not constitute a widow, but patience, with chastity and separation
from all men. Such widows he justly bids us honor, or rather support. For they
need support, being left desolate, and having no husband to stand up for them.
Their state appears to the multitude despicable and inauspicious. Therefore he
wishes them to receive the greater honor from the Priest, and the more so,
because they are worthy of it.
Ver. 4. "But if any widow have children or grandchildren, let them learn
first to show piety at home, and to requite their parents."
Observe the discretion of Paul; how often he urges men from human
considerations. For he does not here lay down any great and lofty motive, but
one that is easy to be understood: "to requite their parents." How? For bringing