the spectacle, would you not deem it to be a very great honor? And here when
you are a spectator in company with the King of Angels, when you see the devil
grasped by the middle of the back, striving much to have the better, but
powerless, do you not run and pursue after such a sight as this? "And how can
this be?" says some one. If you keep the Bible in your hands; for in it you shall
see the lists, and the long races, and his grasps, and the skill of the righteous one.
For by beholding these things you shall learn also how to wrestle so yourself,
and shall escape clear of devils; the performances of the heathen are assemblies
of devils, not theaters of men. Wherefore I exhort you to abstain from these
Satanic assemblies; for if it is not lawful to enter into an idol's house, much less
to Satan's festival. I shall not cease to say these things and weary you, until I see
some change; for to say these things, as says Paul, "to me indeed is not grievous,
but for you it is safe." [Philippians 3:1] Be not then offended at my exhortation.
If any one ought to be offended, it is I who often speak and am not heard, not
you who are always hearing and always disobeying. God grant that you be not
always liable to this charge, but that freed from this shame you be deemed
worthy to enjoy the spiritual spectacle, and the glory which is to come, through
the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom to the Father
and the Holy Ghost be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Homily 33 on the Gospel of John
John 4:21-22
"Jesus says unto her, Woman, believe Me, the hour comes, when you shall
neither in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, worship the Father. You worship
ye know not what; we know what we worship, for salvation is of the Jews."
1. Everywhere, beloved, we have need of faith, faith the mother of
blessings, the medicine of salvation; and without this it is impossible to possess
any one of the great doctrines. Without this, men are like to those who attempt to
cross the open sea without a ship, who for a little way hold out by swimming,
using both hands and feet, but when they have advanced farther, are quickly
swamped by the waves: in like manner they who use their own reasonings,
before they have learned anything, suffer shipwreck; as also Paul says, "Who
concerning faith have made shipwreck." [1 Timothy 1:19] That this be not our
case, let us hold fast the sacred anchor by which Christ brings over the
Samaritan woman now. For when she had said, "How say ye that Jerusalem is
the place in which men ought to worship?" Christ replied, "Believe Me, woman,
that the hour comes, when you shall neither in Jerusalem, nor yet in this
mountain, worship the Father." An exceedingly great doctrine He revealed to
her, and one which He did not mention either to Nicodemus or Nathanael. She
was eager to prove her own privileges more honorable than those of the Jews;
and this she subtly argued from the Fathers, but Christ met not this question. For
it was for the time distracting to speak on the matter, and to show why the
Fathers worshipped in the mountain, and why the Jews at Jerusalem. Wherefore
on this point He was silent, and having taken away from both places priority in
dignity, rouses her soul by showing that neither Jews nor Samaritans possessed
anything great in comparison with that which was to be given; and then He
introduces the difference. Yet even thus He declared that the Jews were more