237. To Christians, this principle also evokes the totality or integrity of the Gospel which the
Church passes down to us and sends us forth to proclaim. Its fullness and richness embrace
scholars and workers, businessmen and artists, in a word, everyone. The genius of each people
receives in its own way the entire Gospel and embodies it in expressions of prayer, fraternity,
justice, struggle and celebration. The good news is the joy of the Father who desires that none of
his little ones be lost, the joy of the Good Shepherd who finds the lost sheep and brings it back to
the flock. The Gospel is the leaven which causes the dough to rise and the city on the hill whose
light illumines all peoples. The Gospel has an intrinsic principle of totality: it will always remain
good news until it has been proclaimed to all people, until it has healed and strengthened every
aspect of humanity, until it has brought all men and women together at table in God’s kingdom.
The whole is greater than the part.

### IV. Social dialogue as a contribution to peace

238. Evangelization also involves the path of dialogue. For the Church today, three areas of
dialogue stand out where she needs to be present in order to promote full human development
and to pursue the common good: dialogue with states, dialogue with society – including dialogue
with cultures and the sciences – and dialogue with other believers who are not part of the Catholic
Church. In each case, “the Church speaks from the light which faith offers”, contributing her
two thousand year experience and keeping ever in mind the life and sufferings of human beings.
This light transcends human reason, yet it can also prove meaningful and enriching to those who
are not believers and it stimulates reason to broaden its perspectives.

239. The Church proclaims “the Gospel of peace” (Eph 6:15) and she wishes to cooperate with all
national and international authorities in safeguarding this immense universal good. By preaching
Jesus Christ, who is himself peace (cf. Eph 2:14), the new evangelization calls on every baptized
person to be a peacemaker and a credible witness to a reconciled life. In a culture which

privileges dialogue as a form of encounter, it is time to devise a means for building consensus and
agreement while seeking the goal of a just, responsive and inclusive society. The principal author,
the historic subject of this process, is the people as a whole and their culture, and not a single
class, minority, group or elite. We do not need plans drawn up by a few for the few, or an
enlightened or outspoken minority which claims to speak for everyone. It is about agreeing to live
together, a social and cultural pact.

240. It is the responsibility of the State to safeguard and promote the common good of
society. Based on the principles of subsidiarity and solidarity, and fully committed to political
dialogue and consensus building, it plays a fundamental role, one which cannot be delegated, in
working for the integral development of all. This role, at present, calls for profound social humility.