language, "but became vain in their reasonings, and their foolish heart was
darkened." For as in a night without a moon, if any one attempt to go by a
strange road, or to sail over a strange sea, so far will he be from soon reaching
his destination, that he will speedily be lost. Thus they, attempting to go the way
leading to Heaven, and having destroyed the light from their own selves, and, in
lieu of it, trusted themselves to the darkness of their own reasoning, and seeking
in bodies for Him who is incorporeal, and in shapes for Him who has no shape,
underwent a most rueful shipwreck. But beside what has been said, he names
also another cause of their error, when he says,
Ver. 22. "Professing themselves to be wise, they became fools."
For having some great conceit of themselves, and not enduring to go the
way which God had commanded them, they were plunged into the reasonings of
senselessness (1 manuscript [διανοίας]). And then to show and give in outline,
what a rueful surge it was, and how destitute of excuse, he goes on to say,
Ver. 23. "And changed the glory of the uncorruptible God into an image
made like to corruptible man, and to birds, and four-footed beasts, and creeping
things."
The first charge is, that they did not find God; the second was, that it was
while they had great and clear (Sav. marg. "wise") means to do it; the third, that
withal they said they were wise; the fourth, that they not only did not find that
Reverend Being, but even lowered Him to devils and to stones and stocks. Now
he takes down their haughtiness also in the Epistle to the Corinthians, but not in
the same way there as here. For there it is from the Cross he gives them the blow,
saying, "The foolishness of God is wiser than men." [1 Corinthians 1:25] But
here, without any comparison, he holds their wisdom by itself up to ridicule,
showing it to be folly and a mere display of vain boasting. Then, that you may
learn that when they had the knowledge of God they gave it up thus
treacherously, "they changed," he says. Now he that changes, has something to
change. For they wished to find out more, and not bear with the limits given
them, and so they were banished from these also. For they were lusters after new

devices, for such is all that is Grecian. And this is why they stood against one
another and Aristotle rose up against Plato, and the Stoics blustered ([ἐ]
[φρυάξαντο] 6 manuscripts "fenced themselves," [ἐ] [φράξαντο]: which Field
inclines to prefer) against him, and one has become hostile to one, another to
another. So that one should not so much marvel at them for their wisdom, as turn
away from them indignant and hate them, because through this very thing they
have become fools. For had they not trusted what they have to reasonings, and
syllogisms, and sophistries, they would not have suffered what they did suffer.
Then, to strengthen the accusation against them he holds the whole of their
idolatry up to ridicule. For in the first place the changing even were a very fit
subject of scorn. But to change to such things too, is beyond all excuse. For what
then did they change it, and what was it which they invested with His Glory?
Some conceptions they ought to have had about Him, as, for instance, that He is
God, that He is Lord of all, that He made them, which were not, that He
exercises a Providence, that He cares for them. For these things are the "Glory of
God." To whom then did they ascribe it? Not even to men, but "to an image
made like to corruptible man." Neither did they stop here, but even dropped
down to the brutes, or rather to the images of these. But consider, I pray, the
wisdom of Paul, how he has taken the two extremes, God the Highest, and
creeping things the lowest: or rather, not the creeping things, but the images of
these; that he might clearly show their evident madness. For what knowledge
they ought to have had concerning Him Who is incomparably more excellent
than all, with that they invested what was incomparably more worthless than all.
But what has this to do with the philosophers? A man may say. To these belongs
most of all what I have said to do with them. For they have the Egyptians who
were the inventors of these things to their masters. And Plato, who is thought
more reverend than the rest of them, glories in these masters. (Plat. Tim. 21. B.
etc.) And his master is in a stupid awe of these idols, for he it is that bids them
sacrifice the cock to Æsculapius (his last words, Phædo), where (i.e. in his
temple. So Field from manuscripts.) are the images of these beasts, and creeping