THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.27, C.3.

tabernacle of the testimony, and the glory of the Lord filled it."
Therefore also the Blessed Virgin was not sanctified until after all in
her was perfected, viz. her body and soul.
I answer that, The sanctification of the Blessed Virgin cannot be
understood as having taken place before animation, for two reasons.
First, because the sanctification of which we are speaking, is nothing
but the cleansing from original sin: for sanctification is a "perfect
cleansing," as Dionysius says (Div. Nom. xii). Now sin cannot be
taken away except by grace, the subject of which is the rational
creature alone. Therefore before the infusion of the rational soul, the
Blessed Virgin was not sanctified.
Secondly, because, since the rational creature alone can be the
subject of sin; before the infusion of the rational soul, the offspring
conceived is not liable to sin. And thus, in whatever manner the
Blessed Virgin would have been sanctified before animation, she
could never have incurred the stain of original sin: and thus she
would not have needed redemption and salvation which is by Christ,
of whom it is written (Mt. 1:21): "He shall save His people from their
sins." But this is unfitting, through implying that Christ is not the
"Saviour of all men," as He is called (1 Tim. 4:10). It remains,
therefore, that the Blessed Virgin was sanctified after animation.
Reply to Objection 1: The Lord says that He "knew" Jeremias before
he was formed in the womb, by knowledge, that is to say, of
predestination: but He says that He "sanctified" him, not before
formation, but before he "came forth out of the womb," etc.
As to what Ambrose says, viz. that in John the Baptist there was not
the spirit of life when there was already the Spirit of grace, by spirit
of life we are not to understand the life-giving soul, but the air which
we breathe out [respiratus]. Or it may be said that in him as yet there
was not the spirit of life, that is the soul, as to its manifest and
complete operations.
Reply to Objection 2: If the soul of the Blessed Virgin had never
incurred the stain of original sin, this would be derogatory to the
dignity of Christ, by reason of His being the universal Saviour of all.
Consequently after Christ, who, as the universal Saviour of all,
needed not to be saved, the purity of the Blessed Virgin holds the
highest place. For Christ did not contract original sin in any way

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.27, C.3.

whatever, but was holy in His very Conception, according to Lk.
1:35: "The Holy which shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son
of God." But the Blessed Virgin did indeed contract original sin, but
was cleansed therefrom before her birth from the womb. This is what
is signified (Job 3:9) where it is written of the night of original sin:
"Let it expect light," i.e. Christ, "and not see it"---(because "no
defiled thing cometh into her," as is written Wis. 7:25), "nor the rising
of the dawning of the day," that is of the Blessed Virgin, who in her
birth was immune from original sin.
Reply to Objection 3: Although the Church of Rome does not
celebrate the Conception of the Blessed Virgin, yet it tolerates the
custom of certain churches that do keep that feast, wherefore this is
not to be entirely reprobated. Nevertheless the celebration of this
feast does not give us to understand that she was holy in her
conception. But since it is not known when she was sanctified, the
feast of her Sanctification, rather than the feast of her Conception, is
kept on the day of her conception.
Reply to Objection 4: Sanctification is twofold. one is that of the
whole nature: inasmuch as the whole human nature is freed from all
corruption of sin and punishment. This will take place at the
resurrection. The other is personal sanctification. This is not
transmitted to the children begotten of the flesh: because it does not
regard the flesh but the mind. Consequently, though the parents of
the Blessed Virgin were cleansed from original sin, nevertheless she
contracted original sin, since she was conceived by way of fleshly
concupiscence and the intercourse of man and woman: for
Augustine says (De Nup. et Concup. i): "All flesh born of carnal
intercourse is sinful."