These things, in the highest degree, pertain to God, in whom exist the culmination of simplicity
and of immateriality, perfect charity, almighty power, and highest majesty.

To the angels, "fire" (as indicative of intellect) may be applied in a middle sense, but to human
minds, with only a more restricted meaning; for by union with a body, its purity is lessened, its
light is obscured, its power weakened, and its upward motion retarded: wherefore the efficacy of
the human mind is rightly compared to a spark.

Hence it would not be able to investigate the truth of this question unless light were cast upon it

by the divine light; and thus the divine light is the principal cause; but the human mind, a cause in
the secondary order.

3) Thirdly, he treats of the formal cause when he says: "arranged according to a reasoned plan,"
and he indicates the mode of treatment under three headings.

a) First, since he proceeds by argumentation, he therefore says, "arranged according to a
reasoned plan." For a question discussed even over a long period according to probable reasons
but still with doubt is, as it were, without form, not yet laying claim to the certitude of truth; and
hence it is said to possess form when reasonable proof is added, through which certitude
regarding the truth may be attained: in this process, intellect gives us vision of the truth, because
what we believe, we owe to authority; but what we understand, we owe to reason, as Augustine
says.

b) In the second place he discusses the mode of treatment, since he treats of this matter not only
in words, but has incorporated it in writing, he says: "I entrust my thought to pen." In so doing,
he has made provision against the weaknesses of memory.

c) Thirdly, since he has written, not after the manner of one imparting doctrine to another present
with him, but as to one absent, by means of a letter.

Thus Aristotle also composed his books in different ways: some addressed to those who in his
presence listened to him, and these books are called Auditus, as one such book is, entitled, De
naturali auditu; but certain others he wrote to those absent, as we find in I Ethic. that the books
De anima were so written, where the names of discourses addressed to those at a distance are
given, as the Greek commentator says.

Accordingly, he adds: "I have taken pains to offer and share with you, prompted by desire for
your judgment," as if addressing an expert and asking his opinion in this matter. Thus, he
continues: "prompted as much by desire for your judgment as by zeal for my task." Because he
had been zealous for ascertaining the truth, he had ordered the aforesaid question according to
reasonable arguments; and, because he was desirous of the judgment of Symmachus, he
presented to him the work thus arranged in orderly fashion.