faith, but are preambles to the articles; for faith presupposes natural
knowledge, even as grace presupposes nature, and perfection
supposes something that can be perfected. Nevertheless, there is
nothing to prevent a man, who cannot grasp a proof, accepting, as a
matter of faith, something which in itself is capable of being
scientifically known and demonstrated.
Reply to Objection 2: When the existence of a cause is demonstrated
from an effect, this effect takes the place of the definition of the
cause in proof of the cause's existence. This is especially the case in
regard to God, because, in order to prove the existence of anything,
it is necessary to accept as a middle term the meaning of the word,
and not its essence, for the question of its essence follows on the
question of its existence. Now the names given to God are derived
from His effects; consequently, in demonstrating the existence of
God from His effects, we may take for the middle term the meaning
of the word "God".
Reply to Objection 3: From effects not proportionate to the cause no
perfect knowledge of that cause can be obtained. Yet from every
effect the existence of the cause can be clearly demonstrated, and
so we can demonstrate the existence of God from His effects;
though from them we cannot perfectly know God as He is in His
essence.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether God exists?

Objection 1: It seems that God does not exist; because if one of two
contraries be infinite, the other would be altogether destroyed. But
the word "God" means that He is infinite goodness. If, therefore, God
existed, there would be no evil discoverable; but there is evil in the
world. Therefore God does not exist.
Objection 2: Further, it is superfluous to suppose that what can be
accounted for by a few principles has been produced by many. But it
seems that everything we see in the world can be accounted for by
other principles, supposing God did not exist. For all natural things
can be reduced to one principle which is nature; and all voluntary
things can be reduced to one principle which is human reason, or
will. Therefore there is no need to suppose God's existence.
On the contrary, It is said in the person of God: "I am Who am." (Ex.
3:14)
I answer that, The existence of God can be proved in five ways.
The first and more manifest way is the argument from motion. It is
certain, and evident to our senses, that in the world some things are
in motion. Now whatever is in motion is put in motion by another, for
nothing can be in motion except it is in potentiality to that towards
which it is in motion; whereas a thing moves inasmuch as it is in act.
For motion is nothing else than the reduction of something from
potentiality to actuality. But nothing can be reduced from potentiality
to actuality, except by something in a state of actuality. Thus that
which is actually hot, as fire, makes wood, which is potentially hot,
to be actually hot, and thereby moves and changes it. Now it is not
possible that the same thing should be at once in actuality and
potentiality in the same respect, but only in different respects. For
what is actually hot cannot simultaneously be potentially hot; but it
is simultaneously potentially cold. It is therefore impossible that in
the same respect and in the same way a thing should be both mover
and moved, i.e. that it should move itself. Therefore, whatever is in
motion must be put in motion by another. If that by which it is put in
motion be itself put in motion, then this also must needs be put in
motion by another, and that by another again. But this cannot go on
to infinity, because then there would be no first mover, and,