suffer, think not that as persons forsaken ye suffer. For neither is it His will to
deliver you from the terrors, but to persuade you to despise them, since this is,
more than anything, deliverance from the terrors.
3. "Fear ye not therefore; you are of more value than many sparrows."
[Matthew 10:31] Do you see that the fear had already prevailed over them? Yea,
for He knew the secrets of the heart; therefore He added, "Fear them not
therefore;" for even should they prevail, it will be over the inferior part, I mean,
the body; which though they should not kill, nature will surely take with her and
depart. So that not even this depends on them, but men have it from nature. And
if you fear this, much more should you fear what is greater, and dread "Him who
is able to destroy both soul and body in hell." And He says not openly now, that
it is Himself, "Who is able to destroy both soul and body," but where He before
declared Himself to be judge, He made it manifest.
But now the contrary takes place: Him, namely, who is able to destroy the
soul, that is, to punish it, we fear not, but those who slay the body, we shudder
at. Yet surely while He together with the soul punishes the body also, they
cannot even chasten the body, much less the soul: and though they chasten it
ever so severely, yet in that way they rather make it more glorious.
Do you see how He signifies the conflicts to be easy? Because in truth,
death did exceedingly agitate their souls, inspiring terror for a time, for that it
had not as yet been made easy to overcome, neither had they that were to despise
it partaken of the grace of the Spirit.
Having, you see, cast out the fear and distress that was agitating their soul;
by what follows He also encourages them again, casting out fear by fear; and not
by fear only, but also by the hope of great prizes; and He threatens with much
authority, in both ways urging them to speak boldly for the truth; and says
further,
"Whosoever therefore shall confess me before men, him will I also confess
before my Father which is in Heaven. But whosoever shall deny me before men,
him will I also deny before my Father which is in Heaven." [Matthew 10:32-33]

Thus not from the good things only, but also from the opposites, does He
urge them; and He concludes with the dismal part.
And mark His exact care; He said not "me," but "in me," implying that not
by a power of his own, but by the help of grace from above, the confessor makes
his confession. But of him that denies, He said not, "in me," but "me;" for he
having become destitute of the gift, his denial ensues.
"Why then is he blamed," one may say, "if being forsaken, he denies?"
Because the being forsaken is the fault of the forsaken person himself.
But why is He not satisfied with the faith in the mind, but requires also the
confession with the mouth? To train us up to boldness in speech, and a more
abundant love and determination, and to raise us on high. Wherefore also He
addresses Himself to all. Nor does He at all apply this to the disciples only in
person, for not them, but their disciples too, He is now rendering noble hearted.
Because he that has learned this lesson will not only teach with boldness, but
will likewise suffer all things easily, and with ready mind. This at any rate
brought over many to the apostles, even their belief in this word. Because both in
the punishment the infliction is heavier, and in the good things the recompense
greater. I mean, whereas he that does right has the advantage in time, and the
delay of the penalty is counted for gain by the sinner: He has introduced an
equivalent, or rather a much greater advantage, the increase of the recompenses.
"Have you the advantage," says He, "by having first confessed me here? I also
will have the advantage of you, by giving you greater things, and unspeakably
greater; for I will confess you there." Do you see that both the good things and
the evil things are there to be dispensed? Why then hasten and hurry yourself?
And why seek your rewards here, thou who art "saved by hope?" Wherefore,
whether you have done anything good, and not received its recompense here, be
not troubled (for with increase, in the time to come, the reward thereof awaits
you): or whether you have done any evil, and not paid the penalty, be not easy;
for there will vengeance receive you, if you turn not and amend.
But if you believe it not, from the things here form your conjecture about