turning to simply intelligible objects; hence in that state it
understands itself through itself. Now, every separate substance
"understands what is above itself and what is below itself, according
to the mode of its substance" (De Causis viii): for a thing is
understood according as it is in the one who understands; while one
thing is in another according to the nature of that in which it is. And
the mode of existence of a separated soul is inferior to that of an
angel, but is the same as that of other separated souls. Therefore the
soul apart from the body has perfect knowledge of other separated
souls, but it has an imperfect and defective knowledge of the angels
so far as its natural knowledge is concerned. But the knowledge of
glory is otherwise.
Reply to Objection 1: The separated soul is, indeed, less perfect
considering its nature in which it communicates with the nature of
the body: but it has a greater freedom of intelligence, since the
weight and care of the body is a clog upon the clearness of its
intelligence in the present life.
Reply to Objection 2: The separated soul understands the angels by
means of divinely impressed ideas; which, however, fail to give
perfect knowledge of them, forasmuch as the nature of the soul is
inferior to that of an angel.
Reply to Objection 3: Man's ultimate happiness consists not in the
knowledge of any separate substances; but in the knowledge of God,
Who is seen only by grace. The knowledge of other separate
substances if perfectly understood gives great happiness---not final
and ultimate happiness. But the separated soul does not understand
them perfectly, as was shown above in this article.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the separated soul knows all natural

things?
Objection 1: It would seem that the separated soul knows all natural
things. For the types of all natural things exist in separate
substances. Therefore, as separated souls know separate
substances, they also know all natural things.
Objection 2: Further, whoever understands the greater intelligible,
will be able much more to understand the lesser intelligible. But the
separated soul understands immaterial substances, which are in the
highest degree of intelligibility. Therefore much more can it
understand all natural things which are in a lower degree of
intelligibility.
On the contrary, The devils have greater natural knowledge than the
separated soul; yet they do not know all natural things, but have to
learn many things by long experience, as Isidore says (De Summo
Bono i). Therefore neither can the separated soul know all natural
things.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), the separated soul, like the
angels, understands by means of species, received from the
influence of the Divine light. Nevertheless, as the soul by nature is
inferior to an angel, to whom this kind of knowledge is natural, the
soul apart from the body through such species does not receive
perfect knowledge, but only a general and confused kind of
knowledge. Separated souls, therefore, have the same relation
through such species to imperfect and confused knowledge of
natural things as the angels have to the perfect knowledge thereof.
Now angels through such species know all natural things perfectly;
because all that God has produced in the respective natures of
natural things has been produced by Him in the angelic intelligence,
as Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. ii, 8). Hence it follows that separated
souls know all natural things not with a certain and proper
knowledge, but in a general and confused manner.
Reply to Objection 1: Even an angel does not understand all natural
things through his substance, but through certain species, as stated
above (Question 87, Article 1). So it does not follow that the soul
knows all natural things because it knows separate substances after