It does not now bring in them who live after the coming of Christ, favored as
they are with more strength, and bound to strive for greater things: since as to its
own foster-children, them it does bring in one and all. Yea, for "many shall
come," says He, "from east and west, and shall lie down in the bosoms of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob." [Matthew 8:11] And Lazarus also receiving the
great prize, is shown dwelling in Abraham's bosom. And all, as many as have
shone forth with excellency in the old dispensation, shone by it, every one of
them. And Christ Himself, had it been in anything evil or alien from Him, would
not have fulfilled it all when He came. For if only to attract the Jews He was
doing this, and not in order to prove it akin to the new law, and concurrent
therewith; wherefore did He not also fulfill the laws and customs of the Gentiles,
that He might attract the Gentiles also?
So that from all considerations it is clear, that not from any badness in itself
does it fail to bring us in, but because it is now the season of higher precepts.
And if it be more imperfect than the new, neither does this imply it to be
evil: since upon this principle the new law itself will be in the very same case.
Because in truth our knowledge of this, when compared with that which is to
come, is a sort of partial and imperfect thing, and is done away on the coming of
that other. "For when," says He, "that which is perfect has come, then that which
is in part shall be done away:" [1 Corinthians 13:10] even as it befell the old law
through the new. Yet we are not to blame the new law for this, though that also
gives place on our attaining unto the Kingdom: for "then," says He, "that which
is in part shall be done away:" but for all this we call it great.
Since then both the rewards thereof are greater, and the power given by the
Spirit more abundant, in reason it requires our graces to be greater also. For it is
no longer "a land that flows with milk and honey," nor a comfortable old age, nor
many children, nor grain and wine, and flocks and herds: but Heaven, and the
good things in the Heavens, and adoption and brotherhood with the OnlyBegotten, and to partake of the inheritance and to be glorified and to reign with
Him, and those unnumbered rewards. And as to our having received more

abundant help, hear Paul, when he says, "There is therefore no condemnation
now to them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the
Spirit: for the law of the Spirit of life has made me free from the law of sin and
death." [Romans 8:1-2]
7. And now after threatening the transgressors, and setting great rewards for
them that do right, and signifying that He justly requires of us something beyond
the former measures; He from this point begins to legislate, not simply, but by
way of comparison with the ancient ordinances, desiring to intimate these two
things: first, that not as contending with the former, but rather in great harmony
with them, He is making these enactments; next, that it was meet and very
seasonable for Him to add thereto these second precepts.
And that this may be made yet clearer, let us hearken to the words of the
Legislator. What then does He Himself say?
"You have heard that it was said to them of old time, You shall not kill."
[Matthew 5:21]
And yet it was Himself who gave those laws also, but so far He states them
impersonally. For if on the one hand He had said, "You have heard that I said to
them of old," the saying would have been hard to receive, and would have stood
in the way of all the hearers. If again, on the other hand, after having said, "You
have heard that it was said to them of old by my Father," He had added, "But I
say," He would have seemed to be taking yet more on Himself.
Wherefore He has simply stated it, making out thereby one point only; the
proof that in fitting season He had come saying these things. For by the words,
"It was said to them of old," He pointed out the length of the time, since they
received this commandment. And this He did to shame the hearer, shrinking
from the advance to the higher class of His commandments; as though a teacher
should say to a child that was indolent, "Do you not know how long a time you
have consumed in learning syllables?" This then He also covertly intimates by
the expression, "them of old time," and thus for the future summons them on to
the higher order of His instructions: as if He had said, "You are learning these