for a long period, the conditions of luxury have not been extended with it, but
have come, and at the same time hastily departed. However, if you like, let it be
granted for argument's sake, that you will live so many years, and will not
sustain any reverse of fortune what is this compared with the endless ages, and
those bitter deed and intolerable punishments? For here indeed both good and
evil things have an end, and that very speedily: but there, both are coextensive
with immortal ages, and in their quality differ unspeakably from the things
which now are.
10. For when you hear of fire, do not suppose the fire in that world to be
like this: for fire in this world burns up and makes away with anything which it
takes hold of; but that fire is continually burning those who have once been
seized by it, and never ceases: therefore also is it called unquenchable. For those
also who have sinned must put on immortality, not for honour, but to have a
constant supply of material for that punishment to work upon; and how terrible
this is, speech could never depict, but from the experience of little things it is
possible to form some slight notion of these great ones. For if you should ever be
in a bath which has been heated more than it ought to be, think then, I pray you,
on the fire of hell: or again if you are ever inflamed by some severe fever
transfer your thoughts to that flame, and then you will be able clearly to discern
the difference. For if a bath and a fever so afflict and distress us, what will our
condition be when we have fallen into that river of fire which winds in front of
the terrible judgment-seat. Then we shall gnash our teeth under the suffering of
our labours and intolerable pains: but there will be no one to succour us: yea we
shall groan mightily, as the flame is applied more severely to us, but we shall see
no one save those who are being punished with us, and great desolation. And
how should any one describe the terrors arising to our souls from the darkness?
For just as that fire has no consuming power so neither has it any power of
giving light: for otherwise there would not be darkness. The dismay produced in
us then by this, and the trembling and the great astonishment can be sufficiently
realized in that day only. For in that world many and various kinds of torment

and torrents of punishment are poured in upon the soul from every side. And if
any one should ask, "and how can the soul bear up against such a multitude of
punishments and continue being chastised through interminable ages," let him
consider what happens in this world, how many have often borne up against a
long and severe disease. And if they have died, this has happened not because
the soul was consumed but because the body was exhausted, so that had the
latter not broken down, the soul would not have ceased being tormented. When
then we have received an incorruptible and inconsumable body there is nothing
to prevent the punishment being indefinitely extended. For here indeed it is
impossible that the two things should coexist. I mean severity of punishment and
permanence of being, but the one contends with the other, because the nature of
the body is perishable and cannot bear the concurrence of both: but when the
imperishable state has supervened, there would be an end of this strife, and both
these terrible things will keep their hold upon us for infinite time with much
force. Let us not then so dispose ourselves now as if the excessive power of the
tortures were destructive of the soul: for even the body will not be able to
experience this at that time, but will abide together with the soul, in a state of
eternal punishment, and there will not be any end to look to beyond this. How
much luxury then, and how much time will you weigh in the balance against this
punishment and vengeance? Do you propose a period of a hundred years or
twice as long? And what is this compared with the endless ages? For what the
dream of a single day is in the midst of a whole lifetime, that the enjoyment of
things here is as contrasted with the state of things to come. Is there then any one
who, for the sake of seeing a good dream, would elect to be perpetually
punished? Who is so senseless as to have recourse to this kind of retribution? For
I am not yet accusing luxury nor revealing now the bitterness which lurks in it:
for the present is not the proper time for these remarks, but when you have been
able to escape it. For now, entangled as you are by this passion, you will suspect
me of talking nonsense, if I were to call pleasure bitter: but when by the grace of
God you have been released from the malady then you will know its topics for