FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.4, C.8.

perfect Happiness which consists in seeing God, will be either in the
soul separated from the body, or in the soul united to the body then
no longer animal but spiritual. Consequently these external goods
are nowise necessary for that Happiness, since they are ordained to
the animal life. And since, in this life, the felicity of contemplation, as
being more Godlike, approaches nearer than that of action to the
likeness of that perfect Happiness, therefore it stands in less need of
these goods of the body as stated in Ethic. x, 8.
Reply to Objection 1: All those material promises contained in Holy
Scripture, are to be understood metaphorically, inasmuch as
Scripture is wont to express spiritual things under the form of things
corporeal, in order "that from things we know, we may rise to the
desire of things unknown," as Gregory says (Hom. xi in Evang.).
Thus food and drink signify the delight of Happiness; wealth, the
sufficiency of God for man; the kingdom, the lifting up of man to
union of God.
Reply to Objection 2: These goods that serve for the animal life, are
incompatible with that spiritual life wherein perfect Happiness
consists. Nevertheless in that Happiness there will be the aggregate
of all good things, because whatever good there be in these things,
we shall possess it all in the Supreme Fount of goodness.
Reply to Objection 3: According to Augustine (De Serm. Dom. in
Monte i, 5), it is not material heaven that is described as the reward
of the saints, but a heaven raised on the height of spiritual goods.
Nevertheless a bodily place, viz. the empyrean heaven, will be
appointed to the Blessed, not as a need of Happiness, but by reason
of a certain fitness and adornment.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.4, C.9.

### ARTICLE 8. Whether the fellowship of friend is necessary for

happiness?
Objection 1: It would seem that friends are necessary for Happiness.
For future Happiness is frequently designated by Scripture under the
name of "glory." But glory consists in man's good being brought to
the notice of many. Therefore the fellowship of friends is necessary
for Happiness.
Objection 2: Further, Boethius [Seneca, Ep. 6] says that "there is no
delight in possessing any good whatever, without someone to share
it with us." But delight is necessary for Happiness. Therefore
fellowship of friends is also necessary.
Objection 3: Further, charity is perfected in Happiness. But charity
includes the love of God and of our neighbor. Therefore it seems that
fellowship of friends is necessary for Happiness.
On the contrary, It is written (Wis. 7:11): "All good things came to me
together with her," i.e. with divine wisdom, which consists in
contemplating God. Consequently nothing else is necessary for
Happiness.
I answer that, If we speak of the happiness of this life, the happy man
needs friends, as the Philosopher says (Ethic. ix, 9), not, indeed, to
make use of them, since he suffices himself; nor to delight in them,
since he possesses perfect delight in the operation of virtue; but for
the purpose of a good operation, viz. that he may do good to them;
that he may delight in seeing them do good; and again that he may
be helped by them in his good work. For in order that man may do
well, whether in the works of the active life, or in those of the
contemplative life, he needs the fellowship of friends.
But if we speak of perfect Happiness which will be in our heavenly
Fatherland, the fellowship of friends is not essential to Happiness;
since man has the entire fulness of his perfection in God. But the
fellowship of friends conduces to the well-being of Happiness.
Hence Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. viii, 25) that "the spiritual
creatures receive no other interior aid to happiness than the eternity,
truth, and charity of the Creator. But if they can be said to be helped
from without, perhaps it is only by this that they see one another and