THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.86, C.2.

would be derogatory to the power of grace, whereby the heart of any
sinner whatsoever can be moved to repent, according to Prov. 21:1:
"The heart of the king is in the hand of the Lord: whithersoever He
will He shall turn it."
It is also erroneous to say that any sin cannot be pardoned through
true Penance. First, because this is contrary to Divine mercy, of
which it is written (Joel 2:13) that God is "gracious and merciful,
patient, and rich in mercy, and ready to repent of the evil"; for, in a
manner, God would be overcome by man, if man wished a sin to be
blotted out, which God were unwilling to blot out. Secondly, because
this would be derogatory to the power of Christ's Passion, through
which Penance produces its effect, as do the other sacraments,
since it is written (1 Jn. 2:2): "He is the propitiation for our sins, and
not for ours only, but also for those of the whole world."
Therefore we must say simply that, in this life, every sin can be
blotted out by true Penance.
Reply to Objection 1: Esau did not truly repent. This is evident from
his saying (Gn. 27:41): "The days will come of the mourning of my
father, and I will kill my brother Jacob." Likewise neither did
Antiochus repent truly; since he grieved for his past sin, not because
he had offended God thereby, but on account of the sickness which
he suffered in his body.
Reply to Objection 2: These words of Augustine should be
understood thus: "So great is the stain of that sin, that man is unable
to humble himself in prayer," i.e. it is not easy for him to do so; in
which sense we say that a man cannot be healed, when it is difficult
to heal him. Yet this is possible by the power of God's grace, which
sometimes turns men even "into the depths of the sea" (Ps. 67:23).
Reply to Objection 3: The word or blasphemy spoken against the
Holy Ghost is final impenitence, as Augustine states (De Verb. Dom.
xi), which is altogether unpardonable, because after this life is
ended, there is no pardon of sins. or, if by the blasphemy against the
Holy Ghost, we understand sin committed through certain malice,
this means either that the blasphemy itself against the Holy Ghost is
unpardonable, i.e. not easily pardonable, or that such a sin does not
contain in itself any motive for pardon, or that for such a sin a man is
punished both in this and in the next world, as we explained in the

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.86, C.2.

SS, Question 14, Article 3.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.86, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether sin can be pardoned without Penance?

Objection 1: It would seem that sin can be pardoned without
Penance. For the power of God is no less with regard to adults than
with regard to children. But He pardons the sins of children without
Penance. Therefore He also pardons adults without penance.
Objection 2: Further, God did not bind His power to the sacraments.
But Penance is a sacrament. Therefore by God's power sin can be
pardoned without Penance.
Objection 3: Further, God's mercy is greater than man's. Now man
sometimes forgives another for offending him, without his repenting:
wherefore our Lord commanded us (Mt. 5:44): "Love your enemies,
do good to them that hate you." Much more, therefore, does God
pardon men for offending him, without their repenting.
On the contrary, The Lord said (Jer. 18:8): "If that nation . . . shall
repent of their evil" which they have done, "I also will repent of the
evil that I have thought to do them," so that, on the other hand, if
man "do not penance," it seems that God will not pardon him his sin.
I answer that, It is impossible for a mortal actual sin to be pardoned
without penance, if we speak of penance as a virtue. For, as sin is an
offense against God, He pardons sin in the same way as he pardons
an offense committed against Him. Now an offense is directly
opposed to grace, since one man is said to be offended with another,
because he excludes him from his grace. Now, as stated in the FS,
Question 110, Article 1, the difference between the grace of God and
the grace of man, is that the latter does not cause, but presupposes
true or apparent goodness in him who is graced, whereas the grace
of God causes goodness in the man who is graced, because the
good-will of God, which is denoted by the word "grace," is the cause
of all created good. Hence it is possible for a man to pardon an
offense, for which he is offended with someone, without any change
in the latter's will; but it is impossible that God pardon a man for an
offense, without his will being changed. Now the offense of mortal
sin is due to man's will being turned away from God, through being
turned to some mutable good. Consequently, for the pardon of this
offense against God, it is necessary for man's will to be so changed
as to turn to God and to renounce having turned to something else in