are, as it were, two halves.
For this cause He also calls her a help, to show that they are one [Genesis
2:18]; for this cause He honors their cohabitation beyond both father and mother,
to show that they are one. [Genesis 2:24] And in like manner a father rejoices
both when son and daughter marry, as though the body were hastening to join a
member of its own; and though so great a charge and expenditure of money is
incurred still he cannot bear with indifference to see her unmarried. For as
though her own flesh itself were severed from her, each one separately is
imperfect for the procreation of children, each one is imperfect as regards the
constitution of this present life. Wherefore also the Prophet says, "the residue of
your spirit." [Malachi 2:15, Septuagint] And how become they one flesh? As if
you should take away the purest part of gold, and mingle it with other gold; so in
truth here also the woman as it were receiving the richest part fused by pleasure,
nourishes it and cherishes it, and withal contributing her own share, restores it
back a Man. And the child is a sort of bridge, so that the three become one flesh,
the child connecting, on either side, each to other. For like as two cities, which a
river divides throughout, become one, if a bridge connect them on both sides, so
is it in this case; and yet more, when the very bridge in this case is formed of the
substance of each. As the body and the head are one body; for they are divided
by the neck; but not divided more than connected, for it, lying between them
brings together each with the other. And it is the same as if a chorus that had
been severed should, by taking one part of itself from this quarter, and the other
again from the right, make one; or as these when come into close rank, and
extending hands, become one; for the hands extended admit not of their being
two. Therefore to wit He said with accuracy of expression, not "they shall be one
flesh" but joined together "into one flesh" [Genesis 2:2, Septuagint], namely, that
of the child. What then? When there is no child, will they not be two? Nay, for
their coming together has this effect, it diffuses and commingles the bodies of
both. And as one who has cast ointment into oil, has made the whole one; so in
truth is it also here.

I know that many are ashamed at what is said, and the cause of this is what
I spoke of, your own lasciviousness, and unchasteness. The fact of marriages
being thus performed, thus depraved, has gained the thing an ill name: for
"marriage is honorable, and the bed undefiled." [Hebrews 13:4] Why are you
ashamed of the honorable, why do you blush at the undefiled? This is for
heretics, this is for such as introduce harlots there. For this cause I am desirous
of having it thoroughly purified, so as to bring it back again to its proper
nobleness, so as to stop the mouths of the heretics. The gift of God is insulted,
the root of our generation; for about that root there is much dung and filth. This
then let us cleanse away by our discourse. Endure then a little while, for he that
holds filth must endure the stench. I wish to show you that you ought not to be
ashamed at these things, but at those which you do; but thou, passing by all
shame at those, art ashamed at these; surely then you condemn God who has
thus decreed.
Shall I tell how marriage is also a mystery of the Church? As Christ came
into the Church, and she was made of him, and he united with her in a spiritual
intercourse, "for," says one, "I have espoused you to one husband, a pure virgin."
[2 Corinthians 11:2] And that we are of Him, he says, of His members, "and of
His flesh." Thinking then on all these things, let us not cast shame upon so great
a mystery. Marriage is a type of the presence of Christ, and are you drunken at
it? Tell me; if you saw an image of the king, would you dishonor it? By no
means.
Now the practices at marriages seem to be a matter of indifference, but they
are the causes of great mischiefs. All is full of lawlessness. "Filthiness, and
foolish talking, and jesting, let it not proceed," says he, "out of your mouth."
[Ephesians 5:4; 4:29] Now all these things are filthiness, foolish talking, and
jesting; and not these simply, but with aggravation, for the thing has become an
art, and there are great praises for those that pursue it. Sins have become an art!
We pursue them not in any chance way, but with earnestness, with science, and
thenceforth the devil takes the command of his own array. For where