THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.79, C.2.

in the bread and wine."
Secondly, it is considered on the part of what is represented by this
sacrament, which is Christ's Passion, as stated above (Question 74,
Article 1; Question 76, Article 2, ad 1). And therefore this sacrament
works in man the effect which Christ's Passion wrought in the world.
Hence, Chrysostom says on the words, "Immediately there came out
blood and water" (Jn. 19:34): "Since the sacred mysteries derive
their origin from thence, when you draw nigh to the awe-inspiring
chalice, so approach as if you were going to drink from Christ's own
side." Hence our Lord Himself says (Mt. 26:28): "This is My blood . . .
which shall be shed for many unto the remission of sins."
Thirdly, the effect of this sacrament is considered from the way in
which this sacrament is given; for it is given by way of food and
drink. And therefore this sacrament does for the spiritual life all that
material food does for the bodily life, namely, by sustaining, giving
increase, restoring, and giving delight. Accordingly, Ambrose says
(De Sacram. v): "This is the bread of everlasting life, which supports
the substance of our soul." And Chrysostom says (Hom. xlvi in
Joan.): "When we desire it, He lets us feel Him, and eat Him, and
embrace Him." And hence our Lord says (Jn. 6:56): "My flesh is meat
indeed, and My blood is drink indeed."
Fourthly, the effect of this sacrament is considered from the species
under which it is given. Hence Augustine says (Tract. xxvi in Joan.):
"Our Lord betokened His body and blood in things which out of
many units are made into some one whole: for out of many grains is
one thing made," viz. bread; "and many grapes flow into one thing,"
viz. wine. And therefore he observes elsewhere (Tract. xxvi in Joan.):
"O sacrament of piety, O sign of unity, O bond of charity!"
And since Christ and His Passion are the cause of grace. and since
spiritual refreshment, and charity cannot be without grace, it is clear
from all that has been set forth that this sacrament bestows grace.
Reply to Objection 1: This sacrament has of itself the power of
bestowing grace; nor does anyone possess grace before receiving
this sacrament except from some desire thereof; from his own
desire, as in the case of the adult. or from the Church's desire in the
case of children, as stated above (Question 73, Article 3). Hence it is
due to the efficacy of its power, that even from desire thereof a man

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.79, C.2.

procures grace whereby he is enabled to lead the spiritual life. It
remains, then, that when the sacrament itself is really received,
grace is increased, and the spiritual life perfected: yet in different
fashion from the sacrament of Confirmation, in which grace is
increased and perfected for resisting the outward assaults of
Christ's enemies. But by this sacrament grace receives increase, and
the spiritual life is perfected, so that man may stand perfect in
himself by union with God.
Reply to Objection 2: This sacrament confers grace spiritually
together with the virtue of charity. Hence Damascene (De Fide Orth.
iv) compares this sacrament to the burning coal which Isaias saw (Is.
6:6): "For a live ember is not simply wood, but wood united to fire; so
also the bread of communion is not simple bread but bread united
with the Godhead." But as Gregory observes in a Homily for
Pentecost, "God's love is never idle; for, wherever it is it does great
works." And consequently through this sacrament, as far as its
power is concerned, not only is the habit of grace and of virtue
bestowed, but it is furthermore aroused to act, according to 2 Cor.
5:14: "The charity of Christ presseth us." Hence it is that the soul is
spiritually nourished through the power of this sacrament, by being
spiritually gladdened, and as it were inebriated with the sweetness of
the Divine goodness, according to Cant 5:1: "Eat, O friends, and
drink, and be inebriated, my dearly beloved."
Reply to Objection 3: Because the sacraments operate according to
the similitude by which they signify, therefore by way of assimilation
it is said that in this sacrament "the body is offered for the salvation
of the body, and the blood for the salvation of the soul," although
each works for the salvation of both, since the entire Christ is under
each, as stated above (Question 76, Article 2). And although the
body is not the immediate subject of grace, still the effect of grace
flows into the body while in the present life we present "our
members" as "instruments of justice unto God" (Rm. 6:13), and in
the life to come our body will share in the incorruption and the glory
of the soul.