loaves, how He extended five to so great a number? Because they then only
thought of being satisfied, not of seeing the miracle. "But," says some one, "their
experience then taught them." Then by reason of that experience these words
ought to have been readily received. For to this end He wrought beforehand that
strange miracle, that taught by it they might no longer disbelieve what should be
said by Him afterwards.
3. Those men then at that time reaped no fruit from what was said, but we
have enjoyed the benefit in the very realities. Wherefore it is necessary to
understand the marvel of the Mysteries, what it is, why it was given, and what is
the profit of the action. We become one Body, and "members of His flesh and of
His bones." [Ephesians 5:30] Let the initiated follow what I say. In order then
that we may become this not by love only, but in very deed, let us be blended
into that flesh. This is effected by the food which He has freely given us,
desiring to show the love which He has for us. On this account He has mixed up
Himself with us; He has kneaded up His body with ours, that we might be a
certain One Thing, like a body joined to a head. For this belongs to them who
love strongly; this, for instance, Job implied, speaking of his servants, by whom
he was beloved so exceedingly, that they desired to cleave unto his flesh. For
they said, to show the strong love which they felt, "Who would give us to be
satisfied with his flesh?" [Job 31:31] Wherefore this also Christ has done, to lead
us to a closer friendship, and to show His love for us; He has given to those who
desire Him not only to see Him, but even to touch, and eat Him, and fix their
teeth in His flesh, and to embrace Him, and satisfy all their love. Let us then
return from that table like lions breathing fire, having become terrible to the
devil; thinking on our Head, and on the love which He has shown for us. Parents
often entrust their offspring to others to feed; "but I," says He, "do not so, I feed
you with My own flesh, desiring that you all be nobly born, and holding forth to
you good hopes for the future. For He who gives out Himself to you here, much
more will do so hereafter. I have willed to become your Brother, for your sake I
shared in flesh and blood, and in turn I give out to you the flesh and the blood by

which I became your kinsman." This blood causes the image of our King to be
fresh within us, produces beauty unspeakable, permits not the nobleness of our
souls to waste away, watering it continually, and nourishing it. The blood derived
from our food becomes not at once blood, but something else; while this does
not so, but straightway waters our souls, and works in them some mighty power.
This blood, if rightly taken, drives away devils, and keeps them afar off from us,
while it calls to us Angels and the Lord of Angels. For wherever they see the
Lord's blood, devils flee, and Angels run together. This blood poured forth
washed clean all the world; many wise sayings did the blessed Paul utter
concerning it in the Epistle to the Hebrews. This blood cleansed the secret place,
and the Holy of Holies. And if the type of it had such great power in the temple
of the Hebrews, and in the midst of Egypt, when smeared on the door-posts,
much more the reality. This blood sanctified the golden altar; without it the high
priest dared not enter into the secret place. This blood consecrated priests, this in
types cleansed sins. But if it had such power in the types, if death so shuddered
at the shadow, tell me how would it not have dreaded the very reality? This
blood is the salvation of our souls, by this the soul is washed, by this is beautiful,
by this is inflamed, this causes our understanding to be more bright than fire, and
our soul more beaming than gold; this blood was poured forth, and made heaven
accessible.
4. Awful in truth are the Mysteries of the Church, awful in truth is the Altar.
A fountain went up out of Paradise sending forth material rivers, from this table
springs up a fountain which sends forth rivers spiritual. By the side of this
fountain are planted not fruitless willows, but trees reaching even to heaven,
bearing fruit ever timely and undecaying. If any be scorched with heat, let him
come to the side of this fountain and cool his burning. For it quenches drought,
and comforts all things that are burnt up, not by the sun, but by the fiery darts.
For it has its beginning from above, and its source is there, whence also its water
flows. Many are the streams of that fountain which the Comforter sends forth,
and the Son is the Mediator, not holding mattock to clear the way, but opening