Now since He who is reverenced is a spirit, He cannot be approached by the body, but only by
the mind; and so worship of Him consists chiefly in acts of the mind by which the mind itself is
ordained to God. These acts are principally those of the theological virtues; and in accordance
with this, Augustine says that God is worshiped by faith, hope, and charity, to which are added
also the acts of the gifts ordained toward God, such as those of wisdom and of fear.

But because we who honor God are also possessed of bodies and receive our knowledge
through bodily senses, there is the necessity that certain physical actions accompany the worship
of God, not only that we may render service to God with our whole being, but also that by these
bodily actions we may arouse in ourselves and in others acts of the mind ordained to God.

Wherefore Augustine says in his book, De cura pro mortuis habenda: "Those who pray make
the members of their bodies conform to their acts of supplication when they genuflect, extend
their hands, or prostrate themselves upon the ground, or perform any other visible action; and
although it is their invisible will and the intention of the heart that is known to God, it is not
unseemly that the human soul should so express itself, but rather by so doing man stirs himself
to pray and to lament his sins the more humbly and fervently."

Hence, all acts by which man subjects himself to God, whether they are acts of mind or of body,
pertain to religion. But because those things that are rendered to the neighbor on account of God
are rendered to God Himself, it is evident that they also pertain to this same subjection in which
religious worship consists; and so to one diligently considering the matter it is apparent that
every good act pertains to religion. Hence Augustine says (loc. cit.): "True sacrifice is every
work done that we may adhere to God in holy companionship; however, in a certain order." First
and foremost, those acts of the mind ordained to God pertain to the worship which we are
speaking of. Secondly, there are acts of the body intended to arouse reverence of mind or to give
expression to it, such as prostrations, sacrifices, and the like. Thirdly, there also pertain to divine
worship all other acts ordained to the neighbor for the sake of God.

Nevertheless, as magnanimity is a certain special virtue, although it uses the acts of all virtues,
since it bestows a grandeur in the exercise of them all and so regards its object under a certain
special aspect; so also religion is a special virtue in the acts of all the virtues, considering a
special aspect of its object, namely, that which is due to God; and thus it forms a part of justice.
There are, moreover, special acts assigned to religion, which pertain to no other virtue, such as
prostrations and the like, in which the worship of God consists secondarily.