272. Loving others is a spiritual force drawing us to union with God; indeed, one who does not love
others “walks in the darkness” (1 Jn 2:11), “remains in death” (1 Jn 3:14) and “does not know God”
(1 Jn 4:8). Benedict XVI has said that “closing our eyes to our neighbour also blinds us to
God”, and that love is, in the end, the only light which “can always illuminate a world grown
dim and give us the courage needed to keep living and working”. When we live out a
spirituality of drawing nearer to others and seeking their welfare, our hearts are opened wide to the
Lord’s greatest and most beautiful gifts. Whenever we encounter another person in love, we learn
something new about God. Whenever our eyes are opened to acknowledge the other, we grow in
the light of faith and knowledge of God. If we want to advance in the spiritual life, then, we must
constantly be missionaries. The work of evangelization enriches the mind and the heart; it opens
up spiritual horizons; it makes us more and more sensitive to the workings of the Holy Spirit, and it
takes us beyond our limited spiritual constructs. A committed missionary knows the joy of being a
spring which spills over and refreshes others. Only the person who feels happiness in seeking the
good of others, in desiring their happiness, can be a missionary. This openness of the heart is a
source of joy, since “it is more blessed to give than to receive” (Acts 20:35). We do not live better
when we flee, hide, refuse to share, stop giving and lock ourselves up in own comforts. Such a life
is nothing less than slow suicide.

273. My mission of being in the heart of the people is not just a part of my life or a badge I can
take off; it is not an “extra” or just another moment in life. Instead, it is something I cannot uproot
from my being without destroying my very self. I am a mission on this earth; that is the reason why
I am here in this world. We have to regard ourselves as sealed, even branded, by this mission of
bringing light, blessing, enlivening, raising up, healing and freeing. All around us we begin to see
nurses with soul, teachers with soul, politicians with soul, people who have chosen deep down to
be with others and for others. But once we separate our work from our private lives, everything
turns grey and we will always be seeking recognition or asserting our needs. We stop being a
people.

274. If we are to share our lives with others and generously give of ourselves, we also have to
realize that every person is worthy of our giving. Not for their physical appearance, their abilities,
their language, their way of thinking, or for any satisfaction that we might receive, but rather
because they are God’s handiwork, his creation. God created that person in his image, and he or
she reflects something of God’s glory. Every human being is the object of God’s infinite
tenderness, and he himself is present in their lives. Jesus offered his precious blood on the cross
for that person. Appearances notwithstanding, every person is immensely holy and deserves our
love. Consequently, if I can help at least one person to have a better life, that already justifies the
offering of my life. It is a wonderful thing to be God’s faithful people. We achieve fulfilment when
we break down walls and our heart is filled with faces and names!