with punishment.
What then do they say when we assert what we have asserted? "That the
words, 'in the beginning was the Word,' do not denote eternity absolutely, for that
this same expression was used also concerning heaven and earth." What
enormous shamelessness and irreverence! I speak to you concerning God, and do
you bring the earth into the argument, and men who are of the earth? At this rate,
since Christ is called Son of God, and God, Man who is called Son of God must
be God also. For, "I have said, You are Gods, and all of you are children of the
Most High." [Psalm 82:6] Will you contend with the Only-Begotten concerning
Sonship, and assert that in that respect He enjoys nothing more than thou? "By
no means," is the reply. And yet you do this even though thou say not so in
words. "How?" Because you say that thou by grace art partaker of the adoption,
and He in like manner. For by saying that He is not Son by nature, thou only
makest him to be so by grace.
However, let us see the proofs which they produce to us. "In the
beginning," it is said, "God made the Heaven and the earth, and the earth was
invisible and unformed." [Genesis 1:2] And, "There 'was' a man of Ramathaim
Zophim." [1 Samuel 1:1] These are what they think strong arguments, and they
are strong; but it is to prove the correctness of the doctrines asserted by us, while
they are utterly powerless to establish their blasphemy. For tell me, what has the
word "was" in common with the word "made"? What has God in common with
man? Why do you mix what may not be mixed? Why confound things which are
distinct, why bring low what is above? In that place it is not the expression
"was" only which denotes eternity, but that One "was in the beginning." And that
other, "The Word was"; for as the word "being," when used concerning man,
only distinguishes present time, but when concerning God, denotes eternity, so
"was," when used respecting our nature, signifies to us past time, and that too
limited, but when respecting God it declares eternity. It would have been enough
then when one had heard the words "earth" and "man," to imagine nothing more
concerning them than what one may fitly think of a nature that came into being,

for that which came to be, be it what it may, has come to be either in time, or the
age before time was, but the Son of God is above not only times, but all ages
which were before, for He is the Creator and Maker of them, as the Apostle says,
"by whom also He made the ages." Now the Maker necessarily is, before the
thing made. Yet since some are so senseless, as even after this to have higher
notions concerning creatures than is their due, by the expression "He made," and
by that other, "there was a man," he lays hold beforehand of the mind of his
hearer, and cuts up all shamelessness by the roots. For all that has been made,
both heaven and earth, has been made in time, and has its beginning in time, and
none of them is without beginning, as having been made: so that when you hear
that "he made the earth," and that "there was a man," you are trifling to no
purpose, and weaving a tissue of useless folly.
For I can mention even another thing by way of going further. What is it? It
is, that if it had been said of the earth, "In the beginning was the earth," and of
man, "In the beginning was the man," we must not even then have imagined any
greater things concerning them than what we have now determined. For the
terms "earth" and "man" as they are presupposed, whatever may be said
concerning them, do not allow the mind to imagine to itself anything greater
concerning them than what we know at present. Just as "the Word," although but
little be said of It, does not allow us to think (respecting It) anything low or poor.
Since in proceeding he says of the earth, "The earth was invisible and
unformed." For having said that "He made" it, and having settled its proper limit,
he afterwards declares fearlessly what follows, as knowing that there is no one
so silly as to suppose that it is without beginning and uncreated, since the word
"earth," and that other "made," are enough to convince even a very simple
person that it is not eternal nor increate, but one of those things created in time.
3. Besides, the expression "was," applied to the earth and to man, is not
indicative of absolute existence. But in the case of a man (it denotes) his being of
a certain place, in that of the earth its being in a certain way. For he has not said
absolutely "the earth was," and then held his peace, but has taught how it was