Reply to Objection 5: Quality in man is of two kinds: natural and
adventitious. Now the natural quality may be in the intellectual part,
or in the body and its powers. From the very fact, therefore, that man
is such by virtue of a natural quality which is in the intellectual part,
he naturally desires his last end, which is happiness. Which desire,
indeed, is a natural desire, and is not subject to free-will, as is clear
from what we have said above (Question 82, Articles 1,2). But on the
part of the body and its powers man may be such by virtue of a
natural quality, inasmuch as he is of such a temperament or
disposition due to any impression whatever produced by corporeal
causes, which cannot affect the intellectual part, since it is not the
act of a corporeal organ. And such as a man is by virtue of a
corporeal quality, such also does his end seem to him, because from
such a disposition a man is inclined to choose or reject something.
But these inclinations are subject to the judgment of reason, which
the lower appetite obeys, as we have said (Question 81, Article 3).
Wherefore this is in no way prejudicial to free-will.
The adventitious qualities are habits and passions, by virtue of
which a man is inclined to one thing rather than to another. And yet
even these inclinations are subject to the judgment of reason. Such
qualities, too, are subject to reason, as it is in our power either to
acquire them, whether by causing them or disposing ourselves to
them, or to reject them. And so there is nothing in this that is
repugnant to free-will.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether free-will is a power?

Objection 1: It would seem that free-will is not a power. For free-will
is nothing but a free judgment. But judgment denominates an act,
not a power. Therefore free-will is not a power.
Objection 2: Further, free-will is defined as "the faculty of the will and
reason." But faculty denominates a facility of power, which is due to
a habit. Therefore free-will is a habit. Moreover Bernard says (De
Gratia et Lib. Arb. 1,2) that free-will is "the soul's habit of disposing
of itself." Therefore it is not a power.
Objection 3: Further, no natural power is forfeited through sin. But
free-will is forfeited through sin; for Augustine says that "man, by
abusing free-will, loses both it and himself." Therefore free-will is not
a power.
On the contrary, Nothing but a power, seemingly, is the subject of a
habit. But free-will is the subject of grace, by the help of which it
chooses what is good. Therefore free-will is a power.
I answer that, Although free-will in its strict sense denotes an act, in
the common manner of speaking we call free-will, that which is the
principle of the act by which man judges freely. Now in us the
principle of an act is both power and habit; for we say that we know
something both by knowledge and by the intellectual power.
Therefore free-will must be either a power or a habit, or a power with
a habit. That it is neither a habit nor a power together with a habit,
can be clearly proved in two ways. First of all, because, if it is a
habit, it must be a natural habit; for it is natural to man to have a freewill. But there is not natural habit in us with respect to those things
which come under free-will: for we are naturally inclined to those
things of which we have natural habits---for instance, to assent to
first principles: while those things which we are naturally inclined
are not subject to free-will, as we have said of the desire of
happiness (Question 82, Articles 1,2). Wherefore it is against the very
notion of free-will that it should be a natural habit. And that it should
be a non-natural habit is against its nature. Therefore in no sense is
it a habit.
Secondly, this is clear because habits are defined as that "by reason