(consolatus) our disobedience by His own obedience; conferring also upon us the gift of communion
with, and subjection to, our Maker. For this reason also He has taught us to say in prayer, "And
forgive us our debts;" since indeed He is our Father, whose debtors we were, having transgressed
His commandments. But who is this Being? Is He some unknown one, and a Father who gives no
commandment to any one? Or is He the God who is proclaimed in the Scriptures, to whom we
were debtors, having transgressed His commandment? Now the commandment was given to man
by the Word. For Adam, it is said, "heard the voice of the Lord God." Rightly then does His
Word say to man, "Thy sins are forgiven thee;" He, the same against whom we had sinned in
the beginning, grants forgiveness of sins in the end. But if indeed we had disobeyed the command
of any other, while it was a different being who said, "Thy sins are forgiven thee;" such an one
is neither good, nor true, nor just. For how can he be good, who does not give from what belongs
to himself? Or how can he be just, who snatches away the goods of another? And in what way can
sins be truly remitted, unless that He against whom we have sinned has Himself granted remission
"through the bowels of mercy of our God," in which "He has visited us" through His Son?
2. And therefore, when He had healed the man sick of the palsy, [the evangelist] says "The
people upon seeing it glorified God, who gave such power unto men." What God, then, did the
bystanders glorify? Was it indeed that unknown Father invented by the heretics? And how could
they glorify him who was altogether unknown to them? It is evident, therefore, that the Israelites
glorified Him who has been proclaimed as God by the law and the prophets, who is also the Father
of our Lord; and therefore He taught men, by the evidence of their senses through those signs which
He accomplished, to give glory to God. If, however, He Himself had come from another Father,
and men glorified a different Father when they beheld His miracles, He [in that case] rendered them
ungrateful to that Father who had sent the gift of healing. But as the only-begotten Son had come
for man's salvation from Him who is God, He did both stir up the incredulous by the miracles
which He was in the habit of working, to give glory to the Father; and to the Pharisees, who did
not admit the advent of His Son, and who consequently did not believe in the remission [of sins]
which was conferred by Him, He said, "That ye may know that the Son of man hath power to
forgive sins." And when He had said this, He commanded the paralytic man to take up the pallet
upon which he was lying, and go into his house. By this work of His He confounded the unbelievers,

Matt. ix. 2; Luke v. 20.

and showed that He is Himself the voice of God, by which man received commandments, which
he broke, and became a sinner; for the paralysis followed as a consequence of sins.
3. Therefore, by remitting sins, He did indeed heal man, while He also manifested Himself who
He was. For if no one can forgive sins but God alone, while the Lord remitted them and healed
men, it is plain that He was Himself the Word of God made the Son of man, receiving from the
Father the power of remission of sins; since He was man, and since He was God, in order that since
as man He suffered for us, so as God He might have compassion on us, and forgive us our debts,
in which we were made debtors to God our Creator. And therefore David said beforehand, "Blessed
are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered. Blessed is the man to whom
the Lord has not imputed sin;" pointing out thus that remission of sins which follows upon His
advent, by which "He has destroyed the handwriting" of our debt, and "fastened it to the cross;"
so that as by means of a tree we were made debtors to God, [so also] by means of a tree we may
obtain the remission of our debt.
4. This fact has been strikingly set forth by many others, and especially through means of Elisha
the prophet. For when his fellow-prophets were hewing wood for the construction of a tabernacle,
and when the iron [head], shaken loose from the axe, had fallen into the Jordan and could not be
found by them, upon Elisha's coming to the place, and learning what had happened, he threw some
wood into the water. Then, when he had done this, the iron part of the axe floated up, and they took
up from the surface of the water what they had previously lost. By this action the prophet pointed
out that the sure word of God, which we had negligently lost by means of a tree, and were not in
the way of finding again, we should receive anew by the dispensation of a tree, [viz., the cross of
Christ]. For that the word of God is likened to an axe, John the Baptist declares [when he says] in
reference to it, "But now also is the axe laid to the root of the trees." Jeremiah also says to the
same purport: "The word of God cleaveth the rock as an axe." This word, then, what was hidden
from us, did the dispensation of the tree make manifest, as I have already remarked. For as we lost
it by means of a tree, by means of a tree again was it made manifest to all, showing the height, the
length, the breadth, the depth in itself; and, as a certain man among our predecessors observed,
"Through the extension of the hands of a divine person, gathering together the two peoples to