5. "Again, you have heard that it was said to them of old time, You shall not
forswear yourself, but shall perform unto the Lord your oaths. But I say unto
you, swear not at all." [Matthew 5:33-34]
Why did He go straightway not to theft, but to false witness, passing over
that commandment? Because he that steals, does upon occasion swear also; but
he that knows not either swearing or speaking falsehood, much less will he
choose to steal. So that by this He has overthrown the other sin likewise: since
falsehood comes of stealing.
But what means, "You shall perform unto the Lord your oaths?" It is this,
"you shall be true in swearing." "But I say unto you, swear not at all."
Next, to lead them farther away from swearing by God, He says, "Neither
by Heaven, for it is God's throne, nor by the earth, for it is the footstool of His
feet; nor by Jerusalem, for it is the city of the great King:" still speaking out of
the prophetical writings, and signifying Himself not to be opposed to the
ancients. This was because they had a custom of swearing by these objects, and
he intimates this custom near the end of his Gospel.
But mark, I pray you, on what ground He magnifies the elements; not from
their own nature, but from God's relation to them, such as it had been in
condescension declared. For because the tyranny of idolatry was great, that the
elements might not be thought worthy of honor for their own sake, He has
assigned this cause, which we have mentioned, which again would pass on to the
glory of God. For He neither said, "because Heaven is beautiful and great," nor,
"because earth is profitable;" but "because the one is God's throne, the other His
footstool;" on every side urging them on towards their Lord.
"Neither by your head," says He, "because you can not make one hair white
or black." [Matthew 5:36]
Here again, not as wondering at man, has He withdrawn him from swearing
by his head (for so man himself would be worshipped), but as referring the glory
to God, and signifying that you are not master even of yourself, and of course
therefore not of the oaths made by your head. For if no one would give up his

own child to another, much more will not God give up His own work to you. For
though it be your head, yet is it the property of another; and so far from being
master thereof, you shall not be able to do with it, no not the least thing of all.
For He said not, "You can not make one hair grow;" but, "Not so much as
change its quality."
"But what," it may be said, "if any one should require an oath, and apply
constraint?" Let the fear of God be more powerful than the constraint: since, if
you are to bring forward such excuses, you will keep none of the things which
are enjoined.
Yea, for first with respect to your wife you will say, "what if she be
contentious and extravagant;" and then as to the right eye, "what if I love it, and
am quite on fire?" and of the unchaste look, "what then, if I cannot help seeing?"
and of our anger against a brother, "what if I be hasty, and not able to govern my
tongue?" and in general, all His sayings you may on this wise trample under
foot. Yet surely with regard to human laws you dare not in any case use this
allegation, nor say, "what then if this or that be the case," but, willing or
unwilling, you receive what is written.
And besides, you will never have compulsion to undergo at all. For he that
has hearkened unto those former blessings, and has framed himself to be such as
Christ enjoined, will have no such constraint to endure from any, being held in
reverence and veneration by all.
"But let your yea, be yea; and your nay, nay: for that which exceeds these
comes of the evil one."
What is it then that "exceeds yea" and "nay"? It is the oath, not the perjury.
For this latter is quite acknowledged, and no man needs to learn that it is of the
evil one; and it is not an excess, but an opposite: whereas an excess means
something more, and added over and above: which kind of thing swearing is.
"What then," says one, "was it of the evil one? And if it was of the evil one,
how was it a law?" Well, this same thing you will say concerning the wife also;
how is that now accounted adultery, which was before permitted?