we avail nothing? Behold, the world is gone after Him." [John 12:19] Thus their
love of power was everywhere in their way. When they admitted that no one can
forgive sins but God only, and Christ immediately did that very thing, which
they had confessed to be a sign of divinity, this could not be a case of ignorance.
But where was Paul then? Perhaps one should say he was sitting at the feet of
Gamaliel, and took no part with the multitude who conspired against Jesus: for
Gamaliel does not appear to have been an ambitious man. Then how is it that
afterwards Paul was found joining with the multitude? He saw the doctrine
growing, and on the point of prevailing, and being generally embraced. For in
the lifetime of Christ, the disciples consorted with Him, and afterwards with
their teachers, but when they were completely separated, Paul did not act as the
other Jews did, from the love of power, but from zeal. For what was the motive
of his journey to Damascus? He thought the doctrine pernicious, and was afraid
that the preaching of it would spread everywhere. But with the Jews it was no
concern for the multitude, but the love of power, that influenced their actions.
Hence they say, "The Romans will come and take away both our place and
nation." [John 11:48] What fear was this that agitated them, but that of man? But
it is worthy of enquiry, how one so skillful in the law as Paul could be ignorant?
For it is he who says, "which He had promised before by His holy prophets."
[Romans 4:2] How is it then that you know not, you who are zealous of the law
of their fathers, who were brought up at the feet of Gamaliel? Yet they who spent
their days on lakes and rivers, and the very publicans, have embraced the
Gospel, while you that study the law are persecuting it! It is for this he condemns
himself, saying, "I am not meet to be called an Apostle." [1 Corinthians 9:9] It is
for this he confesses his ignorance, which was produced by unbelief. For this
cause, he says, that he obtained "mercy." What then does he mean when he says,
"He counted me faithful"? He would give up no right of his Master's: even his
own part he ascribed to Him, and assumed nothing to himself, nor claimed for
his own the glory which was due to God. Hence in another place we find him
exclaiming, "Sirs, why do ye these things to us? We also are men of like passions

with you." [Acts 14:15] So again, "He counted me faithful." And again, "I
labored more abundantly than they all, yet not I, but the grace of God which was
with me." [1 Corinthians 15:10] And again, "It is He that works in us both to will
and to do." [Philippians 2:13] Thus in acknowledging that he "obtained mercy,"
he owns that he deserved punishment, since mercy is for such. And again in
another place he says of the Jews, "Blindness in part is happened to Israel."
[Romans 11:25]
Ver. 14. "And the grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant with faith and
love which is in Christ Jesus."
This is added, lest hearing that he obtained mercy, we should understand by
it only, that being deserving of punishment, as a persecutor and blasphemer,
nevertheless he was not punished. But mercy was not confined to this, that
punishment was not inflicted; many other great favors are implied by it. For not
only has God released us from the impending punishment, but He has made us
"righteous" too, and "sons," and "brethren," and "heirs," and "joint-heirs."
Therefore it is he says, that "grace was exceeding abundant." For the gifts
bestowed were beyond mercy, since they are not such as would come of mercy
only, but of affection and excessive love. Having thus enlarged upon the love of
God which, not content with showing mercy to a blasphemer and persecutor,
conferred upon him other blessings in abundance, he has guarded against that
error of the unbelievers which takes away free will, by adding, "with faith and
love which is in Christ Jesus." Thus much only, he says, did we contribute. We
have believed that He is able to save us.
Moral. Let us then love God through Christ. What means "through Christ"?
That it is He, and not the Law, who has enabled us to do this. Observe what
blessings we owe to Christ, and what to the Law. And he says not merely that
grace has abounded, but "abounded exceedingly," in bringing at once to the
adoption those who deserved infinite punishment.
And observe again that "in" is used for "through." For not only faith is
necessary, but love. Since there are many still who believe that Christ is God,