began to withdraw himself. What could be more splendid than that theatre?
What more conspicuous than that victory? What more signal than those new
trophies of theirs?
The same thing is done in our time also. Even now is there a king of the
Babylonish furnace, even now he kindles a flame fiercer than that. There is even
now such an image, and one who gives command to admire it. At his side are
satraps and soldiers and bewitching music. And many gaze in admiration upon
this image, so varied, so great. For somewhat of the same kind of thing as that
image is covetousness, which does not despise even iron , but unlike as the
materials are whereof it is composed, it gives command to admire all, both brass
and iron, and things much more ordinary than they.
But as these things are, so also even now are there some who are emulous
of these children: who say, "your gods we serve not, and your images we
worship not;" but both the furnace of poverty we endure and all other distress,
for the sake of God's laws. And the wealthy for their part, even as those at that
time, oftentimes, worship this image too and are burnt. But those who possess
nothing despite even this, and although in poverty, are more in the dew than
those who live in affluence. Even as at that time they who cast into the fire were
burnt up; but those in the midst of it found themselves in dew as it were rain.
Then also that tyrant was more burnt up with the flame, his wrath kindling him
violently, than those children. As to them, the fire had no power even to touch
the ends of their hair: but more fiercely than that fire did wrath burn up his mind.
For consider what a thing it was that with so many to look on, he should be
scorned by captive children. And it was a sign that his taking their city also had
not been through his own might, but by reason of the sin of the multitude among
them. Since if he had not the power to overcome these men in chains, and that
when they were cast into a furnace, how could he have overcome the Jews in
regular warfare, had they been all such as these? From which it is plain that the
sins of the multitude betrayed the city.
6. But mark also the children's freedom from vain-glory. For they did not

leap into the furnace, but they kept beforehand the commandment of Christ
where he says, [Matthew 26:41] "Pray that you enter not into temptation."
Neither did they shrink when they were brought to it; but stood in the midst
nobly, neither contending without a summons, nor yet when summoned playing
the coward: but ready for everything, and noble, and full of all boldness of
speech.
But let us hear also what they say, that from this also we may learn their
lofty spirit. [Daniel 3:17] "There is a God in heaven able to deliver us:" they
take no care for themselves, but even when about to be burned the glory of God
is all their thought. For what they say comes to this, Lest perchance if we are
burnt you should charge God with weakness, we now declare unto you
accurately our whole doctrine. "There is a God in heaven," not such as this
image here on earth, this lifeless and mute thing, but able to snatch even from
the midst of the burning fiery furnace. Condemn him not then of weakness for
permitting us to fall into it. So powerful is He that after our fall, He is able to
snatch us out again out of the flame. "But if not, be it known unto you, O king,
that we will not serve your gods, nor worship the golden image which you have
set up." Observe that they by a special dispensation are ignorant of the future: for
if they had foreknown, there would have been nothing wonderful in their doing
what they did. For what marvel is it if when they had a guarantee for safety, they
defied all terrors? Then God indeed would have been glorified in that He was
able to deliver from the furnace: but they would not have been wondered at,
inasmuch as they would not have cast themselves into any dangers. For this
cause He suffered them to be ignorant of the future that He might glorify them
the more. And as they cautioned ([ἠσψαλίξοντο]) the king that he was not to
condemn God of weakness though they might be burnt, so God accomplished
both purposes; the showing forth His own power and the causing the zeal of the
children to appear more conspicuous.
From whence then arose their doubting and their not feeling confident that
they should at all events be preserved? Because they esteemed themselves