He would not, in order that He might render His trophy more brilliant."
Wherefore also in a former passage, showing that it was His work which had
been done, His will that the word should be preached in an unlearned manner, he
said, "For Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel; not with
wisdom of words." But far greater, yea, infinitely greater, than Paul's willing this,
is the fact that Christ willed it.
"Not therefore," says he, "by display of eloquence, neither armed with
arguments from without, do I declare the testimony of God." He says not "the
preaching," but "the testimony of God;" which word was itself sufficient to
withhold him. For he went about preaching death: and for this reason he added,
"for I determined not to know anything among you, save Jesus Christ, and Him
crucified." This was the meaning he meant to convey, that he is altogether
destitute of the wisdom which is without; as indeed he was saying above, "I
came not with excellency of speech:" for that he might have possessed this also
is plain; for he whose garments raised the dead and whose shadow expelled
diseases, much more was his soul capable of receiving eloquence. For this is a
thing which may be taught: but the former transcends all art. He then who knows
things beyond the reach of art, much more must he have had strength for lesser
things. But Christ permitted not; for it was not expedient. Rightly therefore he
says, For I determined not to know any thing: "for I, too, for my part have just
the same will as Christ."
And to me it seems that he speaks to them in a lower tone even than to any
others, in order to repress their pride. Thus, the expression, "I determined to
know nothing," was spoken in contradistinction to the wisdom which is without.
For I came not weaving syllogisms nor sophisms, nor saying unto you anything
else than "Christ was crucified." They indeed have ten thousand things to say,
and concerning ten thousand things they speak, winding out long courses of
words, framing arguments and syllogisms, compounding sophisms without end.
But I came unto you saying no other thing than "Christ was crucified." and all of
them I out-stripped: which is a sign such as no words can express of the power

of Him whom I preach.

1 Corinthians 2:3
2. "And I was with you in weakness, and in fear, and in much trembling."
This again is another topic: for not only are the believers unlearned persons;
not only is he that speaks unlearned; not only is the manner of the teaching of an
unlearned cast throughout; not only was the thing preached of itself enough to
stagger people; (for the cross and death were the message brought;) but together
with these there were also other hindrances, the dangers, and the plots, and the
daily fear, and the being hunted about. For the word "weakness," with him in
many places stands for the persecutions: as also elsewhere. "My weakness which
I had in my flesh you did not set at nought:" [Galatians 4:13-14] and again, "If I
must needs glory, I will glory of the things which concern my weakness." [2
Corinthians 11:30] What [weakness]? "The governor under Aretas the king
guarded the city of the Damascenes, desirous to apprehend me." [2 Corinthians
5:32] And again, "Wherefore I take pleasure in weakness:" [2 Corinthians 12:10]
then, saying in what, he added, "In injuries, in necessities, in distresses." And
here he makes the same statement; for having said, "And I was in weakness," etc.
he did not stop at this point, but explaining the word "weakness" makes mention
of his dangers. He adds again, "and in fear, and in much trembling, I was with
you."
"How do you say? Did Paul also fear dangers?" He did fear, and dreaded
them excessively; for though he was Paul, yet he was a man. But this is no
charge against Paul, but infirmity of human nature; and it is to the praise of his
fixed purpose of mind that when he even dreaded death and stripes, he did
nothing wrong because of this fear. So that they who assert that he feared not
stripes, not only do not honor him, but rather abridge greatly his praises. For if
he feared not, what endurance or what self-restraint was there in bearing the
dangers? I, for my part, on this account admire him; because being in fear, and