understands by discursion, and by composing and dividing, namely,
that in the first apprehension of anything newly apprehended it does
not at once grasp all that is virtually contained in it. And this comes
from the weakness of the intellectual light within us, as has been
said (Article 3). Hence, since the intellectual light is perfect in the
angel, for he is a pure and most clear mirror, as Dionysius says (Div.
Nom. iv), it follows that as the angel does not understand by
reasoning, so neither does he by composing and dividing.
Nevertheless, he understands the composition and the division of
enunciations, just as he apprehends the reasoning of syllogisms: for
he understands simply, such things as are composite, things
movable immovably, and material things immaterially.
Reply to Objection 1: Not every multitude of things understood
causes composition, but a multitude of such things understood that
one of them is attributed to, or denied of, another. When an angel
apprehends the nature of anything, he at the same time understands
whatever can be either attributed to it, or denied of it. Hence, in
apprehending a nature, he by one simple perception grasps all that
we can learn by composing and dividing.
Reply to Objection 2: The various natures of things differ less as to
their mode of existing than do affirmation and negation. Yet, as to
the way in which they are known, affirmation and negation have
something more in common; because directly the truth of an
affirmation is known, the falsehood of the opposite negation is
known also.
Reply to Objection 3: The fact that angels use affirmative and
negative forms of speech, shows that they know both composition
and division: yet not that they know by composing and dividing, but
by knowing simply the nature of a thing.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether there can be falsehood in the intellect of

an angel?
Objection 1: It would seem that there can be falsehood in the angel's
intellect. For perversity appertains to falsehood. But, as Dionysius
says (Div. Nom. iv), there is "a perverted fancy" in the demons.
Therefore it seems that there can be falsehood in the intellect of the
angels.
Objection 2: Further, nescience is the cause of estimating falsely.
But, as Dionysius says (Eccl. Hier. vi), there can be nescience in the
angels. Therefore it seems there can be falsehood in them.
Objection 3: Further, everything which falls short of the truth of
wisdom, and which has a depraved reason, has falsehood or error in
its intellect. But Dionysius (Div. Nom. vii) affirms this of the demons.
Therefore it seems that there can be error in the minds of the angels.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (De Anima iii, text. 41) that
"the intelligence is always true." Augustine likewise says (Questions.
83, qu. 32) that "nothing but what is true can be the object of
intelligence" Therefore there can be neither deception nor falsehood
in the angel's knowledge.
I answer that, The truth of this question depends partly upon what
has gone before. For it has been said (Article 4) that an angel
understands not by composing and dividing, but by understanding
what a thing is. Now the intellect is always true as regards what a
thing is, just as the sense regarding its proper object, as is said in
De Anima iii, text. 26. But by accident, deception and falsehood
creep in, when we understand the essence of a thing by some kind
of composition, and this happens either when we take the definition
of one thing for another, or when the parts of a definition do not
hang together, as if we were to accept as the definition of some
creature, "a four-footed flying beast," for there is no such animal.
And this comes about in things composite, the definition of which is
drawn from diverse elements, one of which is as matter to the other.
But there is no room for error in understanding simple quiddities, as
is stated in Metaph. ix, text. 22; for either they are not grasped at all,
and so we know nothing respecting them; or else they are known
precisely as they exist.