38. It is important to draw out the pastoral consequences of the Council’s teaching, which reflects
an ancient conviction of the Church. First, it needs to be said that in preaching the Gospel a fitting
sense of proportion has to be maintained. This would be seen in the frequency with which certain
themes are brought up and in the emphasis given to them in preaching. For example, if in the
course of the liturgical year a parish priest speaks about temperance ten times but only mentions
charity or justice two or three times, an imbalance results, and precisely those virtues which ought
to be most present in preaching and catechesis are overlooked. The same thing happens when
we speak more about law than about grace, more about the Church than about Christ, more about
the Pope than about God’s word.

39. Just as the organic unity existing among the virtues means that no one of them can be
excluded from the Christian ideal, so no truth may be denied. The integrity of the Gospel message
must not be deformed. What is more, each truth is better understood when related to the
harmonious totality of the Christian message; in this context all of the truths are important and
illumine one another. When preaching is faithful to the Gospel, the centrality of certain truths is
evident and it becomes clear that Christian morality is not a form of stoicism, or self-denial, or
merely a practical philosophy or a catalogue of sins and faults. Before all else, the Gospel invites
us to respond to the God of love who saves us, to see God in others and to go forth from
ourselves to seek the good of others. Under no circumstance can this invitation be obscured! All of
the virtues are at the service of this response of love. If this invitation does not radiate forcefully
and attractively, the edifice of the Church’s moral teaching risks becoming a house of cards, and
this is our greatest risk. It would mean that it is not the Gospel which is being preached, but certain
doctrinal or moral points based on specific ideological options. The message will run the risk of
losing its freshness and will cease to have “the fragrance of the Gospel”.

### IV. A mission embodied within human limits

40. The Church is herself a missionary disciple; she needs to grow in her interpretation of the
revealed word and in her understanding of truth. It is the task of exegetes and theologians to help
“the judgment of the Church to mature”. The other sciences also help to accomplish this, each
in its own way. With reference to the social sciences, for example, John Paul II said that the
Church values their research, which helps her “to derive concrete indications helpful for her
magisterial mission”. Within the Church countless issues are being studied and reflected upon
with great freedom. Differing currents of thought in philosophy, theology and pastoral practice, if
open to being reconciled by the Spirit in respect and love, can enable the Church to grow, since all
of them help to express more clearly the immense riches of God’s word. For those who long for a
monolithic body of doctrine guarded by all and leaving no room for nuance, this might appear as
undesirable and leading to confusion. But in fact such variety serves to bring out and develop
different facets of the inexhaustible riches of the Gospel.