the greater part of it, were to flag and sit down near the very close, it were of no
use to us. This is the hope of our calling; for "for good works" he says.
Otherwise it would profit us nothing.
Moral. Thus here he rejoices not that we should work one work, but all; for,
as we have five senses, and ought to make use of all in their proper season, so
ought we also the several virtues. Now were a man to be temperate and yet
unmerciful, or were he to be merciful and yet grasping, or were he to abstain
indeed from other people's goods, and yet not bestow his own, it would be all in
vain. For a single virtue alone is not enough to present us with boldness before
the judgment-seat of Christ; no, we require it to be great, and various, and
universal, and entire. Hear what Christ says to the disciples, "Go, you and make
disciples of all the nations—teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I
commanded you." [Matthew 28:19] And again, "Whosoever shall break one of
these least commandments, shall be called least in the kingdom of Heaven,"
[Matthew 5:19] that is, in the resurrection; nay, he shall not enter into the
kingdom; for He is wont to call the time also of the resurrection, the kingdom.
"If he break one," says He, "he shall be called least," so that we have need of all.
And observe how it is not possible to enter without works of mercy; but if even
this alone be wanting, we shall depart into the fire. For, says He, "Depart, you
cursed, into the eternal fire, which is prepared for the Devil and his angels."
Why and wherefore? "For I was an hungered, and you gave me no meat; I was
thirsty, and you gave me no drink." [Matthew 25:42] Beholdest thou, how
without any other charge laid against them, for this one alone they perished. And
for this reason alone too were the virgins also excluded from the bride-chamber,
though sobriety surely they did possess. As the Apostle says "and the
sanctification, without which no man shall see the Lord." [Hebrews 12:14]
Consider then, that without sobriety, it is impossible to see the Lord; yet it does
not necessarily follow that with sobriety it is possible to see Him, because oftentimes something else stands in the way. Again, if we do all things ever so rightly,
and yet do our neighbor no service, neither in that case shall we enter into the

kingdom. Whence is this evident? From the parable of the servants entrusted
with the talents. For, in that instance, the man's virtue was in every point
unimpaired, and there had been nothing lacking, but forasmuch as he was
slothful in his business, he was rightly cast out. Nay, it is possible, even by
railing only, to fall into Hell. "For whosoever" says Christ, "shall say to his
brother, You fool, shall be in danger of the hell of fire." [Matthew 5:22] And if a
man be ever so right in all things, and yet be injurious, he shall not enter.
And let no one impute cruelty to God, in that he excludes those who fail in
this matter, from the kingdom of Heaven. For even with men, if any one do any
thing whatsoever contrary to the law, he is banished from the king's presence.
And if he transgresses so much as one of the established laws, if he lays a false
accusation against another, he forfeits his office. And if he commits adultery, and
is detected, he is disgraced, and even though he have done ten thousand right
acts, he is undone; and if he commits murder, and is convicted, this again is
enough to destroy him. Now if the laws of men are so carefully guarded, how
much more should those of God be. "But He is good," a man says. How long are
we to be uttering this foolish talk? Foolish, I say, not because He is not good, but
in that we keep thinking that His goodness will be available to us for these
purposes, though I have again and again used ten thousand arguments on this
subject. Listen to the Scripture, which says, "Say not, His mercy is great, He will
be pacified for the multitude of my sins." [Sirach 5:6] He does not forbid us to
say, "His mercy is great." This is not what He enjoins; rather he would have us
constantly say it, and with this object Paul raises all sorts of arguments, but his
object is what follows. Do not, he means, admire the loving-kindness of God
with this view, with a view to sinning, and saying, "His mercy will be pacified
for the multitude of my sins." For it is with this object that I too discourse so
much concerning His goodness, not that we may presume upon it, and do any
thing we choose, because in that way this goodness will be to the prejudice of
our salvation; but that we may not despair in our sins, but may repent. For "the
goodness of God leads you to repentance," [Romans 2:4] not to greater