brought a gain, and a pleasure that resulted from the gain; for as the scourge did
not procure them anguish, but gladness; so also again the sorrow procured them
those great crowns. And this is the paradox; that not only the sadness of the
world, but also its joy, contains extreme loss; but in the case of spiritual things, it
is exactly the reverse; and not the joy only, but the sadness too contains a rich
treasure of good things! But how, I proceed to explain. In the world, a person
often rejoices, on beholding an enemy in trouble; and by this joy he draws on
himself a great punishment. Again, another person mourns, on seeing a brother
fall; and because of this sadness he will procure for himself much favour with
God. Do you see how godly sorrow is better and more profitable than the joy of
the world? Thus also Paul sorrowed for sinners, and for those who disbelieved in
God; and this sorrow was the means of laying up a great reward for him. But that
I may make what I say more clear, and that you may know that although what I
assert is very strange, it is nevertheless true, viz. that grief is often capable of
refreshing distressed souls, and of rendering a burdened conscience light:
consider how often women, when they have lost their most beloved children,
break their hearts, and perish, if they are forbidden to mourn, and to shed tears.
But if they do all which those who are sad, are wont to do, they are relieved, and
receive consolation. And what wonder that this should be the case with women,
when you may even see a prophet affected in a similar manner? Therefore he
was continually saying, "Allow me— I will weep bitterly— labour not to comfort
me, because of the spoiling of the daughter of my people." [Isaiah 22:4] So that,
oftentimes, sadness is the bearer of consolation; and if it is so with regard to this
world. much more with regard to spiritual things. Therefore he says, "Godly
sorrow works repentance unto salvation, not to be repented of."
[2 Corinthians 7:10] This indeed seems to be obscure; but what he says is to this
effect: "If you grieve over wealth, you are nothing profited. If for sickness, you
have gained nothing, but hast increased your affliction."
9. And I have heard many, after such experience, blame themselves, and
say, What advantage is it that I have grieved? I have not recovered my money,

and I have injured myself. But if you have grieved on account of sin, you have
blotted it out, and hast reaped the greatest pleasure. If you have grieved for your
brethren who have fallen, you have both encouraged and comforted yourself,
and hast also restored them; and even if you were not to profit them, you have an
abundant recompense. And that you may learn that this grieving for those who
have fallen, though we should not at all benefit them, still brings us a large
reward, hear what Ezekiel says; or rather, what God Himself speaks through
him. For when He had sent certain messengers to overturn the city, and to
consume all the dwellings with sword and fire, along with their inhabitants, He
thus charges one of them: "Set a mark upon the forehead of the men that groan,
and are in anguish." And after charging the others, and saying, "Begin ye from
mine holy ones," He goes on to add, "But upon whomsoever the sign is, touch
them not." [Ezekiel 9:4] For what reason, tell me? Because although they avail
nothing, they nevertheless lament the things which are done, and deplore them.
And again, He accuses others, saying, That in their luxury, and gluttony, and
enjoyment of great security, when they beheld the Jews carried away into
captivity, they did not grieve, nor partake of their sadness. And hear what He
says, reproaching them: "They suffered nothing in the affliction of Joseph:"
[Amos 6:6] meaning by Joseph the whole people. And again: "The inhabitants of
Ænan went not forth to bewail the house next unto them." For although they are
justly punished, God wills that we should condole with them, and not rejoice or
insult. "For if I that punish," says He, do not this rejoicingly; nor take pleasure in
their punishment; for "I do not at all will the death of the sinner;"
[Ezekiel 18:32] it is right that you should imitate your Lord; and should mourn
for this very thing, that the sinner has provided matter and occasion for a just
punishment. So that if any one entertains a godly sorrow, he will thence reap a
great advantage.
10. Since therefore those who are scourged are more blessed than the
scourgers, and those in tribulation among us than those who are free from it
outside the Christian pale; and those who are sad are more blessed than those in