FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.5, C.5.

But if we speak of that perfect Happiness which we await after this
life, it must be observed that Origen (Peri Archon. ii, 3), following the
error of certain Platonists, held that man can become unhappy after
the final Happiness.
This, however, is evidently false, for two reasons. First, from the
general notion of happiness. For since happiness is the "perfect and
sufficient good," it must needs set man's desire at rest and exclude
every evil. Now man naturally desires to hold to the good that he
has, and to have the surety of his holding: else he must of necessity
be troubled with the fear of losing it, or with the sorrow of knowing
that he will lose it. Therefore it is necessary for true Happiness that
man have the assured opinion of never losing the good that he
possesses. If this opinion be true, it follows that he never will lose
happiness: but if it be false, it is in itself an evil that he should have a
false opinion: because the false is the evil of the intellect, just as the
true is its good, as stated in Ethic. vi, 2. Consequently he will no
longer be truly happy, if evil be in him.
Secondly, it is again evident if we consider the specific nature of
Happiness. For it has been shown above (Question 3, Article 8) that
man's perfect Happiness consists in the vision of the Divine
Essence. Now it is impossible for anyone seeing the Divine Essence,
to wish not to see It. Because every good that one possesses and
yet wishes to be without, is either insufficient, something more
sufficing being desired in its stead; or else has some inconvenience
attached to it, by reason of which it becomes wearisome. But the
vision of the Divine Essence fills the soul with all good things, since
it unites it to the source of all goodness; hence it is written (Ps.
16:15): "I shall be satisfied when Thy glory shall appear"; and (Wis.
7:11): "All good things came to me together with her," i.e. with the
contemplation of wisdom. In like manner neither has it any
inconvenience attached to it; because it is written of the
contemplation of wisdom (Wis. 8:16): "Her conversation hath no
bitterness, nor her company any tediousness." It is thus evident that
the happy man cannot forsake Happiness of his own accord.
Moreover, neither can he lose Happiness, through God taking it away
from him. Because, since the withdrawal of Happiness is a
punishment, it cannot be enforced by God, the just Judge, except for
some fault; and he that sees God cannot fall into a fault, since
rectitude of the will, of necessity, results from that vision as was
shown above (Question 4, Article 4). Nor again can it be withdrawn

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.5, C.5.

by any other agent. Because the mind that is united to God is raised
above all other things: and consequently no other agent can sever
the mind from that union. Therefore it seems unreasonable that as
time goes on, man should pass from happiness to misery, and vice
versa; because such like vicissitudes of time can only be for such
things as are subject to time and movement.
Reply to Objection 1: Happiness is consummate perfection, which
excludes every defect from the happy. And therefore whoever has
happiness has it altogether unchangeably: this is done by the Divine
power, which raises man to the participation of eternity which
transcends all change.
Reply to Objection 2: The will can be directed to opposites, in things
which are ordained to the end; but it is ordained, of natural
necessity, to the last end. This is evident from the fact that man is
unable not to wish to be happy.
Reply to Objection 3: Happiness has a beginning owing to the
condition of the participator: but it has no end by reason of the
condition of the good, the participation of which makes man happy.
Hence the beginning of happiness is from one cause, its
endlessness is from another.