from the prayer, and so raise the dead man? How then did He work other
miracles without prayer? Saying, "Thou evil spirit, I charge you, come out of
him" [Mark 9:25]; and, "I will, be thou clean" [Mark 1:41]; and, "Arise, take up
your bed" [John 5:8]; and, "Your sins be forgiven you" [Matthew 9:2]; and to the
sea, "Peace, be still." [Mark 4:39] In short, what has He more than the Apostles,
if so be that He also works by prayer? Or rather I should say, that neither did
they work all with prayer, but often they wrought without prayer, calling upon
the Name of Jesus. Now, if His Name had such great power, how could He have
needed prayer? Had He needed prayer, His Name would not have availed. When
He wholly made man, what manner of prayer did He need? Was there not then
great equality of honor? "Let Us make," It says, "man." [Genesis 1:26] What
could be greater sign of weakness, if He needed prayer? But let us see what the
prayer was; "I thank You that You have heard Me." Who now ever prayed in this
manner? Before uttering any prayer, He says, "I thank You," showing that He
needed not prayer. "And I knew that You hear Me always." This He said not as
though He Himself were powerless, but to show that His will and the Father's is
one. But why did He assume the form of prayer? Hear, not me, but Himself,
saying, "For the sake of the people which stand by, that they may believe that
You have sent Me." He said not, "That they may believe that I am inferior, that I
have need of an impulse from above, that without prayer I cannot do anything;
but, "That You have sent Me." For all these things the prayer declares, if we take
it simply. He said not, "You have sent me weak, acknowledging servitude, and
doing nothing of Myself"; but dismissing all these things, that you may have no
such suspicions, He puts the real cause of the prayer, "That they may not deem
Me an enemy of God; that they may not say, He is not of God, that I may show
them that the work has been done according to Your will." All but saying, "Had I
been an enemy of God, what is done would not have succeeded," but the, "You
heard Me," is said in the case of friends and equals. "And I knew that You hear
Me always," that is, "in order that My will be done I need no prayer, except to
persuade men that to You and Me belongs one will." "Why then prayest Thou?"

For the sake of the weak and grosser sort.

John 11:43
"And when He had thus spoken, He cried with a loud voice."
Why said He not, "In the name of My Father come forth"? Or why said He
not, "Father, raise him up"? Why did he omit all these expressions, and after
assuming the attitude of one praying, show by His actions His independent
authority? Because this also was a part of His wisdom, to show condescension
by words, but by His deeds, power. For since they had nothing else to charge
Him with except that He was not of God, and since in this way they deceived
many, He on this account most abundantly proves this very point by what He
says, and in the way that their infirmity required. For it was in His power by
other means to show at once His agreement with the Father and His own dignity,
but the multitude could not ascend so far. And He says,