Reply to 3. Divine science received through divine inspiration does not treat of the angels as its
subject, but only as something incorporated into the science to throw light on its subject. For
Sacred Scripture treats of the angels just as it does other creatures. In the divine science taught by
the philosophers, however, the angels, which they call Intelligences, are considered from the
same point of view as the First Cause or God, insofar as they are also secondary principles of
things, at least through the movement of the spheres, though the angels themselves are subject to
no physical motion. Moreover, motion with respect to choice is reducible to the sense in which
the act of the intellect or will is called motion, which is an improper sense of the term, motion
being understood as operation. Further, when angels are said to move in place, their motion is
not with reference to enclosure in place but with reference to the activity they exercise in this or
that place, or with reference to some other relation they have to place, although that relation is
absolutely equivocal to that which a localized body has to place. So it is clear that they do not
move in the sense in which we say natural things move.

Reply to 4. Act and potency are more common than matter and form. Therefore, even though we
do not find the composition of form and matter in the angels we can still find potency and act in
them. For matter and form are parts of a thing composed of matter and form; and so we find the
composition of matter and form only in things with parts, one of which is related to the other as
potency to act. Now what can be, can also not be; and so one part can be found with or without
the other; and therefore, as the Commentator says, we find the composition of matter and form

only in those things that are by nature corruptible. Nor is the objection valid, that an accident may
be eternally conserved in a subject, like shape in the heavens. For a heavenly body cannot exist
without such a shape, since shape and all accidents in general follow upon substance as their
cause. So a subject is related to its accidents not only as passive potency, but also in a way as an
active power; and for this reason some accidents are naturally conserved forever in their subjects.
But matter is not the cause of form in this way; and therefore all matter subject to form can cease
to be subject to it, unless perhaps an extrinsic cause preserves it; thus we maintain that by the
divine power even some bodies composed of contraries, like the bodies of those arisen from the
dead, are incorruptible.

Now, since the essence of an angel is incorruptible by its nature, it is not composed of form and
matter. But an angel does not exist of himself, and so he is potential to the being (esse) he
receives from God. Consequently, the being (esse) received from God is related to his simple
essence as act to potency. This is what is meant by saying that angels are composed of what they
are (quod est) and that by which they are (quo est); being (esse) is understood as that by which
they are and the angelic nature as what they are. However, even if angels were composed of
matter and form, they would not be composed of sensible matter, from which both the objects of
mathematics must be abstracted and those of metaphysics must be separated.