FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.18, C.3.

term "mankind" to the whole human species.
Reply to Objection 1: Although external things are good in
themselves, nevertheless they have not always a due proportion to
this or that action. And so, inasmuch as they are considered as
objects of such actions, they have not the quality of goodness.
Reply to Objection 2: The object is not the matter "of which" (a thing
is made), but the matter "about which" (something is done); and
stands in relation to the act as its form, as it were, through giving it
its species.
Reply to Objection 3: The object of the human action is not always
the object of an active power. For the appetitive power is, in a way,
passive; in so far as it is moved by the appetible object; and yet it is
a principle of human actions. Nor again have the objects of the
active powers always the nature of an effect, but only when they are
already transformed: thus food when transformed is the effect of the
nutritive power; whereas food before being transformed stands in
relation to the nutritive power as the matter about which it exercises
its operation. Now since the object is in some way the effect of the
active power, it follows that it is the term of its action, and
consequently that it gives it its form and species, since movement
derives its species from its term. Moreover, although the goodness
of an action is not caused by the goodness of its effect, yet an action
is said to be good from the fact that it can produce a good effect.
Consequently the very proportion of an action to its effect is the
measure of its goodness.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.18, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether man's action is good or evil from a

circumstance?
Objection 1: It would seem that an action is not good or evil from a
circumstance. For circumstances stand around [circumstant] an
action, as being outside it, as stated above (Question 7, Article 1).
But "good and evil are in things themselves," as is stated in Metaph.
vi, 4. Therefore an action does not derive goodness or malice from a
circumstance.
Objection 2: Further, the goodness or malice of an action is
considered principally in the doctrine of morals. But since
circumstances are accidents of actions, it seems that they are
outside the scope of art: because "no art takes notice of what is
accidental" (Metaph. vi, 2). Therefore the goodness or malice of an
action is not taken from a circumstance.
Objection 3: Further, that which belongs to a thing, in respect of its
substance, is not ascribed to it in respect of an accident. But good
and evil belong to an action in respect of its substance; because an
action can be good or evil in its genus as stated above (Article 2).
Therefore an action is not good or bad from a circumstance.
On the contrary, the Philosopher says (Ethic. ii, 3) that a virtuous
man acts as he should, and when he should, and so on in respect of
the other circumstances. Therefore, on the other hand, the vicious
man, in the matter of each vice, acts when he should not, or where
he should not, and so on with the other circumstances. Therefore
human actions are good or evil according to circumstances.
I answer that, In natural things, it is to be noted that the whole
fulness of perfection due to a thing, is not from the mere substantial
form, that gives it its species; since a thing derives much from
supervening accidents, as man does from shape, color, and the like;
and if any one of these accidents be out of due proportion, evil is the
result. So it is with action. For the plenitude of its goodness does not
consist wholly in its species, but also in certain additions which
accrue to it by reason of certain accidents: and such are its due
circumstances. Wherefore if something be wanting that is requisite
as a due circumstance the action will be evil.