say, Kiss him for me. So also do ye yourselves retain the fire of love. For it does
not admit of distances, but even through long intervening ways it extends itself,
and is everywhere present.
Ver. 27. "I adjure you by the Lord that this Epistle be read unto all the holy
brethren."
And this command is rather from love, and not so much in the way of
teaching; that with them also, he means, I may be conversing.
Ver. 28. "The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you. Amen."
And he does not merely command, but adjures them, and this from a
fervent mind, that even though they should despise him, for the sake of the
adjuration they may practice what is commanded. For men had a great dread of
that appeal, but now that too is trampled under foot. And often when a slave is
scourged, and adjures by God and His Christ, and says, "So may you die a
Christian," yet no one gives heed, no one regards it; but if he adjures him by his
own son, immediately, though unwilling, and grinding his teeth, he gives up his
anger. Again, another being dragged and led away through the middle of the
market-place, in the presence both of Jews and Greeks, adjures him that leads
him away with the most fearful adjurations, and no one regards it. What will not
the Greeks say, when one of the faithful adjures a faithful man and a Christian,
and no regard is paid to it, but we even despise him.
Will you allow me to tell you a certain story which I myself have heard?
For I do not say it of my own invention, but having heard it from a person
worthy of credit. There was a certain maid-servant united to a wicked man, a vile
run-away slave; she, when her husband having committed many faults was about
to be sold by her mistress; (for the offenses were too great for pardon, and the
woman was a widow, and was not able to punish him who was the plague of her
house, and therefore resolved to sell him; then considering that it was an unholy
thing to separate the husband from the wife, the mistress, although the girl was
useful, to avoid separating her from him, made up her mind to sell her also with
him;) then the girl seeing herself in these straits, came to a venerable person who

was intimate with her mistress, and who also told it to me, and clasping her
knees, and with a thousand lamentations, besought her to entreat her mistress in
her behalf; and having wasted many words, at last she added this also, as thereby
especially to persuade her, laying on her a most awful adjuration, and the
adjuration was this, "So may thou see Christ at the Day of Judgment, as you
neglect not my petition." And having so said, she departed. And she who had
been entreated, upon the intrusion of some worldly care, such as happens in
families, forgot the matter. Then suddenly late in the afternoon, the most awful
adjuration came into her mind, and she felt great compunction, and she went and
with great earnestness asked, and obtained her request. And that very night she
suddenly saw the heavens opened, and Christ Himself. But she saw Him, as far
as it was possible for a woman to see Him. Because she at all regarded the
adjuration, because she was afraid, she was thought worthy of this vision.
And these things I have said, that we may not despise adjurations,
especially when any entreat us for things that are good, as for alms, and for
works of mercy. But now poor men, who have lost their feet, sit and see you
hastening by, and when they cannot follow you with their feet, they expect to
detain you, as with a kind of hook, by the fear of an adjuration, and stretching
out their hands, they adjure you to give them only one or two pennies. But you
hasten by, though adjured by your Lord. And if he adjure you by the eyes either
of your husband, who is gone abroad, or of your son, or your daughter,
immediately you yield, your mind is transported, you are warmed; but if he
adjure you by your Lord, you hasten by. And I have known many women who,
hearing indeed the name of Christ, have hastened by; but being commended for
their beauty by those who came to them, have been melted and softened, and
have stretched out their hand.
Yea thus they have reduced suffering and wretched beggars to this, even to
deal in making sport! For when they do not touch their souls by uttering
vehement and bitter words, they have recourse to this way by which they delight
them exceedingly. And our great wickedness compels him that is in calamity or