to quality; but both according to substance. And so in like manner of all
those we have mentioned, of which we have already spoken at length in
the former books. Let us choose, then, one of the first four of those in our
enumeration and arrangement, i.e. eternal, immortal, incorruptible,
unchangeable; since these four, as I have argued already, have one
meaning; in order that our aim may not be distracted by a multiplicity of
objects. And let it be rather that which was placed first, viz. eternal. Let us
follow the same course with the four that come next, viz. living, wise,
powerful, beautiful. And since life of some sort belongs also to the beast,
which has not wisdom; while the next two, viz. wisdom and might, are so
compared to one another in the case of man, as that Scripture says,
"Better is he that is wise than he that is strong;" and beauty, again, is
commonly attributed to bodily objects also: out of these four that we have
chosen, let Wise be the one we take. Although these four are not to be
called unequal in speaking of God; for they are four names, but one thing.
But of the third and last four,—although it is the same thing in God to be
righteous that it is to be good or to be blessed; and the same thing to be a
spirit that it is to be righteous, and good, and blessed; yet, because in men
there can be a spirit that is not blessed, and there can be one both
righteous and good, but not yet blessed; but that which is blessed is
doubtless both just, and good, and a spirit,—let us rather choose that one
which cannot exist even in men without the three others, viz. blessed.

### CHAP. 6.—HOW THERE IS A TRINITY IN THE VERY SIMPLICITY OF GOD. WHETHER AND HOW THE TRINITY THAT IS GOD IS MANIFESTED FROM THE TRINITIES WHICH HAVE BEEN SHOWN TO BE IN MEN

9. When, then, we say, Eternal, wise, blessed, are these three the Trinity
that is called God? We reduce, indeed, those twelve to this small number
of three; but perhaps we can go further, and reduce these three also to
one of them. For if wisdom and might, or life and wisdom, can be one and
the same thing in the nature of God, why cannot eternity and wisdom, or
blessedness and wisdom, be one and the same thing in the nature of God?
And hence, as it made no difference whether we spoke of these twelve or
of those three when we reduced the many to the small number; so does it
make no difference whether we speak of those three, or of that one, to the

singularity of which we have shown that the other two of the three may be
reduced. What fashion, then, of argument, what possible force and might
of understanding, what liveliness of reason, what sharp-sightedness of
thought, will set forth how (to pass over now the others) this one thing,
that God is called wisdom, is a trinity? For God does not receive wisdom
from any one as we receive it from Him, but He is Himself His own
wisdom; because His wisdom is not one thing, and His essence another,
seeing that to Him to be wise is to be. Christ, indeed, is called in the Holy
Scriptures, "the power of God, and the wisdom of God." But we have
discussed in the seventh book how this is to be understood, so that the
Son may not seem to make the Father wise; and our explanation came to
this, that the Son is wisdom of wisdom, in the same way as He is light of
light, God of God. Nor could we find the Holy Spirit to be in any other
way than that He Himself also is wisdom, and altogether one wisdom, as
one God, one essence. How, then, do we understand this wisdom, which
is God, to be a trinity? I do not say, How do we believe this? For among
the faithful this ought to admit no question. But supposing there is any
way by which we can see with the understanding what we believe, what is
that way?
10. For if we recall where it was in these books that a trinity first began to
show itself to our understanding, the eighth book is that which occurs to
us; since it was there that to the best of our power we tried to raise the
aim of the mind to understand that most excellent and unchangeable
nature, which our mind is not. And we so contemplated this nature as to
think of it as not far from us, and as above us, not in place, but by its own
awful and wonderful excellence, and in such wise that it appeared to be
with us by its own present light. Yet in this no trinity was yet manifest to
us, because in that blaze of light we did not keep the eye of the mind
steadfastly bent upon seeking it; only we discerned it in a sense, because
there was no bulk wherein we must needs think the magnitude of two or
three to be more than that of one. But when we came to treat of love,
which in the Holy Scriptures is called God, then a trinity began to dawn
upon us a little, i.e. one that loves, and that which is loved, and love. But
because that ineffable light beat back our gaze, and it became in some
degree plain that the weakness of our mind could not as yet be tempered
to it, we turned back in the midst of the course we had begun, and