uses gentler treatment, like a wise physician, who applies soothing medicines,
and he comforts them, and says, why be afraid? Why shudder? For does he
punish a person that is doing well? Or is he terrible to a person who lives in the
practice of virtue? Wherefore also he proceeds, "Will you then not be afraid of
the power? Do that which is good, and you shall have praise of the same." You
see how he has made him friends ([ᾥ] [κείωσεν]) with the ruler, by showing that
he even praises him from his throne. You see how he has made wrath
unmeaning.
Ver. 4. "For he is the minister of God to you for good."
So far is he from terrifying you, he says, that he even praises you: so far
from being a hindrance to you, that he even works with you. When then you
have his praise and his succor, how is it that you are not in subjection to him?
For he makes virtue easier for you in other ways also, by chastising the wicked,
by benefiting and honoring the good, and by working together with the will of
God. Whence too he has even given him the name of "Minister." And consider: I
give you counsel to be sober-minded, and he, by the laws, speaks the same
language. I exhort you not to be rapacious and grasping. And he sits in judgment
in such cases, and so is a worker together with us, and an assistant to us, and has
been commissioned by God for this end. Hence there are both reasons for
reverencing him, both because he was commissioned by God, and because it was
for such an object. "But if you do that which is evil, be afraid." It is not then the
ruler that makes the fear, but our own wickedness.
"For he bears not the sword in vain." You see how he has furnished him
with arms, and set him on guard like a soldier, for a terror to those that commit
sin. "For he is the minister of God to execute wrath, a revenger upon him that
does evil." Now lest you should start off at hearing again of punishment, and
vengeance, and a sword, he says again that it is God's law he is carrying out. For
what if he does not know it himself? Yet it is God that has so shaped things
([οὕτως ἐτύπωσεν]). If then, whether in punishing, or in honoring, he be a
Minister, in avenging virtue's cause, in driving vice away, as God wills, why be

captious against him, when he is the cause of so many good doings, and paves
the way for yours too? Since there are many who first practised virtue through
the fear of God. For there are a duller sort, whom things to come have not such a
hold upon as things present. He then who by fear and rewards gives the soul of
the majority a preparatory turn towards its becoming more suited for the word of
doctrine, is with good reason called "the Minister of God."
Ver. 5. "Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath but also for
conscience sake."
What is the meaning of, "not only for wrath?" It means not only because
thou dost resist God by not being subject, nor only because you are procuring
great evils for yourself, both from God and the rulers, but also because he is a
benefactor to you in things of the greatest importance, as he procures peace to
you, and the blessings of civil institutions. For there are countless blessings to
states through these authorities; and if you were to remove them, all things
would go to ruin, and neither city nor country, nor private nor public buildings,
nor anything else would stand, but all the world will be turned upside down,
while the more powerful devour the weaker. And so even if some wrath were not
to follow man's disobedience, even on this ground you ought to be subject, that
you may not seem devoid of conscience and feeling towards the benefactor.
Ver. 6. "For, for this cause pay ye tribute also; for they are God's ministers,
attending continually on this very thing."
Without going one by one into the benefits done to states by the rulers, as
that of good order and peace, the other services, as regarding the soldiery, and
those over the public business, he shows the whole of this by a single case. For
that you are benefited by him, he means, you bear witness yourself, by paying
him a salary. Observe the wisdom and judgment of the blessed Paul. For that
which seemed to be burdensome and annoying— the system of imposts— this
he turns into a proof of their care for men. What is the reason, he means, that we
pay tribute to a king? It is not as providing for us? And yet we should not have
paid it unless we had known in the first instance that we were gainers from this