will you build for me? Says the Lord: or what is the place of my rest? Hath not
my hand made all these things?" [Isaiah 66:1-2]
Marvel not, he says, if they on whom Christ confers His benefits refuse His
kingdom, seeing in the case of Moses it was just the same. (Recapitulation). "He
brought them out;" and rescued them not in a general way, but also while they
were in the wilderness. "Wonders and signs," etc. [Acts 7:35-50] Do you mark
that they themselves (Stephen's hearers) are concerned in those old miracles
also? "This is that Moses:" [Acts 7:37] he, that conversed with God; he, that had
been saved out of situations so strange and wonderful; he, that wrought so great
works, and had so great power. ["Which said unto the children of Israel, A
prophet," etc.] He shows, that the prophecy must by all means be fulfilled, and
that Moses is not opposed to Him. "This is he that was in the Church in the
wilderness, and, that said unto the children of Israel." [Acts 7:38] Do you mark
that thence comes the root, and that "salvation is from the Jews?" [John 4:22]
"With the Angel," it says, "which spoke unto him." [Romans 11:16] Lo, again he
affirms that it was He (Christ) that gave the Law, seeing Moses was with "Him"
in the Church in the wilderness. And here he puts them in mind of a great
marvel, of the things done in the Mount: "Who received living oracles to give
unto us." On all occasions Moses is wonderful, and (so) when need was to
legislate. What means the expression, "Living oracles" ([λόγια])? Those,
whereof the end was shown by words ([διὰ λόγων]): in other words, he means
the prophecies. Then follows the charge, in the first instance, against the
patriarchs [after], the "signs and wonders," after the receiving of the "lively
oracles: To whom," he says, "our fathers would not obey." [Acts 7:39] But
concerning those, Ezekiel says that they are not "living;" as when he says, "And I
gave you statutes that are not good." [Ezekiel 20:25] It is with reference to those
that he says, "Living. But thrust him from them, and in their hearts turned back
to Egypt"— the place where they groaned, where they cried, whence they called
upon God. "And said unto Aaron, Make us gods which shall go before us." [Acts
7:40] O the folly! "Make," say they; "that they may go before us." Whither?

"Into Egypt." See how hard they were to tear away from the customs of Egypt!
What do you say? What, not wait for him that brought you out, but flee the
benefit, and deny the Benefactor? And mark how insulting they are: "For as for
this Moses," they say:— "which brought us out of the land of Egypt" nowhere
the name of God: instead of that, they ascribed all to Moses. Where they ought
to give thanks (to God), they bring Moses forward: where it was, to do as the
Law bade them, they no longer make account of Moses. "We know not what has
become of him." And yet he told them that he was going up to receive the Law:
and they had not patience to wait forty days. "Make us gods"— they did not say,
"a God."— And yet one may well wonder at this, that they do not even know.—
"And they made a calf in those days, and offered sacrifices unto the idol, and
rejoiced in the works of their own hands" [Acts 7:41]: for which they ought to
have hid their faces. What wonder that you know not Christ, seeing ye knew not
Moses, and God Who was manifested by such wonders? But they not only knew
Him not: they also insulted in another way, by their idol making. "Then God
turned, and gave them up to worship the host of heaven" [Acts 7:42] Hence these
same "customs" date their origin, hence the sacrifices: they were themselves the
first that made sacrifices to their idols! For that is why it is marked, "They made
a calf in Horeb, and offered sacrifices to the idol:" seeing that, before this the
name of sacrifice is nowhere mentioned, but only lively ordinances, and "lively
oracles. And rejoiced"— that is the reason for the feasts. [Exodus 32:5-6] "As it
is written in the Book of the Prophets"— and observe, he does not cite the text
without a purpose, but shows by it that there is no need of sacrifices; saying:
"Did ye offer slain beasts and sacrifice to Me?"— He lays an emphasis on this
word (to Me?). You cannot say that it was from sacrificing to Me, that you
proceeded to sacrifice to them:— "by the space of forty years:" and this too, "in
the wilderness," where He had most signally shown Himself their Protector.
"Yea, you took up the tabernacle of Moloch, and the star of your god Remphan:
images which you made to worship them." The cause of sacrifices! "And I will
carry you away beyond Babylon." [Acts 7:43] Even the captivity, an