SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.2.

Reply to Objection 1: Reverence is not the same as honor: but on the
one hand it is the primary motive for showing honor, in so far as one
man honors another out of the reverence he has for him; and on the
other hand, it is the end of honor, in so far as a person is honored in
order that he may be held in reverence by others.
Reply to Objection 2: According to the Philosopher (Ethic. iv, 3),
honor is not a sufficient reward of virtue: yet nothing in human and
corporal things can be greater than honor, since these corporal
things themselves are employed as signs in acknowledgment of
excelling virtue. It is, however, due to the good and the beautiful, that
they may be made known, according to Mt. 5:15, "Neither do men
light a candle, and put it under a bushel, but upon a candlestick, that
it may shine to all that are in the house." In this sense honor is said
to be the reward of virtue.
Reply to Objection 3: Praise is distinguished from honor in two
ways. First, because praise consists only of verbal signs, whereas
honor consists of any external signs, so that praise is included in
honor. Secondly, because by paying honor to a person we bear
witness to a person's excelling goodness absolutely, whereas by
praising him we bear witness to his goodness in reference to an end:
thus we praise one that works well for an end. On the other hand,
honor is given even to the best, which is not referred to an end, but
has already arrived at the end, according to the Philosopher (Ethic. i,
5).
Glory is the effect of honor and praise, since the result of our
bearing witness to a person's goodness is that his goodness
becomes clear to the knowledge of many. The word "glory" signifies
this, for "glory" is the same as kleria, wherefore a gloss of Augustine
on Rm. 16:27 observes that glory is "clear knowledge together with
praise."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether honor is properly due to those who are

above us?
Objection 1: It seems that honor is not properly due to those who are
above us. For an angel is above any human wayfarer, according to
Mt. 11:11, "He that is lesser in the kingdom of heaven is greater than
John the Baptist." Yet an angel forbade John when the latter wished
to honor him (Apoc. 22:10). Therefore honor is not due to those who
are above us.
Objection 2: Further, honor is due to a person in acknowledgment of
his virtue, as stated above (Article 1; Question 63, Article 3). But
sometimes those who are above us are not virtuous. Therefore
honor is not due to them, as neither is it due to the demons, who
nevertheless are above us in the order of nature.
Objection 3: Further, the Apostle says (Rm. 12:10): "With honor
preventing one another," and we read (1 Pt. 2:17): "Honor all men."
But this would not be so if honor were due to those alone who are
above us. Therefore honor is not due properly to those who are
above us.
Objection 4: Further, it is written (Tob. 1:16) that Tobias "had ten
talents of silver of that which he had been honored by the king": and
we read (Esther 6:11) that Assuerus honored Mardochaeus, and
ordered it to be proclaimed in his presence: "This honor is he worthy
of whom the king hath a mind to honor." Therefore honor is paid to
those also who are beneath us, and it seems, in consequence, that
honor is not due properly to those who are above us.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. i, 12) that "honor is
due to the best."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), honor is nothing but an
acknowledgment of a person's excelling goodness. Now a person's
excellence may be considered, not only in relation to those who
honor him, in the point of his being more excellent than they, but
also in itself, or in relation to other persons, and in this way honor is
always due to a person, on account of some excellence or
superiority.