them in. For the saying, "But woe to that man," was that of one showing that
great was the punishment, but not this only, but also by the comparison which
He added He increased the fear.
Then He is not satisfied with these things, but He shows also the way, by
which one may avoid the offenses.
But what is this? The wicked, says He, though they be exceeding dear
friends to you, cut off from your friendship.
And He gives a reason that cannot be gainsaid. For if they continue friends,
you will not gain them, but you will lose yourself besides; but if you should cut
them off, your own salvation at least you will gain. So that if any one's
friendship harms you, cut it off from you. For if of our own members we often
cut off many, when they are both in an incurable state, and are ruining the rest,
much more ought one to do this in the case of friends.
But if evils were by nature, superfluous were all this admonition and
advice, superfluous the precaution by the means that have been mentioned. But
if it be not superfluous, as surely it is not superfluous, it is quite clear that
wickedness is of the will.
"Take heed that you despise not one of these little ones; for I say unto you,
that their angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in Heaven."
He calls little ones not them that are really little, but them that are so
esteemed by the multitude, the poor, the objects of contempt, the unknown (for
how should he be little who is equal in value to the whole world; how should he
be little, who is dear to God?); but them who in the imagination of the multitude
are so esteemed.
And He speaks not of many only, but even of one, even by this again
warding off the hurt of the many offenses. For even as to flee the wicked, so also
to honor the good, has very great gain, and would be a twofold security to him
who gives heed, the one by rooting out the friendships with them that offend, the
other from regarding these saints with respect and honor.
Then in another way also He makes them objects of reverence, saying,

"That their angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in Heaven."
Hence it is evident, that the saints have angels, or even all men. For the
apostle too says of the woman, "That she ought to have power on her head
because of the angels." [1 Corinthians 10:10] And Moses, "He set the bounds of
the nations according to the number of the angels of God." [Deuteronomy 32:8]
But here He is discoursing not of angels only, but rather of angels that are
greater than others. But when He says, "The face of my Father," He means
nothing else than their fuller confidence, and their great honor.
"For the Son of Man has come to save that which was lost."
Again, He is putting another reason stronger than the former, and connects
with it a parable, by which He brings in the Father also as desiring these things.
"For how think ye?" says He; "If a man have an hundred sheep, and one of them
be gone astray, does he not leave the ninety and nine, and goes into the
mountains, and seeks that which is gone astray? And if so be that he find it, he
rejoices over it more than over the ninety and nine, which went not astray. Even
so it is not will before your Father, that one of these little ones should perish."
[Matthew 18:12-14]
Do you see by how many things He is urging to the care of our mean
brethren. Say not then, "Such a one is a blacksmith, a shoemaker, he is a
ploughman, he is a fool," and so despise him. For in order that you should not
feel this, see by how many motives He persuades you to practise moderation,
and presses you into a care for these. He set a little child, and says, "Be as little
children." And, "Whosoever receives such a little child receives me;" and,
"Whosoever shall offend," shall suffer the utmost penalties. And He was not
even satisfied with the comparison of the "millstone," but added also His "woe,"
and commanded us to cut off such, though they be in the place of hands and eyes
to us. And by the angels again that are entrusted with these same mean brethren,
He makes them objects of veneration, and from His own will and passion (for
when He said, "The Son of Man has come to save that which was lost," He
signifies even the cross, like as Paul says, speaking of a brother, "For whom