great gain. And this is so, if we sentence ourselves to intenser fastings, and to
sleeping often on the bare ground, and to other like austerity. For in this way will
much profit come unto us from every quarter; we shall both live the sweet life of
virtue here, and we shall attain unto the good things to come and be perpetually
friends of God.
But in order that the same may not happen again—that you may not, having
here admired what is said, go your way, and cast aside at random, wherever it
may chance, the tablet of your mind, and so allow the devil to blot out these
things—let each one, on returning home, call his own wife, and tell her these
things, and take her to help him; and from this day let him enter into that noble
school of exercise, using for oil the supply of the Spirit. And though you fall
once, twice, many times in your training, despair not, but stand again, and
wrestle; and do not give up until you have bound on you the glorious crown of
triumph over the devil, and hast for the time to come stored up the riches of
virtue in an inviolable treasure-house.
For if you should establish yourself in the habits of this noble self-restraint,
then, not even when remiss, will you be able to transgress any of the
commandments, habit imitating the solidity of nature. Yea, as to sleep is easy,
and to eat, and to drink, and to breathe, so also will the deeds of virtue be easy to
us, and we shall reap to ourselves that pure pleasure, resting in a harbor without
a wave, and enjoying continual calm, and with a great freight bringing our vessel
into haven, in that City, on that day; and we shall attain unto the undecaying
crowns, unto which may we all attain, by the grace and love towards man of our
Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be all glory and might, now and always, and world
without end. Amen.

## Homily 12 on Matthew

Matt. III. 13.
"Then comes Jesus from Galilee to Jordan," etc.
With the servants the Lord, with the criminals the Judge, comes to be
baptized. But be not troubled; for in these humiliations His exaltation does most
shine forth. For He who vouchsafed to be borne so long in a Virgin's womb, and
to come forth thence with our nature, and to be smitten with rods, and crucified,
and to suffer all the rest which He suffered—why do you marvel if He
vouchsafed also to be baptized, and to come with the rest to His servant. For the
amazement lay in that one thing, that being God, He would be made Man; but
the rest after this all follows in course of reason.
For this cause, let me add, John also by way of anticipation said all that he
had said before, that he "was not worthy to unloose the latchet of His shoe;" and
all the rest, as for instance, that He is Judge, and rewards every man according to
his desert, and that He will bestow His Spirit abundantly on all; in order that
when you should see Him coming to the baptism, you might not suspect
anything mean. Therefore he forbids Him, even when He had come, saying,
"I have need to be baptized by You, and You come to me." [Matthew 3:14]
For, because the baptism was "of repentance," and led men to accuse themselves
for their offenses, lest any one should suppose that He too "comes to Jordan" in
this sort of mind, John sets it right beforehand, by calling Him both Lamb, and
Redeemer from all the sin that is in the world. Since He that was able to take
away the sins of the whole race of men, much more was He Himself without sin.
For this cause then he said not, "Behold, He that is without sin," but what was
much more, He "that bears the sin of the world," in order that together with this
truth you might receive that other with all assurance, and having received it
might perceive, that in the conduct of some further economy He comes to the