SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.24, C.9.

prepared in mind, namely, that we should be ready to love our
enemies individually, if the necessity were to occur. That man should
actually do so, and love his enemy for God's sake, without it being
necessary for him to do so, belongs to the perfection of charity. For
since man loves his neighbor, out of charity, for God's sake, the
more he loves God, the more does he put enmities aside and show
love towards his neighbor: thus if we loved a certain man very much,
we would love his children though they were unfriendly towards us.
This is the sense in which Augustine speaks in the passage quoted
in the First Objection, the Reply to which is therefore evident.
Reply to Objection 2: Everything naturally hates its contrary as such.
Now our enemies are contrary to us, as enemies, wherefore this
itself should be hateful to us, for their enmity should displease us.
They are not, however, contrary to us, as men and capable of
happiness: and it is as such that we are bound to love them.
Reply to Objection 3: It is wrong to love one's enemies as such:
charity does not do this, as stated above.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.24, C.10.

### ARTICLE 9. Whether it is necessary for salvation that we

should show our enemies the signs and effects of love?
Objection 1: It would seem that charity demands of a man to show
his enemy the signs or effects of love. For it is written (1 Jn. 3:18):
"Let us not love in word nor in tongue, but in deed and in truth." Now
a man loves in deed by showing the one he loves signs and effects
of love. Therefore charity requires that a man show his enemies such
signs and effects of love.
Objection 2: Further, Our Lord said in the same breath (Mt. 5:44):
"Love your enemies," and, "Do good to them that hate you." Now
charity demands that we love our enemies. Therefore it demands
also that we should "do good to them."
Objection 3: Further, not only God but also our neighbor is the object
of charity. Now Gregory says in a homily for Pentecost (In Evang.
xxx), that "love of God cannot be idle for wherever it is it does great
things, and if it ceases to work, it is no longer love." Hence charity
towards our neighbor cannot be without producing works. But
charity requires us to love our neighbor without exception, though
he be an enemy. Therefore charity requires us to show the signs and
effects of love towards our enemies.
On the contrary, A gloss on Mt. 5:44, "Do good to them that hate
you," says: "To do good to one's enemies is the height of
perfection" [Augustine, Enchiridion lxxiii]. Now charity does not
require us to do that which belongs to its perfection. Therefore
charity does not require us to show the signs and effects of love to
our enemies.
I answer that, The effects and signs of charity are the result of
inward love, and are in proportion with it. Now it is absolutely
necessary, for the fulfilment of the precept, that we should inwardly
love our enemies in general, but not individually, except as regards
the mind being prepared to do so, as explained above (Article 8).
We must accordingly apply this to the showing of the effects and
signs of love. For some of the signs and favors of love are shown to
our neighbors in general, as when we pray for all the faithful, or for a
whole people, or when anyone bestows a favor on a whole