Thus envy, in respect of its species, denotes an evil, since it is
displeasure at another's good, and such displeasure is in itself
contrary to reason: wherefore, as the Philosopher remarks (Ethic. ii,
6), "the very mention of envy denotes something evil." Now this does
not apply to anger, which is the desire for revenge, since revenge
may be desired both well and ill. Secondly, evil is found in a passion
in respect of the passion's quantity, that is in respect of its excess or
deficiency; and thus evil may be found in anger, when, to wit, one is
angry, more or less than right reason demands. But if one is angry in
accordance with right reason, one's anger is deserving of praise.
Reply to Objection 1: The Stoics designated anger and all the other
passions as emotions opposed to the order of reason; and
accordingly they deemed anger and all other passions to be evil, as
stated above (FS, Question 24, Article 2) when we were treating of
the passions. It is in this sense that Jerome considers anger; for he
speaks of the anger whereby one is angry with one's neighbor, with
the intent of doing him a wrong.---But, according to the Peripatetics,
to whose opinion Augustine inclines (De Civ. Dei ix, 4), anger and the
other passions of the soul are movements of the sensitive appetite,
whether they be moderated or not, according to reason: and in this
sense anger is not always evil.
Reply to Objection 2: Anger may stand in a twofold relation to
reason. First, antecedently; in this way it withdraws reason from its
rectitude, and has therefore the character of evil. Secondly,
consequently, inasmuch as the movement of the sensitive appetite is
directed against vice and in accordance with reason, this anger is
good, and is called "zealous anger." Wherefore Gregory says (Moral.
v, 45): "We must beware lest, when we use anger as an instrument of
virtue, it overrule the mind, and go before it as its mistress, instead
of following in reason's train, ever ready, as its handmaid, to obey."
This latter anger, although it hinder somewhat the judgment of
reason in the execution of the act, does not destroy the rectitude of
reason. Hence Gregory says (Moral. v, 45) that "zealous anger
troubles the eye of reason, whereas sinful anger blinds it." Nor is it
incompatible with virtue that the deliberation of reason be
interrupted in the execution of what reason has deliberated: since art
also would be hindered in its act, if it were to deliberate about what
has to be done, while having to act.
Reply to Objection 3: It is unlawful to desire vengeance considered
as evil to the man who is to be punished, but it is praiseworthy to

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.157, C.2.

desire vengeance as a corrective of vice and for the good of justice;
and to this the sensitive appetite can tend, in so far as it is moved
thereto by the reason: and when revenge is taken in accordance with
the order of judgment, it is God's work, since he who has power to
punish "is God's minister," as stated in Rm. 13:4.
Reply to Objection 4: We can and ought to be like to God in the
desire for good; but we cannot be altogether likened to Him in the
mode of our desire, since in God there is no sensitive appetite, as in
us, the movement of which has to obey reason. Wherefore Gregory
says (Moral. v, 45) that "anger is more firmly erect in withstanding
vice, when it bows to the command of reason."