And first then he arouses the disciples from the consideration of the Devil's skill;
but in the second place, from his nature, and the number of his forces. It is not
from any desire to dispirit the soldiers that stand under him, but to arouse, and to
awaken them, that he mentions these stratagems, and prepares them to be
vigilant; for had he merely detailed their power, and there stopped his discourse,
he must have dispirited them. But now, whereas both before and after this, he
shows that it is possible to overcome such an enemy, he rather raises their
courage; for the more clearly the strength of our adversaries is stated on our part
to our own people, so much the more earnest will it render our soldiers.
Ver. 12. "For our wrestling is not," says he, "against flesh and blood, but
against the principalities, against the powers, against the world rulers of this
darkness, against the spiritual hosts of wickedness, in the heavenly places."
Having stimulated them by the character of the conflict, he next goes on to
arouse them also by the prizes set before them. For what is his argument?
Having said that the enemies are fierce, he adds further, that they despoil us of
vast blessings. What are these? The conflict lies "in the heavenlies"; the struggle
is not about riches, not about glory, but about our being enslaved. And thus is the
enmity irreconcilable. The strife and the conflict are fiercer when for vast
interests at stake; for the expression "in the heavenlies" is equivalent to, "for the
heavenly things." It is not that they may gain anything by the conquest, but that
they may despoil us. As if one were to say, "In what does the contract lie?" In
gold. The word "in," means, "in behalf of"; the word "in," also means, "on
account of." Observe how the power of the enemy startles us; how it makes us
all circumspection, to know that the hazard is on behalf of vast interests, and the
victory for the sake of great rewards. For he is doing his best to cast us out of
Heaven.
He speaks of certain "principalities, and powers, and world rulers of this
darkness." What darkness? Is it that of night? No, but of wickedness. "For you
were," says he, "once darkness" [Ephesians 5:8]; so naming that wickedness
which is in this present life; for beyond it, it will have no place, not in Heaven,

nor in the world to come.
"World-rulers" he calls them, not as having the mastery over the world, but
the Scripture is wont to call wicked practices "the world," as, for example, where
Christ says, "They are not of this world, even as I am not of the world." [John
17:16] What then, were they not of the world? Were they not clothed with flesh?
Were they not of those who are in the world? And again; "The world hates Me,
but you it cannot hate." [John 7:7] Where again He calls wicked practices by this
name. Thus the Apostle here by the world means wicked men, and the evil
spirits have more special power over them. "Against the spiritual hosts of
wickedness," says he, "in the heavenly places." "Principalities, and powers," he
speaks of; just as in the heavenly places there are "thrones and dominions,
principalities and powers." [Colossians 1:16]
Ver. 13. "Wherefore," says he, "take up the whole armor of God, that you
may be able to withstand in the evil day, and, having done all, to stand."
By "evil day" he means the present life, and calls it too "this present evil
world" [Galatians 1:4], from the evils which are done in it. It is as much as to
say, Always be armed. And again, "having done all," says he; that is, both
passions, and vile lusts, and all things else that trouble us. He speaks not merely
of doing the deed, but of completing it, so as not only to slay, but to stand also
after we have slain. For many who have gained this victory, have fallen again.
"Having done," says he, "all"; not having done one, but not the other. For even
after the victory, we must stand. An enemy may be struck, but things that are
struck revive again if we do not stand. But if after having fallen they rise up
again, so long as we stand, they are fallen. So long as we waver not, the
adversary rises not again.
"Let us put on the whole armor of God." Do you see how he banishes all
fear? For if it be possible "to do all, and to stand," his describing in detail the
power of the enemy does not create cowardice and fear, but it shakes off
indolence. "That ye may be able," he says, "to withstand in the evil day." And he
further gives them encouragement too from the time; the time, he seems to say,