In effect, Mary's mediation is intimately linked with her motherhood. It possesses a
specifically maternal character, which distinguishes it from the mediation of the other
creatures who in various and always subordinate ways share in the one mediation of
Christ, although her own mediation is also a shared mediation. In fact, while it is true
that "no creature could ever be classed with the Incarnate Word and Redeemer," at the
same time "the unique mediation of the Redeemer does not exclude but rather gives rise
among creatures to a manifold cooperation which is but a sharing in this unique source."
And thus "the one goodness of God is in reality communicated diversely to his
creatures."

The teaching of the Second Vatican Council presents the truth of Mary's mediation as "a
sharing in the one unique source that is the mediation of Christ himself." Thus we read:
"The Church does not hesitate to profess this subordinate role of Mary. She experiences it

continuously and commends it to the hearts of the faithful, so that, encouraged by this
maternal help, they may more closely adhere to the Mediator and Redeemer." This role
is at the same time special and extraordinary. It flows from her divine motherhood and
can be understood and lived in faith only on the basis of the full truth of this motherhood.
Since by virtue of divine election Mary is the earthly Mother of the Father's
consubstantial Son and his "generous companion" in the work of redemption "she is a
mother to us in the order of grace." This role constitutes a real dimension of her
presence in the saving mystery of Christ and the Church.

39. From this point of view we must consider once more the fundamental event in the
economy of salvation, namely the Incarnation of the Word at the moment of the
Annunciation. It is significant that Mary, recognizing in the words of the divine
messenger the will of the Most High and submitting to his power, says: "Behold, I am the
handmaid of the Lord; let it be to me according to your word" (Lk. 1:38). The first
moment of submission to the one mediation "between God and men"-the mediation of
Jesus Christ-is the Virgin of Nazareth's acceptance of motherhood. Mary consents to
God's choice, in order to become through the power of the Holy Spirit the Mother of the
Son of God. It can be said that a consent to motherhood is above all a result of her total
self-giving to God in virginity. Mary accepted her election as Mother of the Son of God,
guided by spousal love, the love which totally "consecrates" a human being to God. By
virtue of this love, Mary wished to be always and in all things "given to God," living in
virginity. The words "Behold, I am the handmaid of the Lord" express the fact that from
the outset she accepted and understood her own motherhood as a total gift of self, a gift
of her person to the service of the saving plans of the Most High. And to the very end she
lived her entire maternal sharing in the life of Jesus Christ, her Son, in a way that
matched her vocation to virginity.