whole Church should help out the effect of this Sacrament: hence James says: Let him
bring in the priests of the Church, and the prayer of faith shall save the sick man. If
however only one priest be present, he is understood to confer the Sacrament in the
power of the whole Church, whose minister he is, and whose person he bears. As in
other Sacraments, the effect of this Sacrament may be hindered by the insincerity
(fictionem) of the recipient.

## CHAPTER LXXIV--Of the Sacrament of Order
SINCE Christ intended to withdraw His bodily presence from the Church, He needed to
institute other men as ministers to Himself, who should dispense the Sacraments to the
faithful. Hence He committed to His disciples the consecration of His Body and Blood,
saying: Do this in memory of me (Luke xxii, 19). He gave them the power of forgiving
sins, according to the text: Whose sins you shall forgive, they are forgiven them (John
xx, 23). He enjoined on them the function of baptising: Go, teach all nations,
baptising them (Matt. xxviii, 19). Now a minister stands to his master as an instrument to
a prime agent. An instrument must be proportionate to the agent: therefore the ministers
of Christ must be conformable to Him. But Christ, our Lord and Master, by His own
power and might worked out our salvation, inasmuch as He was both God and man. As
man, He suffered for our redemption: as He was God, His suffering brought salvation to
us. The ministers of Christ then must be men, and at the same time have some share in
the Divinity (aliquid divinitatis participare) in point of spiritual power: for an instrument
too has some share in the power of the prime agent.
Nor can it be said that this power was given to the disciples of Christ not to be
transmitted to others. It was given unto edification (2 Cor. xiii, 10), to the building up of
the Church, and must be perpetuated so long as the Church needs building up, that is,
to the end of the world (Matt. xxviii, 20). And since spiritual effects are transmitted to us
from Christ under sensible signs, this power had to be delivered to men under some
such signs, -- certain forms of words, definite acts, as imposition of hands, anointing,
the delivery of a book or chalice, and the like. Whenever anything spiritual is
delivered under a corporeal sign, that is called a Sacrament. Thus in the
conferring of spiritual power a Sacrament is wrought, which is called the Sacrament of
Order. Now it is a point of divine liberality that the bestowal of power should be
accompanied with the means of duly exercising that power. But the spiritual power of
administering the Sacraments requires divine grace for its convenient exercise:
therefore in this Sacrament, as in other Sacraments, grace is bestowed.
Among Sacraments the noblest, and that which sets the crown on the rest, is the
Sacrament of the Eucharist. Therefore the power of Order must be considered chiefly in
relation to this Sacrament: for everything is ruled by the end for which it is made. Now
the power that gives perfection, also prepares the matter to receive it. Since then
the power of Order extends to the consecration of the Body of Christ and the
administration of the same to the faithful, it must further extend to the rendering of the
faithful fit and worthy for the reception of that Sacrament. But the believer is rendered fit
and worthy by being free from sin: otherwise he cannot be united with Christ spiritually,
with whom he is sacramentally united in the reception of this Sacrament. The
power of Order therefore must extend to the remission of sins by the administration of
those Sacraments which are directed to that purpose, Baptism and Penance.