THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.39, C.6.

Secondly, the faith of the Church and of the person baptized
conduces to the efficacy of baptism: wherefore those who are
baptized make a profession of faith, and baptism is called the
"sacrament of faith." Now by faith we gaze on heavenly things, which
surpass the senses and human reason. And in order to signify this,
the heavens were opened when Christ was baptized.
Thirdly, because the entrance to the heavenly kingdom was opened
to us by the baptism of Christ in a special manner, which entrance
had been closed to the first man through sin. Hence, when Christ
was baptized, the heavens were opened, to show that the way to
heaven is open to the baptized.
Now after baptism man needs to pray continually, in order to enter
heaven: for though sins are remitted through baptism, there still
remain the fomes of sin assailing us from within, and the world and
the devils assailing us from without. And therefore it is said
pointedly (Lk. 3:21) that "Jesus being baptized and praying, heaven
was opened": because, to wit, the faithful after baptism stand in need
of prayer. Or else, that we may be led to understand that the very fact
that through baptism heaven is opened to believers is in virtue of the
prayer of Christ. Hence it is said pointedly (Mt. 3:16) that "heaven
was opened to Him"---that is, "to all for His sake." Thus, for example,
the Emperor might say to one asking a favor for another: "Behold, I
grant this favor, not to him, but to thee"---that is, "to him for thy
sake," as Chrysostom says (Hom. iv in Matth. [Opus Imperfectum]).
Reply to Objection 1: According to Chrysostom (Hom. iv in Matth.;
from the supposititious Opus Imperfectum), as Christ was baptized
for man's sake, though He needed no baptism for His own sake, so
the heavens were opened unto Him as man, whereas in respect of
His Divine Nature He was ever in heaven.
Reply to Objection 2: As Jerome says on Mt. 3:16,17, the heavens
were opened to Christ when He was baptized, not by an unfolding of
the elements, but by a spiritual vision: thus does Ezechiel relate the
opening of the heavens at the beginning of his book. And
Chrysostom proves this (Hom. iv in Matth.; from the supposititious
Opus Imperfectum) by saying that "if the creature"---namely,
heaven---"had been sundered he would not have said, 'were opened
to Him,' since what is opened in a corporeal sense is open to all."
Hence it is said expressly (Mk. 1:10) that Jesus "forthwith coming up
out of the water, saw the heavens opened"; as though the opening of

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.39, C.6.

the heavens were to be considered as seen by Christ. Some, indeed,
refer this to the corporeal vision, and say that such a brilliant light
shone round about Christ when He was baptized, that the heavens
seemed to be opened. It can also be referred to the imaginary vision,
in which manner Ezechiel saw the heavens opened: since such a
vision was formed in Christ's imagination by the Divine power and
by His rational will, so as to signify that the entrance to heaven is
opened to men through baptism. Lastly, it can be referred to
intellectual vision: forasmuch as Christ, when He had sanctified
baptism, saw that heaven was opened to men: nevertheless He had
seen before that this would be accomplished.
Reply to Objection 3: Christ's Passion is the common cause of the
opening of heaven to men. But it behooves this cause to be applied
to each one, in order that he enter heaven. And this is effected by
baptism, according to Rm. 6:3: "All we who are baptized in Christ
Jesus are baptized in His death." Wherefore mention is made of the
opening of the heavens at His baptism rather than at His Passion.
Or, as Chrysostom says (Hom. iv in Matth.; from the supposititious
Opus Imperfectum): "When Christ was baptized, the heavens were
merely opened: but after He had vanquished the tyrant by the cross;
since gates were no longer needed for a heaven which thenceforth
would be never closed, the angels said, not 'open the gates,' but
'Take them away.'" Thus Chrysostom gives us to understand that the
obstacles which had hitherto hindered the souls of the departed
from entering into heaven were entirely removed by the Passion: but
at Christ's baptism they were opened, as though the way had been
shown by which men were to enter into heaven.