Romans, but of old it was not so. He would have been contemptible had he been
scourged: but as it is, he puts them into greater fear (than they him). Had they
scourged him, they would also have dismissed the whole matter, or even have
killed him; but as it is, the result is not so. See how God permits many (good
results) to be brought about quite in a human way, both in the case of the
Apostles and of the rest (of mankind). Mark how they suspected the thing to be a
pretext, and that in calling himself a Roman, Paul lied: perhaps surmising this
from his poverty. "When the centurion heard that, he went and told the tribune,
saying, Take heed what you do, for this man is a Roman. Then the tribune came,
and said unto him, Tell me, are you a Roman? He said, Yea. And the tribune
answered, With a great sum obtained I this freedom. And Paul said, But I was
free born. Then straightway they departed from him which should have examined
him: and the tribune also was afraid, after he knew that he was a Roman, and
because he had bound him." [Acts 22:26-29]— "But I," he says, "was free born."
So then his father also was a Roman. What then comes of this? He bound him,
and brought him down to the Jews. "On the morrow, because he would have
known the certainty whereof he was accused of the Jews, he loosed him from his
bands, and commanded the chief priests and all their council to appear, and
brought Paul down, and set him before them." [Acts 22:30] He discourses not
now to the multitude, nor to the people. "And Paul, earnestly beholding the
council, said, Men and brethren, I have lived in all good conscience before God
until this day." [Acts 23:1] What he means is this: I am not conscious to myself
of having wronged you at all, or of having done anything worthy of these bonds.
What then said the high priest? Right justly, and ruler-like, and mildly: "And the
high priest Ananias commanded them that stood by him to smite him on the
mouth. Then said Paul unto him, God shall smite you, you whited wall: for do
you sit to judge me after the law, and commandest me to be smitten contrary to
the law? And they that stood by said, Do you revile God's high priest? Then said
Paul, I knew not, brethren, that he was the high priest: for it is written, You shall
not speak evil of the ruler of your people." [Acts 23:3-5] Because "I knew not

that he was high priest." Some say, Why then does he defend himself as if it was
matter of accusation, and adds, "You shall not speak evil of the ruler of your
people?" For if he were not the ruler, was it right for no better reason than that to
abuse (him or any) other? He says himself, "Being reviled, we bless; being
persecuted, we suffer it" [1 Corinthians 4:12]; but here he does the contrary, and
not only reviles, but curses. They are the words of boldness, rather than of anger;
he did not choose to appear in a contemptible light to the tribune. For suppose
the tribune himself had spared to scourge him, only as he was about to be
delivered up to the Jews, his being beaten by their servants would have more
emboldened him: this is why Paul does not attack the servant, but the person
who gave the order. But that saying, "Thou whited wall, and do you sit to judge
me after the law?" (is) instead of, Being (yourself) a culprit: as if he had said,
And (yourself) worthy of stripes without number. See accordingly how greatly
they were struck with his boldness; for whereas the point was to have
overthrown the whole matter, they rather commend him. (infra, v. 9.) "For it is
written," etc. He wishes to show that he thus speaks, not from fear, nor because
(Ananias) did not deserve to be called this, but from obedience to the law in this
point also. And indeed I am fully persuaded that he did not know that it was the
high priest, since he had returned now after a long interval, and was not in the
habit of constant intercourse with the Jews; seeing him too in the midst among
many others: for the high priest was no longer easy to be seen at a glance, there
being many of them and diverse. So, it seems to me, in this also he spoke with a
view to his plea against them: by way of showing that he does obey the law;
therefore he (thus) exculpates himself.
(Recapitulation.) (b) But let us review what has been said. (a) "And when I
was came again to Jerusalem," etc. [Acts 22:17] How was it, that being a Jew,
and there brought up and taught, he did not stay there? Nor did he abide there,
unless he had a mind to furnish numberless occasions against him: everywhere
just like an exile, fleeing about from place to place. (c) "While I prayed in the
temple," he says, "it came to pass that I was in a trance." (To show) that it was