his part, deprives Him of something by sinning as stated above
(Question 12, Articles 3,4). Consequently, in order that compensation
be made, something by way of satisfaction that may conduce to the
glory of God must be taken away from the sinner. Now a good work,
as such, does not deprive the agent of anything, but perfects him: so
that the deprivation cannot be effected by a good work unless it be
penal. Therefore, in order that a work be satisfactory it needs to be
good that it may conduce to God's honor, and it must be penal, so
that something may be taken away from the sinner thereby.
Again punishment preserves from future sin, because a man does
not easily fall back into sin when he has had experience of the
punishment. Wherefore, according to the Philosopher (Ethic. ii, 3)
punishments are medicinal.
Reply to Objection 1: Though God does not delight in our
punishments as such, yet He does, in so far as they are just, and
thus they can be satisfactory.
Reply to Objection 2: Just as, in satisfaction, we have to note the
penality of the work, so, in merit, we must observe its difficulty. Now
if the difficulty of the work itself be diminished, other things being
equal, the merit is also diminished; but if the difficulty be diminished
on the part of the promptitude of the will, this does not diminish the
merit, but increases it; and, in like manner, diminution of the penality
of a work, on account of the will being made more prompt by charity,
does not lessen the efficacy of satisfaction, but increases it.
Reply to Objection 3: That which is due for sin is compensation for
the offense, and this cannot be done without punishment of the
sinner. It is of this debt that Anselm speaks.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the scourges of the present life are

satisfactory?
Objection 1: It would seem that the scourges whereby we are
punished by God in this life, cannot be satisfactory. For nothing but
what is meritorious can be satisfactory, as is clear from what has
been said (Question 14, Article 2). But we do not merit except by
what is in our own power. Since therefore the scourges with which
God punishes us are not in our power, it seems that they cannot be
satisfactory.
Objection 2: Further, only the good make satisfaction. But these
scourges are inflicted on the wicked also, and are deserved by them
most of all. Therefore they cannot be satisfactory.
Objection 3: Further, satisfaction regards past sins. But these
scourges are sometimes inflicted on those who have no sins, as in
the case of Job. Therefore it seems that they are not satisfactory.
On the contrary, It is written (Rm. 5:3,4): "Tribulation worketh
patience, and patience trial, i.e. deliverance from sin," as a gloss
explains it.
Further, Ambrose says (Super Ps. 118): "Although faith," i.e. the
consciousness of sin, "be lacking, the punishment satisfies."
Therefore the scourges of this life are satisfactory.
I answer that, Compensation for a past offense can be enforced
either by the offender or by another. When it is enforced by another,
such compensation is of a vindictive rather than of a satisfactory
nature, whereas when it is made by the offender, it is also
satisfactory. Consequently, if the scourges, which are inflicted by
God on account of sin, become in some way the act of the sufferer
they acquire a satisfactory character. Now they become the act of
the sufferer in so far as he accepts them for the cleansing of his
sins, by taking advantage of them patiently. If, however, he refuse to
submit to them patiently, then they do not become his personal act
in any way, and are not of a satisfactory, but merely of a vindictive
character.
Reply to Objection 1: Although these scourges are not altogether in