what they did preach. For it was not they might increase the gospel that they
were doing this; but that they might wage war against him, and throw him into
greater danger— on this account he accuses them. And see how with exactitude
he laid it. "Thinking," he says, "that they were putting pressure upon my bonds."
[Philippians 1:17] He did not say, putting, but "thinking they were putting upon,"
that is supposing, by way of pointing out that even if they so supposed, still he
himself was not in such a position; but that he even rejoiced on account of the
advance of the preaching. He added therefore saying, "But in this I both rejoice
and will rejoice:" [doctrines deception, and they were bringing in heresies, Paul
could not possibly rejoice. But since the doctrine was sound and of genuine
parentage, on this account he says, "I rejoice and will rejoice." For what if they
are destroying themselves by doing this out of contentiousness? Still, even
unwillingly, they are strengthening my cause. Do you see how great is Paul's
power? How he is caught by no one of the devil's machinations? And not only is
he not caught; but also by these themselves he subdues him. For great indeed is
both the devil's craftiness, and the wickedness of those who minister to him; for
under pretence of being of the same mind, they desired to extinguish the
proclamation. But "he who seizes the cunning in their craftiness" did not permit
that this should take place then. By way of declaring this very thing at least Paul
said, "But the continuing in the flesh is the more necessary for your sake; and
this I confidently know, that I shall continue and remain in company with you
all." Philippians 1:24-25] For those men indeed set their mind on casting me out
of the present life, and are ready to endure anything for this object: but God does
not permit it on your account.
11. These things therefore, all of them, remember with exactness in order
that you may be able with all wisdom to correct those who use the Scriptures
without reference to circumstances and at hap-hazard, and for the destruction of
their neighbours. And we shall be able both to remember what has been said, and
to correct others, if we always betake ourselves to prayers as a refuge, and
beseech the God who gives the word of wisdom to grant both intelligence in

hearing, and a careful and unconquerable guardianship of this spiritual deposit in
our hands. For things which often we have not strength to perform successfully
from our own exertions, these we shall have power to accomplish easily through
prayers which are persevering. For always and without intermission it is a duty
to pray, both for him who is in affliction, and him who is in dangers, and him
who is in prosperity— for him who is in relief and much prosperity, that these
may remain unmoved and without vicissitude, and may never change; and for
him who is in affliction and his many dangers, that he may see some favourable
change brought about to him, and be transported into a calm of consolation. Are
you in a calm? Then beseech God that this calm may continue settled to you.
Have you seen a storm risen up against you? Beseech God earnestly to cause the
billow to pass, and to make a calm out of the storm. Have you been heard? Be
heartily thankful for this; because you have been heard. Have you not been
heard? Persevere, in order that you may be heard. For even if God at any time
delay the giving, it is not in hatred and aversion; but from the desire by the
deferring of the giving perpetually to retain you with himself; just in the way
also that affectionate fathers do; for they also adroitly manage the perpetual and
assiduous attendance of children who are rather indolent by the delay of the
giving. There is to you no need of mediators in audience with God; nor of that
much canvassing; nor of the fawning upon others; but even if you be destitute,
even if bereft of advocacy, alone, by yourself, having called on God for help,
you will in any case succeed. He is not so wont to assent when entreated by
others on our behalf, as by ourselves who are in need; even if we be laden with
ten thousand evil deeds. For if in the case of men, even if we have come into
countless collisions with them, when both at dawn and at mid-day and in the
evening we show ourselves to those who are aggrieved against us, by the
unbroken continuance and the persistent meeting and interview we easily
demolish their enmity— far more in the case of God would this be effected.
12. But you are unworthy. Become worthy by your assiduity. For that it
both is possible that the unworthy should become worthy from his assiduity; and