former, for this is the stronger craving to ill-treat another. He who envies does
everything with all his might and main, while the despiser ofttimes has even pity
on the despised; and his very poverty, and utter want of power, has often been
the cause of his deliverance.
And sometimes by saying to him, "A great deed it will be if you make away
with such an one! If you slay one poor man, what vast advantage will you reap?"
we may thus soften down his anger. But envy sets itself against the rich, and
ceases not until it has wrought its will, and has poured forth its venom. See you,
neither poverty nor wealth is good in itself, but our own disposition. Let us bring
it to a good tone, let us discipline it in true wisdom. If this be well affected,
riches cannot cast us out of the kingdom, poverty will not make us come short.
But we shall meekly bear our poverty, and receive no loss in respect to the
enjoyment of future goods, nor even here on earth. But we shall both enjoy what
is good on earth, and obtain the good things in heaven, which may we all obtain,
through the grace and lovingkindness, etc.

## Homily 3 on Philippians

[Philippians 1:18-20]
"And therein I rejoice, yea, and will rejoice. For I know that this shall turn
to my salvation through your supplication, and the supply of the Spirit of Jesus
Christ, according to my earnest expectation and hope, that in nothing shall I be
put to shame, but that with all boldness, as always, so now also Christ shall be
magnified in my body, whether by life, or by death."
None of the grievous things which are in this present life can fix their fangs
upon that lofty soul, which is truly philosophic, neither enmity, nor accusations,
nor slanders, nor dangers, nor plots. It flies for refuge as it were to a mighty
fortress, securely defended there against all that attack it from this lower earth.
Such was the soul of Paul; it had taken possession of a place higher than any
fortress, the seat of spiritual wisdom, that is, true philosophy. For that of those
without, i.e. the heathen, is mere words, and childish toys. But it is not of these
we now speak, but at present concerning the things of Paul. That blessed one had
both the Emperor for his enemy, and in addition, many other foes many ways
afflicting him, even with bitter slander. And what says he? Not only do I not
grieve nor sink beneath these things, but "I even rejoice, yea, and will rejoice,"
not for a season, but always will I rejoice for these things. "For I know that this
shall turn out to my salvation," that which is to come, when even their enmity
and jealousy towards me further the Gospel. "Through your supplication," he
adds, "and the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ according to my earnest
expectation and hope." Behold the humble-mindedness of this blessed one; he
was striving in the contest, he was now close to his crown, he had done ten
thousand exploits, for he was Paul, and what can one add to this? Still he writes
to the Philippians, I may be saved "through your supplication," I who have
gained salvation through countless achievements. "And the supply," says he, "of