THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.48, C.3.

a sufficient but a superabundant atonement for the sins of the
human race; according to 1 Jn. 2:2: "He is the propitiation for our
sins: and not for ours only, but also for those of the whole world."
Reply to Objection 1: The head and members are as one mystic
person; and therefore Christ's satisfaction belongs to all the faithful
as being His members. Also, in so far as any two men are one in
charity, the one can atone for the other as shall be shown later (XP,
Question 13, Article 2). But the same reason does not hold good of
confession and contrition, because atonement consists in an
outward action, for which helps may be used, among which friends
are to be computed.
Reply to Objection 2: Christ's love was greater than His slayers'
malice: and therefore the value of His Passion in atoning surpassed
the murderous guilt of those who crucified Him: so much so that
Christ's suffering was sufficient and superabundant atonement for
His murderer's crime.
Reply to Objection 3: The dignity of Christ's flesh is not to be
estimated solely from the nature of flesh, but also from the Person
assuming it---namely, inasmuch as it was God's flesh, the result of
which was that it was of infinite worth.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.48, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether Christ's Passion operated by way of

sacrifice?
Objection 1: It would seem that Christ's Passion did not operate by
way of sacrifice. For the truth should correspond with the figure. But
human flesh was never offered up in the sacrifices of the Old Law,
which were figures of Christ: nay, such sacrifices were reputed as
impious, according to Ps. 105:38: "And they shed innocent blood:
the blood of their sons and of their daughters, which they sacrificed
to the idols of Chanaan." It seems therefore that Christ's Passion
cannot be called a sacrifice.
Objection 2: Further, Augustine says (De Civ. Dei x) that "a visible
sacrifice is a sacrament---that is, a sacred sign---of an invisible
sacrifice." Now Christ's Passion is not a sign, but rather the thing
signified by other signs. Therefore it seems that Christ's Passion is
not a sacrifice.
Objection 3: Further, whoever offers sacrifice performs some sacred
rite, as the very word "sacrifice" shows. But those men who slew
Christ did not perform any sacred act, but rather wrought a great
wrong. Therefore Christ's Passion was rather a malefice than a
sacrifice.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (Eph. 5:2): "He delivered Himself
up for us, an oblation and a sacrifice to God for an odor of
sweetness."
I answer that, A sacrifice properly so called is something done for
that honor which is properly due to God, in order to appease Him:
and hence it is that Augustine says (De Civ. Dei x): "A true sacrifice
is every good work done in order that we may cling to God in holy
fellowship, yet referred to that consummation of happiness wherein
we can be truly blessed." But, as is added in the same place, "Christ
offered Himself up for us in the Passion": and this voluntary
enduring of the Passion was most acceptable to God, as coming
from charity. Therefore it is manifest that Christ's Passion was a true
sacrifice. Moreover, as Augustine says farther on in the same book,
"the primitive sacrifices of the holy Fathers were many and various
signs of this true sacrifice, one being prefigured by many, in the
same way as a single concept of thought is expressed in many