nations are as a drop, how small a portion then of that drop is a single man! Yet
Him has He made higher than all things, "not only in this world, but also in that
which is to come." Therefore powers there are whose names are to us
unintelligible, and unknown.
"And He put all things in subjection under His feet."
Not simply so set Him above them as to be honored above them, nor by
way of comparison with them, but so that He should sit over them as His slaves.
Amazing! Awful indeed are these things; every created power has been made the
slave of man by reason of God the Word dwelling in Him. For it is possible for a
man to be above others, without having others in subjection, but only as
preferred before them. But here it is not so. No, "He put all things in subjection
under His feet." And not simply put them in subjection, but in the most abject
subjection, that below which there can be none. Therefore he adds, "under His
feet."
"And gave Him to be Head over all things to the Church."
Amazing again, whither has He raised the Church? As though he were
lifting it up by some engine, he has raised it up to a vast height, and set it on
yonder throne; for where the Head is, there is the body also. There is no interval
to separate between the Head and the body; for were there a separation, then
were it no longer a body, then were it no longer a head. "Over all things," he
says. What is meant by "over all things?" He has suffered neither Angel nor
Archangel nor any other being to be above Him. But not only in this way has He
honored us, in exalting that which is of ourselves, but also in that He has
prepared the whole race in common to follow Him, to cling to Him, to
accompany His train.
"Which is His body."
In order then that when you hear of the Head you may not conceive the
notion of supremacy only, but also of consolidation, and that you may behold
Him not as supreme Ruler only, but as Head of a body.
"The fullness of Him that fills all in all" he says.

As though this were not sufficient to show the close connection and
relationship, what does he add? "The fullness of Christ is the Church." And
rightly, for the complement of the head is the body, and the complement of the
body is the head. Mark what great arrangement Paul observes, how he spares not
a single word, that he may represent the glory of God. "The, complement," he
says, i.e., the head is, as it were, filled up by the body, because the body is
composed and made up of all its several parts, and he introduces Him as having
need of each single one and not only of all in common and together; for unless
we be many, and one be the hand, and another the foot, and another some other
member, the whole body is not filled up. It is by all then that His body is filled
up. Then is the head filled up, then is the body rendered perfect, when we are all
knit together and united. Perceivest thou then the "riches of the glory of His
inheritance? The exceeding greatness of His power towards them that believe?
The hope of your calling?"
Moral. Let us reverence our Head, let us reflect of what a Head we are the
body—a Head, to whom all things are put in subjection. According to this
representation we ought to be better, yea, than the very angels, and greater than
the Archangels, in that we have been honored above them all. God "took not
hold of Angels," as he says in writing to the Hebrews, "but He took hold of the
seed of Abraham." [Hebrews 2:16] He took hold of neither principality nor
power, nor dominion, nor any other authority, but He took up our nature, and
made it to sit on His right hand. And why do I say, has made it sit? He has made
it His garment, and not only so, but has put all things in subjection under His
feet. How many sorts of death do you suppose? How many souls? Ten thousand?
Yea, and ten thousand times told, but nothing equal to it will you mention. Two
things He has done, the greatest things. He has both Himself descended to the
lowest depth of humiliation, and has raised up man to the height of exaltation.
He saved him by His blood. He spoke of the former first, how that He so greatly
humbled Himself. He speaks now of what is stronger than that— a great thing,
the crown of all. Surely, even had we been counted worthy of nothing, it were