THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.7, C.10.

hottest.
Likewise, as regards the "virtue" of grace, He had grace fully, since
He had it for all the operations and effects of grace; and this,
because grace was bestowed on Him, as upon a universal principle
in the genus of such as have grace. Now the virtue of the first
principle of a genus universally extends itself to all the effects of that
genus; thus the force of the sun, which is the universal cause of
generation, as Dionysius says (Div. Nom. i), extends to all things that
come under generation. Hence the second fulness of grace is seen
in Christ inasmuch as His grace extends to all the effects of grace,
which are the virtues, gifts, and the like.
Reply to Objection 1: Faith and hope signify effects of grace with
certain defects on the part of the recipient of grace, inasmuch as
faith is of the unseen, and hope of what is not yet possessed. Hence
it was not necessary that in Christ, Who is the author of grace, there
should be any defects such as faith and hope imply; but whatever
perfection is in faith and hope was in Christ most perfectly; as in fire
there are not all the modes of heat which are defective by the
subject's defect, but whatever belongs to the perfection of heat.
Reply to Objection 2: It pertains essentially to operating grace to
justify; but that it makes the ungodly to be just is accidental to it on
the part of the subject, in which sin is found. Therefore the soul of
Christ was justified by operating grace, inasmuch as it was rendered
just and holy by it from the beginning of His conception; not that it
was until then sinful, or even not just.
Reply to Objection 3: The fulness of grace is attributed to the soul of
Christ according to the capacity of the creature and not by
comparison with the infinite fulness of the Divine goodness.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.7, C.11.

### ARTICLE 10. Whether the fulness of grace is proper to Christ?

Objection 1: It would seem that the fulness of grace is not proper to
Christ. For what is proper to anyone belongs to him alone. But to be
full of grace is attributed to some others; for it was said to the
Blessed Virgin (Lk. 1:28): "Hail, full of grace"; and again it is written
(Acts 6:8): "Stephen, full of grace and fortitude." Therefore the
fulness of grace is not proper to Christ.
Objection 2: Further, what can be communicated to others through
Christ does not seem to be proper to Christ. But the fulness of grace
can be communicated to others through Christ, since the Apostle
says (Eph. 3:19): "That you may be filled unto all the fulness of God."
Therefore the fulness of grace is not proper to Christ.
Objection 3: Further, the state of the wayfarer seems to be
proportioned to the state of the comprehensor. But in the state of the
comprehensor there will be a certain fulness, since "in our heavenly
country with its fulness of all good, although some things are
bestowed in a pre-eminent way, yet nothing is possessed
singularly," as is clear from Gregory (Hom. De Cent. Ovib.; xxxiv in
Ev.). Therefore in the state of the comprehensor the fulness of grace
is possessed by everyone, and hence the fulness of grace is not
proper to Christ. on the contrary, The fulness of grace is attributed to
Christ inasmuch as He is the only-begotten of the Father, according
to Jn. 1:14: "We saw Him as it were . . . the Only-begotten of the
Father, full of grace and truth." But to be the Only-begotten of the
Father is proper to Christ. Therefore it is proper to Him to be full of
grace and truth.
I answer that, The fulness of grace may be taken in two ways: First,
on the part of grace itself, or secondly on the part of the one who has
grace. Now on the part of grace itself there is said to be the fulness
of grace when the limit of grace is attained, as to essence and power,
inasmuch as grace is possessed in its highest possible excellence
and in its greatest possible extension to all its effects. And this
fulness of grace is proper to Christ. But on the part of the subject
there is said to be the fulness of grace when anyone fully possesses
grace according to his condition---whether as regards intensity, by
reason of grace being intense in him, to the limit assigned by God,
according to Eph. 4:1: "But to every one of us is given grace