I shall quote an instance from them that are without. See ye not those lovers?
How many insults are wreaked upon them by their mistresses, how many
artifices practised, how many punishments inflicted: yet they are enchained to
them, they burn for them, and love them better than their own souls, passing
whole nights before their thresholds. From them let us take our example, not
indeed to love such as those—women, I mean, that are harlots; no, but thus to
love our enemies. For tell me, do not harlots treat their lovers with greater
insolence than all the enemies in the world, and squander away their substance,
and cast insult in their face, and impose upon them more servile tasks than upon
their own menials? And yet still they desist not, though no one has so great an
enemy in any one, as the lover in his mistress. Yea, this beloved one disdains,
and reviles, and oftentimes maltreats him, and the more she is loved, the more
she scorns him. And what can be more brutal than a spirit like this? Yet
notwithstanding he loves her still.
But possibly we shall find love like this in spiritual characters also, not in
those of our day, (for it has "waxed cold,") [Matthew 24:12] but in those great
and glorious men of old. Moses, the blessed Moses, surpassed even those that
love with human passion. How, and in what way? First, he gave up the court,
and the luxury, and the retinue, and the glory attending it, and chose rather to be
with the Israelites. Yet is this not only what no one else would ever have done,
but would have even been ashamed, were another to have discovered him, of
being found to be a kinsman of men, who were slaves and not only slaves, but
were looked upon as even execrable. Yet was he not only not ashamed of his
kindred, but with all his spirit defended them, and threw himself into dangers for
their sake. [Acts 7:24] How? Seeing, it is said, one doing an injury to one of
them, he defended him that suffered the injury, and slew him that inflicted it. But
this is not as yet for the sake of enemies. Great indeed is this act of itself, but not
so great as what comes afterwards. The next day, then, he saw the same thing
taking place, and when he saw him whom he had defended doing his neighbor
wrong, he admonished him to desist from his wrong-doing. But he said, with

great ingratitude, "Who made you a ruler and a judge over us?" [Acts 7:27] Who
would not have taken fire at these words? Had then the former act been that of
passion and frenzy, then would he have smitten and killed this man also; for
surely he on whose behalf it was done, never would have informed against him.
But because they were brethren, it is said, he spoke thus. When he [the Hebrew]
was being wronged, he uttered no such word "Who made you a ruler and a judge
over us?" "Why did you not say this yesterday?" Moses would say, "Your
injustice, and your cruelty, these make me a ruler and a judge."
But now, mark, how that some, in fact, say as much even to God Himself.
Whenever they are wronged indeed, they would have Him a God of vengeance,
and complain of His long suffering; but when themselves do wrong, not for a
moment.
However, what could be more bitter than words like these? And yet
notwithstanding, after this, when he was sent to that ungrateful, to that thankless
race, he went, and shrunk not back. Yea, and after those miracles, and after the
wonders wrought by his hand, oftentimes they sought to stone him to death and
he escaped out of their hands. They kept murmuring too incessantly, and yet still,
notwithstanding, so passionately did he love them, as to say unto God, when
they committed that heinous sin, "Yet now if You will forgive, forgive their sin;
and if not, blot even me also out of the book which You have written." [Exodus
32:32] Fain would I perish, says he, with them, rather than without them be
saved. Here, verily, is love even to madness, verily, unbounded love. What do
you say, Moses? Are you regardless of Heaven? I am, says he, for I love those
who have wronged me. Prayest thou to be blotted out? Yea, says he, what can I
do, for it is love? And what again after these things? Hear what the Scripture
says elsewhere; "And it went ill with Moses for their sakes." [Psalm 106:32]
How often did they wax wanton? How often did they reject both himself and his
brother? How often did they seek to return back to Egypt? And yet after all these
things did he burn, yea, was beside himself with love for them, and was ready to
suffer for their sakes.