Reply to Objection 2: To "receive" is said to be common to the
creature and to the Son not in a univocal sense, but according to a
certain remote similitude whereby He is called the First Born of
creatures. Hence the authority quoted subjoins: "That He may be the
First Born among many brethren," after saying that some were
conformed to the image of the Son of God. But the Son of God
possesses a position of singularity above others, in having by nature
what He receives, as Basil also declares (Hom. xv De Fide); hence He
is called the only begotten (Jn. 1:18): "The only begotten Who is in
the bosom of the Father, He hath declared unto us."
From this appears the Reply to the Third Objection.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether it is proper to the Father to be

unbegotten?
Objection 1: It would seem that it is not proper to the Father to be
unbegotten. For every property supposes something in that of which
it is the property. But "unbegotten" supposes nothing in the Father;
it only removes something. Therefore it does not signify a property
of the Father.
Objection 2: Further, Unbegotten is taken either in a privative, or in a
negative sense. If in a negative sense, then whatever is not begotten
can be called unbegotten. But the Holy Ghost is not begotten;
neither is the divine essence. Therefore to be unbegotten belongs
also to the essence; thus it is not proper to the Father. But if it be
taken in a privative sense, as every privation signifies imperfection
in the thing which is the subject of privation, it follows that the
Person of the Father is imperfect; which cannot be.
Objection 3: Further, in God, "unbegotten" does not signify relation,
for it is not used relatively. Therefore it signifies substance;
therefore unbegotten and begotten differ in substance. But the Son,
Who is begotten, does not differ from the Father in substance.
Therefore the Father ought not to be called unbegotten.
Objection 4: Further, property means what belongs to one alone.
Since, then, there are more than one in God proceeding from
another, there is nothing to prevent several not receiving their being
from another. Therefore the Father is not alone unbegotten.
Objection 5: Further, as the Father is the principle of the person
begotten, so is He of the person proceeding. So if by reason of his
opposition to the person begotten, it is proper to the Father to be
unbegotten it follows that it is proper to Him also to be
unproceeding.
On the contrary, Hilary says (De Trin. iv): "One is from one ---that is,
the Begotten is from the Unbegotten---namely, by the property in
each one respectively of innascibility and origin."
I answer that, As in creatures there exist a first and a secondary
principle, so also in the divine Persons, in Whom there is no before

or after, is formed the principle not from a principle, Who is the
Father; and the principle from a principle, Who is the Son.
Now in things created a first principle is known in two ways; in one
way as the first "principle," by reason of its having a relation to what
proceeds from itself; in another way, inasmuch as it is a "first"
principle by reason of its not being from another. Thus therefore the
Father is known both by paternity and by common spiration, as
regards the persons proceeding from Himself. But as the principle,
not from a principle He is known by the fact that He is not from
another; and this belongs to the property of innascibility, signified
by this word "begotten."
Reply to Objection 1: Some there are who say that innascibility,
signified by the word "unbegotten," as a property of the Father, is
not a negative term only, but either that it means both these things
together---namely, that the Father is from no one, and that He is the
principle of others; or that it imports universal authority, or also His
plenitude as the source of all. This, however, does not seem true,
because thus innascibility would not be a property distinct from
paternity and spiration; but would include them as the proper is
included in the common. For source and authority signify in God
nothing but the principle of origin. We must therefore say with
Augustine (De Trin. v, 7) that "unbegotten" imports the negation of
passive generation. For he says that "unbegotten" has the same
meaning as "not a son." Nor does it follow that "unbegotten" is not
the proper notion of the Father; for primary and simple things are
notified by negations; as, for instance, a point is defined as what has
no part.
Reply to Objection 2: "Unbegotten" is taken sometimes in a negative
sense only, and in that sense Jerome says that "the Holy Ghost is
unbegotten," that is, He is not begotten. Otherwise "unbegotten"
may be taken in a kind of privation sense, but not as implying any
imperfection. For privation can be taken in many ways; in one way
when a thing has not what is naturally belongs to another, even
though it is not of its own nature to have it; as, for instance, if a
stone be called a dead thing, as wanting life, which naturally belongs
to some other things. In another sense, privation is so called when
something has not what naturally belongs to some members of its
genus; as for instance when a mole is called blind. In a third sense
privation means the absence of what something ought to have; in
which sense, privation imports an imperfection. In this sense,