always a point of great importance with them to show that He was once dead.
Though you should deny it, says he, ([ἐ] [κεῖνοι]) those (present) will bear
witness to the fact. ["Having loosed the pangs of death."] He that gives Death
trouble, may much more give trouble to them that crucified Him: however,
nothing of the kind is here said, as that He had power to slay you. Meanwhile, let
us also learn thus to hold. For one that is in pain like a woman in travail, does
not hold the thing held, and is not active but passive; and makes haste to cast it
off. And it is well said: "For David says in reference to him" (v. 25); that you
may not refer that saying to the Prophet.— ["Therefore being a Prophet, and
knowing," etc.] (v. 30, 31.) Do you observe how he now interprets the prophecy,
and does not give it bare of comment? How did He "seat Him upon" David's
"throne?" For the kingdom after the Spirit is in heaven. Observe how, along with
the resurrection, he has also declared the kingdom in the fact of His rising again.
He shows that the Prophet was under constraint: for the prophecy was
concerning Him. Why does he say, not, Concerning His kingdom (it was a great
matter), but "Concerning His resurrection?" And how did He seat Him upon his
(David's) throne? Why, He reigns as King over Jews also, yea, what is much
more, over them that crucified Him. "For His flesh saw no corruption." This
seems to be less than resurrection, but it is the same thing.
"This Jesus"— observe how he does not call Him otherwise— "has God
raised up; whereof all we are witnesses. Being therefore by the right hand of
God exalted" (v. 33, 34): again he takes refuge with the Father, and yet it had
been enough to say what precedes: but he knows what a great point this is. Here
he has hinted at the Ascension also, and that Christ is in heaven: but neither does
he say this openly. "And having received," says he, "the promise of the Holy
Ghost." Observe how, in the beginning of his discourse, he does not say that
Jesus Himself had sent It, but the Father: now, however, that he has mentioned
His signs and the things done to Him by the Jews, and has spoken of His
resurrection, he boldly introduces what he has to say about these matters, again
adducing themselves as witnesses by both senses: ["He has shed forth this,

which you do see and hear."] And of the resurrection he has made continual
mention, but of their outrageous deed he has spoken once for all. "And having
received the promise of the Holy Ghost." This again is great. "The promise," he
says; because [promised] before His Passion. Observe how he now makes it all
His ["He has poured forth this"], covertly making a great point. For if it was He
that poured it forth, it is of Him that the Prophet has spoken above, In the last
days I will pour forth of My Spirit on My Servants, and on Mine handmaids, and
I will do wonders in the heaven above. [Acts 2:17] Observe what he secretly
puts into it! But then, because it was a great thing, he again veils it with the
expression of "His having received of the Father." He has spoken of the good
things fulfilled, of the signs; has said, that He is king, the point that touched
them; has said, that it is He that gives the Spirit. (Arist. Rhet. 1. 3.) (For, however
much a person may say, if it does not issue in something advantageous, he
speaks to no purpose.) Just as John: "The same," says he, "shall baptize you with
the Holy Ghost." [Matthew 3:11] And it shows that the Cross not only did not
make Him less, but rendered Him even more illustrious, seeing that of old God
promised it to Him, but now has given it. Or [it may be], "the promise" which He
promised to us. He so foreknew it about to be, and has given it to us greater after
the resurrection. And, "has poured it out," he says; not requiring worthiness: and
not simply gave, but with abundance. Whence does this appear? Henceforth after
the mention of His giving the Spirit, he confidently speaks also of His ascension
into heaven; and not only so, but again adducing the witness, and reminding
them of that Person concerning Whom Christ once spoke. [Matthew 22:43] "For
not David," says he ascended into the heavens. [Acts 2:34] Here he no longer
speaks in lowly phrase, having the confidence which results from the things said;
nor does he say, "Be it permitted me to speak," or the like: "But he says himself;
The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit on My right hand, until I make Your enemies
Your footstool." Now if He be David's Lord, much more shall they not disdain
Him. "Sit on My right hand;" he has set the whole matter here; "until I make
Your enemies Your footstool:" here also he has brought upon them a great terror,