them. But does he banish you and involve you in innumerable ills? Well, he is
making the crown more glorious for you. But does he destroy and murder you?
Even hereby he profits you very greatly, procuring for you the rewards of the
martyrs, and conducting you more quickly into the untroubled haven, and
affording you matter for a more abundant recompence, and contriving for you to
make a gain of the universal penalty. Which thing indeed is most marvellous of
all, that the plotters, so far from injuring at all, do rather make the objects of
their despite more approved. To this what can be comparable? I mean, to the
choice of such a mode of life as this, and no other, is.
Thus whereas He had called the way strait and narrow; to soothe our labors
on this side also, He signifies the security thereof to be great, and great the
pleasure; even as of the opposite course great is the unsoundness, and the
detriment. For as virtue even from things here was signified by Him to have her
rewards, so vice also her penalties. For what I am ever saying, that I will say
now also: that in both ways He is everywhere bringing about the salvation of His
hearers on the one hand by zeal for virtue, on the other by hatred of vice. Thus,
because there would be some to admire what He said, while they yield no proof
of it by their works, He by anticipation awakens their fears, saying, Though the
things spoken be good, hearing is not sufficient for security, but there is need
also of obedience in actions, and the whole lies chiefly in this. And here He ends
His discourse, leaving the fear at its height in them.
For as with regard to virtue, not only from the things to come did He urge
them (speaking of a kingdom, and of Heaven, and an unspeakable reward, and
comfort, and the unnumbered good things): but also from the things present,
indicating the firm and immoveable quality of the Rock; so also with respect to
wickedness, not from the expected things only does He excite their fears (as
from the tree that is cut down, and the unquenchable fire, and the not entering
into the kingdom, and from His saying, "I know you not"): but also from the
things present, the downfall, I mean, in what is said of the house.
4. Wherefore also He made His argument more expressive, by trying its

force in a parable; for it was not the same thing to say, "The virtuous man shall
be impregnable, but the wicked easily subdued," as to suppose a rock, and a
house, and rivers, and rain, and wind, and the like.
"And every one," says He, "that hears these sayings of mine, and does them
not, shall be likened to a foolish man, which built his house upon the sand."
And well did He call this man "foolish": for what can be more senseless
than one building a house on the sand, and while he submits to the labor,
depriving himself of the fruit and refreshment, and instead thereof undergoing
punishment? For that they too, who follow after wickedness, do labor, is surely
manifest to every one: since both the extortioner, and the adulterer, and the false
accuser, toil and weary themselves much to bring their wickedness to effect; but
so far from reaping any profit from these their labors, they rather undergo great
loss. For Paul too intimated this when he said, "He that sows to his flesh, shall of
his flesh reap corruption." [Galatians 6:8] To this man are they like also, who
build on the sand; as those that are given up to fornication, to wantonness, to
drunkenness, to anger, to all the other things.
Such an one was Ahab, but not such Elijah (since when we have put virtue
and vice along side of one another, we shall know more accurately the
difference): for the one had built upon the rock, the other on the sand; wherefore
though he were a king, he feared and trembled at the prophet, at him that had
only his sheepskin. Such were the Jews but not the apostles; and so though they
were few and in bonds, they exhibited the steadfastness of the rock; but those,
many as they were, and in armor, the weakness of the sand. For so they said,
"What shall we do to these men?" [Acts 4:16] Do you see those in perplexity, not
who are in the hands of others, and bound, but who are active in holding down
and binding? And what can be more strange than this? Have you hold of the
other, and art yet in utter perplexity? Yes, and very naturally. For inasmuch as
they had built all on the sand, therefore also were they weaker than all. For this
cause also they said again, "What do ye, seeking to bring this man's blood upon
us?" [Acts 5:28] What says he? Do you scourge, and are you in fear? Do you