THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.54, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether Christ's body rose glorified?

Objection 1: It seems that Christ's body did not rise glorified. For
glorified bodies shine, according to Mt. 13:43: "Then shall the just
shine as the sun in the kingdom of their Father." But shining bodies
are seen under the aspect of light, but not of color. Therefore, since
Christ's body was beheld under the aspect of color, as it had been
hitherto, it seems that it was not a glorified one.
Objection 2: Further, a glorified body is incorruptible. But Christ's
body seems not to have been incorruptible; because it was palpable,
as He Himself says in Lk. 24:39: "Handle, and see." Now Gregory
says (Hom. in Evang. xxvi) that "what is handled must be corruptible,
and that which is incorruptible cannot be handled." Consequently,
Christ's body was not glorified.
Objection 3: Further, a glorified body is not animal, but spiritual, as
is clear from 1 Cor. 15. But after the Resurrection Christ's body
seems to have been animal, since He ate and drank with His
disciples, as we read in the closing chapters of Luke and John.
Therefore, it seems that Christ's body was not glorified.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (Phil. 3:21): "He will reform the
body of our lowness, made like to the body of His glory."
I answer that, Christ's was a glorified body in His Resurrection, and
this is evident from three reasons. First of all, because His
Resurrection was the exemplar and the cause of ours, as is stated in
1 Cor. 15:43. But in the resurrection the saints will have glorified
bodies, as is written in the same place: "It is sown in dishonor, it
shall rise in glory." Hence, since the cause is mightier than the
effect, and the exemplar than the exemplate; much more glorious,
then, was the body of Christ in His Resurrection. Secondly, because
He merited the glory of His Resurrection by the lowliness of His
Passion. Hence He said (Jn. 12:27): "Now is My soul troubled," which
refers to the Passion; and later He adds: "Father, glorify Thy name,"
whereby He asks for the glory of the Resurrection. Thirdly, because
as stated above (Question 34, Article 4), Christ's soul was glorified
from the instant of His conception by perfect fruition of the Godhead.
But, as stated above (Question 14, Article 1, ad 2), it was owing to
the Divine economy that the glory did not pass from His soul to His

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.54, C.3.

body, in order that by the Passion He might accomplish the mystery
of our redemption. Consequently, when this mystery of Christ's
Passion and death was finished, straightway the soul communicated
its glory to the risen body in the Resurrection; and so that body was
made glorious.
Reply to Objection 1: Whatever is received within a subject is
received according to the subject's capacity. Therefore, since glory
flows from the soul into the body, it follows that, as Augustine says
(Ep. ad Dioscor. cxviii), the brightness or splendor of a glorified body
is after the manner of natural color in the human body; just as
variously colored glass derives its splendor from the sun's radiance,
according to the mode of the color. But as it lies within the power of
a glorified man whether his body be seen or not, as stated above
(Article 1, ad 2), so is it in his power whether its splendor be seen or
not. Accordingly it can be seen in its color without its brightness.
And it was in this way that Christ's body appeared to the disciples
after the Resurrection.
Reply to Objection 2: We say that a body can be handled not only
because of its resistance, but also on account of its density. But
from rarity and density follow weight and lightness, heat and cold,
and similar contraries, which are the principles of corruption in
elementary bodies. Consequently, a body that can be handled by
human touch is naturally corruptible. But if there be a body that
resists touch, and yet is not disposed according to the qualities
mentioned, which are the proper objects of human touch, such as a
heavenly body, then such body cannot be said to be handled. But
Christ's body after the Resurrection was truly made up of elements,
and had tangible qualities such as the nature of a human body
requires, and therefore it could naturally be handled; and if it had
nothing beyond the nature of a human body, it would likewise be
corruptible. But it had something else which made it incorruptible,
and this was not the nature of a heavenly body, as some maintain,
and into which we shall make fuller inquiry later (XP, Question 82,
Article 1), but it was glory flowing from a beatified soul: because, as
Augustine says (Ep. ad Dioscor. cxviii): "God made the soul of such
powerful nature, that from its fullest beatitude the fulness of health
overflows into the body, that is, the vigor of incorruption." And
therefore Gregory says (Hom. in Evang. xxvi): "Christ's body is
shown to be of the same nature, but of different glory, after the
Resurrection."