SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.54, C.5.

guile is ascribed chiefly to speech. Yet guile may happen also in
deeds, according to Ps. 104:25, "And to deal deceitfully with his
servants." Guile is also in the heart, according to Ecclus. 19:23, "His
interior is full of deceit," but this is to devise deceits, according to
Ps. 37:13: "They studied deceits all the day long."
Reply to Objection 3: Whoever purposes to do some evil deed, must
needs devise certain ways of attaining his purpose, and for the most
part he devises deceitful ways, whereby the more easily to obtain his
end. Nevertheless it happens sometimes that evil is done openly and
by violence without craftiness and guile; but as this is more difficult,
it is of less frequent occurrence.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.54, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether fraud pertains to craftiness?

Objection 1: It would seem that fraud does not pertain to craftiness.
For a man does not deserve praise if he allows himself to be
deceived, which is the object of craftiness; and yet a man deserves
praise for allowing himself to be defrauded, according to 1 Cor. 6:1,
"Why do you not rather suffer yourselves to be defrauded?"
Therefore fraud does not belong to craftiness.
Objection 2: Further, fraud seems to consist in unlawfully taking or
receiving external things, for it is written (Acts 5:1) that "a certain
man named Ananias with Saphira his wife, sold a piece of land, and
by fraud kept back part of the price of the land." Now it pertains to
injustice or illiberality to take possession of or retain external things
unjustly. Therefore fraud does not belong to craftiness which is
opposed to prudence.
Objection 3: Further, no man employs craftiness against himself. But
the frauds of some are against themselves, for it is written (Prov.
1:18) concerning some "that they practice frauds against their own
souls." Therefore fraud does not belong to craftiness.
On the contrary, The object of fraud is to deceive, according to Job
13:9, "Shall he be deceived as a man, with your fraudulent
dealings?" Now craftiness is directed to the same object. Therefore
fraud pertains to craftiness.
I answer that, Just as "guile" consists in the execution of craftiness,
so also does "fraud." But they seem to differ in the fact that "guile"
belongs in general to the execution of craftiness, whether this be
effected by words, or by deeds, whereas "fraud" belongs more
properly to the execution of craftiness by deeds.
Reply to Objection 1: The Apostle does not counsel the faithful to be
deceived in their knowledge, but to bear patiently the effect of being
deceived, and to endure wrongs inflicted on them by fraud.
Reply to Objection 2: The execution of craftiness may be carried out
by another vice, just as the execution of prudence by the virtues:
and accordingly nothing hinders fraud from pertaining to
covetousness or illiberality.