SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.184, C.6.

Consequently when the salvation of his subjects demands the
personal presence of the pastor, the pastor should not withdraw his
personal presence from his flock, neither for the sake of some
temporal advantage, nor even on account of some impending danger
to his person, since the good shepherd is bound to lay down his life
for his sheep.
On the other hand, if the salvation of his subjects can be sufficiently
provided for by another person in the absence of the pastor, it is
lawful for the pastor to withdraw his bodily presence from his flock,
either for the sake of some advantage to the Church, or on account
of some danger to his person. Hence Augustine says (Ep. ccxxviii ad
Honorat.): "Christ's servants may flee from one city to another, when
one of them is specially sought out by persecutors: in order that the
Church be not abandoned by others who are not so sought for.
When, however, the same danger threatens all, those who stand in
need of others must not be abandoned by those whom they need."
For "if it is dangerous for the helmsman to leave the ship when the
sea is calm, how much more so when it is stormy," as Pope Nicholas
I says (cf. VII, qu. i, can. Sciscitaris).
Reply to Objection 1: To flee as a hireling is to prefer temporal
advantage or one's bodily welfare to the spiritual welfare of one's
neighbor. Hence Gregory says (Hom. xiv in Ev.): "A man cannot
endanger himself for the sake of his sheep, if he uses his authority
over them not through love of them but for the sake of earthly gain:
wherefore he fears to stand in the way of danger lest he lose what he
loves." But he who, in order to avoid danger, leaves the flock without
endangering the flock, does not flee as a hireling.
Reply to Objection 2: If he who is surety for another be unable to
fulfil his engagement, it suffices that he fulfil it through another.
Hence if a superior is hindered from attending personally to the care
of his subjects, he fulfils his obligation if he do so through another.
Reply to Objection 3: When a man is appointed to a bishopric, he
embraces the state of perfection as regards one kind of perfection;
and if he be hindered from the practice thereof, he is not bound to
another kind of perfection, so as to be obliged to enter the religious
state. Yet he is under the obligation of retaining the intention of
devoting himself to his neighbor's salvation, should an opportunity
offer, and necessity require it of him.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.184, C.6.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.184, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether it is lawful for a bishop to have property

of his own?
Objection 1: It would seem that it is not lawful for a bishop to have
property of his own. For our Lord said (Mt. 19:21): "If thou wilt be
perfect, go sell all thou hast, and give to the poor . . . and come,
follow Me"; whence it would seem to follow that voluntary poverty is
requisite for perfection. Now bishops are in the state of perfection.
Therefore it would seem unlawful for them to possess anything as
their own.
Objection 2: Further, bishops take the place of the apostles in the
Church, according to a gloss on Lk. 10:1. Now our Lord commanded
the apostles to possess nothing of their own, according to Mt. 10:9,
"Do not possess gold, nor silver, nor money in your purses";
wherefore Peter said for himself and the other apostles (Mt. 19:27):
"Behold we have left all things and have followed Thee." Therefore it
would seem that bishops are bound to keep this command, and to
possess nothing of their own.
Objection 3: Further, Jerome says (Ep. lii ad Nepotian.): "The Greek
kleros denotes the Latin 'sors.' Hence clerics are so called either
because they are of the Lord's estate, or because the Lord Himself is
the estate, i.e. portion of clerics. Now he that possesses the Lord,
can have nothing besides God; and if he have gold and silver,
possessions, and chattels of all kinds, with such a portion the Lord
does not vouchsafe to be his portion also." Therefore it would seem
that not only bishops but even clerics should have nothing of their
own.
On the contrary, It is stated (XII, qu. i, can. Episcopi de rebus):
"Bishops, if they wish, may bequeath to their heirs their personal or
acquired property, and whatever belongs to them personally."
I answer that, No one is bound to works of supererogation, unless he
binds himself specially thereto by vow. Hence Augustine says (Ep.
cxxvii ad Paulin. et Arment.): "Since you have taken the vow, you
have already bound yourself, you can no longer do otherwise. Before
you were bound by the vow, you were free to submit." Now it is
evident that to live without possessing anything is a work of
supererogation, for it is a matter not of precept but of counsel.