vainglory. But, leaving them, let us direct the discourse to our own selves. For
besides the things that have been said, there is this also to be added, that men
were persuaded of these things to their own peril. Be not thou therefore
shameless, but let us think over that night, the stocks, and the hymns of praise.
This let us also do, and we shall open for ourselves— not a prison, but— heaven.
If we pray, we shall be able even to open heaven. Elias both shut and opened
heaven by prayer. [James 5:17] There is a prison in heaven also. "Whatsoever,"
He says, "you shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven." [Matthew 16:19]
Let us pray by night, and we shall loose these bonds. For that prayers loose sins,
let that widow convince us, let that friend convince us, who at that untimely hour
of the night persists and knocks [Luke 11:5]: let Cornelius convince us, for,
"your prayers," it says, "and your alms have come up before God." [Acts 10:4]
Let Paul convince us, who says, "Now she that is a widow indeed and desolate,
trusts in God, and continues in supplications night and day." [1 Timothy 5:5] If
he speaks thus of a widow, a weak woman, much more would he of men. I have
both before discoursed to you on this, and now repeat it: let us arouse ourselves
during the night: though thou make not many prayers, make one with
watchfulness, and it is enough, I ask no more: and if not at midnight, at any rate
at the first dawn. Show that the night is not only for the body, but also for the
soul: do not suffer it to pass idly, but make this return to your Master: nay rather
(the benefit) itself returns to you. Say, if we fall into any difficult strait, to whom
do we not make request? And if we soon obtain our request, we breathe freely
again. What a boon were it for you, to have a friend to go to with your request,
who shall be ready to take it as a kindness, and to be obliged to you for your
asking? What a boon, not to have to go about and seek one to ask of, but to find
one ready? To have no need of others through whom you may solicit? What
could be greater than this? Since here is One who then does most, when we
make not our requests of others than Himself: just as a sincere friend then most
complains of us for not trusting in his friendship, when we ask of others to make
request to him. Thus also let us act. "But what," you will ask, "if I should have

offended Him?" Cease to give offense, and weep, and so draw near to Him, and
you will quickly render Him propitious as to your former sins. Say only, I have
offended: say it from your soul and with a sincere mind, and all things are
remitted to you. Thou dost not so much desire your sins to be forgiven, as He
desires to forgive you your sins. In proof that thou dost not so desire it, consider
that you have no mind either to practice vigils, or to give your money freely: but
He, that He might forgive our sins, spared not His Only-begotten and True Son,
the partner of His throne. Do you see how He more desires to forgive you your
sins (than thou to be forgiven)? Then let us not be slothful, nor put off this any
longer. He is merciful and good: only let us give Him an opportunity.
And (even) this (He seeks), only that we may not become unprofitable,
since even without this He could have freed us from them: but like as we (with
the same view) devise and arrange many things for our servants to do, so does
He in the matter of our salvation. "Let us anticipate His face with thanksgiving."
[Psalm 95:2. "Let us come before His presence." E.V.], since He is good and
kind. But if you call not upon Him, what will He do? Thou dost not choose to
say, Forgive; you will not say it from your heart, but with your mouth only. What
is it, to call in truth? (To call) with purpose of heart, with earnestness, with a
sincere mind; just as men say of perfumes, "This is genuine, and has nothing
spurious," so here. He who truly calls on Him, he who truly prays to Him,
continually attends to it, and desists not, until he obtain (his request): but he who
does it in a merely formal manner ([ἀ] [φοσιούμενος]), and even this only by
way of fulfilling a law, does not call in truth. Whosoever you are, say not only, "I
am a sinner," but be earnest also to rid yourself of this character; say not this
only, but also grieve. If you grieve, you are in earnest: if you are not in earnest,
you grieve not: if you grieve not, you trifle. What sort of man is he who shall
say, "I am sick," and not to do all to be freed from his sickness? A mighty
weapon is Prayer. "If you," says the Lord, "know how to give good gifts to your
children, how much more your Father?" [Luke 11:13] Then wherefore are you
unwilling to approach Him? He loves you, He is of more power than all besides.