SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.38, C.4.

however, the lower power ought not to exercise its act, except in so
far as it is moved by the higher power, as may be seen also in the
physical order, it follows that such persons lose the use of their
power, so that it is not lawful for them to use it. Yet if they use it, this
power has its effect in sacramental acts, because therein man acts
only as God's instrument, so that sacramental effects are not
precluded on account of any fault whatever in the person who
confers the sacrament.
On the other hand, the power of jurisdiction is that which is
conferred by a mere human appointment. Such a power as this does
not adhere to the recipient immovably: so that it does not remain in
heretics and schismatics; and consequently they neither absolve nor
excommunicate, nor grant indulgence, nor do anything of the kind,
and if they do, it is invalid.
Accordingly when it is said that such like persons have no spiritual
power, it is to be understood as referring either to the second power,
or if it be referred to the first power, not as referring to the essence
of the power, but to its lawful use.
This suffices for the Replies to the Objections.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.38, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether it is right that schismatics should be

punished with excommunication?
Objection 1: It would seem that schismatics are not rightly punished
with excommunication. For excommunication deprives a man chiefly
of a share in the sacraments. But Augustine says (Contra Donat. vi,
5) that "Baptism can be received from a schismatic." Therefore it
seems that excommunication is not a fitting punishment for
schismatics.
Objection 2: Further, it is the duty of Christ's faithful to lead back
those who have gone astray, wherefore it is written against certain
persons (Ezech. 34:4): "That which was driven away you have not
brought again, neither have you sought that which was lost." Now
schismatics are more easily brought back by such as may hold
communion with them. Therefore it seems that they ought not to be
excommunicated.
Objection 3: Further, a double punishment is not inflicted for one and
the same sin, according to Nahum 1:9: "God will not judge the same
twice" [Septuagint version]. Now some receive a temporal
punishment for the sin of schism, according to Question 23, Article
5, where it is stated: "Both divine and earthly laws have laid down
that those who are severed from the unity of the Church, and disturb
her peace, must be punished by the secular power." Therefore they
ought not to be punished with excommunication.
On the contrary, It is written (Num. 16:26): "Depart from the tents of
these wicked men," those, to wit, who had caused the schism, "and
touch nothing of theirs, lest you be involved in their sins."
I answer that, According to Wis. 11:11, "By what things a man
sinneth, by the same also he should be punished". Now a
schismatic, as shown above (Article 1), commits a twofold sin: first
by separating himself from communion with the members of the
Church, and in this respect the fitting punishment for schismatics is
that they be excommunicated. Secondly, they refuse submission to
the head of the Church, wherefore, since they are unwilling to be
controlled by the Church's spiritual power, it is just that they should
be compelled by the secular power.