more to you. If any man has thorns, let him cast the fire of the Spirit among
them. If any has a hard and stubborn heart, let him by employing the same fire
make it soft and yielding. If any by the wayside is trodden down by all kind of
thoughts, let him enter into more sheltered places, and not lie exposed for those
that will to invade for plunder: that so we may see your cornfields waving with
grain. Besides, if we exercise such care as this over ourselves, and apply
ourselves industriously to this spiritual hearing, if not at once yet by degrees, we
shall surely be freed from all the cares of life.
Let us therefore take heed that it be not said of us, that our ears are those of
a deaf adder. [Psalm 58:4] For tell me, in what does a hearer of this kind differ
from a beast? And how could he be otherwise than more irrational than any
irrational animal, who does not attend when God is speaking? And if to be wellpleasing to God is really to be a man, what else but a beast can he be who will
not even hear how he may succeed in this? Consider then what a misfortune it
would be for us to fall down of our own accord from (the nature of) men to (that
of) beasts, when Christ is willing of men to make us equal to angels. For to serve
the belly, to be possessed by the desire of riches, to be given to anger, to bite, to
kick, become not men, but beasts. Nay, even the beasts have each, as one may
say, one single passion, and that by nature. But man, when he has cast away the
dominion of reason, and torn himself from the commonwealth of God's devising,
gives himself up to all the passions, is no longer merely a beast, but a kind of
many-formed motley monster; nor has he even the excuse from nature, for all his
wickedness proceeds from deliberate choice and determination.
May we never have cause to suspect this of the Church of Christ. Indeed,
we are concerning you persuaded of better things, and such as belong to
salvation; but the more we are so persuaded, the more careful we will be not to
desist from words of caution. In order that having mounted to the summit of
excellencies, we may obtain the promised goods. Which may it come to pass that
we all attain to, through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ,
by whom and with whom, to the Father and the Holy Ghost, be glory world

without end. Amen.

Homily 3 on the Gospel of John
John 1:1
"In the beginning was the Word."
1. On the subject of attention in hearkening it is superfluous to exhort you
any more, so quickly have you shown by your actions the effects of my advice.
For your manner of running together, your attentive postures, the thrusting one
another in your eagerness to get the inner places, where my voice may more
clearly be heard by you, your unwillingness to retire from the press until this
spiritual assembly be dissolved, the clapping of hands, the murmurs of applause;
in a word, all things of this kind may be considered proofs of the fervor of your
souls, and of your desire to hear. So that on this point it is superfluous to exhort
you. One thing, however, it is necessary for us to bid and entreat, that you
continue to have the same zeal, and manifest it not here only, but that also when
you are at home, you converse man with wife, and father with son, concerning
these matters. And say somewhat of yourselves, and require somewhat in return
from them; and so all contribute to this excellent banquet.
For let no one tell me that our children ought not to be occupied with these
things; they ought not only to be occupied with them, but to be zealous about
them only. And although on account of your infirmity I do not assert this, nor
take them away from their worldly learning, just as I do not draw you either
from your civil business; yet of these seven days I claim that you dedicate one to
the common Lord of us all. For is it not a strange thing that we should bid our
domestics slave for us all their time, and ourselves apportion not even a little of
our leisure to God; and this too when all our service adds nothing to Him, (for
the Godhead is incapable of want,) but turns out to our own advantage? And yet
when you take your children into the theaters, you allege neither their