Matt. xxv. 34.

saved. For as they were saved by means of the blindness of the Egyptians, so are we, too, by that
of the Jews; if, indeed, the death of the Lord is the condemnation of those who fastened Him to the
cross, and who did not believe His advent, but the salvation of those who believe in Him. For the
apostle does also say in the Second [Epistle] to the Corinthians: "For we are unto God a sweet
savour of Christ, in them which are saved, and in them which perish: to the one indeed the savour
of death unto death, but to the other the savour of life unto life." To whom, then, is there the
savour of death unto death, unless to those who believe not neither are subject to the Word of God?
And who are they that did even then give themselves over to death? Those men, doubtless, who
do not believe, nor submit themselves to God. And again, who are they that have been saved and
received the inheritance? Those, doubtless, who do believe God, and who have continued in His
love; as did Caleb [the son] of Jephunneh and Joshua [the son] of Nun, and innocent children,
who have had no sense of evil. But who are they that are saved now, and receive life eternal? Is it
not those who love God, and who believe His promises, and who "in malice have become as little
children?"

### Chapter XXIX.—Refutation of the arguments of the Marcionites, who attempted to show
that God was the author of sin, because He blinded Pharaoh and his servants.
1. "But," say they, "God hardened the heart of Pharaoh and of his servants." Those, then,
who allege such difficulties, do not read in the Gospel that passage where the Lord replied to the
disciples, when they asked Him, "Why speakest Thou unto them in parables?"—"Because it is
given unto you to know the mystery of the kingdom of heaven; but to them I speak in parables,
that seeing they may not see, and hearing they may not hear, understanding they may not understand;
in order that the prophecy of Isaiah regarding them may be fulfilled, saying, Make the heart of this
people gross and make their ears dull, and blind their eyes. But blessed are your eyes, which see
the things that ye see; and your ears, which hear what ye do hear." For one and the same God
[that blesses others] inflicts blindness upon those who do not believe, but who set Him at naught;
just as the sun, which is a creature of His, [acts with regard] to those who, by reason of any weakness
of the eyes cannot behold his light; but to those who believe in Him and follow Him, He grants a
fuller and greater illumination of mind. In accordance with this word, therefore, does the apostle

say, in the Second [Epistle] to the Corinthians: "In whom the this world hath blinded the minds of
them that believe not, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ should shine [unto them]."
And again, in that to the Romans: "And as they did not think fit to have God in their knowledge,
God gave them up to a reprobate mind, to do those things that are not convenient." Speaking of
antichrist, too, he says clearly in the Second to the Thessalonians: "And for this cause God shall
send them the working of error, that they should believe a lie; that they all might be judged who
believed not the truth, but consented to iniquity."
2. If, therefore, in the present time also, God, knowing the number of those who will not believe,
since He foreknows all things, has given them over to unbelief, and turned away His face from men
of this stamp, leaving them in the darkness which they have themselves chosen for themselves,
what is there wonderful if He did also at that time give over to their unbelief, Pharaoh, who never
would have believed, along with those who were with him? As the Word spake to Moses from the
bush: "And I am sure that the king of Egypt will not let you go, unless by a mighty hand." And
for the reason that the Lord spake in parables, and brought blindness upon Israel, that seeing they
might not see, since He knew the [spirit of] unbelief in them, for the same reason did He harden
Pharaoh's heart; in order that, while seeing that it was the finger of God which led forth the people,
he might not believe, but be precipitated into a sea of unbelief, resting in the notion that the exit of
these [Israelites] was accomplished by magical power, and that it was not by the operation of God
that the Red Sea afforded a passage to the people, but that this occurred by merely natural causes
(sed naturaliter sic se habere).