as wicked, as a boaster.

2 Corinthians 10:3
2. For though we walk in the flesh, we do not war according to the flesh.
Here he goes on to alarm them also by the figure he uses, 'for,' says he, 'we
are indeed encompassed with flesh; I own it, but we do not live by the flesh;' or
rather, he said not even this, but for the present reserves it, for it belongs to the
encomium on his life: but first discourses of the Preaching, and shows that it is
not of man, nor needs aid from beneath. Wherefore he said not, 'we do not live
according to the flesh,' but, "we do not war according to the flesh," that is, 'we
have undertaken a war and a combat; but we do not war with carnal weapons,
nor by help of any human succors.'

2 Corinthians 10:4
"For our weapons are not of the flesh."
For what sort of weapons are of the flesh? Wealth, glory, power, fluency,
cleverness, circumventions , flatteries, hypocrisies, whatsoever else is similar to
these. But ours are not of this sort: but of what kind are they?
"Mighty before God."
And he said not, 'we are not carnal,' but, "our weapons." For as I said, for
the present he discourses of the Preaching, and refers the whole power to God.
And he says not, 'spiritual,' although this was the fitting opposite to "carnal," but
"mighty," in this implying the other also, and showing that their weapons are
weak and powerless. And mark the absence of pride in him; for he said not, 'we
are mighty,' but, "our weapons are mighty before God." 'We did not make them
such, but God Himself.' For because they were scourged, were persecuted, and
suffered wrongs incurable without number, which things were proofs of
weakness: to show the strength of God he says, "but they are mighty before
God." For this especially shows His strength, that by these things He gains the
victory. So that even though we are encompassed with them, yet it is He that
wars and works by them. Then he goes through a long eulogium upon them,
saying,
"To the casting down of strong holds." And lest when hearing of strong
holds you should think of anything material , he says,

2 Corinthians 10:5
"Casting down imaginations."
First giving emphasis by the figure, and then by this additional expression
declaring the spiritual character of the warfare. For these strongholds besiege
souls, not bodies. Whence they are stronger than the others, and therefore also
the weapons they require are mightier. But by strongholds he means the Grecian
pride, and the strength of their sophisms and their syllogisms. But nevertheless,
'these weapons,' he says, 'confounded every thing that stood up against them; for
they cast down imaginations,
'And every high thing that is exalted against the knowledge of God.' He
persisted in the metaphor that he might make the emphasis greater. 'For though
there should be strongholds,' he says, 'though fortifications, though any other
thing soever, they yield and give way before these weapons.
"And bringing every thought into captivity to the obedience of Christ." And
yet the name, "captivity," has an ill sound with it; for it is the destruction of
liberty. Wherefore then has he used it? With a meaning of its own, in regard to
another point. For the word "captivity" conveys two ideas, the loss of liberty, and
the being so violently overpowered as not to rise up again. It is therefore in
respect to this second meaning that he took it. As when he shall say "I robbed
other churches," [2 Corinthians 11:8] he does not intend the taking stealthily, but
the stripping and taking their all, so also here in saying, "bringing into captivity."
For the fight was not equally maintained, but he conquered with great ease.
Wherefore he did not say, 'we conquer and have the better,' only; but 'we even
bring "into captivity;"' just as above, he did not say, 'we advance engines against
the "strongholds:"' but, 'we cast them down, for great is the superiority of our
weapons.' 'For we war not with words,' he says, but with deeds against words,
not with fleshly wisdom, but with the spirit of meekness and of power. How was