One of the mss. reads here: Sanguis pro sanguine ejus effundetur.

through transgression. But now, by means of communion with Himself, the Lord has reconciled
man to God the Father, in reconciling us to Himself by the body of His own flesh, and redeeming
us by His own blood, as the apostle says to the Ephesians, "In whom we have redemption through
His blood, the remission of sins;" and again to the same he says, "Ye who formerly were far off
have been brought near in the blood of Christ;" and again, "Abolishing in His flesh the enmities,
[even] the law of commandments [contained] in ordinances." And in every Epistle the apostle
plainly testifies, that through the flesh of our Lord, and through His blood, we have been saved.
4. If, therefore, flesh and blood are the things which procure for us life, it has not been declared
of flesh and blood, in the literal meaning (proprie) of the terms, that they cannot inherit the kingdom
of God; but [these words apply] to those carnal deeds already mentioned, which, perverting man
to sin, deprive him of life. And for this reason he says, in the Epistle to the Romans: "Let not sin,
therefore, reign in your mortal body, to be under its control: neither yield ye your members
instruments of unrighteousness unto sin; but yield yourselves to God, as being alive from the dead,
and your members as instruments of righteousness unto God." In these same members, therefore,
in which we used to serve sin, and bring forth fruit unto death, does He wish us to [be obedient]
unto righteousness, that we may bring forth fruit unto life. Remember, therefore, my beloved friend,
that thou hast been redeemed by the flesh of our Lord, re-established by His blood; and "holding
the Head, from which the whole body of the Church, having been fitted together, takes
increase"—that is, acknowledging the advent in the flesh of the Son of God, and [His] divinity
(deum), and looking forward with constancy to His human nature (hominem), availing thyself
also of these proofs drawn from Scripture—thou dost easily overthrow, as I have pointed out, all
those notions of the heretics which were concocted afterwards.

### Chapter XV.—Proofs of the resurrection from Isaiah and Ezekiel; the same God who created
us will also raise us up.

Harvey restores the Greek thus, $%, &-. %/&#0 1.(23"#. 4)4%*3+ 5$6)789).#+, which he thinks has a reference to the
patient waiting for "Christ's second advent to judge the world." The phrase might also be translated, and "receiving stedfastly
His human nature."

1. Now, that He who at the beginning created man, did promise him a second birth after his
dissolution into earth, Esaias thus declares: "The dead shall rise again, and they who are in the
tombs shall arise, and they who are in the earth shall rejoice. For the dew which is from Thee is
health to them." And again: "I will comfort you, and ye shall be comforted in Jerusalem: and ye
shall see, and your heart shall rejoice, and your bones shall flourish as the grass; and the hand of
the Lord shall be known to those who worship Him." And Ezekiel speaks as follows: "And the
hand of the Lord came upon me, and the Lord led me forth in the Spirit, and set me down in the
midst of the plain, and this place was full of bones. And He caused me to pass by them round about:
and, behold, there were many upon the surface of the plain very dry. And He said unto me, Son of
man, can these bones live? And I said, Lord, Thou who hast made them dost know. And He said
unto me, Prophesy upon these bones, and thou shalt say to them, Ye dry bones, hear the word of
the Lord. Thus saith the Lord to these bones, Behold, I will cause the spirit of life to come upon
you, and I will lay sinews upon you, and bring up flesh again upon you, and I will stretch skin upon
you, and will put my Spirit into you, and ye shall live; and ye shall know that I am the Lord. And
I prophesied as the Lord had commanded me. And it came to pass, when I was prophesying, that,
behold, an earthquake, and the bones were drawn together, each one to its own articulation: and I
beheld, and, lo, the sinews and flesh were produced upon them, and the skins rose upon them round
about, but there was no breath in them. And He said unto me, Prophesy to the breath, son of man,
and say to the breath, These things saith the Lord, Come from the four winds (spiritibus), and
breathe upon these dead, that they may live. So I prophesied as the Lord had commanded me, and
the breath entered into them; and they did live, and stood upon their feet, an exceeding great
gathering." And again he says, "Thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will set your graves open, and
cause you to come out of your graves, and bring you into the land of Israel; and ye shall know that
I am the Lord, when I shall open your sepulchres, that I may bring my people again out of the
sepulchres: and I will put my Spirit into you, and ye shall live; and I will place you in your land,
and ye shall know that I am the Lord. I have said, and I will do, saith the Lord." As we at once
perceive that the Creator (Demiurgo) is in this passage represented as vivifying our dead bodies,
and promising resurrection to them, and resuscitation from their sepulchres and tombs, conferring
upon them immortality also (He says, "For as the tree of life, so shall their days be"), He is
shown to be the only God who accomplishes these things, and as Himself the good Father,
benevolently conferring life upon those who have not life from themselves.
2. And for this reason did the Lord most plainly manifest Himself and the Father to His disciples,
lest, forsooth, they might seek after another God besides Him who formed man, and who gave him