FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.4.

In the peace-offerings, the breast-bone and the right shoulder were
allotted to the use of the priest, in order to prevent a certain kind of
divination which is known as "spatulamantia," so called because it
was customary in divining to use the shoulder-blade [spatula], and
the breast-bone of the animals offered in sacrifice; wherefore these
things were taken away from the offerers. This is also denoted the
priest's need of wisdom in the heart, to instruct the people--this was
signified by the breast-bone, which covers the heart; and his need of
fortitude, in order to bear with human frailty--and this was signified
by the right shoulder.
Reply to Objection 9. Because the holocaust was the most perfect
kind of sacrifice, therefore none but a male was offered for a
holocaust: because the female is an imperfect animal. The offering of
turtledoves and doves was on account of the poverty of the offerers,
who were unable to offer bigger animals. And since peace-victims
were offered freely, and no one was bound to offer them against his
will, hence these birds were offered not among the peace-victims,
but among the holocausts and victims for sin, which man was
obliged to offer at times. Moreover these birds, on account of their
lofty flight, while befitting the perfection of the holocausts: and were
suitable for sin-offerings because their song is doleful.
Reply to Objection 10. The holocaust was the chief of all the
sacrifices: because all were burnt in honor of God, and nothing of it
was eaten. The second place in holiness, belongs to the sacrifice for
sins, which was eaten in the court only, and on the very day of the
sacrifice (Lev. 7:6,15). The third place must be given to the peaceofferings of thanksgiving, which were eaten on the same day, but
anywhere in Jerusalem. Fourth in order were the "ex-voto" peaceofferings, the flesh of which could be eaten even on the morrow. The
reason for this order is that man is bound to God, chiefly on account
of His majesty; secondly, on account of the sins he has committed;
thirdly, because of the benefits he has already received from Him;
fourthly, by reason of the benefits he hopes to receive from Him.
Reply to Objection 11. Sins are more grievous by reason of the state
of the sinner, as stated above (73, 10): wherefore different victims
are commanded to be offered for the sin of a priest, or of a prince, or
of some other private individual. "But," as Rabbi Moses says (Doct.
Perplex. iii), "we must take note that the more grievous the sin, the
lower the species of animals offered for it. Wherefore the goat, which
is a very base animal, was offered for idolatry; while a calf was

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.4.

offered for a priest's ignorance, and a ram for the negligence of a
prince."
Reply to Objection 12. In the matter of sacrifices the Law had in view
the poverty of the offerers; so that those who could not have a fourfooted animal at their disposal, might at least offer a bird; and that he
who could not have a bird might at least offer bread; and that if a
man had not even bread he might offer flour or ears of corn.
The figurative cause is that the bread signifies Christ Who is the
"living bread" (Jn. 6:41,51). He was indeed an ear of corn, as it were,
during the state of the law of nature, in the faith of the patriarchs; He
was like flour in the doctrine of the Law of the prophets; and He was
like perfect bread after He had taken human nature; baked in the fire,
i.e. formed by the Holy Ghost in the oven of the virginal womb;
baked again in a pan by the toils which He suffered in the world; and
consumed by fire on the cross as on a gridiron.
Reply to Objection 13. The products of the soil are useful to man,
either as food, and of these bread was offered; or as drink, and of
these wine was offered; or as seasoning, and of these oil and salt
were offered; or as healing, and of these they offered incense, which
both smells sweetly and binds easily together.
Now the bread foreshadowed the flesh of Christ; and the wine, His
blood, whereby we were redeemed; oil betokens the grace of Christ;
salt, His knowledge; incense, His prayer.
Reply to Objection 14. Honey was not offered in the sacrifices to
God, both because it was wont to be offered in the sacrifices to
idols; and in order to denote the absence of all carnal sweetness and
pleasure from those who intend to sacrifice to God. Leaven was not
offered, to denote the exclusion of corruption. Perhaps too, it was
wont to be offered in the sacrifices to idols.
Salt, however, was offered, because it wards off the corruption of
putrefaction: for sacrifices offered to God should be incorrupt.
Moreover, salt signifies the discretion of wisdom, or again,
mortification of the flesh.
Incense was offered to denote devotion of the heart, which is
necessary in the offerer; and again, to signify the odor of a good