I answer that, As was explained above, there can be only three
persons in God. For it was shown above that the several persons are
the several subsisting relations really distinct from each other. But a
real distinction between the divine relations can come only from
relative opposition. Therefore two opposite relations must needs
refer to two persons: and if any relations are not opposite they must
needs belong to the same person. Since then paternity and filiation
are opposite relations, they belong necessarily to two persons.
Therefore the subsisting paternity is the person of the Father; and
the subsisting filiation is the person of the Son. The other two
relations are not opposed to each other; therefore these two cannot
belong to one person: hence either one of them must belong to both
of the aforesaid persons; or one must belong to one person, and the
other to the other. Now, procession cannot belong to the Father and
the Son, or to either of them; for thus it would follows that the
procession of the intellect, which in God is generation, wherefrom
paternity and filiation are derived, would issue from the procession
of love, whence spiration and procession are derived, if the person
generating and the person generated proceeded from the person
spirating; and this is against what was laid down above (Question
27, Articles 3,4). We must frequently admit that spiration belongs to
the person of the Father, and to the person of the Son, forasmuch as
it has no relative opposition either to paternity or to filiation; and
consequently that procession belongs to the other person who is
called the person of the Holy Ghost, who proceeds by way of love, as
above explained. Therefore only three persons exist in God, the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.
Reply to Objection 1: Although there are four relations in God, one of
them, spiration, is not separated from the person of the Father and of
the Son, but belongs to both; thus, although it is a relation, it is not
called a property, because it does not belong to only one person; nor
is it a personal relation---i.e. constituting a person. The three
relations---paternity, filiation, and procession---are called personal
properties, constituting as it were the persons; for paternity is the
person of the Father, filiation is the person of the Son, procession is
the person of the Holy Ghost proceeding.
Reply to Objection 2: That which proceeds by way of intelligence, as
word, proceeds according to similitude, as also that which proceeds
by way of nature; thus, as above explained (Question 27, Article 3),
the procession of the divine Word is the very same as generation by

way of nature. But love, as such, does not proceed as the similitude
of that whence it proceeds; although in God love is co-essential as
being divine; and therefore the procession of love is not called
generation in God.
Reply to Objection 3: As man is more perfect than other animals, he
has more intrinsic operations than other animals, because his
perfection is something composite. Hence the angels, who are more
perfect and more simple, have fewer intrinsic operations than man,
for they have no imagination, or feeling, or the like. In God there
exists only one real operation---that is, His essence. How there are in
Him two processions was above explained (Question 27, Articles
1,4).
Reply to Objection 4: This argument would prove if the Holy Ghost
possessed another goodness apart from the goodness of the Father;
for then if the Father produced a divine person by His goodness, the
Holy Ghost also would do so. But the Father and the Holy Ghost
have one and the same goodness. Nor is there any distinction
between them except by the personal relations. So goodness
belongs to the Holy Ghost, as derived from another; and it belongs
to the Father, as the principle of its communication to another. The
opposition of relation does not allow the relation of the Holy Ghost to
be joined with the relation of principle of another divine person;
because He Himself proceeds from the other persons who are in
God.
Reply to Objection 5: A determinate number, if taken as a simple
number, existing in the mind only, is measured by one. But when we
speak of a number of things as applied to the persons in God, the
notion of measure has no place, because the magnitude of the three
persons is the same (Question 42, Articles 1,4), and the same is not
measured by the same.