Anima iii.) as indicated by the Commentator (De Anima iii). But when
it understands other things, the object actually understood becomes
one with the intellect in act, in so far as the form of the object
understood becomes the form of the intellect, for as much as the
intellect is in act; not that it becomes identified with the essence of
the intellect, as Avicenna proves (De Natural. vi.), because the
essence of the intellect remains one under two forms whereby it
understands two things in succession, in the same way as primary
matter remains one under various forms. Hence also the
Commentator (De Anima iii.) compares the passive intellect, in this
respect, to primary matter. Thus it by no means follows that our
intellect in seeing God becomes the very essence of God, but that
the latter is compared to it as its perfection or form.
Reply to Objection 1:: These and all like authorities must be
understood to refer to the knowledge whereby we know God on the
way, for the reason given above.
Reply to Objection 1:: The infinite is unknown if we take it in the
privative sense, as such, because it indicates removal of completion
whence knowledge of a thing is derived. Wherefore the infinite
amounts to the same as matter subject to privation, as stated in
Phys. iii. But if we take the infinite in the negative sense, it indicates
the absence of limiting matter, since even a form is somewhat
limited by its matter. Hence the infinite in this sense is of itself most
knowable; and it is in this way that God is infinite.
Reply to Objection 1:: Augustine is speaking of bodily vision, by
which God will never be seen. This is evident from what precedes:
"For no man hath seen God at any time, nor can any man see Him as
these things which we call visible are seen: in this way He is by
nature invisible even as He is incorruptible." As, however, He is by
nature supremely being, so He is in Himself supremely intelligible.
But that He be for a time not understood by us is owing to our
defect: wherefore that He be seen by us after being unseen is owing
to a change not in Him but in us.
Reply to Objection 1:: In heaven God will be seen by the saints as He
is, if this be referred to the mode of the object seen, for the saints
will see that God has the mode which He has. But if we refer the
mode to the knower, He will not be seen as He is, because the
created intellect will not have so great an efficacy in seeing, as the
Divine essence has to the effect of being seen.

Reply to Objection 1:: There is a threefold medium both in bodily and
in intellectual vision. The first is the medium "under which" the
object is seen, and this is something perfecting the sight so as to
see in general, without determining the sight to any particular object.
Such is bodily light in relation to bodily vision; and the light of the
active intellect in relation to the passive intellect, in so far as this
light is a medium. The second is the light "by which" the object is
seen, and this is the visible form whereby either sight is determined
to a special object, for instance by the form of a stone to know a
stone. The third is the medium "in which" it is seen; and this is
something by gazing on which the sight is led to something else:
thus by looking in a mirror it is led to see the things reflected in the
mirror, and by looking at an image it is led to the thing represented
by the image. In this way, too, the intellect from knowing an effect is
led to the cause, or conversely. Accordingly in the heavenly vision
there will be no third medium, so that, to wit, God be known by the
images of other things, as He is known now, for which reason we are
said to see now in a glass: nor will there be the second medium,
because the essence itself of God will be that whereby our intellect
will see God. But there will only be the first medium, which will
upraise our intellect so that it will be possible for it to be united to
the uncreated substance in the aforesaid manner. Yet this medium
will not cause that knowledge to be mediate, because it does not
come in between the knower and the thing known, but is that which
gives the knower the power to know [FP, Question 12, Article 5].
Reply to Objection 1:: Corporeal creatures are not said to be seen
immediately, except when that which in them is capable of being
brought into conjunction with the sight is in conjunction therewith.
Now they are not capable of being in conjunction with the sight of
their essence on account of their materiality: hence they are seen
immediately when their image is in conjunction with the sight. But
God is able to be united to the intellect by His essence: wherefore He
would not be seen immediately, unless His essence were united to
the intellect: and this vision, which is effected immediately, is called
"vision of face." Moreover the likeness of the corporeal object is
received into the sight according to the same ratio as it is in the
object, although not according to the same mode of being.
Wherefore this likeness leads to the object directly: whereas no
likeness can lead our intellect in this way to God, as shown above:
and for this reason the comparison fails.