Hebrews 7:8-10
[Hebrews 7:8] "And here men that die receive tithes: but there he of whom
it is testified that he lives." But lest we should say, Tell us, why are you going so
far back? He says, [Hebrews 7:9] "And as I may so say" (and he did well in
softening it) "Levi also who receives tithes payed tithes in Abraham." How?
[Hebrews 7:10] "For he was yet in his loins when Melchisedec met him," i.e.
Levi was in him, although he was not yet born. And he said not the Levites but
Levi.
Have you seen the superiority? Have you seen how great is the interval
between Abraham and Melchisedec, who bears the type of our High Priest? And
he shows that the superiority had been caused by authority, not necessity. For the
one paid the tithe, which indicates the priest: the other gave the blessing, which
indicates the superior. This superiority passes on also to the descendants.
In a marvelous and triumphant way he cast out the Jewish [system]. On this
account he said, "You have become dull," [Hebrews 5:12], because he wished to
lay these foundations, that they might not start away. Such is the wisdom of
Paul, first preparing them well, he so leads them into what he wishes. For the
human race is hard to persuade, and needs much attention, even more than
plants. Since in that case there is [only] the nature of material bodies, and earth,
which yields to the hands of the husbandmen: but in this there is will, which is
liable to many alterations, and now prefers this, now that. For it quickly turns to
evil.
5. Wherefore we ought always to "guard" ourselves, lest at any time we
should fall asleep. For "Lo" (it is said) "he that keeps Israel shall neither slumber
nor sleep" [Psalm 121:4], and "Do not suffer your foot to be moved." [Psalm
121:3] He did not say, 'be not moved' but "do not thou suffer," etc. The suffering
depends then on ourselves, and not on any other. For if we will stand "steadfast

and unmoveable" [1 Corinthians 15:58], we shall not be shaken.
What then? Does nothing depend on God? All indeed depends on God, but
not so that our free-will is hindered. 'If then it depend on God,' (one says), 'why
does He blame us?' On this account I said, 'so that our free-will is not hindered.'
It depends then on us, and on Him. For we must first choose the good; and then
He leads us to His own. He does not anticipate our choice, lest our free-will
should be outraged. But when we have chosen, then great is the assistance he
brings to us.
How is it then that Paul says, "not of him that wills," if it depend on
ourselves also "nor of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy." [Romans
9:16]
In the first place, he did not introduce it as his own opinion, but inferred it
from what was before him and from what had been put forward [in the
discussion]. For after saying, "It is written, I will have mercy on whom I will
have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I will have compassion"
[Romans 9:15], he says, "It follows then that it is not of him that wills, nor of him
that runs, but of God that shows mercy." "You will say then unto me, why does
He yet find fault?" [Romans 9:16-19]
And secondly the other explanation may be given, that he speaks of all as
His, whose the greater part is. For it is ours to choose and to wish; but God's to
complete and to bring to an end. Since therefore the greater part is of Him, he
says all is of Him, speaking according to the custom of men. For so we
ourselves also do. I mean for instance: we see a house well built, and we say the
whole is the Architect's [doing], and yet certainly it is not all his, but the
workmen's also, and the owner's, who supplies the materials, and many others',
but nevertheless since he contributed the greatest share, we call the whole his. So
then [it is] in this case also. Again, with respect to a number of people, where the
many are, we say All are: where few, nobody. So also Paul says, "not of him that
wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy."
And herein he establishes two great truths: one, that we should not be lifted