on and wish to be delivered from them, that I may see you shortly, and that with
pleasure, without bringing any load of heaviness from thence. "And may with
you be refreshed."
See how he again shows unassumingness. For he does not say, I may teach
you, and give you a lesson, but that, "I may with you be refreshed." And yet he
was the very man engaged in the striving and conflict. In what sense then does
he say "that I may be refreshed with you ([συναναπαύσωμαι])?" It is to gratify
them on this point too, and to make them the more cheerful by making them
sharers of his crown, and to show that they too struggle and labor. Then, as was
always his custom to do, he adds prayer after the exhortation, and says,
Ver. 33. "Now the God of peace be with you all. Amen."
Chap. xvi. ver. 1. "I commend unto you Phebe our sister, which is a
deaconess (A.V. servant) of the church which is at Cenchrea."
See how many ways he takes to give her dignity. For he has both mentioned
her before all the rest, and called her sister. And it is no slight thing to be called
the sister of Paul. Moreover he has added her rank, by mentioning her being
"deaconess."
Ver. 2. "That ye receive her in the Lord, as becomes saints." (Gr. "the
saints.")
That is, for the Lord's sake, that she may enjoy honor among you. For he
that receives a person for the Lord's sake, though it be no great one that he
receives, yet receives him with attention. But when it is a saint, consider what
attention he ought to have shown him. And this is why he adds, "as becomes
saints," as such persons ought to be received. For she has two grounds for her
having attention shown her by you, both that of her being received for the Lord's
sake, and that of her being a saint herself. And that you assist her in whatsoever
business she has need (or "asks," [χρήζῃ]) of you. You see how little he burdens
them. For he does not say, That ye dispatch, but that you contribute your own
part, and reach out a hand to her: and that "in whatsoever business she has
need." Not in whatsoever business she may be, but in such as she may ask of

you. But she will ask in such things as lie in your power. Then again there comes
a very great praise of her. "For she has been a succorer of many and of myself
also."
See his judgment. First come the encomiums, then he makes an exhortation
intervene, and then again gives encomiums, so placing on each side of the needs
of this blessed woman her praises. For how can the woman be else than blessed
who has the blessing of so favorable a testimony from Paul, who had also the
power to render assistance to him who had righted the whole world? For this was
the summit of her good deeds, and so he placed it the last, as he says, "and of
myself also." But what does the phrase "of myself also" convey? Of the herald of
the world, of him who has suffered so much, of him who is equal to assisting
tens of thousands ([μυρίοις ἀρκοὕντος]). Let us then imitate, both men and
women, this holy woman and her that follows, with her husband also. And who
are they?
Ver. 2. "Greet," he says, "Priscilla and Aquila, my helpers in Christ Jesus."
To the excellence of these St. Luke also bears witness. Partly when he says
that Paul "abode with them, for by their occupation they were tent-makers" [Acts
18:3]; and partly when he points out the woman as receiving Apollos, and
instructing him in the way of the Lord. [Acts 18:26] Now these are great things,
but what Paul mentions are greater. And what does he mention? In the first place
he calls them "helpers," to point out that they had been sharers of his very great
labors and dangers. Then he says,
Ver. 4. "Who for my life have laid down their own necks."
You see they are thoroughly furnished martyrs. For in Nero's time it is
probable that there were thousands of dangers, at the time as he even
commanded all Jews to be removed from Rome. [Acts 8:2].
"Unto whom not only I give thanks, but also all the Churches of the
Gentiles."
Here he hints at their hospitality, and pecuniary assistance, holding them in
admiration because they had both poured forth their blood, and had made their