truly, the Apostle means, He ought, as God, to have been believed; however, he
does not ground his affirmation upon this, but examines it like a case where man
is concerned, speaking much as he does in the Epistle to the Hebrews; [Hebrews
6:18] where he says, "That by two immutable things in which it was impossible
for God to lie, we may have a strong encouragement." Thus here also he makes
the things already bestowed a sure token of the promise of those which are yet to
come. For this reason he further calls it an "earnest," [Cf. also 2 Corinthians
1:22] for an earnest is a part of the whole. He has purchased what we are most
concerned in, our salvation; and has given us an earnest in the mean while. Why
then did He not give the whole at once? Because neither have we, on our part,
done the whole of our work. We have believed. This is a beginning; and He too
on His part has given an earnest. When we show our faith by our works, then He
will add the rest. Nay, more, He has given yet another pledge, His own blood,
and has promised another still. In the same way as in case of war between nation
and nation they give hostages: just so has God also given His Son as a pledge of
peace and solemn treaties, and, further, the Holy Spirit also which is from Him.
For they, that are indeed partakers of the Spirit, know that He is the earnest of
our inheritance. Such an one was Paul, who already had here a foretaste of the
blessings there. And this is why he was so eager, and yearned to be released
from things below, and groaned within himself. He transferred his whole mind
there, and saw every thing with different eyes. You have no part in the reality,
and therefore failest to understand the description. Were we all partakers of the
Spirit, as we ought to be partakers, then should we behold Heaven, and the order
of things that is there.
It is an earnest, however, of what? Of
Ver. 14. "The redemption of God's own possession."
For our absolute redemption takes place then. For now we have our life in
the world, we are liable to many human accidents, and are living among ungodly
men. But our absolute redemption will be then, when there shall be no sins, no
human sufferings, when we shall not be indiscriminately mixed with all kinds of

people.
At present, however, there is but an earnest, because at present we are far
distant from these blessings. Yet is our citizenship not upon earth; even now we
are out of the pale of the things that are here below. Yes, we are sojourners even
now.
Ver. 14. "Unto the praise of His glory."
This he adds in immediate connection. And why? Because it would serve to
give those who heard it full assurance. Were it for our sake only, he means to
say, that God did this, there might be some room for misgiving. But if it be for
His own sake, and in order to display His goodness, he assigns, as a sort of
witness, a reason why these things never possibly could be otherwise. We find
the same language everywhere applied to the case of the Israelites. "Do Thou
this for us for Your Name's sake;" [Psalm 109:21] and again, God Himself said,
"I do it for My own sake;" [Isaiah 48:11] and so Moses, "Do it, if for nothing
else, yet for the glory of Your Name." This gives those who hear it full assurance;
it relieves them to be told, that whatever He promises, for His own goodness'
sake He will most surely perform.
Moral. Let not the hearing, however, make us too much at our ease; for
although He does it for His own sake, yet notwithstanding He requires a duty on
our part. If He says, "Them that honor Me I will honor, and they that despise Me
shall be lightly esteemed," [1 Samuel 2:30] let us reflect that there is that which
He requires of us also. True, it is the praise of His glory to save those that are
enemies, but those who, after being made friends, continue His friends. So that if
they were to return back to their former state of enmity, all were vain and to no
purpose. There is not another Baptism, nor is there a second reconciliation again,
but "a certain fearful expectation of judgment which shall devour the
adversaries." [Hebrews 10:27] If we intend at the same time to be always at
enmity with Him and yet to claim forgiveness at His hand, we shall never cease
to be at enmity, and to be wanton, to grow in depravity, and to be blind to the
Sun of Righteousness which has risen. Do you not see the ray that shall open