have known My Father also," and by Himself He declared the Father. But Philip
reversed the order, and said, "Show us the Father," as though knowing Christ
exactly. But Christ endures him not, but puts him in the right way, persuading
him to gain the knowledge of the Father through Himself, while Philip desired to
see Him with these bodily eyes, having perhaps heard concerning the Prophets,
that they "saw God." But those cases, Philip, were acts of condescension.
Wherefore Christ said, "No man has seen God at any time" [John 1:18]; and
again, "Every man that has heard and has learned from God comes unto Me."
[John 6:45] "You have neither heard His voice at any time, nor seen His shape."
[John 5:37] And in the Old Testament, "No man shall see My face, and live."
[Exodus 33:20] What says Christ? Very reprovingly He says, "Have I been so
long time with you, and have you not known Me, Philip?" He said not, "have you
not seen," but, "have you not known Me." "Why," Philip might say, "do I wish to
learn concerning You? At present I seek to see Your Father, and You say unto me,
have you not known Me?" What connection then has this with the question?
Surely a very close one; for if He is that which the Father is, yet continuing a
Son, with reason He shows in Himself Him who begot Him. Then to distinguish
the Persons He says, "He that has seen Me has seen the Father," lest any one
should assert that the same is Father, the same Son. For had He been the Father,
He would not have said, "He that has seen Me has seen Him." Why then did He
not reply, "you ask things impossible, and not allowed to man; to Me alone is
this possible"? Because Philip had said, "it suffices us," as though knowing
Christ, He shows that he had not even seen Him. For assuredly he would have
known the Father, had he been able to know the Son. Wherefore He says, "He
that has seen Me, has seen the Father." "If any one has seen Me, he shall also
behold Him." What He says is of this kind: "It is not possible to see either Me or
Him." For Philip sought the knowledge which is by sight, and since he thought
that he had so seen Christ, he desired in like manner to see the Father; but Jesus
shows him that he had not even seen Himself. And if any one here call
knowledge, sight, I do not contradict him, for, "he that has known Me," says

Christ, "has known the Father." Yet He did not say this, but desiring to establish
the Consubstantiality, declared, "he that knows My Essence, knows that of the
Father also." "And what is this?" says some one; "for he who is acquainted with
creation knows also God." Yet all are acquainted with creation, and have seen it,
but all do not know God. Besides, let us consider what Philip seeks to see. Is it
the wisdom of the Father? Is it His goodness? Not so, but the very whatever God
is, the very Essence. To this therefore Christ answers, "He that has seen Me."
Now he that has seen the creation, has not also seen the Essence of God. "If any
one has seen Me, he has seen the Father," He says. Now had He been of a
different Essence, He would not have spoken thus. But to make use of a grosser
argument, no man that knows not what gold is, can discern the substance of gold
in silver. For one nature is not shown by another. Wherefore He rightly rebuked
him, saying, "Am I so long with you?" Have you enjoyed such teaching, have
you seen miracles wrought with authority, and all belonging to the Godhead,
which the Father alone works, sins forgiven, secrets published, death retreating,
a creation wrought from earth, and have you not known Me? Because He was
clothed with flesh, therefore He said, "Have you not known Me?"
2. You have seen the Father; seek not to see more; for in Him you have seen
Me. If you have seen Me, be not over-curious; for you have also in Me known
Him.