that end; inasmuch as it befits the divine goodness that other things
should be partakers therein.
Reply to Objection 1: The divine will is God's own existence
essentially, yet they differ in aspect, according to the different ways
of understanding them and expressing them, as is clear from what
has already been said (Question 13, Article 4). For when we say that
God exists, no relation to any other object is implied, as we do imply
when we say that God wills. Therefore, although He is not anything
apart from Himself, yet He does will things apart from Himself.
Reply to Objection 2: In things willed for the sake of the end, the
whole reason for our being moved is the end, and this it is that
moves the will, as most clearly appears in things willed only for the
sake of the end. He who wills to take a bitter draught, in doing so
wills nothing else than health; and this alone moves his will. It is
different with one who takes a draught that is pleasant, which
anyone may will to do, not only for the sake of health, but also for its
own sake. Hence, although God wills things apart from Himself only
for the sake of the end, which is His own goodness, it does not
follow that anything else moves His will, except His goodness. So, as
He understands things apart from Himself by understanding His own
essence, so He wills things apart from Himself by willing His own
goodness.
Reply to Objection 3: From the fact that His own goodness suffices
the divine will, it does not follow that it wills nothing apart from itself,
but rather that it wills nothing except by reason of its goodness.
Thus, too, the divine intellect, though its perfection consists in its
very knowledge of the divine essence, yet in that essence knows
other things.
Reply to Objection 4: As the divine intellect is one, as seeing the
many only in the one, in the same way the divine will is one and
simple, as willing the many only through the one, that is, through its
own goodness.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether whatever God wills He wills necessarily?

Objection 1: It seems that whatever God wills He wills necessarily.
For everything eternal is necessary. But whatever God wills, He wills
from eternity, for otherwise His will would be mutable. Therefore
whatever He wills, He wills necessarily.
Objection 2: Further, God wills things apart from Himself, inasmuch
as He wills His own goodness. Now God wills His own goodness
necessarily. Therefore He wills things apart from Himself
necessarily.
Objection 3: Further, whatever belongs to the nature of God is
necessary, for God is of Himself necessary being, and the principle
of all necessity, as above shown (Question 2, Article 3). But it
belongs to His nature to will whatever He wills; since in God there
can be nothing over and above His nature as stated in Metaph. v, 6.
Therefore whatever He wills, He wills necessarily.
Objection 4: Further, being that is not necessary, and being that is
possible not to be, are one and the same thing. If, therefore, God
does not necessarily will a thing that He wills, it is possible for Him
not to will it, and therefore possible for Him to will what He does not
will. And so the divine will is contingent upon one or the other of two
things, and imperfect, since everything contingent is imperfect and
mutable.
Objection 5: Further, on the part of that which is indifferent to one or
the other of two things, no action results unless it is inclined to one
or the other by some other power, as the Commentator [Averroes]
says in Phys. ii. If, then, the Will of God is indifferent with regard to
anything, it follows that His determination to act comes from
another; and thus He has some cause prior to Himself.
Objection 6: Further, whatever God knows, He knows necessarily.
But as the divine knowledge is His essence, so is the divine will.
Therefore whatever God wills, He wills necessarily.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (Eph. 1:11): "Who worketh all
things according to the counsel of His will." Now, what we work
according to the counsel of the will, we do not will necessarily.