Abednego."
13. Contemplate with me also, how first he proclaims the Arbiter of the
contest. "Blessed be God, who has sent His angel and delivered His servants."
[Daniel 3:28] This of the power of God. He speaks also of the virtue of the
combatants. "Because they trusted in Him, and have changed the king's word,
and have yielded their bodies, that they might not worship any god except their
own God." Could anything equal the virtue of this? Before this, when they said,
"We will not serve your gods," he was inflamed more fiercely than the very
furnace; but now, when by their deeds they had taught him this, he was so far
from being indignant, that he praised and admired them, for not having obeyed
him! So good a thing is virtue, that it has even its enemies themselves to applaud
and admire it! These had fought and conquered, but the vanquished party gave
thanks, that the sight of the fire had not terrified them, but that the hope in their
Lord had comforted them. And He names the God of the whole world after the
three youths, not at all circumscribing His sovereignty, but inasmuch as these
three youths were equivalent to the whole world. For this reason he both
applauds those who had despised him, and passing by so many governors, kings,
and princes, those who had obeyed him, he stands in admiration of the three
captives and slaves, who derided his tyranny! For they did these things, not for
the sake of contention, but for the love of wisdom; not of defiance, but of
devotion; not as being puffed up with pride, but fired with zeal. For great indeed
is the blessing of a hope in God; which then also the barbarian learned, and
making it manifest that it was from that source they had escaped the impending
peril, he exclaimed aloud: "Because they trusted in Him!" [Daniel 3:28]
14. But I say all this now, and select all the histories that contain trials and
tribulations, and the wrath of kings, and their evil designs, in order that we may
fear nothing, save only offending God. For then also was there a furnace
burning; yet they derided it, but feared sin. For they knew that if they were
consumed in the fire, they should suffer nothing that was to be dreaded; but that
if they were guilty of impiety, they should undergo the extremes of misery. It is

the greatest punishment to commit sin, though we may remain unpunished; as on
the other hand, it is the greatest honour and repose to live virtuously, though we
may be punished. For sins separate us from God; as He Himself speaks; "Have
not your sins separated between you and Me?" But punishments lead us back to
God. As one says, "Give peace; for You have recompensed us for all things."
Suppose any one has a wound; which is the most deserving of fear, gangrene, or
the surgeon's knife? The steel, or the devouring progress of the ulcer? Sin is a
gangrene, punishment is the surgeon's knife. As then, he who has a gangrene,
although he is not lanced, has to sustain the malady, and is then in the worse
condition, when he is not lanced; so also the sinner, though he be not punished,
is the most wretched of men; and is then especially wretched, when he has no
punishment, and is suffering no distress. And as those who have a disease of the
spleen, or a dropsy, when they enjoy a plentiful table, and cool drinks, and a
variety of delicacies, and condiments, are then especially in a most pitiable state,
increasing as they do their disease by luxury; but should they rigorously subject
themselves to hunger and thirst, according to medical laws, they might have
some hope of recovery; so also those who live in iniquity, if they are punished,
may have favourable hopes; but if, together with their wickedness, they enjoy
security and luxury, they become more wretched than those who cram their
bellies, though they are in a state of dropsy; and so much the more, as the soul is
better than the body. If then you see any who are in the same sins, and some of
them struggling continually with hunger, and a thousand ills; while others are
drinking their fill, and living sumptuously, and gormandizing; think those the
better off, who endure sufferings. For not only is the flame of voluptuousness cut
off by these misfortunes, but they also depart to the future Judgment, and that
dread tribunal, with no small relief; and go hence, having discharged here the
penalty of the greater part of their sins by the ills they have suffered.
15. But enough of consolation. It is time for us now, at last, to proceed to
the exhortation on the subject of avoiding oaths, and to remove that seeming
palliation on behalf of those who swear, which is but futile, and useless. For