FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.100, C.7.

be subject to the commander, and the opposite of this is most
grievous; and secondly it is requisite that he should be in
coordination with the other soldiers.
Now among those things whereby we are ordained to God, the first
is that man should be subjected to Him faithfully, by having nothing
in common with His enemies. The second is that he should show
Him reverence: the third that he should offer Him service. Thus, in an
army, it is a greater sin for a soldier to act treacherously and make a
compact with the foe, than to be insolent to his commander: and this
last is more grievous than if he be found wanting in some point of
service to him.
As to the precepts that direct man in his behavior towards his
neighbor, it is evident that it is more repugnant to reason, and a
more grievous sin, if man does not observe the due order as to those
persons to whom he is most indebted. Consequently, among those
precepts that direct man in his relations to his neighbor, the first
place is given to that one which regards his parents. Among the
other precepts we again find the order to be according to the gravity
of sin. For it is more grave and more repugnant to reason, to sin by
deed than by word; and by word than by thought. And among sins of
deed, murder which destroys life in one already living is more
grievous than adultery, which imperils the life of the unborn child;
and adultery is more grave than theft, which regards external goods.
Reply to Objection 1: Although our neighbor is better known than
God by the way of the senses, nevertheless the love of God is the
reason for the love of our neighbor, as shall be declared later on (SS,
Question 25, Article 1; SS, Question 26, Article 2). Hence the
precepts ordaining man to God demanded precedence of the others.
Reply to Objection 2: Just as God is the universal principle of being
in respect of all things, so is a father a principle of being in respect
of his son. Therefore the precept regarding parents was fittingly
placed after the precepts regarding God. This argument holds in
respect of affirmative and negative precepts about the same kind of
deed: although even then it is not altogether cogent. For although in
the order of execution, vices should be uprooted before virtues are
sown, according to Ps. 33:15: "Turn away from evil, and do good,"
and Is. 1:16,17: "Cease to do perversely; learn to do well"; yet, in the
order of knowledge, virtue precedes vice, because "the crooked line
is known by the straight" (De Anima i): and "by the law is the

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.100, C.7.

knowledge of sin" (Rm. 3:20). Wherefore the affirmation precept
demanded the first place. However, this is not the reason for the
order, but that which is given above. Because in the precepts
regarding God, which belongs to the first table, an affirmative
precept is placed last, since its transgression implies a less grievous
sin.
Reply to Objection 3: Although sin of thought stands first in the
order of execution, yet its prohibition holds a later position in the
order of reason.