who had fallen, who had been disgraced, who had been despised, who was lying
beneath our feet, how shall the Father give us a Father's rewards? If we subdue
not one so placed in subjection to us, what confidence shall we have to enter into
our Father's house? For, tell me, suppose you had a son, and, that he,
disregarding the well-disposed part of your household, should associate with
them that have distressed you, with them that have been expelled his father's
house, with them that spend their time at the gaming table, and that he should go
on so doing to the very last; will he not be disinherited? It is plain enough he
will. And so too shall we; if, disregarding the Angels who have well pleased our
Father and whom He has set over us, we have our conversation with the devil,
inevitably we shall be disinherited, which God forbid; but let us engage in the
war we have to wage with him.
If any one has an enemy, if any one has been wronged by him, if any one is
exasperated, let him collect together all that wrath, all that fierceness, and pour it
out upon the head of the devil. Here wrath is a good thing, here anger is
profitable, here revenge is praiseworthy, for just as among the heathen, revenge
is a vice, so truly here is revenge a virtue. So then if you have any failings, rid
yourself of them here. And if you are not able yourself to put them away, do it,
though with your members also. Hath any one struck you? Bear malice against
the devil, and never relinquish your hatred towards him. Or again, has no one
struck you? Yet bear him malice still, because he insulted, because he offended
your Lord and Master, because he injures and wars against your brethren. With
him be ever at enmity, ever implacable, ever merciless. Thus shall he be
humbled, thus despicable, thus shall he be an easy prey. If we are fierce towards
him, he shall never be fierce towards us. If we are compliant, then he will be
fierce; it is not with him as it is with our brethren. He is the foe and enemy, both
of life and salvation, both ours and his own. If he loves not himself, how shall he
be able to love us? Let us then put ourselves in array and wound him, having for
our mighty confederate the Lord Jesus Christ, who can both render us
impregnable to his snares, and worthy of the good things to come; which God

grant that we may all attain, through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord
Jesus Christ, with whom, together with the Holy Ghost, be unto the Father, glory,
might, and honor, now and ever, and throughout all ages. Amen.

## Homily 23 on Ephesians

Ephesians 6:14
"Stand therefore, having girded your loins with truth."
Having drawn up this army, and roused their zeal—for both these things
were requisite, both that they should be drawn up in array and subject to each
other, and that their spirit should be aroused—and having inspired them with
courage, for this was requisite also, he next proceeds also to arm them. For arms
had been of no use, had they not been first posted each in his own place, and had
not the spirit of the soldier's soul been roused; for we must first arm him within,
and then without.
Now if this is the case with soldiers, much more is it with spiritual soldiers.
Or rather in their case, there is no such thing as arming them without, but
everything is within. He has roused their ardor, and set it on fire, he has added
confidence. He has set them in due array. Observe how he also puts on the
armor. "Stand therefore," says he. The very first feature in tactics is, to know
how to stand well, and many things will depend upon that. Hence he discourses
much concerning standing, saying also elsewhere, "Watch ye, stand fast." [1
Corinthians 16:13] And again, "So stand fast in the Lord." [Philippians 4:1] And
again, "Let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall." [1 Corinthians
10:12] And again, "That ye may be able, having done all, to stand." [Ephesians
6:13] Doubtless then he does not mean merely any way of standing, but a correct
way, and as many as have had experience in wars know how great a point it is to
know how to stand. For if in the case of boxers and wrestlers, the trainer
recommends this before anything else, namely, to stand firm, much more will it
be the first thing in warfare, and military matters.
The man who, in a true sense, stands, is upright; he stands not in a lazy
attitude, not leaning upon anything. Exact uprightness discovers itself by the