Corrected from Ecclesia in the text.

3. There is another, who is a renowned teacher among them, and who, struggling to reach
something more sublime, and to attain to a kind of higher knowledge, has explained the primary
Tetrad as follows: There is [he says] a certain Proarche who existed before all things, surpassing
all thought, speech, and nomenclature, whom I call Monotes (unity). Together with this Monotes
there exists a power, which again I term Henotes (oneness). This Henotes and Monotes, being one,
produced, yet not so as to bring forth [apart from themselves, as an emanation] the beginning of
all things, an intelligent, unbegotten, and invisible being, which beginning language terms "Monad."
With this Monad there co-exists a power of the same essence, which again I term Hen (One). These
powers then— Monotes, and Henotes, and Monas, and Hen—produced the remaining company of
the Æons.
4. Iu, Iu! Pheu, Pheu!—for well may we utter these tragic exclamations at such a pitch of
audacity in the coining of names as he has displayed without a blush, in devising a nomenclature
for his system of falsehood. For when he declares: There is a certain Proarche before all things,
surpassing all thought, whom I call Monotes; and again, with this Monotes there co-exists a power
which I also call Henotes,—it is most manifest that he confesses the things which have been said
to be his own invention, and that he himself has given names to his scheme of things, which had
never been previously suggested by any other. It is manifest also, that he himself is the one who
has had sufficient audacity to coin these names; so that, unless he had appeared in the world, the
truth would still have been destitute of a name. But, in that case, nothing hinders any other, in
dealing with the same subject, to affix names after such a fashion as the following: There is a
certain Proarche, royal, surpassing all thought, a power existing before every other substance, and
extended into space in every direction. But along with it there exists a power which I term a Gourd;
and along with this Gourd there exists a power which again I term Utter-Emptiness. This Gourd
and Emptiness, since they are one, produced (and yet did not simply produce, so as to be apart from
themselves) a fruit, everywhere visible, eatable, and delicious, which fruit-language calls a
Cucumber. Along with this Cucumber exists a power of the same essence, which again I call a
Melon. These powers, the Gourd, Utter-Emptiness, the Cucumber, and the Melon, brought forth
the remaining multitude of the delirious melons of Valentinus. For if it is fitting that that language
which is used respecting the universe be transformed to the primary Tetrad, and if any one may
assign names at his pleasure, who shall prevent us from adopting these names, as being much more
credible [than the others], as well as in general use, and understood by all?
5. Others still, however, have called their primary and first-begotten Ogdoad by the following
names: first, Proarche; then Anennoetos; thirdly, Arrhetos; and fourthly, Aoratos. Then, from the
clarus; others think that Colorbasus is the teacher in question.