did not say, "By the name," but, "In the name," and it was in Him ([εἰς αὐτὸν])
that the man believed. But they did not yet make bold to use the expression, "The
faith which is in Him." For, that the phrase "By Him" should not be too low,
observe that after saying, "Upon the faith of His name," he adds, "His name has
made him strong," and then it is that he says, "Yea, the faith which is by Him has
given him this perfect soundness." Observe how he implies, that in the [καὶ
ἐκεἵνο] former expression also "Whom God raised up," he did but condescend to
their low attainments. For that Person needed not Another's help for His rising
again, Whose Name raised up a lame man, being all one as dead. Mark how on
all occasions he adduces their own testimony. Thus above, he said, "As ye
yourselves also know;" and, "In the midst of you:" and here again, "Whom ye see
and know: in the presence of you all." [Acts 2:22] And yet that it was, "In His
name," they knew not: but they did know that the man was lame, that he stands
there whole. They that had wrought the deed themselves confessed, that it was
not by their own power, but by that of Christ. And had this assertion been
unfounded, had they not been truly persuaded themselves that Christ had risen
again, they would not have sought to establish the honor of a dead man instead
of their own, especially while the eyes of the multitude were upon them. Then,
when their minds were alarmed, immediately he encourages them, by the
appellation of Brethren, "And now, brethren, I know, etc." For in the former
discourse he foretold nothing, but only says concerning Christ, "Therefore let all
the house of Israel know assuredly:" here he adds an admonition. There he
waited till the people spoke: here, he knew how much they had already effected,
and that the present assembly was better disposed toward them. "That through
ignorance you did it." And yet the circumstances mentioned above were not to
be put to the score of ignorance. To choose the robber, to reject Him Who had
been adjudged to be acquitted, to desire even to destroy Him— how should this
be referred to ignorance? Nevertheless, he gives them liberty to deny it, and to
change their mind about what had happened. Now this indeed, that you put to
death the innocent, you knew: but that you were killing "the Prince of Life," this,

belike, you did not know. And he exculpated not them alone, but also the chief
contrivers of the evil, "ye and your rulers:" for doubtless it would have roused
their opposition, had he gone off into accusation. For the evil-doer, when you
accuse him of some wickedness that he has done, in his endeavor to exonerate
himself, grows more vehement. And he no longer says, "You crucified," "You
killed," but, "You did it;" leading them to seek for pardon. If those rulers did it
through ignorance, much more did these present. "But these things which God
before had showed," etc. [Acts 3:18] But it is remarkable, that both in the first
and in the second discourse, speaking to the same effect, that is, in the former,
"By the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God;" and in this, "God
before had showed that Christ should suffer;" in neither does he adduce any
particular text in proof. The fact is, that each one of such passages is
accompanied with many accusations, and with mention of the punishment in
store for them [as]; "I will deliver up," says one, "the wicked in requital for His
grave, and the rich in return for His death." [Isaiah 53:9] And again, * * *
"Those things," he says, "which God before had showed by the mouth of all His
prophets, that Christ should suffer, He has so fulfilled." It shows the greatness of
that "counsel," in that all spoke of it, and not one only. It does not follow,
because the event was through ignorance, that it took place irrespectively of
God's ordinance. See how great is the Wisdom of God, when it uses the
wickedness of others to bring about that which must be. "He has fulfilled," he
says: that they may not imagine that anything at all is wanting; for whatsoever
Christ must needs suffer, has been fulfilled. But do not think, that, because the
Prophets said this, and because you did it through ignorance, this suffices to your
exculpation. However, he does not express himself thus, but in milder terms
says, "Repent ye therefore." [Acts 3:19] "Why? For either it was through
ignorance, or by the dispensation of God." "That your sins may be blotted out." I
do not mean the crimes committed at the Crucifixion; perhaps they were through
ignorance; but so that your other sins may be blotted out: this only. "So shall the
times of refreshing come unto you." Here he speaks of the Resurrection,