πολλἥς]). For for a person who had no works, to be justified by faith, was
nothing unlikely. But for a person richly adorned with good deeds, not to be
made just from hence, but from faith, this is the thing to cause wonder, and to set
the power of faith in a strong light. And this is why he passes by all the others,
and leads his discourse back to this man. And he calls him "father, as pertaining
to the flesh," to throw them out of the genuine relationship ([συγγενείας
γνησίας]) to him, and to pave the Gentiles' way to kinsmanship with him. And
then he says, "For if Abraham were justified by works, he has whereof to glory:
but not before God." After saying that God "justified the circumcision by faith
and the uncircumcision through faith," and making the same sufficiently sure in
what he said before, he now proves it by Abraham more clearly than he
promised, and pitches the battle for faith against works, and makes this righteous
man the subject of the whole struggle; and that not without special meaning.
Wherefore also he sets him up very high by calling him "forefather," and putting
a constraint upon them to comply with him in all points. For, Tell me not, he
would say, about the Jews, nor bring this man or that before me. For I will go up
to the very head of all, and the source whence circumcision took its rise. For "if
Abraham," he says, "was justified by works, he has whereof to glory: but not
before God." What is here said is not plain, and so one must make it plainer. For
there are two "gloryings," one of works, and one of faith. After saying then, "if
he was justified by works, he has whereof to glory; but not before God;" he
points out that he might have whereof to glory from faith also, yea and much
greater reason for it. For the great power of Paul is especially displayed in this,
that he turns what is objected to the other side, and shows that what seemed
rather to be on the side of salvation by works, viz. glorying or boldness of claim
([παρρησιάζεσθαι]) belonged much more truly to that by faith. For he that
glories in his works has his own labors to put forward: but he that finds his honor
in having faith in God, has a much greater ground for glorying to show, in that it
is God that he glorifies and magnifies. For those things which the nature of the
visible world tells him not of, in receiving these by faith in Him, he at once

displays sincere love towards Him, and heralds His power clearly forth. Now
this is the character of the noblest soul, and the philosophic spirit, and lofty
mind. For to abstain from stealing and murdering is trifling sort of acquirement,
but to believe that it is possible for God to do things impossible requires a soul
of no mean stature, and earnestly affected towards Him; for this is a sign of
sincere love. For he indeed honors God, who fulfils the commandments, but he
does so in a much greater degree who thus follows wisdom ([φιλοσοφὥν]) by his
faith. The former obeys Him, but the latter receives that opinion of Him which is
fitting, and glorifies Him, and feels wonder at Him more than that evinced by
works. For that glorying pertains to him that does aright, but this glorifies God,
and lies wholly in Him. For he glories at conceiving great things concerning
Him, which redound to His glory. And this is why he speaks of having whereof
to glory before God. And not for this only, but also for another reason: for he
who is a believer glories again, not only because he loves God in sincerity, but
also because he has enjoyed great honor and love from him. For as he shows his
love to Him by having great thoughts about Him, (for this is a proof of love), so
does God also love him, though deserving to suffer for countless sins, not in
freeing him from punishment only, but even by making him righteous. He then
has whereof to glory, as having been counted worthy of mighty love.
Ver. 4. "For to him that works is the reward not reckoned of grace, but of
debt."
Then is not this last the greatest? He means. By no means: for it is to the
believer that it is reckoned. But it would not have been reckoned, unless there
were something that he contributed himself. And so he too has God for his
debtor, and debtor too for no common things, but great and high ones. For to
show his high-mindedness and spiritual understanding, he does not say "to him
that believes" merely, but
Ver. 5. "To him that believes in Him that justifies the ungodly."
For reflect how great a thing it is to be persuaded and have full confidence
that God is able on a sudden not to free a man who has lived in impiety from