Kingdom of heaven. "The violent," it says, "take it by force." [Matthew 11:12] It
is then not possible to attain to it by sluggishness, but by zeal. But what means
"the violent"? There is need of much violence, (for strait is the way,) there is
need of a youthful soul and a noble. Plunderers desire to outstrip all other, they
look to nothing, neither to conviction, nor accusation, nor punishment, but are
given up to one thing only, the getting hold of what they desire to seize, and they
run past all that are before them in the way. Seize we then the Kingdom of
heaven, for here to seize is no fault but rather praise, and the fault is the not
seizing. Here our wealth comes not from another's loss. Haste we then to seize it.
Should passion disquiet us, should lust disquiet us, let us do violence to our
nature, let us become more gentle, let us labor a little, that we may rest forever.
Seize not thou gold, but seize that wealth which shows gold to be but mud. For
tell me, if lead and gold were laid before you, which would you take? Is it not
clear that you would take the gold? Do you then, where one who seizes is
punished, prefer that which is the more valuable, but where one who seizes is
honored, give up what is the more valuable? If there were punishment in both
cases, would you not rather aim at this latter ? But in this case there is nothing
like punishment, but even blessedness. And, "How," says some one, "may one
seize it?" Cast away the things which you have already in your hands; for so
long as you grasp them you will not be able to seize the other. For consider, I
pray you, a man with his hands full of silver, will he be able, as long as he
retains it, to seize on gold, unless he first cast away the silver, and be free?
Because he that seizes a thing must be well-girt so as not to be detained. And
even now there are adverse powers running down against us to rob us, but let us
fly them, let us fly them, trailing after us nothing that may give a hold, let us cut
asunder the cords, let us strip ourselves of the things of earth. What need of
silken garments? How long shall we be unrolling this mockery? How long shall
we be burying gold? I desired to cease from always saying these things, but you
will not suffer me, continually supplying me with occasions and arguments. But
now at least let us desist, that having instructed others by our lives, we may

obtain the promised good things, through the grace and lovingkindness of our
Lord Jesus Christ, by whom and with whom to the Father and the Holy Ghost be
glory, now and ever and world without end. Amen.

Homily 55 on the Gospel of John
John 8:48-49
"Then answered the Jews, and said unto Him, Say we not well that you are a
Samaritan, and hast a devil? Jesus answered, I have not a devil; but I honor My
Father."
1. A shameless and a forward thing is wickedness, and when it ought to
hide itself, then is it the fiercer. As was the case with the Jews. For when they
ought to have been pricked by what was said, admiring the boldness and
conclusiveness of the words, they even insult Him, calling Him a Samaritan, and
saying that He had a devil, and they ask, "Said we not well that you are a
Samaritan, and hast a devil?" Because when He utters anything sublime, this is
thought among the very senseless to be madness. Yet nowhere before did the
Evangelist say that they called Him "a Samaritan"; but from this expression it is
probable that this had been often asserted by them.
"You have a devil," says some one. Who is it that has a devil? He that
honors God, or he that insults Him that honors Him? What then says Christ, who
is very meekness and gentleness? "I have not a devil, but I honor Him that sent
me." Where there was need to instruct them, to pull down their excessive
insolence, to teach them not to be proud because of Abraham, He was vehement;
but when it was needful that He being insulted should bear it, He used much
gentleness. When they said, "We have God and Abraham for our Father," He
touched them sharply; but when they called Him a demoniac, He spoke
submissively, thus teaching us to avenge insults offered to God, but to overlook
such as are offered to ourselves.