said not, "Fast," but, "Eat of all that is set before you." With regard to wealth,
however, He required of them great strictness, saying, "Provide not gold, or
silver, or brass, in your purses." [Matthew 10:9]
And all this I say, not to depreciate fasting, God forbid, but rather highly to
commend it. But I grieve when other duties being neglected, you think it enough
for salvation, having but the last place in the choir of virtue. For the greatest
thing is charity, and moderation, and almsgiving; which hits a higher mark even
than virginity.
Wherefore, if you desire to become equal to the apostles, there is nothing to
hinder you. For to have arrived at this virtue only suffices for your not at all
falling short of them. Let no one therefore wait for miracles. For though the evil
spirit is grieved, when he is driven out of a body, yet much more so, when he
sees a soul delivered from sin. For indeed this is his great power. [Acts 8:10]
This power caused Christ to die, that He might put an end to it. Yea, for this
brought in death; by reason of this all things have been turned upside down. If
then thou remove this, you have cut out the nerves of the devil, you have
"bruised his head," you have put an end to all his might, you have scattered his
host, you have exhibited a sign greater than all signs.
The saying is not mine, but the blessed Paul's. For when he had said, "Covet
earnestly the best gifts, and yet show I unto you a more excellent way;" [1
Corinthians 12:31] he did not speak next of a sign, but of charity, the root of all
our good things. If then we practise this, and all the self-denial that flows from it,
we shall have no need of signs; even as on the other hand, if we do not practise
it, we shall gain nothing by the signs.
Bearing in mind then all this, let us imitate those things whereby the
apostles became great. And whereby did they become great? Hear Peter, saying,
"Behold we have forsaken all, and followed You; what shall we have therefore?"
[Matthew 19:27] Hear also Christ saying to them, "You shall sit upon twelve
thrones," and, "every one that has forsaken houses, or brethren, or father, or
mother, shall receive an hundredfold in this world, and shall inherit everlasting

life." From all worldly things, therefore, let us withdraw ourselves, and dedicate
ourselves to Christ, that we may both be made equal to the apostles according to
His declaration, and may enjoy eternal life; unto which may we all attain, by the
grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ to whom be glory and
might forever and ever. Amen.

## Homily 47 on Matthew

Matthew 13:34-35.
" All these things spoke Jesus unto the multitudes in parables, and without a
parable spoke He not unto them; that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by
the prophet, saying, I will open my mouth in parables; I will utter things that
have been kept secret from the foundation of the world."
But Mark says, "As they were able to hear it, He spoke the word unto them
in parables." [Matthew 4:33]
Then pointing out that He is not making a new thing, He brings in the
Prophet also, proclaiming beforehand this His manner of teaching. And to teach
us the purpose of Christ, how He discoursed in this manner, not that they might
be ignorant, but that He might lead them to inquiry, he added, "And without a
parable spoke He nothing unto them." Yet surely He did say many things
without a parable; but then nothing. And for all this no man asked Him
questions, whereas the Prophets, we know, they were often questioning: as
Ezekiel, for instance; as many others: but these did no such thing. Yet surely His
sayings were enough to cast them into perplexity, and to stir them up to the
inquiry; for indeed a very sore punishment was threatened by those parables:
however, not even so were they moved.
Wherefore also He left them and went away. For,
"Then," says he, "Jesus sent the multitudes away, and went into His house."
And not one of the Scribes follows Him; whence it is clear that for no other
purpose did they follow, than to take hold of Him. But when they marked not
His sayings, thenceforth He let them be.
"And His disciples come unto Him, asking Him concerning the parable of
the tares;" although at times wishing to learn, and afraid [Mark 9:32] to ask.
Whence then arose their confidence in this instance? They had been told, "To