SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.9, C.10.

cast it from thee."
With regard to the argument in the contrary sense the reply is that
the Lord gave this command in reference to those nations into
whose territory the Jews were about to enter. For the latter were
inclined to idolatry, so that it was to be feared lest, through frequent
dealings with those nations, they should be estranged from the faith:
hence the text goes on (Dt. 7:4): "For she will turn away thy son from
following Me."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.9, C.11.

### ARTICLE 10. Whether unbelievers may have authority or

dominion over the faithful?
Objection 1: It would seem that unbelievers may have authority or
dominion over the faithful. For the Apostle says (1 Tim. 6:1):
"Whosoever are servants under the yoke, let them count their
masters worthy of all honor": and it is clear that he is speaking of
unbelievers, since he adds (1 Tim. 6:2): "But they that have believing
masters, let them not despise them." Moreover it is written (1 Pt.
2:18): "Servants be subject to your masters with all fear, not only to
the good and gentle, but also to the froward." Now this command
would not be contained in the apostolic teaching unless unbelievers
could have authority over the faithful. Therefore it seems that
unbelievers can have authority over the faithful.
Objection 2: Further, all the members of a prince's household are his
subjects. Now some of the faithful were members of unbelieving
princes' households, for we read in the Epistle to the Philippians
(4:22): "All the saints salute you, especially they that are of Caesar's
household," referring to Nero, who was an unbeliever. Therefore
unbelievers can have authority over the faithful.
Objection 3: Further, according to the Philosopher (Polit. i, 2) a slave
is his master's instrument in matters concerning everyday life, even
as a craftsman's laborer is his instrument in matters concerning the
working of his art. Now, in such matters, a believer can be subject to
an unbeliever, for he may work on an unbeliever's farm. Therefore
unbelievers may have authority over the faithful even as to
dominion.
On the contrary, Those who are in authority can pronounce
judgment on those over whom they are placed. But unbelievers
cannot pronounce judgment on the faithful, for the Apostle says (1
Cor. 6:1): "Dare any of you, having a matter against another, go to be
judged before the unjust," i.e. unbelievers, "and not before the
saints?" Therefore it seems that unbelievers cannot have authority
over the faithful.
I answer that, That this question may be considered in two ways.
First, we may speak of dominion or authority of unbelievers over the
faithful as of a thing to be established for the first time. This ought by

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.9, C.11.