body what properly belongs to itself as a spirit; immortality to
everyone; impassibility, glory, and power to the good, whose bodies
will be called "spiritual." So, after the resurrection, man will not
require food; whereas he required it in the state of innocence.
Reply to Objection 1: As Augustine says (Questions. Vet. et Nov.
Test. qu. 19): "How could man have an immortal body, which was
sustained by food? Since an immortal being needs neither food nor
drink." For we have explained (Article 1) that the immortality of the
primitive state was based on a supernatural force in the soul, and
not on any intrinsic disposition of the body: so that by the action of
heat, the body might lose part of its humid qualities; and to prevent
the entire consumption of the humor, man was obliged to take food.
Reply to Objection 2: A certain passion and alteration attends
nutriment, on the part of the food changed into the substance of the
thing nourished. So we cannot thence conclude that man's body was
passible, but that the food taken was passible; although this kind of
passion conduced to the perfection of the nature.
Reply to Objection 3: If man had not taken food he would have
sinned; as he also sinned by taking the forbidden fruit. For he was
told at the same time, to abstain from the tree of knowledge of good
and evil, and to eat of every other tree of Paradise.
Reply to Objection 4: Some say that in the state of innocence man
would not have taken more than necessary food, so that there would
have been nothing superfluous; which, however, is unreasonable to
suppose, as implying that there would have been no faecal matter.
Wherefore there was need for voiding the surplus, yet so disposed
by God as to be decorous and suitable to the state.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether in the state of innocence man would

have acquired immortality by the tree of life?
Objection 1: It would seem that the tree of life could not be the cause
of immortality. For nothing can act beyond its own species; as an
effect does not exceed its cause. But the tree of life was corruptible,
otherwise it could not be taken as food; since food is changed into
the substance of the thing nourished. Therefore the tree of life could
not give incorruptibility or immortality.
Objection 2: Further, effects caused by the forces of plants and other
natural agencies are natural. If therefore the tree of life caused
immortality, this would have been natural immortality.
Objection 3: Further, this would seem to be reduced to the ancient
fable, that the gods, by eating a certain food, became immortal;
which the Philosopher ridicules (Metaph. iii, Did. ii, 4).
On the contrary, It is written (Gn. 3:22): "Lest perhaps he put forth
his hand, and take of the tree of life, and eat, and live for ever."
Further, Augustine says (Questions. Vet. et Nov. Test. qu. 19): "A
taste of the tree of life warded off corruption of the body; and even
after sin man would have remained immortal, had he been allowed to
eat of the tree of life."
I answer that, The tree of life in a certain degree was the cause of
immortality, but not absolutely. To understand this, we must observe
that in the primitive state man possessed, for the preservation of life,
two remedies, against two defects. One of these defects was the lost
of humidity by the action of natural heat, which acts as the soul's
instrument: as a remedy against such loss man was provided with
food, taken from the other trees of paradise, as now we are provided
with the food, which we take for the same purpose. The second
defect, as the Philosopher says (De Gener. i, 5), arises from the fact
that the humor which is caused from extraneous sources, being
added to the humor already existing, lessens the specific active
power: as water added to wine takes at first the taste of wine, then,
as more water is added, the strength of the wine is diminished, till
the wine becomes watery. In like manner, we may observe that at
first the active force of the species is so strong that it is able to
transform so much of the food as is required to replace the lost