SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.179, C.3.

consideration of truth, "has little influence on the moral virtues":
wherefore he declares (Ethic. x, 8) that the moral virtues pertain to
active but not to contemplative happiness.
On the other hand, the moral virtues belong to the contemplative life
dispositively. For the act of contemplation, wherein the
contemplative life essentially consists, is hindered both by the
impetuosity of the passions which withdraw the soul's intention from
intelligible to sensible things, and by outward disturbances. Now the
moral virtues curb the impetuosity of the passions, and quell the
disturbance of outward occupations. Hence moral virtues belong
dispositively to the contemplative life.
Reply to Objection 1: As stated above (Article 1), the contemplative
life has its motive cause on the part of the affections, and in this
respect the love of God and our neighbor is requisite to the
contemplative life. Now motive causes do not enter into the essence
of a thing, but dispose and perfect it. Wherefore it does not follow
that the moral virtues belong essentially to the contemplative life.
Reply to Objection 2: Holiness or cleanness of heart is caused by the
virtues that are concerned with the passions which hinder the purity
of the reason; and peace is caused by justice which is about
operations, according to Is. 32:17, "The work of justice shall be
peace": since he who refrains from wronging others lessens the
occasions of quarrels and disturbances. Hence the moral virtues
dispose one to the contemplative life by causing peace and
cleanness of heart.
Reply to Objection 3: Beauty, as stated above (Question 145, Article
2), consists in a certain clarity and due proportion. Now each of
these is found radically in the reason; because both the light that
makes beauty seen, and the establishing of due proportion among
things belong to reason. Hence since the contemplative life consists
in an act of the reason, there is beauty in it by its very nature and
essence; wherefore it is written (Wis. 8:2) of the contemplation of
wisdom: "I became a lover of her beauty."
On the other hand, beauty is in the moral virtues by participation, in
so far as they participate in the order of reason; and especially is it
in temperance, which restrains the concupiscences which especially
darken the light of reason. Hence it is that the virtue of chastity most

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.179, C.3.

of all makes man apt for contemplation, since venereal pleasures
most of all weigh the mind down to sensible objects, as Augustine
says (Soliloq. i, 10).

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.179, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether there are various actions pertaining to

the contemplative life?
Objection 1: It would seem that there are various actions pertaining
to the contemplative life. For Richard of St. Victor [De Grat.
Contempl. i, 3,4] distinguishes between "contemplation,"
"meditation," and "cogitation." Yet all these apparently pertain to
contemplation. Therefore it would seem that there are various
actions pertaining to the contemplative life.
Objection 2: Further, the Apostle says (2 Cor. 3:18): "But we . . .
beholding [speculantes] the glory of the Lord with open face, are
transformed into the same clarity." Now this belongs to the
contemplative life. Therefore in addition to the three aforesaid, vision
[speculatio] belongs to the contemplative life.
Objection 3: Further, Bernard says (De Consid. v, 14) that "the first
and greatest contemplation is admiration of the Majesty." Now
according to Damascene (De Fide Orth. ii, 15) admiration is a kind of
fear. Therefore it would seem that several acts are requisite for the
contemplative life.
Objection 4: Further, "Prayer," "reading," and "meditation" [Hugh of
St. Victor, Alleg. in N.T. iii, 4] are said to belong to the contemplative
life. Again, "hearing" belongs to the contemplative life: since it is
stated that Mary (by whom the contemplative life is signified)
"sitting . . . at the Lord's feet, heard His word" (Lk. 10:39). Therefore
it would seem that several acts are requisite for the contemplative
life.
On the contrary, Life signifies here the operation on which a man is
chiefly intent. Wherefore if there are several operations of the
contemplative life, there will be, not one, but several contemplative
lives.
I answer that, We are now speaking of the contemplative life as
applicable to man. Now according to Dionysius (Div. Nom. vii)
between man and angel there is this difference, that an angel
perceives the truth by simple apprehension, whereas man arrives at
the perception of a simple truth by a process from several premises.
Accordingly, then, the contemplative life has one act wherein it is