[Romans 13:7] For when among the rest of the world they shall see us
forbearing, they will be put to shame.
"Not as unwise, but as wise, redeeming the time."
It is not from any wish that you should be artful, and versatile, that he gives
this advice. But what he means is this. The time is not yours. At present you are
strangers, and sojourners, and foreigners, and aliens; seek not honors, seek not
glory, seek not authority, nor revenge; bear all things, and in this way, "redeem
the time"; give up many things, anything they may require. Imagine now, I say, a
man had a magnificent house, and persons were to make their way in, on
purpose to murder him, and he were to give a large sum, and thus to rescue
himself. Then we should say, he has redeemed himself. So also have you a large
house, and a true faith in your keeping. They will come to take all away. Give
whatever they may demand, only preserve the principal thing, I mean the faith.
"Because the days," says he, "are evil."
What is the evil of the day? The evil of the day ought to belong to the day.
What is the evil of a body? Disease. And what again the evil of the soul?
Wickedness. What is the evil of water? Bitterness. And the evil of each
particular thing, is with reference to that nature of it which is affected by the evil.
If then there is an evil in the day, it ought to belong to the day, to the hours, to
the day-light. So also Christ says, "Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof."
[Matthew 6:34] And from this expression we shall understand the other. In what
sense then does he call "the days evil"? In what sense the "time" evil? It is not
the essence of the thing, not the things as so created, but it is the things
transacted in them. In the same way as we are in the habit of saying, "I have
passed a disagreeable and wretched day." And yet how could it be disagreeable,
except from the circumstances which took place in it? Now the events which
take place in it are, good things from God, but evil things from bad men. So then
of the evils which happen in the times, men are the creators, and hence it is that
the times are said to be evil. And thus we also call the times evil.
Ver. 17, 18. "Wherefore," he adds, "be ye not foolish, but understand what

the will of the Lord is; and be not drunk with wine, wherein is riot."
For indeed intemperance in this renders men passionate and violent, and
hot-headed, and irritable and savage. Wine has been given us for cheerfulness,
not for drunkenness. Whereas now it appears to be an unmanly and contemptible
thing for a man not to get drunk. And what sort of hope then is there of
salvation? What? Contemptible, tell me, not to get drunk, where to get drunk
ought of all things in the world to be most contemptible? For it is of all things
right for even a private individual to keep himself far from drunkenness; but how
much more so for a soldier, a man who lives among swords, and bloodshed, and
slaughter: much more, I say, for the soldier, when his temper is sharpened by
other causes also, by power, by authority, by being constantly in the midst of
stratagems and battles. Would you know where wine is good? Hear what the
Scripture says, "Give strong drink unto him that is ready to perish, and wine unto
the bitter in soul." [Proverbs 31:6] And justly, because it can mitigate asperity
and gloominess, and drive away clouds from the brow. "Wine makes glad the
heart of man" [Psalm 104:15], says the Psalmist. How then does wine produce
drunkenness? For it cannot be that one and the same thing should work opposite
effects. Drunkenness then surely does not arise from wine, but from
intemperance. Wine is bestowed upon us for no other purpose than for bodily
health; but this purpose also is thwarted by immoderate use. But hear moreover
what our blessed Apostle writes and says to Timothy, "Use a little wine for your
stomach's sake, and your frequent infirmities."
This is the reason why God has formed our bodies in moderate proportions,
and so as to be satisfied with a little, from thence at once instructing us that He
has made us adapted to another life. And that life He would fain have bestowed
upon us even from the very beginning; but since we rendered ourselves
unworthy of it, He deferred it; and in the time during which He deferred it, not
even in that does He allow us immoderate indulgence; for a little cup of wine
and a single loaf is enough to satisfy a man's hunger. And man the lord of all the
brute creation has He formed so as to require less food in proportion than they,