And what wonder if he enjoyed so much honor in the house, when we see
what great regard he obtained even in a prison. You know how practiced in
cruelty are the dispositions of those who have the custody of prisons. They profit
by the misfortune of others, and harass those whom others support in their
afflictions, making a gain of them that is truly deplorable, with a more than
brutal cruelty. For they take advantage of those wretched circumstances which
ought to excite their pity. And we may further observe, that they do not treat in
the same manner all their prisoners; for those who are confined upon accusation
only, and who are injuriously treated, they perhaps pity, but they punish with
numberless inflictions those who are imprisoned for shameful and atrocious
crimes. So that the keeper of the prison not only from the manner of such men
might have been expected to be inhuman, but from the cause for which he was
imprisoned. For who would not have been incensed against a young man, who
having been raised to so great honor, was charged with requiting such favors by
a base attempt upon the master's wife. Would not the keeper, considering these
things, the honor to which he had been raised, and the crime for which he was
imprisoned, would he not have treated him with more than brutal cruelty? But he
was raised above all these things by his hope in God. For the virtue of the soul
can mollify even wild beasts. And by the same meekness which had gained his
master, he captivated also the keeper of the prison. Thus Joseph was again a
ruler, he ruled in the prison as he had ruled in the house. For since he was
destined to reign, it was fit that he should learn to be governed, and while he was
governed he became a governor, and presided in the house.
For if Paul requires this of one who is promoted to a Church, saying, "If a
man know not how to rule his own house, how shall he take care of the Church
of God?" [1 Timothy 3:5], it was fit that he who was to be a governor, should
first be an excellent ruler of the house. He presided over the prison, not as over a
prison, but as if it had been a house. For he alleviated the calamities of all, and
took charge of those who were imprisoned as if they had been his own members,
not only taking an interest in their misfortunes and consoling them, but if he saw

any one absorbed in thought, he went to him and enquired the cause, and could
not bear even to see any one dejected, or be easy till he had relieved his
dejection. Such love as this, many a one has not shown even to his own children.
And to these things may be traced the beginning of his good fortune. For our part
must go before, and then the blessing of God will follow.
For that he did show this care and concern we learn from the story. He saw,
it is said, two eunuchs who had been cast into prison by Pharaoh, his chief butler
and chief baker, and he said, "Wherefore do you look so sadly today?" [Genesis
40:7] And not from this question only, but from the conduct of these men, we
may discern his merit. For, though they were the officers of the king, they did
not despise him, nor in their despair did they reject his services, but they laid
open to him all their secret, as to a brother who could sympathize with them.
And all this has been said by me to prove, that though the virtuous man be
in slavery, in captivity, in prison; though he be in the depth of the earth, nothing
will be able to overcome him. This I have said to servants, that they may learn
that though they have masters that are very brutes, as this Egyptian, or ferocious
as the keeper of the prison, they may gain their regard, and though they be
heathen as they were, or whatever they be, they may soon win them to
gentleness. For nothing is more engaging than good manners, nothing more
agreeable and delightful than meekness, gentleness, and obedience. A person of
this character is suitable to all. Such an one is not ashamed of slavery, he does
not avoid the poor, the sick, and the infirm. For virtue is superior, and prevails
over everything. And if it has such power in slaves, how much more in those
who are free? This then let us practice, whether bond or free, men or women.
Thus we shall be loved both by God and men; and not only by virtuous men, but
by the wicked; nay by them more especially, for they more especially honor and
respect virtue. For as those who are under rule stand most in awe of the meek, so
do the vicious most revere the virtuous, knowing from what they themselves
have fallen. Since such then is the fruit of virtue, this let us pursue, and attain. If
we adhere to this, nothing will be formidable, but all things easy and