honorable, not preferring place to place, but giving them the precedence because
of their intention. As though He had said, "About the 'place' of worship you have
no need henceforth to dispute, but in the 'manner' the Jews have an advantage
over you Samaritans, for 'ye,' He says, 'worship ye know not what; we know
what we worship.'"
How then did the Samaritans "know not" what they worshipped? Because
they thought that God was local and partial; so at least they served Him, and so
they sent to the Persians, and reported that "the God of this place is angry with
us" devils, joining things which ought not to be joined. The Jews, on the
contrary, were free from this supposition, at least the greater part of them, and
knew that He was God of the world. Therefore He says, "You worship ye know
not what; we know what we worship." Do not wonder that He numbers Himself
among Jews, for He speaks to the woman's opinion of Him as though He were a
Jewish Prophet, and therefore He puts, "we worship." For that He is of the
objects of worship is clear to every one, because to worship belongs to the
creature, but to be worshipped to the Lord of the creature. But for a time He
speaks as a Jew; and the expression "we" in this place means "we Jews." Having
then exalted what was Jewish, He next makes Himself credible, and persuades
the woman to give the greater heed to His words, by rendering His discourse
above suspicion, and showing that He does not exalt what belongs to them by
reason of relationship to those of His own tribe. For it is clear, that one who had
made these declarations concerning the place on which the Jews most prided
themselves, and thought that they were superior to all, and who had taken away
their high claims, would not after this speak to get favor of any, but with truth
and prophetic power. When therefore He had for a while removed her from such
reasonings, say ing, "Woman, believe Me," and what follows, then He adds, "for
salvation is of the Jews." What He says is of this kind: neither, that blessings to
the world came from them, (for to know God and condemn idols had its
beginning from them, and with you the very act of worship, although ye do it not
rightly, yet received its origin from them,) or else, He speaks of His own

Coming. Or rather, one would not be wrong in calling both these things
"salvation" which He said was "of the Jews"; which Paul implied when he said,
"Of whom is Christ according to the flesh, who is God over all." [Romans 9:5]
Do you see how He commends the old Covenant, and shows that it is the root of
blessings, and that He is throughout not opposed to the Law, since He makes the
groundwork of all good things to come from the Jews?

John 4:23
"But the hour comes, and now is, when the true worshipers shall worship the
Father."
"We, O woman," He says, "excel you in the manner of our worship, but even
this shall henceforth have an end. Not the places only, but even the manner of
serving God shall be changed. And this change is at your very doors. 'For the
hour comes, and now is.'"
2. For since what the Prophets said they said long before the event, to show
that here it is not so, He says, "And now is." Think not, He says, that this is a
prophecy of such a kind as shall be accomplished after a long time, the
fulfillment is already at hand and at your very doors, "when the true worshipers
shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth." In saying "true," He excludes
Jews as well as Samaritans; for although the Jews be better than the Samaritans,
yet are they far inferior to those that shall come, as inferior as is the type to the
reality. But He speaks of the Church, that she is the "true" worship, and such as
is meet for God.
"For the Father seeks such to worship Him."
If then He in times past sought such as these, He allowed to those others
their way of worship, not willingly, but from condescension, and for this reason,
that He might bring them in also. Who then are "the true worshipers"? Those
who confine not their service by place, and who serve God in spirit; as Paul says,
"Whom I serve in my spirit in the Gospel of His Son": and again, "I beseech you
that you present your bodies a living sacrifice, acceptable unto God, your
reasonable service." [Romans 1:9 and 12:1]