SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.0, C.6.

for one and the same man to have science and faith about the same
thing relatively, i.e. in relation to the object, but not in the same
respect. For it is possible for the same person, about one and the
same object, to know one thing and to think another: and, in like
manner, one may know by demonstration the unity of the Godhead,
and, by faith, the Trinity. On the other hand, in one and the same
man, about the same object, and in the same respect, science is
incompatible with either opinion or faith, yet for different reasons.
Because science is incompatible with opinion about the same object
simply, for the reason that science demands that its object should be
deemed impossible to be otherwise, whereas it is essential to
opinion, that its object should be deemed possible to be otherwise.
Yet that which is the object of faith, on account of the certainty of
faith, is also deemed impossible to be otherwise; and the reason why
science and faith cannot be about the same object and in the same
respect is because the object of science is something seen whereas
the object of faith is the unseen, as stated above.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.0, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether those things that are of faith should be

divided into certain articles?
Objection 1: It would seem that those things that are of faith should
not be divided into certain articles. For all things contained in Holy
Writ are matters of faith. But these, by reason of their multitude,
cannot be reduced to a certain number. Therefore it seems
superfluous to distinguish certain articles of faith.
Objection 2: Further, material differences can be multiplied
indefinitely, and therefore art should take no notice of them. Now the
formal aspect of the object of faith is one and indivisible, as stated
above (Article 1), viz. the First Truth, so that matters of faith cannot
be distinguished in respect of their formal object. Therefore no
notice should be taken of a material division of matters of faith into
articles.
Objection 3: Further, it has been said by some [William of Auxerre,
Summa Aurea] that "an article is an indivisible truth concerning God,
exacting [arctans] our belief." Now belief is a voluntary act, since, as
Augustine says (Tract. xxvi in Joan.), "no man believes against his
will." Therefore it seems that matters of faith should not be divided
into articles.
On the contrary, Isidore says: "An article is a glimpse of Divine truth,
tending thereto." Now we can only get a glimpse of Divine truth by
way of analysis, since things which in God are one, are manifold in
our intellect. Therefore matters of faith should be divided into
articles.
I answer that, the word "article" is apparently derived from the
Greek; for the Greek arthron [William of Auxerre, Summa Aurea]
which the Latin renders "articulus," signifies a fitting together of
distinct parts: wherefore the small parts of the body which fit
together are called the articulations of the limbs. Likewise, in the
Greek grammar, articles are parts of speech which are affixed to
words to show their gender, number or case. Again in rhetoric,
articles are parts that fit together in a sentence, for Tully says (Rhet.
iv) that an article is composed of words each pronounced singly and
separately, thus: "Your passion, your voice, your look, have struck
terror into your foes."