commanded the blood to be poured out and to be covered with earth
(Lev. 17:13). For the same reason they were forbidden to eat animals
that had been suffocated or strangled: because the blood of these
animals would not be separated from the body: or because this form
of death is very painful to the victim; and the Lord wished to
withdraw them from cruelty even in regard to irrational animals, so
as to be less inclined to be cruel to other men, through being used to
be kind to beasts. They were forbidden to eat the fat: both because
idolaters ate it in honor of their gods; and because it used to be
burnt in honor of God; and, again, because blood and fat are not
nutritious, which is the cause assigned by Rabbi Moses (Doct.
Perplex. iii). The reason why they were forbidden to eat the sinews is
given in Gn. 32:32, where it is stated that "the children of Israel . . .
eat not the sinew . . . because he touched the sinew of" Jacob's
"thing and it shrank."
The figurative reason for these things is that all these animals
signified certain sins, in token of which those animals were
prohibited. Hence Augustine says (Contra Faustum iv, 7): "If the
swine and lamb be called in question, both are clean by nature,
because all God's creatures are good: yet the lamb is clean, and the
pig is unclean in a certain signification. Thus if you speak of a
foolish, and of a wise man, each of these expressions is clean
considered in the nature of the sound, letters and syllables of which
it is composed: but in signification, the one is clean, the other
unclean." The animal that chews the cud and has a divided hoof, is
clean in signification. Because division of the hoof is a figure of the
two Testaments: or of the Father and Son: or of the two natures in
Christ: of the distinction of good and evil. While chewing the cud
signifies meditation on the Scriptures and a sound understanding
thereof; and whoever lacks either of these is spiritually unclean. In
like manner those fish that have scales and fins are clean in
signification. Because fins signify the heavenly or contemplative life;
while scales signify a life of trials, each of which is required for
spiritual cleanness. Of birds certain kinds were forbidden. In the
eagle which flies at a great height, pride is forbidden: in the griffon
which is hostile to horses and men, cruelty of powerful men is
prohibited. The osprey, which feeds on very small birds, signifies
those who oppress the poor. The kite, which is full of cunning,
denotes those who are fraudulent in their dealings. The vulture,
which follows an army, expecting to feed on the carcases of the
slain, signifies those who like others to die or to fight among
themselves that they may gain thereby. Birds of the raven kind

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.7.