THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.1, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether it was necessary for the restoration of

the human race that the Word of God should become
incarnate?
Objection 1: It would seem that it was not necessary for the
reparation of the human race that the Word of God should become
incarnate. For since the Word of God is perfect God, as has been
said (FP, Question 4, Articles 1,2), no power was added to Him by the
assumption of flesh. Therefore, if the incarnate Word of God restored
human nature. He could also have restored it without assuming
flesh.
Objection 2: Further, for the restoration of human nature, which had
fallen through sin, nothing more is required than that man should
satisfy for sin. Now man can satisfy, as it would seem, for sin; for
God cannot require from man more than man can do, and since He is
more inclined to be merciful than to punish, as He lays the act of sin
to man's charge, so He ought to credit him with the contrary act.
Therefore it was not necessary for the restoration of human nature
that the Word of God should become incarnate.
Objection 3: Further, to revere God pertains especially to man's
salvation; hence it is written (Mal. 1:6): "If, then, I be a father, where
is my honor? and if I be a master, where is my fear?" But men revere
God the more by considering Him as elevated above all, and far
beyond man's senses, hence (Ps. 112:4) it is written: "The Lord is
high above all nations, and His glory above the heavens"; and farther
on: "Who is as the Lord our God?" which pertains to reverence.
Therefore it would seem unfitting to man's salvation that God should
be made like unto us by assuming flesh.
On the contrary, What frees the human race from perdition is
necessary for the salvation of man. But the mystery of the
Incarnation is such; according to Jn. 3:16: "God so loved the world
as to give His only-begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in Him
may not perish, but may have life everlasting." Therefore it was
necessary for man's salvation that God should become incarnate.
I answer that, A thing is said to be necessary for a certain end in two
ways. First, when the end cannot be without it; as food is necessary
for the preservation of human life. Secondly, when the end is

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.1, C.3.

attained better and more conveniently, as a horse is necessary for a
journey. In the first way it was not necessary that God should
become incarnate for the restoration of human nature. For God with
His omnipotent power could have restored human nature in many
other ways. But in the second way it was necessary that God should
become incarnate for the restoration of human nature. Hence
Augustine says (De Trin. xii, 10): "We shall also show that other
ways were not wanting to God, to Whose power all things are equally
subject; but that there was not a more fitting way of healing our
misery."
Now this may be viewed with respect to our "furtherance in good."
First, with regard to faith, which is made more certain by believing
God Himself Who speaks; hence Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xi, 2):
"In order that man might journey more trustfully toward the truth, the
Truth itself, the Son of God, having assumed human nature,
established and founded faith." Secondly, with regard to hope, which
is thereby greatly strengthened; hence Augustine says (De Trin. xiii):
"Nothing was so necessary for raising our hope as to show us how
deeply God loved us. And what could afford us a stronger proof of
this than that the Son of God should become a partner with us of
human nature?" Thirdly, with regard to charity, which is greatly
enkindled by this; hence Augustine says (De Catech. Rudib. iv):
"What greater cause is there of the Lord's coming than to show
God's love for us?" And he afterwards adds: "If we have been slow
to love, at least let us hasten to love in return." Fourthly, with regard
to well-doing, in which He set us an example; hence Augustine says
in a sermon (xxii de Temp.): "Man who might be seen was not to be
followed; but God was to be followed, Who could not be seen. And
therefore God was made man, that He Who might be seen by man,
and Whom man might follow, might be shown to man." Fifthly, with
regard to the full participation of the Divinity, which is the true bliss
of man and end of human life; and this is bestowed upon us by
Christ's humanity; for Augustine says in a sermon (xiii de Temp.):
"Go was made man, that man might be made God."
So also was this useful for our "withdrawal from evil." First, because
man is taught by it not to prefer the devil to himself, nor to honor him
who is the author of sin; hence Augustine says (De Trin. xiii, 17):
"Since human nature is so united to God as to become one person,
let not these proud spirits dare to prefer themselves to man, because
they have no bodies." Secondly, because we are thereby taught how
great is man's dignity, lest we should sully it with sin; hence