How then are we to get the better of him? In the way which Christ that
taught us, by fleeing to God for refuge; and neither to be depressed in famine, as
believing in God who is able to feed even with a word; nor amidst whatever
good things we may receive to tempt Him who gave them, but to be content with
the glory which is from above, making no account of that which is of men, and
on every occasion to despise what is beyond our need. For nothing does so make
us fall under the power of the devil, as longing for more, and loving
covetousness. And this we may see even by what is done now. For now also
there are those who say, "All these things will we give you, if you will fall down
and worship;" who are indeed men by nature, but have become his instruments.
Since at that time too he approached Him, not by himself only, but also by
others. Which Luke also was declaring, when he said, that "he departed from
Him for a season;" showing that hereafter he approached Him by his proper
instruments.
"And, behold, angels came and ministered unto Him." [Matthew 4:11] For
when the assault was going on, He suffered them not to appear, that He might
not thereby drive away the prey; but after He had convicted him in all points,
and caused him to take to flight, then they appear: that you also may learn, that
after your victories which are copied from His, angels will receive you also,
applauding you, and waiting as guards on you in all things. Thus, for example,
angels take Lazarus [Luke 16:22] away with them, after the furnace of poverty
and of famine and of all distress. For as I have already said, Christ on this
occasion exhibits many things, which we ourselves are to enjoy.
6. Forasmuch then as all these things have been done for you, emulate and
imitate His victory. And should any one approach you of those who are that evil
spirit's servants, and savor the things that be of him, upbraiding you and saying,
"If you are marvellous and great, remove the mountain;" be not troubled, nor
confounded, but answer with meekness, and say some such thing as you have
heard your Lord say: "You shall not tempt the Lord your God."
Or should he, offering glory and dominion, and an endless amount of

wealth, enjoin you to worship him, stand again manfully. For neither did the
devil deal so with the common Lord of us all only, but every day also he brings
these his machinations to bear on each of His servants, not in mountains only
and in wildernesses, nor by himself: but in cities likewise, in market-places, and
in courts of justice, and by means of our own kindred, even men. What then
must we do? Disbelieve him altogether, and stop our ears against him, and hate
him when he flatters, and when he proffers more, then so much the more shun
him. Because in Eve's case also, when he was most lifting her up with hopes,
then he cast her down, and did her the greatest evils. Yea, for he is an implacable
enemy, and has taken up against us such war as excludes all treaty. And we are
not so earnest for our own salvation, as he is for our ruin. Let us then shun him,
not with words only, but also with works; not in mind only, but also in deed; and
let us do none of the things which he approves, for so shall we do all those which
God approves. Yea, for he makes also many promises, not that he may give, but
that he may take. He promises by rapine, that he may deprive us of the kingdom,
and of righteousness; and sets treasures in the earth as a kind of gins or traps,
that he may deprive us both of these and of the treasures in Heaven, and he
would have us be rich here, that we may not be rich there.
And if he should not be able by wealth to cast us out of our portion there, he
comes another way, the way of poverty; as he did with respect to Job. That is,
when he saw that wealth did him no harm, he weaves his toils by poverty,
expecting on that side to get the better of him. But what could be more foolish
than this? Since he that has been able to bear wealth with moderation, much
more will he bear poverty with manliness; and he who desires not riches when
present, neither will he seek them when absent; even as that blessed man did not,
but by his poverty, on the other hand, he became still more glorious. For of his
possessions that wicked demon had power indeed to deprive him, but his love
toward God he not only could not take away, but made it even stronger, and
when he had stripped him of all, he caused him to abound with more blessings;
wherefore also he was in perplexity. For the more plagues he brought upon him,