was commanded to be delivered "to Eleazar the priest," because
Christ was delivered into the hands of the priests to be slain. It was
immolated "without the camp," because Christ "suffered outside the
gate" (Heb. 13:12). And the priest dipped "his finger in her blood,"
because the mystery of Christ's Passion should be considered and
imitated.
It was sprinkled "over against . . . the tabernacle," which denotes the
synagogue, to signify either the condemnation of the unbelieving
Jews, or the purification of believers; and this "seven times," in
token either of the seven gifts of the Holy Ghost, or of the seven
days wherein all time is comprised. Again, all things that pertain to
the Incarnation of Christ should be burnt with fire, i.e. they should be
understood spiritually; for the "skin" and "flesh" signified Christ's
outward works; the "blood" denoted the subtle inward force which
quickened His external deeds; the "dung" betokened His weariness,
His thirst, and all such like things pertaining to His weakness. Three
things were added, viz. "cedar-wood," which denotes the height of
hope or contemplation; "hyssop," in token of humility or faith;
"scarlet twice dyed," which denotes twofold charity; for it is by these
three that we should cling to Christ suffering. The ashes of this
burning were gathered by "a man that is clean," because the relics of
the Passion came into the possession of the Gentiles, who were not
guilty of Christ's death. The ashes were put into water for the
purpose of expiation, because Baptism receives from Christ's
Passion the power of washing away sins. The priest who immolated
and burned the cow, and he who burned, and he who gathered
together the ashes, were unclean, as also he that sprinkled the
water: either because the Jews became unclean through putting
Christ to death, whereby our sins are expiated; and this, until the
evening, i.e. until the end of the world, when the remnants of Israel
will be converted; or else because they who handle sacred things
with a view to the cleansing of others contract certain
uncleannesses, as Gregory says (Pastor. ii, 5); and this until the
evening, i.e. until the end of this life.
Reply to Objection 6: As stated above (ad 5), an uncleanness which
was caused by corruption either of mind or of body was expiated by
sin-offerings. Now special sacrifices were wont to be offered for the
sins of individuals: but since some were neglectful about expiating
such sins and uncleannesses; or, through ignorance, failed to offer
this expiation; it was laid down that once a year, on the tenth day of
the seventh month, a sacrifice of expiation should be offered for the

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.6.

whole people. And because, as the Apostle says (Heb. 7:28), "the
Law maketh men priests, who have infirmity," it behooved the priest
first of all to offer a calf for his own sins, in memory of Aaron's sin in
fashioning the molten calf; and besides, to offer a ram for a
holocaust, which signified that the priestly sovereignty denoted by
the ram, who is the head of the flock, was to be ordained to the glory
of God. Then he offered two he-goats for the people: one of which
was offered in expiation of the sins of the multitude. For the he-goat
is an evil-smelling animal; and from its skin clothes are made having
a pungent odor; to signify the stench, uncleanness and the sting of
sin. After this he-goat had been immolated, its blood was taken,
together with the blood of the calf, into the Holy of Holies, and the
entire sanctuary was sprinkled with it; to signify that the tabernacle
was cleansed from the uncleanness of the children of Israel. But the
corpses of the he-goat and calf which had been offered up for sin
had to be burnt, to denote the destruction of sins. They were not,
however, burnt on the altar: since none but holocausts were burnt
thereon; but it was prescribed that they should be burnt without the
camp, in detestation of sin: for this was done whenever sacrifice was
offered for a grievous sin, or for the multitude of sins. The other goat
was let loose into the wilderness: not indeed to offer it to the
demons, whom the Gentiles worshipped in desert places, because it
was unlawful to offer aught to them; but in order to point out the
effect of the sacrifice which had been offered up. Hence the priest
put his hand on its head, while confessing the sins of the children of
Israel: as though that goat were to carry them away into the
wilderness, where it would be devoured by wild beasts, because it
bore the punishment of the people's sins. And it was said to bear the
sins of the people, either because the forgiveness of the people's
sins was signified by its being let loose, or because on its head
written lists of sins were fastened.
The figurative reason of these things was that Christ was
foreshadowed both by the calf, on account of His power; and by the
ram, because He is the Head of the faithful; and by the he-goat, on
account of "the likeness of sinful flesh" (Rm. 8:3). Moreover, Christ
was sacrificed for the sins of both priests and people: since both
those of high and those of low degree are cleansed from sin by His
Passion. The blood of the calf and of the goat was brought into the
Holies by the priest, because the entrance to the kingdom of heaven
was opened to us by the blood of Christ's Passion. Their bodies
were burnt without the camp, because "Christ suffered without the
gate," as the Apostle declares (Heb. 13:12). The scape-goat may