conversant in avoiding evil and desiring good; and so also, whatsoever we
gather by the knowledge that comes from inquiry, in the way of examples
either to be guarded against or to be imitated, and in the way of necessary
proofs respecting any subject, accommodated to our use.
23. When a discourse then relates to these things, I hold it to be a
discourse belonging to knowledge, and to be distinguished from a
discourse belonging to wisdom, to which those things belong, which
neither have been, nor shall be, but are; and on account of that eternity in
which they are, are said to have been, and to be, and to be about to be,
without any changeableness of times. For neither have they been in such
way as that they should cease to be, nor are they about to be in such way
as if they were not now; but they have always had and always will have
that very absolute being. And they abide, but not as if fixed in some place
as are bodies; but as intelligible things in incorporeal nature, they are so
at hand to the glance of the mind, as things visible or tangible in place are
to the sense of the body. And not only in the case of sensible things
posited in place, there abide also intelligible and incorporeal reasons of
them apart from local space; but also of motions that pass by in
successive times, apart from any transit in time, there stand also like
reasons, themselves certainly intelligible, and not sensible. And to attain
to these with the eye of the mind is the lot of few; and when they are
attained as much as they can be, he himself who attains to them does not
abide in them, but is as it were repelled by the rebounding of the eye itself
of the mind, and so there comes to be a transitory thought of a thing not
transitory.
And yet this transient thought is committed to the memory through the
instructions by which the mind is taught; that the mind which is
compelled to pass from thence, may be able to return thither again;
although, if the thought should not return to the memory and find there
what it had committed to it, it would be led thereto like an uninstructed
person, as it had been led before, and would find it where it had first
found it, that is to say, in that incorporeal truth, whence yet once more it
may be as it were written down and fixed in the mind. For the thought of
man, for example, does not so abide in that incorporeal and
unchangeable reason of a square body, as that reason itself abides: if, to

be sure, it could attain to it at all without the phantasy of local space. Or if
one were to apprehend the rhythm of any artificial or musical sound,
passing through certain intervals of time, as it rested without time in
some secret and deep silence, it could at least be thought as long as that
song could be heard; yet what the glance of the mind, transient though it
was, caught from thence and, absorbing as it were into a belly, so laid up
in the memory, over this it will be able to ruminate in some measure by
recollection, and to transfer what it has thus learned into systematic
knowledge. But if this has been blotted out by absolute forgetfulness, yet
once again, Under the guidance of teaching, one will come to that which
had altogether dropped away, and it will be found such as it was.