SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.88, C.4.

of justice, but the judgment of discretion, as stated above. Nor is
truth here to be taken for the part of justice, but for a condition of
speech.
Reply to Objection 2: Devotion, faith and like conditions requisite for
the right manner of swearing are implied by judgment: for the other
two regard the things sworn to as stated above. We might also reply
that justice regards the reason for swearing.
Reply to Objection 3: There is great danger in swearing, both on
account of the greatness of God Who is called upon to bear witness,
and on account of the frailty of the human tongue, the words of
which are confirmed by oath. Hence these conditions are more
requisite for an oath than for other human actions.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.88, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether an oath is an act of religion or latria?

Objection 1: It would seem that an oath is not an act of religion, or
latria. Acts of religion are about holy and divine things. But oaths are
employed in connection with human disputes, as the Apostle
declares (Heb. 6:16). Therefore swearing is not an act of religion or
latria.
Objection 2: Further, it belongs to religion to give worship to God, as
Tully says (De Invent. Rhet. ii, 53). But he who swears offers nothing
to God, but calls God to be his witness. Therefore swearing is not an
act of religion or latria.
Objection 3: Further, the end of religion or latria is to show reverence
to God. But the end of an oath is not this, but rather the confirmation
of some assertion. Therefore swearing is not an act of religion.
On the contrary, It is written (Dt. 6:13): "Thou shalt fear the Lord thy
God, and shalt serve Him only, and thou shalt swear by His name."
Now he speaks there of the servitude of religion. Therefore swearing
is an act of religion.
I answer that, As appears from what has been said above (Article 1),
he that swears calls God to witness in confirmation of what he says.
Now nothing is confirmed save by what is more certain and more
powerful. Therefore in the very fact that a man swears by God, he
acknowledges God to be more powerful, by reason of His unfailing
truth and His universal knowledge; and thus in a way he shows
reverence to God. For this reason the Apostle says (Heb. 6:16) that
"men swear by one greater than themselves," and Jerome
commenting on Mt. 5:34, says that "he who swears either reveres or
loves the person by whom he swears." The Philosopher, too, states
(Metaph. i, 3) that "to swear is to give very great honor." Now to
show reverence to God belongs to religion or latria. wherefore it is
evident that an oath is an act of religion or latria.
Reply to Objection 1: Two things may be observed in an oath. The
witness adduced, and this is Divine: and the thing witnessed to, or
that which makes it necessary to call the witness, and this is human.
Accordingly an oath belongs to religion by reason of the former, and
not of the latter.