but we rush and kick worse than wild asses, with respect to injuries against
ourselves, being savage and inhuman; but of those against God not making much
account. And with respect to friends too we have the same disposition; should
any one vex us, we bear it not; should he insult us, we are savage more than wild
beasts, we who are reading these things every day. A disciple betrayed Him, the
rest forsook Him and fled, they that had been benefited by Him spat at Him, the
servants of the high priest smote Him with the palm of the hand, the soldiers
buffeted Him; they that passed by jeered Him and reviled Him, the thieves
accused Him; and to no man did He utter a word, but by silence overcame all;
instructing you by His actions, that the more meekly you shall endure, the more
will you prevail over them that do you evil, and will be an object of admiration
before all. For who will not admire him that endures with forbearance the insults
he receives from them that are using him despitefully? For even as, though any
man suffer justly, yet enduring the evil meekly, he is considered by the more part
to suffer unjustly; so though one suffer unjustly, yet if he be violent, he will get
the suspicion of suffering justly, and will be an object of ridicule, as being
dragged captive by his anger, and losing his own nobility. For such a one, we
must not call so much as a freeman, though he be lord over ten thousand
servants.
But did some person exceedingly provoke you? And what of that? For then
should self-control be shown, since when there is no one to vex, we see even the
wild beasts gentle; for neither are they always savage, but when any one rouses
them. And we therefore, if we are only then quiet, when there is no one
provoking us, what advantage have we over them. For they are both oftentimes
justly indignant, and have much excuse, for by being stirred and goaded are they
roused, and besides these things they are devoid of reason, and have savageness
in their nature.
But whence, I pray you, can you find a plea for being savage and fierce?
What hardship have you suffered? Have you been robbed? For this self-same
reason should you endure it, so as to gain more amply. But were you deprived of

character? And what is this? Your condition is in no way worsened by this, if
you practise self-command. But if you suffer no grievance, whence are you
angry with him that has done you no harm, but has even benefited you? For they
who honor, make them that are not watchful the more vain; but they who insult
and despise render those that take heed to themselves more steadfast. For the
careless are more injured by being honored than by being insulted. And the one
set of persons, if we be sober, become to us authors of self-control, but the others
excite our pride, they fill us with boastfulness, vainglory, folly, they make our
soul the feebler.
And to this fathers bear witness, who do not flatter their own children so
much as they chide them, fearing lest from the praise they should receive any
harm, and their teachers use the same remedy to them. So that if we are to avoid
any one, it should be those that flatter us rather than those that insult us; for this
bait brings greater mischief than insult to them, who do not take heed, and it is
more difficult to control this feeling than that. And the reward too is far more
abundant from thence, and the admiration greater. For indeed it is more worthy
of admiration to see a man insulted, and not moved, than beaten and smitten, and
not falling.
And how is it possible not to be moved? One may say. Hath any one
insulted you? Place the sign upon your breast, call to mind all the things that
were then done; and all is quenched. Consider not the insults only, but if also any
good has been ever done unto you, by him that has insulted you, and straightway
you will become meek, or rather consider before all things the fear of God, and
soon you will be mild and gentle.
4. Together with these things even from your own servants take a lesson
concerning these matters; and when you see yourself insulting, but your servant
holding his peace, consider that it is possible to practise self-control, and
condemn yourself for being violent; and in the very time of offering insults learn
not to insult; and thus not even when insulted, will you be vexed. Consider that
he who is insolent is beside himself and mad, and you will not feel indignant,