withdraws himself, and makes his antagonist waste his strength upon the air.
And in this way he will not be struck himself, and will also exhaust the whole of
the other's strength. And this takes place in regard to affronts also. For when you
do affronts in return, you have the worse, not as overcome (so 1 manuscript
[νικηθεὶς], Sav. [κινηθεὶς]) by a man, but what is far more disgraceful, by the
slavish passion of anger. But if you are silent, then you will conquer, and erect a
trophy without a fight, and will have thousands to crown you, and to condemn
the slander of falsehood. For he that replies, seems to be speaking in return as if
stung. And he that is stung, gives reason to suspect that he is conscious of being
guilty of what is said of him. But if you laugh at it, by your laughing you do
away with the sentence against you. And if you would have a clear proof of what
has been said, ask the enemy himself, when he is most vexed? When you are
heated, and insult him in return? Or when you laugh at him as he insults you?
And you will be told the last rather. For he too is not so much pleased with not
being insulted in return, as he is vexed because his abuse was not able to gain
any hold upon you. Did you never see men in a passion, how they make no great
account of their own wounds, but rush on with much violence, and are worse
than very wild boars for seeking the hurt of their neighbor, and look to this
alone, and are more given to this than to being on their guard against getting
harmed? When therefore you deprive him of that he desires most, you bereave
him of everything, by holding him thus cheap, and showing him to be easy to be
despised, and a child rather than a man; and you indeed have gained the
reputation of a wise man, and him you invest with the character of a noisome
beast. This too let us do when we are struck, and when we wish to strike, let us
abstain from striking again. But, would you give a mortal blow? "Turn to him the
other cheek also" [Matthew 5:39], and you will smite him with countless
wounds. For they that applaud, and wonder at you, are more annoying to him
than men to stone him would be; and before them, his conscience will condemn
him, and will exact the greatest punishment of him, and so he will go off with a
confused look as if he had been treated with the utmost rigor. And if it is the

estimation of the multitude that you look for, this too you will have in larger
share. And in a general way we have a kind of sympathy with those who are the
sufferers; but when we also see that they do not strike (several manuscripts
resist, [ἀ] [ντιπίπτοντας]) in return, but even give themselves up to it, we not
only pity them, but even feel admiration for them.
Here then I find reason to lament, that we who might have things present, if
we listened to Christ's Law as we should, and also attain to things to come, are
cast out of both by not paying attention to what has been told us, but giving
ourselves to unwarranted philosophising about them. For He has given us laws
upon all these points for our good, and has shown us what makes us have a good
name, what brings us to disgrace. And if it was likely to have proved His
disciples ridiculous, He would not have enjoined this. But since this makes them
the most notable of men namely, the not speaking ill, when we have ill spoken of
us; the not doing ill when we have ill done us; this was His reason for enjoining
it. But if this be so, much more the speaking of good when we have ill spoken of
us, and the praising of those that insult us, and the doing good to those that plot
against us, will make us so. This then was why He gave these laws. For He is
careful for His own disciples, and knowing well what it is that makes little or
great. If then He both cares and knows, why do you quarrel with Him, and wish
to go another road? For conquering by doing ill is one of the devil's laws. Hence
in the Olympic games which were celebrated to him it is so that all the
competitors conquer. But in Christ's race this is not the rule about the prize, for,
on the contrary, the law is for the person smitten, and not for the person smiting,
to be crowned. For such is the character of His race, it has all its regulations the
other way; so that it is not in the victory only, but also in the way of the victory,
that the marvel is the greater. Now when things which on the other side are signs
of a victory, on this side he shows to be productive of defeat, this is the power of
God, this the race of Heaven, this the theatre of Angels. I know that you are
warmed thoroughly now, and have become as soft as any wax, but when you
have gone hence you will spew it all out. This is why I sorrow, that what we are