FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.14, C.4.

actions bear on things singular and contingent. Consequently,
properly speaking, counsel is about things done by us.
Reply to Objection 1: Counsel implies conference, not of any kind,
but about what is to be done, for the reason given above.
Reply to Objection 2: Although that which is laid down by the law is
not due to the action of him who seeks counsel, nevertheless it
directs him in his action: since the mandate of the law is one reason
for doing something.
Reply to Objection 3: Counsel is not only about what is done, but
also about whatever has relation to what is done. And for this reason
we speak of consulting about future events, in so far as man is
induced to do or omit something, through the knowledge of future
events.
Reply to Objection 4: We seek counsel about the actions of others, in
so far as they are, in some way, one with us; either by union of
affection---thus a man is solicitous about what concerns his friend,
as though it concerned himself; or after the manner of an instrument,
for the principal agent and the instrument are, in a way, one cause,
since one acts through the other; thus the master takes counsel
about what he would do through his servant.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.14, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether counsel is about all things that we do?

Objection 1: It would seem that counsel is about all things that we
have to do. For choice is the "desire of what is counselled" as stated
above (Article 1). But choice is about all things that we do. Therefore
counsel is too.
Objection 2: Further, counsel implies the reason's inquiry. But,
whenever we do not act through the impulse of passion, we act in
virtue of the reason's inquiry. Therefore there is counsel about
everything that we do.
Objection 3: Further, the Philosopher says (Ethic. iii, 3) that "if it
appears that something can be done by more means than one, we
take counsel by inquiring whereby it may be done most easily and
best; but if it can be accomplished by one means, how it can be done
by this." But whatever is done, is done by one means or by several.
Therefore counsel takes place in all things that we do.
On the contrary, Gregory of Nyssa [Nemesius, De Nat. Hom. xxxiv.]
says that "counsel has no place in things that are done according to
science or art."
I answer that, Counsel is a kind of inquiry, as stated above (Article
1). But we are wont to inquire about things that admit of doubt;
hence the process of inquiry, which is called an argument, "is a
reason that attests something that admitted of doubt" [Cicero, Topic.
ad Trebat.]. Now, that something in relation to human acts admits of
no doubt, arises from a twofold source. First, because certain
determinate ends are gained by certain determinate means: as
happens in the arts which are governed by certain fixed rules of
action; thus a writer does not take counsel how to form his letters,
for this is determined by art. Secondly, from the fact that it little
matters whether it is done this or that way; this occurs in minute
matters, which help or hinder but little with regard to the end aimed
at; and reason looks upon small things as mere nothings.
Consequently there are two things of which we do not take counsel,
although they conduce to the end, as the Philosopher says (Ethic. iii,
3): namely, minute things, and those which have a fixed way of being
done, as in works produced by art, with the exception of those arts
that admit of conjecture such as medicine, commerce, and the like,