him.
As for worldly instruction, we may learn from these facts that he had none
at all of it. Besides, Luke testifies this when he writes not only that he was
ignorant, but that he was absolutely unlettered. [Acts 4:13] As was likely. For
one who was so poor, never coming into the public assemblies, nor falling in
with men of respectability, but as it were nailed to his fishing, or even if he ever
did meet any one, conversing with fishmongers and cooks, how, I say, was he
likely to be in a state better than that of the irrational animals? How could he
help imitating the very dumbness of his fishes?
2. This fisherman then, whose business was about lakes, and nets, and fish;
this native of Bethsaida of Galilee; this son of a poor fisherman, yes, and poor to
the last degree; this man ignorant, and to the last degree of ignorance too, who
never learned letters either before or after he accompanied Christ; let us see what
he utters, and on what matters he converses with us. Is it of things in the field? Is
it of things in rivers? On the trade in fish? For these things, perhaps, one expects
to hear from a fisherman. But fear not; we shall hear nought of these; but we
shall hear of things in heaven, and what no one ever learned before this man.
For, as might be expected of one who speaks from the very treasures of the
Spirit, he has come bringing to us sublime doctrines, and the best way of life and
wisdom, [as though just arrived from the very heavens; yea, rather such as it was
not likely that all even there should know, as I said before. ] Do these things
belong to a fisherman? Tell me. Do they belong to a rhetorician at all? To a
sophist or philosopher? To every one trained in the wisdom of the Gentiles? By
no means. The human soul is simply unable thus to philosophize on that pure
and blessed nature; on the powers that come next to it; on immortality and
endless life; on the nature of mortal bodies which shall hereafter be immortal; on
punishment and the judgment to come; on the enquiries that shall be as to deeds
and words, as to thoughts and imaginations. It cannot tell what is man, what the
world; what is man indeed, and what he who seems to be man, but is not; what is
the nature of virtue, what of vice.

3. Some of these things indeed the disciples of Plato and Pythagoras
enquired into. Of the other philosophers we need make no mention at all; they
have all on this point been so excessively ridiculous; and those who have been
among them in greater esteem than the rest, and who have been considered the
leading men in this science, are so more than the others; and they have
composed and written somewhat on the subject of polity and doctrines, and in all
have been more shamefully ridiculous than children. For they have spent their
whole life in making women common to all, in overthrowing the very order of
life, in doing away the honor of marriage, and in making other the like ridiculous
laws. As for doctrines on the soul, there is nothing excessively shameful that
they have left unsaid; asserting that the souls of men become flies, and gnats,
and bushes, and that God Himself is a soul; with some other the like indecencies.
And not this alone in them is worthy of blame, but so is also their evershifting current of words; for since they assert everything on uncertain and
fallacious arguments, they are like men carried here and there in Euripus, and
never remain in the same place.
Not so this fisherman; for all he says is infallible; and standing as it were
upon a rock, he never shifts his ground. For since he has been thought worthy to
be in the most secret places, and has the Lord of all speaking within him, he is
subject to nothing that is human. But they, like persons who are not held worthy
even in a dream to set foot in the king's palace, but who pass their time in the
forum with other men, guessing from their own imagination at what they cannot
see, have erred a great error, and, like blind or drunken men in their wandering,
have dashed against each other; and not only against each other, but against
themselves, by continually changing their opinion, and that ever on the same
matters.
4. But this unlettered man, the ignorant, the native of Bethsaida, the son of
Zebedee, (though the Greeks mock ten thousand times at the rusticity of the
names, I shall not the less speak them with the greater boldness.) For the more
barbarous his nation seems to them, and the more he seems removed from