all interest in corpus coeleste and primum mobile. He and his successors have wiped
out for ever star-worship and astrology; and astronomy thus remaining on their hands,
they have assorted it among the sciences to which it is nearest akin, namely, dynamics
and chemistry, to trouble the metaphysician no more. -- Of old, men worshipped the
stars, as the Hebrew prophets reproached the people with adoring all the host of
heaven (4 Kings xxi, 3, 5: Ezech. viii, 16: Jer xix, 13: Amos v, 26: Acts vii, 42). When
they had ceased to worship, men still believed in the stars, and star-carrying crystal
spheres, affecting the origin and development of planets and animals on earth, and
even human thoughts and elections. From these fancies Plato is fairly free: he speaks
with scant respect for the stars in Rep. vii, 529. Nor do they go for much in the genuine
writings of Aristotle. It was the Oriental genius of the Neo-Platonists, and after them the
Arabians, that brought in the heavenly bodies to the perturbation of mental philosophy.
Albertus Magnus and St Thomas followed this lead. I may refer to the original Latin of
the Contra Gentiles, B. III, Chapp. XXII, XXIII, LXXXII-LXXXVIII, CIV, CV. St Thomas
speaks of the `heavenly bodies' meaning thereby, not the stars, but the star-bearing
crystal spheres. The corpus coeleste, `the heavenly body' par excellence with him, is
the tenth and outermost crystalline sphere, which by its diurnal motion from east to west
controls the motion of all inferior material things, and is called the primum mobile. St
Thomas argues that this outermost sphere itself is moved by some intelligence, either
by a soul animating it, or by an angel, or immediately by God. Through this primum
mobile, St Thomas thinks, God governs the universe and fixes the qualities of the whole
material universe. So the St Thomas of the thirteenth century, but no Aquinas
Modernus. We must not build our theology on a mistaken astronomy. On the whole we
may do well, following Newman's lead, to seek God certainly in the starry heavens,
which are ever telling his glory (Ps. xviii), but to seek Him still more in the hearts and
consciences of men, in the realm of mind rather than in the realm of matter. This,
according to St Thomas, is the mode of natural cognition by which the angels know
God, "through study of their own substances" (Chap. XLIX). And our soul is a spiritual
substance also.

## CHAPTER XXV--That the End of every Subsistent Intelligence is to understand God
THE proper act of everything is its end, as being its second perfection: hence what
is well disposed to its own proper act is said to be virtuous and good. But to understand
is the proper act of a subsistent intelligence: that then is its end. And the most perfect
instance of this act is its final end and perfection: this is particularly true of acts which
are not directed to production, acts such as understanding and feeling. But since such
acts take their species from their objects, and are known through their objects, any
given one of these acts will be the more perfect, the more perfect its object is.
Consequently, to understand the most perfect intelligible object, which is God, will be
the most perfect instance of the activity of understanding. To know God then by
understanding is the final end of every subsistent intelligence.
But one may say: `It is true that the last end of a subsistent intelligence consists in
understanding the best intelligible object, still the best intelligible object, absolutely
speaking, is not the best object for this or that subsistent intelligence; but the higher
any subsistent intelligence is, the higher is its best intelligible object; and therefore the
highest subsistent intelligence created has for its best intelligible object that which is
best absolutely; hence its happiness will be in understanding God; but the happiness of
a lower subsistent intelligence will be to understand some lower intelligible object, which
is at the same time the highest of the objects that can be understood by it. And
particularly it seems to be the lot of the human understanding, on account of its
weakness, not to understand the absolutely best intelligible object: for in respect of the
knowledge of that truth of which there is most to be known the human intellect is as the
bat's eye to the sun.
Nevertheless it may be manifestly shown that the end of every subsistent intelligence,
even the lowest, is to understand God. For (a) the final end of all beings, to which they
tend, is God (Chap.XVIII. But the human understanding, however it be lowest in
the order of subsistent intelligences, is nevertheless superior to all beings devoid of
understanding. Since then the nobler substance has not the ignobler end, God Himself
will be the end also of the human understanding. But every intelligent being gains its
last end by understanding it. Therefore it is by understanding that the human intellect
attains God as its end.
(c). Everything most of all desires its own last end. But the human mind is moved to
more desire and love and delight over the knowledge of divine things, little as it can
discern about them, than over the perfect knowledge that it has of the lowest things.