blessings together with them that love Him, through the grace and mercy of our
Lord Jesus Christ, with whom to the Father, together with the Holy Ghost, be
glory, might, honor, now and ever, world without end. Amen.

Homily 29 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts XIII. 16, 17
"Then Paul stood up, and beckoning with his hand said, Men of Israel, and
you that fear God, give audience. The God of this people of Israel chose our
fathers, and exalted the people when they dwelt as strangers in the land of
Egypt, and with an high arm brought He them out of it."
Behold Barnabas giving place to Paul— how should it be otherwise?— to
him whom he brought from Tarsus; just as we find John on all occasions giving
way to Peter: and yet Barnabas was more looked up to than Paul: true, but they
had an eye only to the common advantage. "Then Paul stood up," it says—this
was a custom of the Jews— "and beckoned with his hand." And see how he
prepares the way beforehand for his discourse: having first praised them, and
showed his great regard for them in the words, "you that fear God," he so begins
his discourse. And he says not, You proselytes, since it was a term of
disadvantage. "The God of this people chose our fathers: and the people"— See,
he calls God Himself their God peculiarly, Who is the common God of men; and
shows how great from the first were His benefits, just as Stephen does. This they
do to teach them, that now also God has acted after the same custom, in sending
His own Son; [Luke 20:13]: as (Christ) Himself (does) in the parable of the
vineyard— "And the people," he says, "He exalted when it sojourned in the land
of Egypt"— and yet the contrary was the case: true, but they increased in
numbers; moreover, the miracles were wrought on their account: "and with an
high arm brought He them out of it." Of these things (the wonders) which were
done in Egypt, the prophets are continually making mention. And observe, how
he passes over the times of their calamities, and nowhere brings forward their
faults, but only God's kindness, leaving those for themselves to think over. "And
about the time of forty years suffered He their manners in the wilderness." [Acts

13:18] Then the settlement. "And when he had destroyed seven nations in the
land of Canaan, He divided their land to them by lot." [Acts 13:19] And the time
was long; four hundred and fifty years. "And after that He gave unto them judges
about the space of four hundred and fifty years, until Samuel the prophet." [Acts
13:20] Here he shows that God varied His dispensations towards them (at
various times). "And afterward they desired a king:" and (still) not a word of
their ingratitude, but throughout he speaks of the kindness of God. "And God
gave unto them Saul the son of Cis, a man of the tribe of Benjamin, by the space
of forty years." [Acts 13:21] "And when he had removed him, He raised up unto
them David to be their king: to whom also He gave testimony, and said, I have
found David the son of Jesse, a man after My own heart, which shall fulfil all My
will. Of this man's seed has God according to His promise raised unto Israel a
Saviour, Jesus." (v. 22, 23.) This was no small thing that Christ should be from
David. Then John bears witness to this: "When John had first preached before
His coming the baptism of repentance to all the people of Israel. And as John
fulfilled his course, he said, Whom do you think that I am? I am not He. But,
behold, there comes one after me, whose shoes of His feet I am not worthy to
loose." (v. 24, 25.) And John too not merely bears witness (to the fact), but (does
it in such sort that) when men were bringing the glory to him, he declines it: for
it is one thing (not to affect) an honor which nobody thinks of offering; and
another, to reject it when all men are ready to give it, and not only to reject it, but
to do so with such humility. "Men and brethren, children of the stock of
Abraham, and whosoever among you fears God, to you is the word of this
salvation sent. For they that dwell at Jerusalem, and their rulers, because they
knew Him not, nor yet the voices of the prophets which are read every sabbath
day, they have fulfilled them in condemning Him. And though they found no
cause of death in Him, yet desired they Pilate that He should be slain." [Acts
13:26-28] On all occasions we find them making a great point of showing this,
that the blessing is peculiarly theirs, that they may not flee (from Christ), as
thinking they had nothing to do with Him, because they had crucified Him.