ourselves, and expect God to help us in defect of all action of our own: that is
inconsistent with the divine ordinance and with His goodness.
But because, though it rests with us to act, still that our actions shall attain their due end
does not rest with us, owing to obstacles that may arise, the success that each one
shall have in his action comes under divine arrangement. The Lord then lays it down
that we ought not to be solicitous for what does not belong to us, that is, for the success
of our actions: but He has not forbidden us to be solicitous about what does belong to
us, that is, for the work which we ourselves do. It is not then to act against the precept
of the Lord, to feel solicitude for the things which have to be done; but he goes against
the precept, who is solicitous for what may turn out even when (etiam si) he does all
that is in his power to do, and takes due precautions beforehand (praemittat) to meet
the contingency of such untoward events.
When that is done, we ought to hope in God's providence, by whom even the birds and
herbs are sustained. To feel solicitude on such points seems to appertain to the
error of the Gentiles who deny divine providence. Therefore the Lord concludes that we
should take no thought for the morrow (Matt. vi, 34), by which He has not forbidden us
to lay up betimes things needful for the morrow; but He forbids that solicitude about
future events which goes with a sort of despair of the divine assistance, as also the
allowing of the solicitude that will have to be entertained to-morrow to come in before its
time perversely to-day: for every day brings its own solicitude; hence it is added,
Sufficient for the day is the evil thereof.

## CHAPTER CXXXIV--In what the Good of Poverty consists
LET us observe in riches what is to be thought of poverty. Exterior riches are necessary
to the good of virtue inasmuch as by them we support the body and succour other
people. Means to an end must derive their goodness from the end. Exterior riches
therefore must be some sort of a good to man, still not a principal but a secondary good:
for the principal good is the end, -- other things are good as subordinate to the end.
Therefore it has been held that the virtues are the greatest of good things to man, and
exterior riches the least. Now the means to any end must be checked by the
requirements of that end. Riches therefore are so far forth good as they make for
the exercise of virtue. But if that measure is exceeded, and the exercise of virtue
impeded by them, they are no longer to be counted among good but among evil things.
Hence it comes about that the possession of riches is a good thing for some men, who
turn them to a virtuous use; and an evil thing for other men, who thereby are withdrawn
from virtue, either by excessive solicitude or excessive affection for their wealth, or by
elation of mind thence arising.
But there are virtues of the active life and virtues of the contemplative life; and these two
orders of virtues make use of riches in different ways. The contemplative virtues need
riches solely for the sustenance of nature: the active virtues as well for this
purpose as also for the further purpose of helping a neighbour. Hence the contemplative
life is more perfect in this, that it requires fewer earthly aids, its attention being wholly
given to divine things. Hence the Apostle says: Having food, and wherewith to be
clothed, with these let us be content (1 Tim. vi, 8).
Poverty then is praiseworthy, inasmuch as it delivers a man from the vices in which
some men are entangled by riches. Again, inasmuch as it removes the solicitude that
goes with wealth, it is useful to some persons, namely, to those who have the gift of
occupying themselves with better things; but hurtful to others, who, set free from this
solicitude, busy themselves about worse things. But in so far as poverty takes
away the good that comes of riches, namely, the helping of other people, and hinders
self support, it is simply an evil, except in so far as the loss of the power of helping
neighbours in temporals may be compensated by the advantage of a free attention to
divine and spiritual things. But the good of one's own subsistence is so necessary, that
the lack of it can be compensated by no other good: for on the offer of no other good
should a man deprive himself of the means of supporting his own life. Poverty therefore
is praiseworthy, when it delivers a man from earthly cares, and he thereby arrives to
give his mind more freely to divine and spiritual things, yet so that he retains the means
of lawful self-support, whereunto not much provision is requisite. And the less solicitude
any method of poverty involves, the more praiseworthy is that poverty. But poverty is
not more praiseworthy, the greater it is: for poverty is not good in itself, but only
inasmuch as it removes from a man's path the obstacles of his freely applying himself to
spiritual things: hence the measure of such removal of obstacles is the measure of the
goodness of poverty. And this is a general principle with respect to all creatures: they
are good only in so far as they lead to virtue, not in themselves.