In proof of this, we must know that evil is caused in the action
otherwise than in the effect. In the action evil is caused by reason of
the defect of some principle of action, either of the principal or the
instrumental agent; thus the defect in the movement of an animal
may happen by reason of the weakness of the motive power, as in
the case of children, or by reason only of the ineptitude of the
instrument, as in the lame. On the other hand, evil is caused in a
thing, but not in the proper effect of the agent, sometimes by the
power of the agent, sometimes by reason of a defect, either of the
agent or of the matter. It is caused by reason of the power or
perfection of the agent when there necessarily follows on the form
intended by the agent the privation of another form; as, for instance,
when on the form of fire there follows the privation of the form of air
or of water. Therefore, as the more perfect the fire is in strength, so
much the more perfectly does it impress its own form, so also the
more perfectly does it corrupt the contrary. Hence that evil and
corruption befall air and water comes from the perfection of the fire:
but this is accidental; because fire does not aim at the privation of
the form of water, but at the bringing in of its own form, though by
doing this it also accidentally causes the other. But if there is a
defect in the proper effect of the fire---as, for instance, that it fails to
heat---this comes either by defect of the action, which implies the
defect of some principle, as was said above, or by the indisposition
of the matter, which does not receive the action of the fire, the agent.
But this very fact that it is a deficient being is accidental to good to
which of itself it belongs to act. Hence it is true that evil in no way
has any but an accidental cause; and thus is good the cause of evil.
Reply to Objection 1: As Augustine says (Contra Julian. i): "The Lord
calls an evil will the evil tree, and a good will a good tree." Now, a
good will does not produce a morally bad act, since it is from the
good will itself that a moral act is judged to be good. Nevertheless
the movement itself of an evil will is caused by the rational creature,
which is good; and thus good is the cause of evil.
Reply to Objection 2: Good does not cause that evil which is
contrary to itself, but some other evil: thus the goodness of the fire
causes evil to the water, and man, good as to his nature, causes an
act morally evil. And, as explained above (Question 19, Article 9),
this is by accident. Moreover, it does happen sometimes that one
contrary causes another by accident: for instance, the exterior
surrounding cold heats (the body) through the concentration of the

inward heat.
Reply to Objection 3: Evil has a deficient cause in voluntary things
otherwise than in natural things. For the natural agent produces the
same kind of effect as it is itself, unless it is impeded by some
exterior thing; and this amounts to some defect belonging to it.
Hence evil never follows in the effect, unless some other evil preexists in the agent or in the matter, as was said above. But in
voluntary things the defect of the action comes from the will actually
deficient, inasmuch as it does not actually subject itself to its proper
rule. This defect, however, is not a fault, but fault follows upon it
from the fact that the will acts with this defect.
Reply to Objection 4: Evil has no direct cause, but only an accidental
cause, as was said above.