Wherefore also Paul says, "We are ambassadors for Christ, as though God did
beseech you by us." [2 Corinthians 5:20] See ye not that in the case of Gentile
rulers, all bow to them, and oftentimes even persons superior in family, in life, in
intelligence, to those who judge them? Yet still because of him who has given
them, they consider none of these things, but respect the decision of their
governor, whosoever he be that receives the rule over them. Is there then such
fear when man appoints, but when God appoints do we despise him who is
appointed, and abuse him, and besmirch him with ten thousand reproaches, and
though forbidden to judge our brethren, do we sharpen our tongue against our
priests? And how can this deserve excuse, when we see not the beam in our own
eye, but are bitterly over-curious about the mote in another's? Do you not know
that by so judging you make your own judgment the harder? And this I say not
as approving of those who exercise their priesthood unworthily, but as greatly
pitying and weeping for them; yet do I not on this account allow that it is right
that they should be judged by those over whom they are set. And although their
life be very much spoken against, you, if you take heed to yourself, will not be
harmed at all in respect of the things committed to them by God. For if He
caused a voice to be uttered by an ass, and bestowed spiritual blessings by a
diviner, working by the foolish mouth and impure tongue of Balaam, in behalf of
the offending Jews, much more for the sake of you the right-minded will He,
though the priests be exceedingly vile, work all the things that are His, and will
send the Holy Ghost. For neither does the pure draw down that Spirit by his own
purity, but it is grace that works all. "For all," it says, "is for your sake, whether
it be Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas." [1 Corinthians 3:22-23] For the things which
are placed in the hands of the priest it is with God alone to give; and however far
human wisdom may reach, it will appear inferior to that grace. And this I say,
not in order that we may order our own life carelessly, but that when some of
those set over you are careless livers, you the ruled may not often heap up evil
for yourselves. But why speak I of priests? Neither Angel nor Archangel can do
anything with regard to what is given from God; but the Father, the Son, and the

Holy Ghost, dispenses all, while the priest lends his tongue and affords his hand.
For neither would it be just that through the wickedness of another, those who
come in faith to the symbols of their salvation should be harmed. Knowing all
these things, let us fear God, and hold His priests in honor, paying them all
reverence; that both for our own good deeds, and the attention shown to them,
we may receive a great return from God, through the grace and lovingkindness
of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom to the Father and the Holy Ghost be glory,
dominion, and honor, now and ever, and world without end. Amen.