harvest;" and made no addition to their number? Because though they were but
twelve, He made them many from that time forward, not by adding to their
number, but by giving them power.
Then to signify how great the gift is, He says, "Pray ye the Lord of the
harvest;" and indirectly declares it to be His own prerogative. For after having
said, "Pray ye the Lord of the harvest;" when they had not made any entreaty nor
prayer, He Himself at once ordains them, reminding them also of the sayings of
John, [Matthew 3:12] of the threshing floor, and of the Person winnowing, and
of the chaff, and of the wheat. Whence it is evident that Himself is the
husbandman, Himself the Lord of the harvest, Himself the master and owner of
the prophets. For if He sent them to reap, clearly it was not to reap what belongs
to another, but what Himself had sown by the prophets.
But not in this way only was He indirectly encouraging them, in calling
their ministry a harvest; but also by making them able for the ministry.
"And when He had called unto Him," it says, "His twelve disciples, He gave
them power against unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all manner of
sickness, and all manner of disease."
Still the Spirit was not yet given. For "there was not yet," it says, "a Spirit,
because that Jesus was not yet glorified." How then did they cast out the spirits?
By His command, by His authority.
And mark, I pray you, also, how well timed was the mission. For not at the
beginning did He send them; but when they had enjoyed sufficiently the
advantage of following Him, and had seen a dead person raised, and the sea
rebuked, and devils expelled, and a paralytic new-strung, and sins remitted, and
a leper cleansed, and had received a sufficient proof of His power, both by deeds
and words, then He sends them forth: and not to dangerous acts, for as yet there
was no danger in Palestine, but they had only to stand against evil speakings.
However, even of this He forewarns them, I mean of their perils; preparing them
even before the time, and making them feel as in conflict by His continual
predictions of that sort.

5. Then, since He had mentioned to us two pairs of apostles, that of Peter,
and that of John, and after those had pointed out the calling of Matthew, but had
said nothing to us either of the calling or of the name of the other apostles; here
of necessity He sets down the list of them, and their number, and makes known
their names, saying thus:
"Now the names of the twelve apostles are these; first, Simon, who is called
Peter." [Matthew 10:2]
Because there was also another Simon, the Canaanite; and there was Judas
Iscariot, and Judas the brother of James; and James the son of Alphæus, and
James the son of Zebedee.
Now Mark does also put them according to their dignity; for after the two
leaders, He then numbers Andrew; but our evangelist not so, but without
distinction; or rather He sets before himself even Thomas who came far short of
him.
But let us look at the list of them from the beginning.
"First, Simon, who is called Peter, and Andrew his brother."
Even this is no small praise. For the one he named from his virtue, the other
from his high kindred, which was in conformity to his disposition.
Then, "James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother."
Do you see how He arranges them not according to their dignity. For to me
John seems to be greater, not only than the others, but even than his brother.
After this, when he had said, "Philip, and Bartholomew," he added,
"Thomas, and Matthew the Publican." [Matthew 10:3]
But Luke not so, but in the opposite order, and he puts him before Thomas.
Next, "James the son of Alphæus." For there was, as I have already said, the
son of Zebedee also. Then after having mentioned "Lebbæus, whose surname
was Thaddæus," and "Simon" Zelotes, whom he calls also "the Canaanite," he
comes to the traitor. And not as a sort of enemy or foe, but as one writing a
history, so has he described him. He says not, "the unholy, the all unholy one,"
but has named him from his city, "Judas Iscariot." Because there was also