formlessness of the heaven is indicated by the words, "darkness
was upon the face of the deep," since the air is included under
heaven; and the formlessness of the earth, by the words, "the earth
was void and empty."
Reply to Objection 1: The word earth is taken differently in this
passage by Augustine, and by other writers. Augustine holds that by
the words "earth" and "water," in this passage. primary matter itself
is signified on account of its being impossible for Moses to make the
idea of such matter intelligible to an ignorant people, except under
the similitude of well-known objects. Hence he uses a variety of
figures in speaking of it, calling it not water only, nor earth only, lest
they should think it to be in very truth water or earth. At the same
time it has so far a likeness to earth, in that it is susceptible of form,
and to water in its adaptability to a variety of forms. In this respect,
then, the earth is said to be "void and empty," or "invisible and
shapeless," that matter is known by means of form. Hence,
considered in itself, it is called "invisible" or "void," and its
potentiality is completed by form; thus Plato says that matter is
"place" [Timaeus, quoted by Aristotle, Phys. iv, text. 15]. But other
holy writers understand by earth the element of earth, and we have
said (Article 1) how, in this sense, the earth was, according to them,
without form.
Reply to Objection 2: Nature produces effect in act from being in
potentiality; and consequently in the operations of nature potentiality
must precede act in time, and formlessness precede form. But God
produces being in act out of nothing, and can, therefore, produce a
perfect thing in an instant, according to the greatness of His power.
Reply to Objection 3: Accident, inasmuch as it is a form, is a kind of
act; whereas matter, as such, is essentially being in potentiality.
Hence it is more repugnant that matter should be in act without form,
than for accident to be without subject.
In reply to the first argument in the contrary sense, we say that if,
according to some holy writers, formlessness was prior in time to
the informing of matter, this arose, not from want of power on God's
part, but from His wisdom, and from the design of preserving due
order in the disposition of creatures by developing perfection from
imperfection.

In reply to the second argument, we say that certain of the ancient
natural philosophers maintained confusion devoid of all distinction;
except Anaxagoras, who taught that the intellect alone was distinct
and without admixture. But previous to the work of distinction Holy
Scripture enumerates several kinds of differentiation, the first being
that of the heaven from the earth, in which even a material
distinction is expressed, as will be shown later (Article 3; Question
68, Article 1). This is signified by the words, "In the beginning God
created heaven and earth." The second distinction mentioned is that
of the elements according to their forms, since both earth and water
are named. That air and fire are not mentioned by name is due to the
fact that the corporeal nature of these would not be so evident as
that of earth and water, to the ignorant people to whom Moses
spoke. Plato (Timaeus xxvi), nevertheless, understood air to be
signified by the words, "Spirit of God," since spirit is another name
for air, and considered that by the word heaven is meant fire, for he
held heaven to be composed of fire, as Augustine relates (De Civ.
Dei viii, 11). But Rabbi Moses (Perplex. ii), though otherwise agreeing
with Plato, says that fire is signified by the word darkness, since,
said he, fire does not shine in its own sphere. However, it seems
more reasonable to hold to what we stated above; because by the
words "Spirit of God" Scripture usually means the Holy Ghost, Who
is said to "move over the waters," not, indeed, in bodily shape, but
as the craftsman's will may be said to move over the material to
which he intends to give a form. The third distinction is that of place;
since the earth is said to be under the waters that rendered it
invisible, whilst the air, the subject of darkness, is described as
being above the waters, in the words: "Darkness was upon the face
of the deep." The remaining distinctions will appear from what
follows (Question 71).