feelings as the occasion required: limiting his own panegyric, not by what he
knew of himself, but by what the subject of necessity required. For he might
have said, "I most of all had a right to receive, even more than they, because 'I
labored more abundantly than they.'" But this he omits, being a point wherein
he surpassed them; and those points wherein they were great and which were
just grounds for their receiving, those only he sets down: as follows:
"Am I not an Apostle? Am I not free?" i.e. "have I not authority over
myself? Am I under any, to overrule me and forbid my receiving?"
"But they have an advantage over you, in having been with Christ."
"Nay, neither is this denied me." With a view to which he says,
"Have I not seen Jesus Christ our Lord?" For "last of all," [1 Corinthians
15:8] says he, "as unto one born out of due time, He appeared unto me also."
Now this likewise was no small dignity: since "many Prophets," [Matthew
13:17] says He, "and righteous men have desired to see the things which you see,
and have not seen them:" and, "Days will come when you shall desire to see one
of these days." [Luke 17:22]
"What then, though thou be 'an Apostle,' and 'free,' and hast 'seen Christ,' if
you have not exhibited any work of an Apostle; how then can it be right for you
to receive?" Wherefore after this he adds,
"Are you not my work in the Lord?" For this is the great thing; and those
others avail nothing, apart from this. Even Judas himself was "an Apostle," and
"free," and "saw Christ;" but because he had not "the work of an Apostle," all
those things profited him not. You see then why he adds this also, and calls
themselves to be witnesses of it.
Moreover, because it was a great thing which he had uttered, see how he
chastens it, adding, "In the Lord:" i.e., "the work is God's, not mine."

1 Corinthians 9:2
"If to others I am not an Apostle, yet at least I am to you."
Do you see how far he is from enlarging here without necessity? And yet he
had the whole world to speak of, and barbarous nations, and sea and land.
However, he mentions none of these things, but carries his point by concession,
and even granting more than he need. As if he had said, "Why need I dwell on
things over and above, since these even alone are enough for my present
purpose? I speak not, you will observe, of my achievements in other quarters,
but of those which have you for witnesses. Upon which it follows that if from no
other quarter, yet from you I have a right to receive. Nevertheless, from whom I
had most right to receive, even you whose teacher I was, from those I received
not."
"If to others I am not an Apostle, yet at least I am to you." Again, he states
his point by concession. For the whole world had him for its Apostle.
"However," says he, "I say not that, I am not contending nor disputing, but what
concerns you I lay down. 'For the seal of mine Apostleship are you:'" i.e., its
proof. "Should any one, moreover, desire to learn whence I am an Apostle, you
are the persons whom I bring forward: for all the signs of an Apostle have I
exhibited among you, and not one have I failed in." As also he speaks in the
Second Epistle, saying, [2 Corinthians 12:12] "Though I am nothing, truly the
signs of an Apostle were wrought among you in all patience, by signs and
wonders and mighty works. For what is there wherein you were made inferior to
the rest of the Churches?" Wherefore he says, "The seal of mine Apostleship are
you." "For I both exhibited miracles, and taught by word, and underwent
dangers, and showed forth a blameless life." And these topics you may see fully
set forth by these two Epistles, how he lays before them the demonstration of
each with all exactness.