2 Corinthians 8:11
"And now also you have completed the doing of it."
He said not, you have done it, but, you have put a completion to it,
"That as there was the readiness to will, so also [there may be] the
completion also out of your ability."
That this good work halt not at readiness but receive also the reward that
follows upon deeds.

2 Corinthians 8:12
2. "For if the readiness is there, it is acceptable according as a man has,
not according as he has not."
See wisdom unspeakable. In that (having pointed out those who were doing
beyond their power, I mean the Thessalonians, and having praised them for this
and said, "I bear them record that even beyond their power;") he exhorts the
Corinthians to do only "after" their power, leaving the example to do its own
work; for he knew that not so much exhortation, as emulation, incites unto
imitation of the like; wherefore he says, "For if the readiness is there, it is
acceptable according as a man has, not according as he has not."
'Fear not,' he means, 'because I have said these things, for what I said was
an encomium upon their munificence , but God requires things after a man's
power,' "according as he has, not according as he has not." For the word "is
acceptable," here implies 'is required.' And he softens it greatly, in confident
reliance upon this example, and as winning them more surely by leaving them at
liberty. Wherefore also he added,

2 Corinthians 8:13
"For I say not this, that others may be eased, and you distressed."
And yet Christ praised the contrary conduct in the widow's case, that she
emptied out all of her living and gave out of her want. [Mark 12:43] But because
he was discoursing to Corinthians among whom he chose to suffer hunger; "for
it were good for me rather to die, than that any man should make my glorying
void;" [1 Corinthians 9:15] he therefore uses a tempered exhortation, praising
indeed those who had done beyond their power, but not compelling these to do
so; not because he did not desire it, but because they were somewhat weak. For
wherefore does he praise those, because "in much proof of affliction the
abundance of their joy and their deep poverty abounded unto the riches of their
liberality:" and because they gave "beyond their power?" is it not very evident
that it is as inducing these also to this conduct? So that even if he appears to
permit a lower standard; he does so, that by it he may raise them to this.
Consider, for instance, how even in what follows he is covertly preparing the
way for this. For having said these things, he added,

2 Corinthians 8:14
"Your abundance being a supply for their want."
For not only by the words he has before used but by these also, he is
desirous of making the commandment light. Nor yet from this consideration
alone, but from that of the recompense also, again he makes it easier; and utters
higher things than they deserve, saying, "That there may be equality at this time,
and their abundance" a supply "for your want." Now what is it that he says?
'You are flourishing in money; they in life and in boldness towards God.' 'Give
ye to them, therefore, of the money which you abound in but they have not; that
you may receive of that boldness wherein they are rich and you are lacking.' See
how he has covertly prepared for their giving beyond their power and of their
want. 'For,' he says, 'if you desire to receive of their abundance, give of your
abundance; but if to win for yourself the whole, you will give of your want and
beyond your power.' He does not say this, however, but leaves it to the reasoning
of his hearers; and himself meanwhile works out his object and the exhortation
that was meet, adding in keeping with what appeared, the words, that "there may
be equality at this time." How equality? You and they mutually giving your
superabundance, and filling up your wants. And what sort of equality is this,
giving spiritual things for carnal? For great is the advantage on that side; how
then does he call it "equality?" either in respect of each abounding and wanting,
does he say that this [equality] takes place; or else in respect of the present life
only. And therefore after saying "equality," he added, "at this time." Now this he
said, both to subdue the high-mindedness of the rich, and to show that after our
departure hence the spiritual possess the greater advantage. For here indeed we
all enjoy much equality of honor; but then there will be a wide distinction and a
very great superiority, when the just shine brighter than the sun. Then since he
showed that they were to be not only giving, but also receiving, and more, in