for the recovery of a sick man; and there are instances of seasonable sleep
having saved the physician all further labor. But in the case before us, it is
impossible to take any of these things into consideration; nay there is but one
method and way of healing appointed, after we have gone wrong, and that is, the
powerful application of the Word. This is the one instrument, the only diet, the
finest atmosphere. This takes the place of physic, cautery and cutting, and if it be
needful to sear and amputate, this is the means which we must use, and if this be
of no avail, all else is wasted; with this we both rouse the soul when it sleeps,
and reduce it when it is inflamed; with this we cut off excesses, and fill up
defects, and perform all manner of other operations which are requisite for the
soul's health. Now as regards the ordering of our daily life for the best, it is true
that the life of another may provoke us to emulation. But in the matter of
spurious doctrine, when any soul is diseased thereby, then there is great need of
the Word, not only in view of the safety of our own people, but in view of the
enemy without. If, indeed, one had the sword of the spirit, and the shield of faith,
[Ephesians 6:16-17] so as to be able to work miracles, and by means of these
marvels to stop the mouths of impudent gainsayers, one would have little need of
the assistance of the Word; still in the days of miracles the Word was by no
means useless, but essentially necessary. For St. Paul made use of it himself,
although he was everywhere so great an object of wonder for his miracles; and
another of those who belonged to the "glorious company of the Apostles" exhorts
us to apply ourselves to acquiring this power, when he says: "Be ready always to
give an answer to every man that asks you a reason concerning the hope that is
in you," and they all, with one accord, committed the care of the poor widows to
Stephen, for no other reason than that they themselves might have leisure "for
the ministry of the Word." [Acts 6:4] To this we ought equally to apply ourselves,
unless indeed we are endued with a power of working miracles. But if there is
not the least sign of such a power being left us, while on every side many
enemies are constantly attacking us, why then it necessarily follows that we
should arm ourselves with this weapon, both in order that we may not be

wounded ourselves with the darts of the enemy, and in order that we may wound
him.
4. Wherefore it should be our ambition that the Word of Christ dwell in us
richly. [Colossians 3:16] For it is not for one kind of battle only that we have to
be prepared. This warfare is manifold, and is engaged with a great variety of
enemies; neither do all these use the same weapons, nor do they practice the
same method of attack; and he who has to join battle with all, must needs know
the artifices of all, and be at once both archer and slinger, captain and general, in
the ranks and in command, on foot and on horseback, in sea-fight and in siege.
In common warfare, indeed, each man repels the enemy by discharging the
particular duty which he has undertaken. But here it is otherwise; and if any one
wishes to come off conqueror in this warfare, he must understand all forms of
the art, as the devil knows well how to introduce his own assailants through any
one spot which may happen to be unguarded, and to carry off the sheep. But not
so where he perceives the shepherd coming equipped with accurate knowledge
at all points, and well acquainted with his plottings. Wherefore we ought to be
well-guarded in all parts: for a city, so long as it happens to be surrounded with a
wall, laughs to scorn the besiegers, abiding in great security; but if any one
makes a breach in the wall, though but of the size of a gate, the rest of the circuit
is of no use, although the whole of it stand quite securely; so it is with the city of
God: so long as the presence of mind and wisdom of the shepherd, which
answers to the wall, protect it on all sides, all the enemy's devices end in his
confusion and ridicule, and they who dwell within the wall abide unmolested,
but wherever any one has been able to demolish a single part, though the rest
stand never so fast, through that breach ruin will enter upon the whole. For to
what purpose does a man contend earnestly with the Greeks, if at the same time
he becomes a prey to the Jews? Or get the better of both these and then fall into
the clutches of the Manichæans? or after he has proved himself superior to them
even, if they who introduce fatalism enter in, and make havoc of the flock? But
not to enumerate all the heresies of the devil, it will be enough to say that unless