## Homily 48 on Matthew

Matt. XIII. 53.
"And it came to pass, that, when Jesus had finished these parables, He
departed thence."
Wherefore said He, "these"? Because He was to speak others besides. And
wherefore, again, does He depart? Desiring to sow the word everywhere.
"And when He had come into His own country, He taught them in their
synagogue." [Matthew 13:54]
And what does he now call His country? As it seems to me, Nazareth. "For
He did not many mighty works there," [Matthew 13:58] it is said, but in
Capernaum He did miracles: wherefore He said also, "And thou, Capernaum,
which art exalted unto Heaven, shall be brought down to hell; for if the mighty
works, which have been done in you, had been done in Sodom, it would have
remained until this day." [Matthew 11:23]
But having come there, while He slackens somewhat in His miracles; so as
not to inflame them unto more envy, nor to condemn them more grievously, by
the aggravation of their unbelief: He yet puts forth a doctrine, having no less of
wonder in it than the miracles. For these utterly senseless men, when they ought
to have marvelled, and to have been amazed at the power of His words, they on
the contrary hold Him cheap, because of him who seemed to be His father; yet
we know they had many examples of these things in the former times, and from
fathers of no note had seen illustrious children. For so David was the son of a
certain mean husbandman, Jesse; and Amos, the child of a goatherd, and himself
a goatherd; [Amos 7:14-15] and Moses too, the lawgiver, had a father very
inferior to himself. When they therefore, for this especially, ought to adore and
be amazed, that being of such parents He spoke such things, it being quite
manifest, that so it was not of man's care, but of God's grace: yet they, what

things they should admire Him for, for those they despise Him.
He is moreover continually frequenting the synagogues, lest if He were
always abiding in the wilderness, they should the more accuse Him as making a
schism, and fighting against their polity. Being amazed therefore, and in
perplexity, they said, "Whence has this man this wisdom, and these powers?"
either calling the miracles powers, or even the wisdom itself. "Is not this the
carpenter's son?" [Matthew 13:55] The greater then the marvel, and the more
abundant the ground of amaze. "Is not His mother called Mary, and His brethren
James, and Joses, and Simon, and Judas? And His sisters, are they not all with
us? Whence has this man these things? And they were offended in Him."
[Matthew 13:55-56]
Do you see that Nazareth was where He was discoursing? "Are not his
brethren," it is said, "such a one, and such a one?" And what of this? Why, by
this especially you ought to have been led on to faith. But envy you see is a poor
base thing, and often falls foul of itself. For what things were strange and
marvellous, and enough to have gained them over, these offended them.
What then says Christ unto them? "A prophet," says He, "is not without
honor, save in his own country, and in his own house: and He did not," it is said,
"many mighty works, because of their unbelief." But Luke says, "And He did not
there many miracles." And yet it was to be expected He should have done them.
For if the feeling of wonder towards Him was gaining ground (for indeed even
there He was marvelled at), wherefore did He not do them? Because He looked
not to the display of Himself, but to their profit. Therefore when this succeeded
not, He overlooked what concerned Himself, in order not to aggravate their
punishment.
And yet see after how long a time He came to them, and after how great a
display of miracles: but not even so did they endure it, but were inflamed again
with envy.
Wherefore then did He yet do a few miracles? That they might not say,
"Physician, heal yourself." [Luke 4:23] That they might not say, "He is a foe and