Puteoli: where we found brethren, and were desired to tarry with them seven
days: and so we went toward Rome." (v. 13, 14.) (b) Observe them tarrying a
while, and again hasting onwards. (e) "And from thence, when the brethren heard
of us, they came to meet us as far as Appii forum, and the Three Taverns" [Acts
28:15]: not fearing the danger. (c) Paul therefore was now so much respected,
that he was even permitted to be by himself: for if even before this they used him
kindly, much more would they now. (g) "He was suffered," it says, "to dwell by
himself, with a soldier that kept him." [Acts 28:16] That it might not be possible
for any plot to be laid against him there either— for there could be no raising of
sedition now. So that in fact they were not keeping Paul in custody, but guarding
him, so that nothing unpleasant should happen: for it was not possible now, in so
great a city, and with the Emperor there, and with Paul's appeal, for anything to
be done contrary to order. So surely is it the case, that always through the things
which seem to be against us, all things turn out for us. "With the soldier"— for
he was Paul's guard. "And having called together the chief of the Jews" [Acts
28:17], he discourses to them, who both depart gainsaying, and are taunted by
him, yet they dare not say anything: for it was not permitted them to deal with
his matter at their own will. For this is a marvellous thing, that not by the things
which seem to be for our security, but by their very opposites, all comes to be for
us. And that you may learn this— Pharaoh commanded the infants to be cast into
the river. [Exodus 1:22] Unless the infants had been cast forth, Moses would not
have been saved, he would not have been brought up in the palace. When he was
safe, he was not in honor; when he was exposed, then he was in honor. But God
did this, to show His riches of resource and contrivance. The Jew threatened
him, saying, "Would you kill me?" [Exodus 1:14] and this too was of profit to
him. It was of God's providence, in order that he should see that vision in the
desert, in order that the proper time should be completed, that he should learn
philosophy in the desert, and there live in security. And in all the plottings of the
Jews against him the same thing happens: then he becomes more illustrious. As
also in the case of Aaron; they rose up against him, and thereby made him more

illustrious [Numbers 16 and 17]: that so his ordination should be unquestionable,
that he might be held in admiration for the future also from the plates of brass
([τὥν πετάλων τοὕ χαλκοὕ]). Of course you know the history: wherefore I pass
over the narration. And if you will, let us go over the same examples from the
beginning.
Cain slew his brother, but in this he rather benefited him: for hear what
Scripture says, "The voice of your brother's blood cries unto Me" [Genesis 4:10]:
and again in another place, "To the blood that speaks better things than that of
Abel." [Hebrews 12:24] He freed him from the uncertainty of the future, he
increased his reward: we have all learned hereby what love God had for him. For
what was he injured? Not a whit, in that he received his end sooner. For say,
what do they gain, who die more slowly? Nothing: for the having good days
does not depend on the living many years or few years, but in the using life
properly. The Three Children were thrown into the furnace, and through this they
became more illustrious: Daniel was cast into the pit, and thence was he made
more renowned. (Daniel 3 and 6.) You see that trials in every case bring forth
great good even in this life, much more in the life to come: but as to malice, the
case is the same, as if a man having a reed should set himself to fight with the
fire: it seems indeed to beat the fire, but it makes it brighter, and only consumes
itself. For the malice of the wicked becomes food and an occasion of splendor to
virtue: for by God's turning the unrighteousness to good account, our character
shines forth all the more. Again, when the devil works anything of this kind, he
makes those more illustrious that endure. How then, you will say, was this not
the case with Adam, but, on the contrary, he became more disgraced? Nay, in
this case of all others God turned (the malice of) that (wicked one) to good
account: but if (Adam) was the worse for it, it was he that injured himself: for it
is the wrongs that are done to us by others that become the means of great good
to us, not so the wrongs which are done by ourselves. As indeed, because the
fact is that when hurt by others, we grieve, but not so when hurt by ourselves,
therefore it is that God shows, that he who suffers unjustly at the hands of