THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.31, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the matter of Christ's body should have

been taken from a woman?
Objection 1: It would seem that the matter of Christ's body should
not have been taken from a woman. For the male sex is more noble
than the female. But it was most suitable that Christ should assume
that which is perfect in human nature. Therefore it seems that He
should not have taken flesh from a woman but rather from man: just
as Eve was formed from the rib of a man.
Objection 2: Further, whoever is conceived of a woman is shut up in
her womb. But it ill becomes God, Who fills heaven and earth, as is
written Jer. 23:24, to be shut up within the narrow limits of the womb.
Therefore it seems that He should not have been conceived of a
woman.
Objection 3: Further, those who are conceived of a woman contract a
certain uncleanness: as it is written (Job 25:4): "Can man be justified
compared with God? Or he that is born of a woman appear clean?"
But it was unbecoming that any uncleanness should be in Christ: for
He is the Wisdom of God, of whom it is written (Wis. 7:25) that "no
defiled thing cometh into her." Therefore it does not seem right that
He should have taken flesh from a woman.
On the contrary, It is written (Gal. 4:4): "God sent His Son, made of a
woman."
I answer that, Although the Son of God could have taken flesh from
whatever matter He willed, it was nevertheless most becoming that
He should take flesh from a woman. First because in this way the
entire human nature was ennobled. Hence Augustine says
(Questions. lxxxiii, qu. 11): "It was suitable that man's liberation
should be made manifest in both sexes. Consequently, since it
behooved a man, being of the nobler sex, to assume, it was
becoming that the liberation of the female sex should be manifested
in that man being born of a woman."
Secondly, because thus the truth of the Incarnation is made evident.
Wherefore Ambrose says (De Incarn. vi): "Thou shalt find in Christ
many things both natural, and supernatural. In accordance with
nature He was within the womb," viz. of a woman's body: "but it was

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.31, C.5.

above nature that a virgin should conceive and give birth: that thou
mightest believe that He was God, who was renewing nature; and
that He was man who, according to nature, was being born of a
man." And Augustine says (Ep. ad Volus. cxxxvii): "If Almighty God
had created a man formed otherwise than in a mother's womb, and
had suddenly produced him to sight . . . would He not have
strengthened an erroneous opinion, and made it impossible for us to
believe that He had become a true man? And whilst He is doing all
things wondrously, would He have taken away that which He
accomplished in mercy? But now, He, the mediator between God and
man, has so shown Himself, that, uniting both natures in the unity of
one Person, He has given a dignity to ordinary by extraordinary
things, and tempered the extraordinary by the ordinary."
Thirdly, because in this fashion the begetting of man is
accomplished in every variety of manner. For the first man was made
from the "slime of the earth," without the concurrence of man or
woman: Eve was made of man but not of woman: and other men are
made from both man and woman. So that this fourth manner
remained as it were proper to Christ, that He should be made of a
woman without the concurrence of a man.
Reply to Objection 1: The male sex is more noble than the female,
and for this reason He took human nature in the male sex. But lest
the female sex should be despised, it was fitting that He should take
flesh of a woman. Hence Augustine says (De Agone Christ. xi): "Men,
despise not yourselves: the Son of God became a man: despise not
yourselves, women; the Son of God was born of a woman."
Reply to Objection 2: Augustine thus (Contra Faust. xxiii) replies to
Faustus, who urged this objection; "By no means," says he, "does
the Catholic Faith, which believes that Christ the Son of God was
born of a virgin, according to the flesh, suppose that the same Son
of God was so shut up in His Mother's womb, as to cease to be
elsewhere, as though He no longer continued to govern heaven and
earth, and as though He had withdrawn Himself from the Father. But
you, Manicheans, being of a mind that admits of nought but material
images, are utterly unable to grasp these things." For, as he again
says (Ep. ad Volus. cxxxvii), "it belongs to the sense of man to form
conceptions only through tangible bodies, none of which can be
entire everywhere, because they must of necessity be diffused
through their innumerable parts in various places . . . Far otherwise
is the nature of the soul from that of the body: how much more the