had assailed him; yet the war within was enough, those waves on waves, that
sleet of cares, that war of thoughts. For if one that has charge of but a single
house, and has servants and superintendents and stewards, often cannot take
breath for cares, though there be none that molests him: he that has the care not
of a single house, but of cities and peoples and nations and of the whole world;
and in respect to such great concerns, and with so many spitefully entreating
him, and single-handed, and suffering so many things, and so tenderly concerned
as not even a father is for his children— consider what he endured. For that you
may not say, What if he was anxious, yet the anxiety was slight , he added
further the intensity of the care, saying,

2 Corinthians 11:29
"Who is weak, and I am not weak?" He did not say, 'and I share not in his
dejection?' but, 'so am I troubled and disturbed, as though I myself were laboring
under that very affection, that very infirmity.'
"Who is made to stumble, and I burn not?" See, again, how he places before
us the excess of his grief by calling it "burning." 'I am on fire,' 'I am in a flame,'
he says, which is surely greater than any thing he has said. For those other
things, although violent, yet both pass quickly by, and brought with them that
pleasure which is unfading; but this was what afflicted and straightened him, and
pierced his mind through and through; the suffering such things for each one of
the weak, whosoever he might be. For he did not feel pained for the greater sort
only and despise the lesser, but counted even the abject among his familiar
friends. Wherefore also he said, "who is weak?" whosoever he may be; and as
though he were himself the Church throughout the world, so was he distressed
for every member.

2 Corinthians 11:30
"If I must needs glory, I will glory of the things which concern my
weakness."
Do you see that he no where glories of miracles, but of his persecutions and
his trials? For this is meant by "weaknesses." And he shows that his warfare was
of a diversified character. For both the Jews warred upon him, and the Gentiles
stood against him, and the false brethren fought with him, and brethren caused
him sorrow, through their weakness and by taking offense:— on every side he
found trouble and disturbance, from friends and from strangers. This is the
special mark of an Apostle, by these things is the Gospel woven.

2 Corinthians 11:31-33
"The God and Father of the Lord Jesus knows that I lie not. The Governor
under Aretas the king guarded the city of the Damascenes, desiring to apprehend
me."
What can be the reason that he here strongly confirms and gives assurance
of [his truth], seeing he did not so in respect to any of the former things?
Because, perhaps, this was of older date and not so well known ; while of those
other facts, his care for the churches, and all the rest, they were themselves
cognisant. See then how great the war [against him] was, since on his account
the city was "guarded." And when I say this of the war, I say it of the zeal of
Paul; for except this had breathed intensely, it had not kindled the governor to so
great madness. These things are the part of an apostolic soul, to suffer so great
things and yet in nothing to veer about, but to bear nobly whatever befalls; yet
not to go out to meet dangers, nor to rush upon them. See for instance here, how
he was content to evade the siege, by being "let down through a window in a
basket." For though he were even desirous "to depart hence;" still nevertheless
he also passionately affected the salvation of men. And therefore he ofttimes had
recourse even to such devices as these, preserving himself for the Preaching; and
he refused not to use even human contrivances when the occasion called for
them; so sober and watchful was he. For in cases where evils were inevitable, he
needed only grace; but where the trial was of a measured character, he devises
many things of himself even, here again ascribing the whole to God. And just as
a spark of unquenchable fire, if it fell into the sea, would be merged as many
waves swept over it, yet would again rise shining to the surface; even so surely
the blessed Paul also would now be overwhelmed by perils, and now again,
having dived through them, would come up more radiant, overcoming by
suffering evil.