SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.106, C.3.

according to one's means. And since what is last in the order of
generation is first in the order of destruction, it follows that the first
degree of ingratitude is when a man fails to repay a favor, the second
when he declines to notice or indicate that he has received a favor,
while the third and supreme degree is when a man fails to recognize
the reception of a favor, whether by forgetting it or in any other way.
Moreover, since opposite affirmation includes negation, it follows
that it belongs to the first degree of ingratitude to return evil for
good, to the second to find fault with a favor received, and to the
third to esteem kindness as though it were unkindness.
Reply to Objection 1: In every sin there is material ingratitude to
God, inasmuch as a man does something that may pertain to
ingratitude. But formal ingratitude is when a favor is actually
contemned, and this is a special sin.
Reply to Objection 2: Nothing hinders the formal aspect of some
special sin from being found materially in several kinds of sin, and in
this way the aspect of ingratitude is to be found in many kinds of sin.
Reply to Objection 3: These three are not different species but
different degrees of one special sin.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.106, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether ingratitude is always a mortal sin?

Objection 1: It seems that ingratitude is always a mortal sin. For one
ought to be grateful to God above all. But one is not ungrateful to
God by committing a venial sin: else every man would be guilty of
ingratitude. Therefore no ingratitude is a venial sin.
Objection 2: Further, a sin is mortal through being contrary to
charity, as stated above (Question 24, Article 12). But ingratitude is
contrary to charity, since the debt of gratitude proceeds from that
virtue, as stated above (Question 106, Article 1, ad 3; Article 6, ad 2).
Therefore ingratitude is always a mortal sin.
Objection 3: Further, Seneca says (De Benef. ii): "Between the giver
and the receiver of a favor there is this law, that the former should
forthwith forget having given, and the latter should never forget
having received." Now, seemingly, the reason why the giver should
forget is that he may be unaware of the sin of the recipient, should
the latter prove ungrateful; and there would be no necessity for that
if ingratitude were a slight sin. Therefore ingratitude is always a
mortal sin.
Objection 4: On the contrary, No one should be put in the way of
committing a mortal sin. Yet, according to Seneca (De Benef. ii),
"sometimes it is necessary to deceive the person who receives
assistance, in order that he may receive without knowing from whom
he has received." But this would seem to put the recipient in the way
of ingratitude. Therefore ingratitude is not always a mortal sin.
I answer that, As appears from what we have said above (Article 2), a
man may be ungrateful in two ways: first, by mere omission, for
instance by failing to recognize the favor received, or to express his
appreciation of it or to pay something in return, and this is not
always a mortal sin, because, as stated above (Question 106, Article
6), the debt of gratitude requires a man to make a liberal return,
which, however, he is not bound to do; wherefore if he fail to do so,
he does not sin mortally. It is nevertheless a venial sin, because it
arises either from some kind of negligence or from some
disinclination to virtue in him. And yet ingratitude of this kind may
happen to be a mortal sin, by reason either of inward contempt, or of
the kind of thing withheld, this being needful to the benefactor, either