and the whole was ascribed to God. For this cause he has said elsewhere, "We
carry this treasure in earthen vessels" [2 Corinthians 4:7]; that is, in bodies weak
and liable to suffering. Why? "That the excellency of the power may be of God,
and not of us." If our bodies were not subject to infirmity, all would be ascribed
to them. And elsewhere we see him grieving at the infirmity of Epaphroditus,
concerning whom he writes, "He was sick near unto death, but God had mercy
on him." [Philippians 2:27] And many other instances there are of his ignorance
of events, which was profitable both for him and his disciples.
"Trophimus I have left at Miletum sick." Miletus was near Ephesus. Did this
happen then when he sailed to Judea, or upon some other occasion? For after he
had been in Rome, he returned to Spain, but whether he came thence again into
these parts, we know not. We see him however deserted by all. "For Demas," he
says, "has forsaken me. Crescens is departed into Galatia, Titus to Dalmatia.
Erastus abode at Corinth. Trophimus have I left at Miletum sick."
Ver. 21. "Do your diligence to come before winter. Eubulus greets you, and
Pudens and Linus, and Claudia."
This Linus, some say, was second Bishop of the Church of Rome after
Peter. "And Claudia." You see how zealous for the faith the women were, how
ardent! Such was Priscilla and this Claudia, already crucified, already prepared
for the battle! But why, when there were so many faithful, does he mention only
these women? Manifestly because they in purpose had already withdrawn from
worldly affairs, and were illustrious above other. For a woman, as such, meets
not with any impediments. It is the work of divine grace, that this sex should be
impeded only in the affairs of this life, or rather not even in them. For a woman
undertakes no small share of the whole administration, being the keeper of the
house. And without her not even political affairs could be properly conducted.
For if their domestic concerns were in a state of confusion and disorder, those
who are engaged in public affairs would be kept at home, and political business
would be ill managed. So that neither in those matters, as neither in spiritual, is
she inferior. For she is able, if so inclined, to endure a thousand deaths.

Accordingly many women have suffered martyrdom. She is able to practice
chastity even more than men, no such strong flame disturbing her; and to show
forth modesty and gravity, and "holiness, without which no one shall see the
Lord" [Hebrews 12:14]; and contempt of wealth, if she will, and in short all
other virtues.
"Do your diligence to come before winter." See how he urges him, yet he
does not say anything to grieve him. He does not say, "Before I die," lest he
should afflict him; but, "Before winter," that thou be not detained.
"Eubulus," he says, "greets you, and Pudens, and Linus, and Claudia, and
all the brethren." He does not mention the rest by name. Do you see that those
were the most zealous?
Ver. 22. "The Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit."
There can be no better prayer than this. Grieve not for my departure. The
Lord will be with you. And he says, not "with you," but "with your spirit." Thus
there is a twofold assistance, the grace of the Spirit, and God helping it. And
otherwise God will not be with us, if we have not spiritual grace. For if we be
deserted by grace, how shall He be with us?
"Grace be with us. Amen."
Thus he prays for himself too, that they may always be well-pleasing to
Him, that they may have grace together with the spiritual gift, for where this is,
nothing will be grievous. For as he who beholds the king, and is in favor with
him, is sensible of no uneasiness; so though our friends forsake us, though we be
overtaken by calamity, we shall feel no distress, if that grace be with us and
fortify us.
Moral . But how shall we draw down grace upon us? By doing what is
pleasing to God, and obeying Him in all things. In great houses do we not see
those domestics in favor, who do not regard their own interest, but with all zeal
and alacrity promote their masters', and who not from the compulsion of the
master, but from their own affection and good disposition, order all things well.
When they are always before their eyes, when they are engaged in the house,