because we have no substance more precious than that. For this reason too He is
wont often to compare their sweetness to honey, not that so much only is the
measure of their sweetness, but because among us there is nothing sweeter. Now,
to show that they very exceedingly surpass the nature of precious stones, and the
sweetness of any honey, hear the prophet speaking concerning them, and
declaring this superiority; "More to be desired are they," he says "than gold and
much precious stone; sweeter are they also than honey and the honeycomb."
[Psalm 19:10] But to those (only) who are in health; wherefore he has added,
"For your servant keeps them." And again in another place calling them sweet he
has added, "to my throat." For he says, "How sweet are your words unto my
throat." [Psalm 119:103] And again he insists on the superiority, saying, "Above
honey and the honeycomb to my mouth." For he was in very sound health. And
let not us either come near to these while we are sick, but when we have healed
our soul, so receive the food that is offered us.
It is for this reason that, after so long a preface, I have not yet attempted to
fathom these expressions (of St. John), in order that every one having laid aside
all manner of infirmity, as though he were entering into heaven itself, so may
enter here pure, and freed from wrath and carefulness and anxiety of this life, of
all other passions. For it is not otherwise possible for a man to gain from hence
anything great, except he have first so cleansed anew his soul. And let no one
say that the time to the coming communion is short, for it is possible, not only in
five days, but in one moment, to change the whole course of life. Tell me what is
worse than a robber and a murderer, is not this the extremest kind of
wickedness? Yet such an one arrived straight at the summit of excellence, and
passed into Paradise itself, not needing days, nor half a day, but one little
moment. So that a man may change suddenly, and become gold instead of clay.
For since what belongs to virtue and to vice is not by nature, the change is easy,
as being independent of any necessity. "If you be willing and obedient," He says,
"you shall eat the good of the land." [Isaiah 1:19] Do you see that there needs
the will only? will— not the common wishing of the multitude— but earnest

will. For I know that all are wishing to fly up to heaven even now; but it is
necessary to show forth the wish by works. The merchant too wishes to get rich;
but he does not allow his wish to stop with the thought of it; no, he fits out a
ship, and gets together sailors, and engages a pilot, and furnishes the vessel with
all other stores, and borrows money, and crosses the sea, and goes away into a
strange land, and endures many dangers, and all the rest which they know who
sail the sea. So too must we show our will; for we also sail a voyage, not from
land to land, but from earth to heaven. Let us then so order our reason, that it be
serviceable to steer our upward course, and our sailors that they be obedient to it,
and let our vessel be stout, that it be not swamped amidst the reverses and
despondencies of this life, nor be lifted up by the blasts of vainglory, but be a
fast and easy vessel. If so we order our ship, and so our pilot and our crew, we
shall sail with a fair wind, and we shall draw down to ourselves the Son of God,
the true Pilot, who will not leave our bark to be engulfed, but, though ten
thousand winds may blow, will rebuke the winds and the sea, and instead of
raging waves, make a great calm.
6. Having therefore ordered yourselves, so come to our next assembly, if at
least it be at all an object of desire to you to hear somewhat to your advantage,
and lay up what is said in your souls. But let not one of you be the "wayside,"
none the "stony ground," none the "full of thorns." [Matthew 13:4-7] Let us
make ourselves fallow lands. For so shall we (the preachers) put in the seed with
gladness, when we see the land clean, but if stony or rough, pardon us if we like
not to labor in vain. For if we shall leave off sowing and begin to cut up thorns,
surely to cast seed into ground unwrought were extreme folly.
It is not meet that he who has the advantage of such hearing be partaker of
the table of devils. "For what fellowship has righteousness with
unrighteousness?" [2 Corinthians 6:14] You stand listening to John, and learning
the things of the Spirit by him; and do you after this depart to listen to harlots
speaking vile things, and acting viler, and to effeminates cuffing one another?
How will you be able to be fairly cleansed, if you wallow in such mire? Why