SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.157, C.7.

under the aspect of evil: wherefore anger is more a capital vice than
hatred is.
Reply to Objection 3: Anger is stated to be the door to the vices
accidentally, that is by removing obstacles, to wit by hindering the
judgment of reason, whereby man is withdrawn from evil. It is,
however, directly the cause of certain special sins, which are called
its daughters.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.157, C.8.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether six daughters are fittingly assigned to

anger?
Objection 1: It would seem that six daughters are unfittingly
assigned to anger, namely "quarreling, swelling of the mind,
contumely, clamor, indignation and blasphemy." For blasphemy is
reckoned by Isidore [Questions. in Deut., qu. xvi] to be a daughter of
pride. Therefore it should not be accounted a daughter of anger.
Objection 2: Further, hatred is born of anger, as Augustine says in
his rule (Ep. ccxi). Therefore it should be placed among the
daughters of anger.
Objection 3: Further, "a swollen mind" would seem to be the same as
pride. Now pride is not the daughter of a vice, but "the mother of all
vices," as Gregory states (Moral. xxxi, 45). Therefore swelling of the
mind should not be reckoned among the daughters of anger.
On the contrary, Gregory (Moral. xxxi, 45) assigns these daughters to
anger.
I answer that, Anger may be considered in three ways. First, as
consisting in thought, and thus two vices arise from anger. one is on
the part of the person with whom a man is angry, and whom he
deems unworthy [indignum] of acting thus towards him, and this is
called "indignation." The other vice is on the part of the man himself,
in so far as he devises various means of vengeance, and with such
like thoughts fills his mind, according to Job 15:2, "Will a wise
man . . . fill his stomach with burning heat?" And thus we have
"swelling of the mind."
Secondly, anger may be considered, as expressed in words: and
thus a twofold disorder arises from anger. One is when a man
manifests his anger in his manner of speech, as stated above (Article
5, ad 3) of the man who says to his brother, "Raca": and this refers to
"clamor," which denotes disorderly and confused speech. The other
disorder is when a man breaks out into injurious words, and if these
be against God, it is "blasphemy," if against one's neighbor, it is
"contumely."
Thirdly, anger may be considered as proceeding to deeds; and thus

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.157, C.8.

anger gives rise to "quarrels," by which we are to understand all
manner of injuries inflicted on one's neighbor through anger.
Reply to Objection 1: The blasphemy into which a man breaks out
deliberately proceeds from pride, whereby a man lifts himself up
against God: since, according to Ecclus. 10:14, "the beginning of the
pride of man is to fall off from God," i.e. to fall away from reverence
for Him is the first part of pride [Question 162, Article 7, ad 2]; and
this gives rise to blasphemy. But the blasphemy into which a man
breaks out through a disturbance of the mind, proceeds from anger.
Reply to Objection 2: Although hatred sometimes arises from anger,
it has a previous cause, from which it arises more directly, namely
displeasure, even as, on the other hand, love is born of pleasure.
Now through displeasure, a man is moved sometimes to anger,
sometimes to hatred. Wherefore it was fitting to reckon that hatred
arises from sloth rather than from anger.
Reply to Objection 3: Swelling of the mind is not taken here as
identical with pride, but for a certain effort or daring attempt to take
vengeance; and daring is a vice opposed to fortitude.