SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.133, C.4.

money which he employs in going to great expense, and as well as
the love of money, which love the magnificent man moderates, lest
he be hindered from spending much.
Reply to Objection 1: As stated above (Question 129, Article 2), those
virtues that are about external things experience a certain difficulty
arising from the genus itself of the thing about which the virtue is
concerned, and another difficulty besides arising from the greatness
of that same thing. Hence the need for two virtues, concerned about
money and its use; namely, liberality, which regards the use of
money in general, and magnificence, which regards that which is
great in the use of money.
Reply to Objection 2: The use of money regards the liberal man in
one way and the magnificent man in another. For it regards the
liberal man, inasmuch as it proceeds from an ordinate affection in
respect of money; wherefore all due use of money (such as gifts and
expenditure), the obstacles to which are removed by a moderate love
of money, belongs to liberality. But the use of money regards the
magnificent man in relation to some great work which has to be
produced, and this use is impossible without expenditure or outlay.
Reply to Objection 3: The magnificent man also makes gifts of
presents, as stated in Ethic. iv, 2, but not under the aspect of gift, but
rather under the aspect of expenditure directed to the production of
some work, for instance in order to honor someone, or in order to do
something which will reflect honor on the whole state: as when he
brings to effect what the whole state is striving for.
Reply to Objection 4: The chief act of virtue is the inward choice, and
a virtue may have this without outward fortune: so that even a poor
man may be magnificent. But goods of fortune are requisite as
instruments to the external acts of virtue: and in this way a poor man
cannot accomplish the outward act of magnificence in things that
are great simply. Perhaps, however, he may be able to do so in
things that are great by comparison to some particular work; which,
though little in itself, can nevertheless be done magnificently in
proportion to its genus: for little and great are relative terms, as the
Philosopher says (De Praedic. Cap. Ad aliquid.).

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.133, C.4.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.133, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether magnificence is a part of fortitude?

Objection 1: It seems that magnificence is not a part of fortitude. For
magnificence agrees in matter with liberality, as stated above (Article
3). But liberality is a part, not of fortitude, but of justice. Therefore
magnificence is not a part of fortitude.
Objection 2: Further, fortitude is about fear and darings. But
magnificence seems to have nothing to do with fear, but only with
expenditure, which is a kind of action. Therefore magnificence
seems to pertain to justice, which is about actions, rather than to
fortitude.
Objection 3: Further, the Philosopher says (Ethic. iv, 2) that "the
magnificent man is like the man of science." Now science has more
in common with prudence than with fortitude. Therefore
magnificence should not be reckoned a part of fortitude.
On the contrary, Tully (De Invent. Rhet. ii) and Macrobius (De Somn.
Scip. i) and Andronicus reckon magnificence to be a part of fortitude.
I answer that, Magnificence, in so far as it is a special virtue, cannot
be reckoned a subjective part of fortitude, since it does not agree
with this virtue in the point of matter: but it is reckoned a part
thereof, as being annexed to it as secondary to principal virtue.
In order for a virtue to be annexed to a principal virtue, two things
are necessary, as stated above (Question 80). The one is that the
secondary virtue agree with the principal, and the other is that in
some respect it be exceeded thereby. Now magnificence agrees with
fortitude in the point that as fortitude tends to something arduous
and difficult, so also does magnificence: wherefore seemingly it is
seated, like fortitude, in the irascible. Yet magnificence falls short of
fortitude, in that the arduous thing to which fortitude tends derives
its difficulty from a danger that threatens the person, whereas the
arduous thing to which magnificence tends, derives its difficulty
from the dispossession of one's property, which is of much less
account than danger to one's person. Wherefore magnificence is
accounted a part of fortitude.
Reply to Objection 1: Justice regards operations in themselves, as