SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.46, C.15.

discern good from evil counsel.
Reply to Objection 3: Acquired prudence is caused by the exercise
of acts, wherefore "its acquisition demands experience and
time" (Ethic. ii, 1), hence it cannot be in the young, neither in habit
nor in act. On the other hand gratuitous prudence is caused by
divine infusion. Wherefore, in children who have been baptized but
have not come to the use of reason, there is prudence as to habit but
not as to act, even as in idiots; whereas in those who have come to
the use of reason, it is also as to act, with regard to things necessary
for salvation. This by practice merits increase, until it becomes
perfect, even as the other virtues. Hence the Apostle says (Heb. 5:14)
that "strong meat is for the perfect, for them who by custom have
their senses exercised to the discerning of good and evil."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.46, C.16.

### ARTICLE 15. Whether prudence is in us by nature?

Objection 1: It would seem that prudence is in us by nature. The
Philosopher says that things connected with prudence "seem to be
natural," namely "synesis, gnome" [FS, Question 57, Article 6] and
the like, but not those which are connected with speculative wisdom.
Now things belonging to the same genus have the same kind of
origin. Therefore prudence also is in us from nature.
Objection 2: Further, the changes of age are according to nature.
Now prudence results from age, according to Job 12:12: "In the
ancient is wisdom, and in length of days prudence." Therefore
prudence is natural.
Objection 3: Further, prudence is more consistent with human nature
than with that of dumb animals. Now there are instances of a certain
natural prudence in dumb animals, according to the Philosopher (De
Hist. Anim. viii, 1). Therefore prudence is natural.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. ii, 1) that "intellectual
virtue is both originated and fostered by teaching; it therefore
demands experience and time." Now prudence is an intellectual
virtue, as stated above (Article 4). Therefore prudence is in us, not by
nature, but by teaching and experience.
I answer that, As shown above (Article 3), prudence includes
knowledge both of universals, and of the singular matters of action
to which prudence applies the universal principles. Accordingly, as
regards the knowledge of universals, the same is to be said of
prudence as of speculative science, because the primary universal
principles of either are known naturally, as shown above (Article 6):
except that the common principles of prudence are more connatural
to man; for as the Philosopher remarks (Ethic. x, 7) "the life which is
according to the speculative reason is better than that which is
according to man": whereas the secondary universal principles,
whether of the speculative or of the practical reason, are not
inherited from nature, but are acquired by discovery through
experience, or through teaching.
On the other hand, as regards the knowledge of particulars which
are the matter of action, we must make a further distinction, because