## CHAPTER CXXII--Of the reason for which Simple Fornication is a Sin by Divine Law,
and of the Natural Institution of Marriage
HENCE appears the folly of those who say that simple fornication is not a sin. For
they say: Given a woman free from a husband, and under no control of father or any
other person, if any one approaches her with her consent, he does her no wrong,
because she is pleased so to act, and has the disposal of her own person: nor does he
do any wrong to another, for she is under no one's control: therefore there appears no
sin. Nor does it seem to be a sufficient answer to say that she wrongs God, for God is
not offended by us except by what we do against our own good (Chap.CXXI):

together after the sexual act so long as is necessary for the rearing and training of the
offspring. This appears in birds, whose young are incapable of finding their own food
immediately they are hatched: for since the bird does not suckle her young with milk,
according to the provision made by nature in quadrupeds, but has to seek food abroad
for her young, and therefore keep them warm in the period of feeding, the female could
not do this duty all alone by herself: hence divine providence has put in the male a
natural instinct or standing by the female for the rearing of the brood. Now in the human
species the female is clearly insufficient of herself for the rearing of the offspring, since
the need of human life makes many demands, which cannot be met by one parent
alone. Hence the fitness of human life requires man to stand by woman after the sexual
act is done, and not to go off at once and form connexions with any one he meets, as is
the way with fornicators. Nor is this reasoning traversed by the fact of some particular
woman having wealth and power enough to nourish her offspring all by herself: for in
human acts the line of natural rectitude is not drawn to suit the accidental variety of the
individual, but the properties common to the whole species.
A further consideration is, that in the human species the young need not only bodily
nutrition, as animals do, but also the training of the soul. Other animals have their
natural instincts (suas prudentias) to provide for themselves: but man lives by reason,
which [read quam] takes the experience of a long time to arrive at discretion. Hence
children need instruction by the confirmed experience of their parents: nor are they
capable of such instruction as soon as they are born, but after a long time, the time in
fact taken to arrive at the years of discretion. For this instruction again a long time is
needed; and then moreover, because of the assaults of passion, whereby the
judgement of prudence is thwarted, there is need not of instruction only, but also of
repression. For this purpose the woman by herself is not competent, but at this point
especially there is requisite the concurrence of the man, in whom there is at once
reason more perfect to instruct, and force more potent to chastise. Therefore in the
human race the advancement of the young in good must last, not for a short time, as in
birds, but for a long period of life. Hence, whereas it is necessary in all animals for the
male to stand by the female for such time as the father's concurrence is requisite for
bringing up of the progeny, it is natural for man to be tied to the society of one fixed
woman for a long period, not a short one. This social tie we call marriage. Marriage then
is natural to man, and an irregular connexion outside of marriage is contrary to the good
of man; and therefore fornication must be sinful.
Nor yet should it be counted a slight sin for one to procure the emission of the semen
irrespective of the due purpose of generation and rearing of issue, on the pretence that
it is a slight sin, or no sin at all, to apply any part of one's body to another use than that
to which it is naturally ordained, as if, for example, one were to walk on his hands, or do
with his feet something that ought to be done with his hands. The answer is that by such
inordinate applications as those mentioned the good of man is not greatly injured: but
the inordinate emission of the semen is repugnant to the good of nature, which is the
conservation of the species. Hence, after the sin of murder, whereby a human
nature already in actual existence is destroyed, this sort of sin seem to hold the second
place, whereby the generation of human nature is precluded.