where the dead were, as the prophet says concerning Him: "And the Lord remembered His dead
saints who slept formerly in the land of sepulture; and He descended to them, to rescue and save
them." And the Lord Himself says, "As Jonas remained three days and three nights in the whale's
belly, so shall the Son of man be in the heart of the earth." Then also the apostle says, "But when
He ascended, what is it but that He also descended into the lower parts of the earth?" This, too,
David says when prophesying of Him, "And thou hast delivered my soul from the nethermost
hell;" and on His rising again the third day, He said to Mary, who was the first to see and to
worship Him, "Touch Me not, for I have not yet ascended to the Father; but go to the disciples, and
say unto them, I ascend unto My Father, and unto your Father."
2. If, then, the Lord observed the law of the dead, that He might become the first-begotten from
the dead, and tarried until the third day "in the lower parts of the earth;" then afterwards rising
in the flesh, so that He even showed the print of the nails to His disciples, He thus ascended to
the Father;—[if all these things occurred, I say], how must these men not be put to confusion, who
allege that "the lower parts" refer to this world of ours, but that their inner man, leaving the body
here, ascends into the super-celestial place? For as the Lord "went away in the midst of the shadow
of death," where the souls of the dead were, yet afterwards arose in the body, and after the
resurrection was taken up [into heaven], it is manifest that the souls of His disciples also, upon
whose account the Lord underwent these things, shall go away into the invisible place allotted to
them by God, and there remain until the resurrection, awaiting that event; then receiving their
bodies, and rising in their entirety, that is bodily, just as the Lord arose, they shall come thus into
the presence of God. "For no disciple is above the Master, but every one that is perfect shall be as
his Master." As our Master, therefore, did not at once depart, taking flight [to heaven], but
awaited the time of His resurrection prescribed by the Father, which had been also shown forth
through Jonas, and rising again after three days was taken up [to heaven]; so ought we also to await
the time of our resurrection prescribed by God and foretold by the prophets, and so, rising, be taken
up, as many as the Lord shall account worthy of this [privilege].

Ps. lxxxvi. 23.

Ps. xxiii. 4.

### Chapter XXXII.—In that flesh in which the saints have suffered so many afflictions, they
shall receive the fruits of their labours; especially since all creation waits for this, and God
promises it to Abraham and his seed.
1. Inasmuch, therefore, as the opinions of certain [orthodox persons] are derived from heretical
discourses, they are both ignorant of God's dispensations, and of the mystery of the resurrection
of the just, and of the [earthly] kingdom which is the commencement of incorruption, by means of
which kingdom those who shall be worthy are accustomed gradually to partake of the divine nature
(capere Deum); and it is necessary to tell them respecting those things, that it behoves the
righteous first to receive the promise of the inheritance which God promised to the fathers, and to
reign in it, when they rise again to behold God in this creation which is renovated, and that the
judgment should take place afterwards. For it is just that in that very creation in which they toiled
or were afflicted, being proved in every way by suffering, they should receive the reward of their
suffering; and that in the creation in which they were slain because of their love to God, in that
they should be revived again; and that in the creation in which they endured servitude, in that they
should reign. For God is rich in all things, and all things are His. It is fitting, therefore, that the
creation itself, being restored to its primeval condition, should without restraint be under the
dominion of the righteous; and the apostle has made this plain in the Epistle to the Romans, when
he thus speaks: "For the expectation of the creature waiteth for the manifestation of the sons of
God. For the creature has been subjected to vanity, not willingly, but by reason of him who hath
subjected the same in hope; since the creature itself shall also be delivered from the bondage of
corruption into the glorious liberty of the sons of God."
2. Thus, then, the promise of God, which He gave to Abraham, remains stedfast. For thus He
said: "Lift up thine eyes, and look from this place where now thou art, towards the north and south,
and east and west. For all the earth which thou seest, I will give to thee and to thy seed, even for
ever." And again He says, "Arise, and go through the length and breadth of the land, since I will
give it unto thee;" and [yet] he did not receive an inheritance in it, not even a footstep, but was
always a stranger and a pilgrim therein. And upon the death of Sarah his wife, when the Hittites
were willing to bestow upon him a place where he might bury her, he declined it as a gift, but
bought the burying-place (giving for it four hundred talents of silver) from Ephron the son of Zohar