8. This Being, therefore, also made spiritual things, of which, as far as to the third heaven, the
apostle was made a spectator, and heard unspeakable words which it is not possible for a man to
utter, inasmuch as they are spiritual; and He Himself bestows [gifts] on the worthy as inclination
prompts Him, for paradise is His; and He is truly the Spirit of God, and not an animal Demiurge,
otherwise He should never have created spiritual things. But if He really is of an animal nature,
then let them inform us by whom spiritual things were made. They have no proof which they can
give that this was done by means of the travail of their Mother, which they declare themselves to
be. For, not to speak of spiritual things, these men cannot create even a fly, or a gnat, or any other
small and insignificant animal, without observing that law by which from the beginning animals
have been and are naturally produced by God —through the deposition of seed in those that are of
the same species. Nor was anything formed by the Mother alone; [for] they say that this Demiurge
was produced by her, and that he was the Lord (the author) of all creation. And they maintain that
he who is the Creator and Lord of all that has been made is of an animal nature, while they assert
that they themselves are spiritual,—they who are neither the authors nor lords of any one work,
not only of those things which are extraneous to them, but not even of their own bodies! Moreover,
these men, who call themselves spiritual, and superior to the Creator, do often suffer much bodily
pain, sorely against their will.
9. Justly, therefore, do we convict them of having departed far and wide from the truth. For if
the Saviour formed the things which have been made, by means of him (the Demiurge), he is proved
in that case not to be inferior but superior to them, since he is found to have been the former even
of themselves; for they, too, have a place among created things. How, then, can it be argued that
these men indeed are spiritual, but that he by whom they were created is of an animal nature? Or,
again, if (which is indeed the only true supposition, as I have shown by numerous arguments of
the very clearest nature) He (the Creator) made all things freely, and by His own power, and arranged
and finished them, and His will is the substance of all things, then He is discovered to be the
one only God who created all things, who alone is Omnipotent, and who is the only Father rounding
and forming all things, visible and invisible, such as may be perceived by our senses and such as
cannot, heavenly and earthly, "by the word of His power;" and He has fitted and arranged all
things by His wisdom, while He contains all things, but He Himself can be contained by no one:
He is the Former, He the Builder, He the Discoverer, He the Creator, He the Lord of all; and there
is no one besides Him, or above Him, neither has He any mother, as they falsely ascribe to Him;
nor is there a second God, as Marcion has imagined; nor is there a Pleroma of thirty Æons, which
has been shown a vain supposition; nor is there any such being as Bythus or Proarche; nor are there