wonder at the conduct of these men? For if she had even died for her son, it
would have been nothing strange, since great is the tyranny of nature, and
irresistible is the obligation arising from the maternal pangs! But these men so
loved those whom they had not begotten, whom they had not brought up, yea
rather, whom they had never seen, whom they had not heard of, whom they had
never met, whom they knew only from their calamity, that if they had possessed
a thousand lives, they would have chosen to deliver them all up for their safety.
Tell me not that they were not slaughtered, that they did not pour forth their
blood, but that they used as much boldness with their judges as it was likely that
no other men would do, but such as had already renounced their own lives; and
that with this sentiment they ran from the mountains to the tribunal. For, indeed,
if they had not before prepared themselves against every sort of slaughter, they
would not have been able to speak thus freely to the judges, or to have
manifested such magnanimity. For they remained all day long sitting before the
doors of the place of justice, being prepared to snatch from the hands of the
executioners those who were about to be led off to punishment!
5. Where now are those who are clad in threadbare cloaks, and display a
long beard, and carry staves in the right hand; the philosophers of the world, who
are more abject in disposition than the dogs under the table; and do every thing
for the sake of the belly? All these men then forsook the city, they all hasted
away, and hid themselves in caves! But they only, who truly by works manifest
the love of wisdom, appeared as fearlessly in the forum, as if no evil had
overtaken the city. And the inhabitants of the city fled away to the mountains and
to the deserts, but the citizens of the desert hastened into the city; demonstrating
by deeds what, on the preceding days, I have not desisted from saying, that the
very furnace will not be able to harm the man who leads a virtuous life. Such a
thing is philosophy of soul, rising superior to all things, and to all prosperous or
adverse events; for neither is it enfeebled by the former, nor beaten down and
debased by the latter, but abides on the same level through the whole course of
things, showing its own native force and power! Who, indeed, was not convicted

of weakness by the difficulty of the present crisis? Those who had held the first
offices in our city, who were in places of power, who were surrounded with
immense wealth, and who were in high favour with the Emperor, leaving their
houses utterly deserted, all consulted their own safety, and all friendship and
kindred were found worthless, and those whom they formerly knew, at this
season of calamity, they desired not to know, and prayed to be unknown of them!
But the monks, poor as they were, having nothing more than a mean garment,
who had lived in the coarsest manner, who seemed formerly to be nobodies, men
habituated to mountains and forests; as if they had been so many lions, with a
great and lofty soul, while all were fearing and quaking, stood forth and relieved
the danger, and that, not in the course of many days, but in a brief moment of
time! And as distinguished warriors without coming into close conflict with their
adversaries, but merely by making their appearance in the ranks, and shouting,
put the foe to rout, so also these in one day descended, and said their say, and
removed the calamity, and returned to their own tabernacles. So great is the
moral wisdom that was brought among men by Christ.
6. And why do I speak of the rich, and of those in authority? When those
very persons who had been invested with power to judge the criminals; who
acted with the highest authority, were entreated by these selfsame monks to grant
a sentence of pardon, they said, they had no power over the result; for that it was
unsafe and dangerous, not only to insult the Emperor, but even to dismiss those
who had insulted him, when taken, without punishment. But these men were too
powerful for any one to resist; and besieging them by magnanimity and
perseverance, they induced these officers by their importunity to exercise a
power which they had not received from the Emperor; and even succeeded in
persuading the judges, when men had been manifestly convicted of the guilt, not
to declare the sentence of condemnation, but to defer the final result to the
decision of the Emperor; and they promised certainly to persuade him to grant a
pardon to those who had transgressed against him; and they were about to set out
on a journey to him. But the judges, reverencing the moral wisdom of these men,