named?
Objection 1: It would seem that the orders of the angels are not
properly named. For all the heavenly spirits are called angels and
heavenly virtues. But common names should not be appropriated to
individuals. Therefore the orders of the angels and virtues are ineptly
named.
Objection 2: Further, it belongs to God alone to be Lord, according to
the words, "Know ye that the Lord He is God" (Ps. 99:3). Therefore
one order of the heavenly spirits is not properly called
"Dominations."
Objection 3: Further, the name "Domination" seems to imply
government and likewise the names "Principalities" and "Powers."
Therefore these three names do not seem to be properly applied to
three orders.
Objection 4: Further, archangels are as it were angel princes.
Therefore this name ought not to be given to any other order than to
the "Principalities."
Objection 5: Further, the name "Seraphim" is derived from ardor,
which pertains to charity; and the name "Cherubim" from
knowledge. But charity and knowledge are gifts common to all the
angels. Therefore they ought not to be names of any particular
orders.
Objection 6: Further, Thrones are seats. But from the fact that God
knows and loves the rational creature He is said to sit within it.
Therefore there ought not to be any order of "Thrones" besides the
"Cherubim" and "Seraphim." Therefore it appears that the orders of
angels are not properly styled.
On the contrary is the authority of Holy Scripture wherein they are so
named. For the name "Seraphim" is found in Is. 6:2; the name
"Cherubim" in Ezech. 1 (Cf. 10:15,20); "Thrones" in Col. 1:16;
"Dominations," "Virtues," "Powers," and "Principalities" are
mentioned in Eph. 1:21; the name "Archangels" in the canonical
epistle of St. Jude (9), and the name "Angels" is found in many

places of Scripture.
I answer that, As Dionysius says (Coel. Hier. vii), in the names of the
angelic orders it is necessary to observe that the proper name of
each order expresses its property. Now to see what is the property of
each order, we must consider that in coordinated things, something
may be found in a threefold manner: by way of property, by way of
excess, and by way of participation. A thing is said to be in another
by way of property, if it is adequate and proportionate to its nature:
by excess when an attribute is less than that to which it is attributed,
but is possessed thereby in an eminent manner, as we have stated
(Question 13, Article 2) concerning all the names which are
attributed to God: by participation, when an attribute is possessed
by something not fully but partially; thus holy men are called gods
by participation. Therefore, if anything is to be called by a name
designating its property, it ought not to be named from what it
participates imperfectly, nor from that which it possesses in excess,
but from that which is adequate thereto; as, for instance, when we
wish properly to name a man, we should call him a "rational
substance," but not an "intellectual substance," which latter is the
proper name of an angel; because simple intelligence belongs to an
angel as a property, and to man by participation; nor do we call him
a "sensible substance," which is the proper name of a brute;
because sense is less than the property of a man, and belongs to
man in a more excellent way than to other animals.
So we must consider that in the angelic orders all spiritual
perfections are common to all the angels, and that they are all more
excellently in the superior than in the inferior angels. Further, as in
these perfections there are grades, the superior perfection belongs
to the superior order as its property, whereas it belongs to the
inferior by participation; and conversely the inferior perfection
belongs to the inferior order as its property, and to the superior by
way of excess; and thus the superior order is denominated from the
superior perfection.
So in this way Dionysius (Coel. Hier. vii) explains the names of the
orders accordingly as they befit the spiritual perfections they signify.
Gregory, on the other hand, in expounding these names (Hom. xxxiv
in Evang.) seems to regard more the exterior ministrations; for he
says that "angels are so called as announcing the least things; and
the archangels in the greatest; by the virtues miracles are wrought;
by the powers hostile powers are repulsed; and the principalities