faced at it, and with the eyes of a free man, and with uplifted look, take up your
confession; and if he say again, Do you worship the Crucified? Say in reply to
him, Yes! And not the adulterer, not the insulter of his father, not the murderer of
his children (for such be all the gods they have ), but Him who by the Cross
stopped the mouths of devils, and did away with their countless juggleries. For
the Cross is for our sakes, being the work of unspeakable Love towards man, the
sign of His great concern for us. And in addition to what has been said, since
they were puffed up with great pomposity of speech and with their cloak of
external wisdom, I, he means to say, bidding an entire farewell to these
reasonings, come to preach the Cross, and am not ashamed because of it: "for it
is the power of God to salvation." For since there is a power of God to
chastisement also (for when He chastised the Egyptians, He said, "This is My
great power, ") [Joel 2:25] and a power to destruction, (for, "fear Him," He says,
"that is able to destroy both body and soul in hell"), [Matthew 10:28] for this
cause he says, it is not these that I come to bring, the powers of chastisement and
punishment, but those of salvation. What then? Did not the Gospel tell of these
things also, namely, the account of hell, and that of the outer darkness, and of the
venomous worm? And yet we know of these from no other source than the
Gospel. In what sense then does he say, "the power of God unto salvation?"
Attend only to what follows. "To every one that believes; to the Jew first, and
also to the Greek."
For it is not to all absolutely, but to them that receive it. For though thou be
a Grecian (i.e. Heathen), and even one that has run into every kind of vice,
though a Scythian, though a barbarian, though a very brute, and full of all
irrationality, and burdened with the weights of endless sins, no sooner have you
received the word concerning the Cross, and been baptized, than you have
blotted out all these; and why says he here, "to the Jew first, and also to the
Greek?" What means this difference? And yet he has often said, "Neither
circumcision is anything, nor uncircumcision" [Galatians 5:6 and 6:15]; how
then does he here discriminate, setting the Jew before the Greek? Now why is

this? Seeing that by being first he does not therefore receive any more of the
grace (for the same gift is bestowed both on this person and that,) but the "first"
is an honor in order of time only. For he has no such advantage as that of
receiving greater righteousness, but is only honored in respect of his receiving it
first. Since in the case of those that are enlightened (you that are initiated know
what is meant,) all run to the baptism, yet not all at the same hour, but one first
and another second. Yet the first does not receive more than the second, nor he
than the person after him, but all enjoy the same gifts. The "first" then here is an
honor in word, not a superiority in grace. Then after saying, "unto salvation," he
enhances the gift further, by showing that it stays not at the present point, but
proceeds farther. For this is what he sets forth, when he says,
Ver. 17. "For therein is the righteousness of God revealed."
But he who has become just shall live, not for the present life only, but for
that which is to come. And he hints not only this, but also another thing along
with this, namely, the brightness and gloriousness of such a life. For since it is
possible to be saved, yet not without shame (as many are saved of those, who by
the royal humanity are released from punishment), that no one may suspect this
upon hearing of safety, he adds also righteousness; and righteousness, not your
own, but that of God; hinting also the abundance of it and the facility. For you do
not achieve it by toilings and labors, but you receive it by a gift from above,
contributing one thing only from your own store, "believing." Then since his
statement did not seem credible, if the adulterer and effeminate person, and
robber of graves, and magician, is not only to be suddenly freed from
punishment but to become just, and just too with the highest righteousness; he
confirms his assertion from the Old Testament. And first with a short sentence,
he lays open a vast sea of histories to one who has a capacity for seeing them.
For after having said, "from faith to faith," he sends the hearer back to the
dispensations of God, which took place thus in the Old Testament, which, when
writing to the Hebrews, he explains with his usual great wisdom, showing that
both the just and the sinners were justified in that way even then, wherefore also