forefather, neglected their own part. On this account he calls them both "foolish
and unprofitable"; for it is the part of folly to confide in things unprofitable. ]
"Contentions," he means, with heretics, in which he would not have us labor to
no purpose, where nothing is to be gained, for they end in nothing. For when a
man is perverted and predetermined not to change his mind, whatever may
happen, why should you labor in vain, sowing upon a rock, when you should
spend your honorable toil upon your own people, in discoursing with them upon
almsgiving and every other virtue? How then does he elsewhere say, "If God
perhaps will give them repentance" [2 Timothy 2:25]; but here, "A man that is an
heretic after the first and second admonition reject, knowing that he that is such
is subverted and sins, being condemned of himself"? In the former passage he
speaks of the correction of those of whom he had hope, and who had simply
made opposition. But when he is known and manifest to all, why do you contend
in vain? Why do you beat the air? What means, "being condemned of himself"?
Because he cannot say that no one has told him, no one admonished him; since
therefore after admonition he continues the same, he is self-condemned.
Ver. 12. "When I shall send Artemas unto you, or Tychicus; be diligent to
come unto me to Nicopolis." What do you say? After having appointed him to
preside over Crete, do you again summon him to yourself? It was not to
withdraw him from that occupation, but to discipline him the more for it. For
that he does not call him to attend upon him, as if he took him everywhere with
him as his follower, appears from what he adds:
"For I have determined there to winter."
Now Nicopolis is a city of Thrace.
Ver. 14. "Bring Zenas the lawyer and Apollos on their journey diligently,
that nothing be wanting unto them."
These were not of the number to whom Churches had been entrusted, but of
the number of his companions. But Apollos was the more vehement, being "an
eloquent man, and mighty in the Scriptures." [Acts 18:24] But if Zenas was a
lawyer, you say, he ought not to have been supported by others. But by a lawyer

here is meant one versed in the laws of the Jews. And he seems to say, supply
their wants abundantly, that nothing may be lacking to them.
Ver. 14, 15. "And let ours also learn to maintain good works for necessary
uses, that they be not unfruitful. All that are with me salute you. Greet them that
love us in the faith."
That is, either those that love Paul himself, or those men that are faithful.
"Grace be with you all. Amen."
How then do you command him to stop the mouths of gainsayers, if he
must pass them by when they are doing everything to their own destruction? He
means that he should not do it principally for their advantage, for being once
perverted in their minds, they would not profit by it. But if they injured others, it
behooved him to withstand and contend with them; and manfully await them,
but if you are reduced to necessity, seeing them destroying others, be not silent,
but stop their mouths, from regard to those whom they would destroy. It is not
indeed possible for a zealous man of upright life to abstain from contention, but
so do as I have said. For the evil arises from idleness and a vain philosophy, that
one should be occupied about words only. For it is a great injury to be uttering a
superfluity of words, when one ought to be teaching, or praying, or giving
thanks. For it is not right to be sparing of our money but not sparing of our
words; we ought rather to spare words than our money, and not to give ourselves
up to all sorts of persons.
What means, "that they be careful to maintain good works"? That they wait
not for those who are in want to come to them, but that they seek out those who
need their assistance. Thus the considerate man shows his concern, and with
great zeal will he perform this duty. For in doing good actions, it is not those
who receive the kindness that are benefited, so much as those who do it that
make gain and profit, for it gives them confidence towards God. But in the other
case, there is no end of contention: therefore he calls the heretic incorrigible. For
as to neglect those for whom there is a hope of conversion is the part of
slothfulness, so to bestow pains upon those who are diseased past remedy is the