THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.36, C.7.

But others say that the star first appeared when Christ was born, and
that the Magi set off as soon as they saw the star, and accomplished
a journey of very great length in thirteen days, owing partly to the
Divine assistance, and partly to the fleetness of the dromedaries.
And I say this on the supposition that they came from the far east.
But others, again, say that they came from a neighboring country,
whence also was Balaam, to whose teaching they were heirs; and
they are said to have come from the east, because their country was
to the east of the country of the Jews. In this case Herod killed the
babes, not as soon as the Magi departed, but two years after: and
that either because he is said to have gone to Rome in the
meanwhile on account of an accusation brought against him, or
because he was troubled at some imminent peril, and for the time
being desisted from his anxiety to slay the child, or because he may
have thought that the Magi, "being deceived by the illusory
appearance of the star, and not finding the child, as they had
expected to, were ashamed to return to him": as Augustine says (De
Consensu Evang. ii). And the reason why he killed not only those
who were two years old, but also the younger children, would be, as
Augustine says in a sermon on the Innocents, because he feared lest
a child whom the stars obey, might make himself appear older or
younger.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.36, C.8.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether the star which appeared to the Magi

belonged to the heavenly system?
Objection 1: It would seem that the star which appeared to the Magi
belonged to the heavenly system. For Augustine says in a sermon
on the Epiphany (cxxii): "While God yet clings to the breast, and
suffers Himself to be wrapped in humble swaddling clothes,
suddenly a new star shines forth in the heavens." Therefore the star
which appeared to the Magi belonged to the heavenly system.
Objection 2: Further, Augustine says in a sermon on the Epiphany
(cci): "Christ was made known to the shepherds by angels, to the
Magi by a star. A heavenly tongue speaks to both, because the
tongue of the prophets spoke no longer." But the angels who
appeared to the shepherds were really angels from heaven.
Therefore also the star which appeared to the Magi was really a star
from the heavens.
Objection 3: Further, stars which are not in the heavens but in the air
are called comets, which do not appear at the birth of kings, but
rather are signs of their approaching death. But this star was a sign
of the King's birth: wherefore the Magi said (Mt. 2:2): "Where is He
that is born King of the Jews? For we have seen His star in the east."
Therefore it seems that it was a star from the heavens.
On the contrary, Augustine says (Contra Faust. ii): "It was not one of
those stars which since the beginning of the creation observe the
course appointed to them by the Creator; but this star was a stranger
to the heavens, and made its appearance at the strange sight of a
virgin in childbirth."
I answer that, As Chrysostom says (Hom. vi in Matth.), it is clear, for
many reasons, that the star which appeared to the Magi did not
belong to the heavenly system. First, because no other star
approaches from the same quarter as this star, whose course was
from north to south, these being the relative positions of Persia,
whence the Magi came, and Judea. Secondly, from the time. For it
appeared not only at night, but also at midday: and no star can do
this, not even the moon. Thirdly, because it was visible at one time
and hidden at another. For when they entered Jerusalem it hid itself:
then, when they had left Herod, it showed itself again. Fourthly,