Ver. 6. "Young men likewise exhort to be soberminded."
See how he everywhere recommends the observance of decorum. For he
has committed to women the greater part in the instruction of women, having
appointed the elder to teach the younger. But the whole instruction of men he
assigns to Titus himself. For nothing is so difficult for that age as to overcome
unlawful pleasures. For neither the love of wealth, nor the desire of glory, or any
other thing so much solicits the young, as fleshly lust. Therefore passing over
other things, he directs his admonition to that vital point. Not however that he
would have other things neglected; for what says he?
Ver. 7. "In all things showing yourself a pattern of good works."
Let the elder women, he says, teach the younger, but do you yourself exhort
young men to be soberminded. And let the luster of your life be a common
school of instruction, a pattern of virtue to all, publicly exhibited, like some
original model, containing in itself all beauties, affording examples whence
those who are willing may easily imprint upon themselves any of its excellences.
Ver. 7, 8. "In [your] doctrine showing uncorruptness, gravity, sincerity,
Sound speech that cannot be condemned; that he that is of the contrary part may
be ashamed, having no evil thing to say of you."
By "him that is of the contrary part," he means the devil, and every one
who ministers to him. For when the life is illustrious, and the discourse
corresponds to it, being meek and gentle, and affording no handle to the
adversaries, it is of unspeakable advantage. Of great use then is the ministry of
the word, not any common word, but that which is approved, and cannot be
condemned, affording no pretext to those who are willing to censure it.
Ver. 9. "Exhort servants to be obedient to their own masters, and to please
them well in all things."
Do you see what he has previously said, "that he that is of the contrary part
may be ashamed, having no evil thing to say of you." He therefore is deserving
of condemnation, who under pretense of continence separates wives from their
husbands, and he who under any other pretext takes away servants from their

masters. This is not "speech that cannot be condemned," but it gives great handle
to the unbelieving, and opens the mouths of all against us.
"Not answering again."
Ver. 10. "Not purloining, but showing all good fidelity, that they may adorn
the doctrine of God our Saviour in all things."
Thus he has well said in another place, "Doing service as to the Lord, and
not to men." For if you serve your master with good will, yet the occasion of this
service proceeds from your fear, and he who with so great fear renders Him
service, shall receive the greater reward. For if he restrain not his hand, or his
unruly tongue, how shall the Gentile admire the doctrine that is among us? But if
they see their slave, who has been taught the philosophy of Christ, displaying
more self-command than their own philosophers, and serving with all meekness
and good will, he will in every way admire the power of the Gospel. For the
Greeks judge not of doctrines by the doctrine itself, but they make the life and
conduct the test of the doctrines. Let women therefore and servants be their
instructors by their conversation. For both among themselves, and everywhere, it
is admitted that the race of servants is passionate, not open to impression,
intractable, and not very apt to receive instruction in virtue, not from their
nature, God forbid, but from their ill breeding, and the neglect of their masters.
For those who rule them care about nothing but their own service; or if they do
sometimes attend to their morals, they do it only to spare themselves the trouble
that would be caused them by their fornication, their thefts, or their drunkenness,
and being thus neglected and having no one to concern himself about them, they
naturally sink into the very depths of wickedness. For if under the direction of a
father and mother, a guardian, a master, and teacher, with suitable companions,
with the honor of a free condition, and many other advantages, it is difficult to
escape intimacies with the wicked, what can we expect from those who are
destitute of all these, and are mixed up with the wicked, and associate fearlessly
with whomsoever they will, no one troubling herself about their friendships?
What sort of persons do we suppose they will be? On this account it is difficult