## CHAPTER LXXX, LXXXI--Arguments of those who wish to prove that the Human Soul
perishes with the Body, with Replies to the same
ARG. 1. If human souls are multiplied according to the multiplication of bodies, as
shown above (Chap.LXXV), then when the bodies perish, the souls cannot remain
in their multitude. Hence one of two conclusions must follow: either the human
soul must wholly cease to be; or there must remain one soul only, which seems to suit
the view of those who make that alone incorruptible which is one in all men, whether
that be the active intellect alone, as Alexander says, or with the active also the potential
intellect, as Averroes says.
Reply. Whatever things are necessarily in conjunction and proportion with one another,
are made many or one together, each by its own cause. If the being of the one depends
on the other, its unity or multiplication also will depend on the same: otherwise it will
depend on some extrinsic cause. Form then and matter must always be in proportion
with one another, and conjoined by a certain natural tie. Hence matter and form must
vary together in point of multiplicity and unity. If then the form depends on the matter for
its being, the multiplication of the form will depend on the matter, and so will its unity.
But if the form is in no such dependence on the matter, then, -- though it will still be
necessary for the form to be multiplied with the multiplication of the matter, -- the unity
or multiplicity of the form will not depend on the matter. But it has been shown (Chap.

be united with their bodies only accidentally, and soul and body would not make up an
essential but only an accidental unity. But inasmuch as they are forms, they must be
commensurate with their bodies. Hence it is clear that their several different
commensuratenesses remain in the departed souls, and consequently plurality.
Arg. 3. It seems quite impossible, on the theory of those who suppose the eternity of the
world, for human souls to remain in their multitude after the death of the body. For if the
world is from eternity, infinite men have died before our time. If then the souls of the
dead remain after death in their multitude, we must say that there is now an actual
infinity of souls of men previously dead. But actual infinity is impossible in nature.
Reply. Of supporters of the eternity of the world, some have simply allowed the
impossibility, saying that human souls perish altogether with their bodies. Others have
said that of all souls there remains one spiritual existence which is common to all, -- the
active intellect according to some, or with the active also the potential intellect
according to others. Others have supposed souls to remain in their multitude after
their bodies; but, not to be obliged to suppose an infinity of souls, they have said that
the same souls are united to different bodies after a fixed period; and this was the
opinion of the Platonists, of which hereafter (Chap.LXXXIII). Others, avoiding all
the aforesaid answers, have maintained that there was no difficulty in the existence of
an actual infinity of departed souls: for an actual infinity of things, not related to one
another, was only an accidental infinity, in which they saw no difficulty; and this is the
position of Avicenna and Algazel. Which of these was the opinion of Aristotle is
not expressly set down in his writings, although he does expressly hold the eternity of
the world. But the last mentioned opinion is not inconsistent with his principles: for in the
Physics, III, v, his argument against an actual infinity is confined to natural bodies, and
is not extended to immaterial substances. Clearly however the professors of the
Catholic faith can feel no difficulty on this point, as they do not allow the eternity of the
world.
Arg. 5. It is impossible for any substance to exist destitute of all activity. But all activity of
the soul ends with the body, as may be shown by simple enumeration. For the faculties
of the vegetative soul work through bodily qualities and a bodily instrument; and the
term of their activity is the body itself, which is perfected by the soul, is thereby
nourished and developed, and comes to furnish the generative products. Also all the
activities of the faculties of the sensitive soul are accomplished through bodily organs;
and some of them are accompanied by (sensible) bodily change, as in the case of the
passions. As for the act of understanding, although it is not an activity exercised through
any bodily organ, nevertheless its objects are phantasms, which stand to it as colours to
sight: hence as sight cannot see without colours, so the intellectual soul cannot
understand without phantasms. The soul also needs, for purposes of understanding, the
faculties which prepare the phantasms to become actual terms of intellect, namely, the
cogitative faculty and the memory, of which it is certain that they cannot endure without
the body, seeing that they work through organs of the body. Hence Aristotle says that
"the soul by no means understands without a phantasm," and that "nothing understands
without the passive intellect," by which name he designates the cogitative faculty,