not do them; nor was I a philosopher in words only. "Faith, longsuffering." He
means, how none of these things troubled me. "Charity," which those men had
not; "patience," nor yet this. Towards the heretics, he means, I show much
longsuffering; "patience," that under persecution.
Ver. 11. "Persecutions, afflictions."
There are two things that disquiet a teacher, the number of heretics, and
men's wanting fortitude to endure sufferings. And yet he has said much about
these, that such always have been, and always will be, and no age will be free
from them, and that they will not be able to injure us, and that in the world there
are vessels of gold and of silver. You see how he proceeds to discourse about his
afflictions, "which came upon me at Antioch, at Iconium, at Lystra."
Why has he selected these instances out of many? Because the rest was
known to Timothy, and these perhaps were new events, and he does not mention
the former ones, for he is not enumerating them particularly, for he is not
actuated by ambition or vainglory, but he recounts them for the consolation of
his disciple, not from ostentation. And here he speaks of Antioch in Pisidia, and
Lystra, whence Timothy himself was. "What persecutions I endured." There was
twofold matter of consolation, that I displayed a generous zeal, and that I was
not forsaken. It cannot be said, that God abandoned me, but He rendered my
crown more radiant.
"What persecutions I endured: but out of them all the Lord delivered me."
Ver. 12. "Yea, and all those that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer
persecution."
But why, he says, should I speak only of myself? Each one that will live
godly will be persecuted. Here he calls afflictions and sorrows, "persecutions,"
for it is not possible that a man pursuing the course of virtue should not be
exposed to grief, tribulation, and temptations. For how can he escape it who is
treading in the strait and narrow way, and who has heard, that "in the world you
shall have tribulation"? [John 16:33] If Job in his time said, "The life of man
upon earth is a state of trial" [Job 7:1, Septuagint]; how much more was it so in

those days?
Ver. 13. "But evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving,
and being deceived."
Let none of these things, he says, disturb you, if they are in prosperity, and
thou in trials. Such is the nature of the case. From my own instance you may
learn that it is impossible for man, in his warfare with the wicked, not to be
exposed to tribulation. One cannot be in combat and live luxuriously, one cannot
be wrestling and feasting. Let none therefore of those who are contending seek
for ease or joyous living. Again, the present state is contest, warfare, tribulation,
straits, and trials, and the very scene of conflicts. The season for rest is not now,
this is the time for toil and labor. No one who has just stripped and anointed
himself thinks of ease. If you think of ease, why did you strip, or prepare to
fight? "But do I not maintain the fight?" you say. What, when you do not
conquer your desires, nor resist the evil bias of nature?
Ver. 14. "But continue thou in the things that you have learned and hast
been assured of, knowing of whom you have learned them; And that from a child
you have known the holy Scriptures, which are able to make you wise unto
salvation through the faith which in Christ Jesus."
What is this? As the prophet David exhorted, saying, "Be not thou envious
against the workers of iniquity" [Psalm 37:1], so Paul exhorts, "Continue thou in
the things which you have learned," and not simply learned, but "hast been
assured of," that is, hast believed. And what have I believed? That this is the
Life. And if you see things happening contrary to your belief, be not troubled.
The same happened to Abraham, yet he was not affected at it. He had heard, "In
Isaac shall your seed be called" [Genesis 21:12]; and he was commanded to
sacrifice Isaac, yet he was not troubled nor dismayed. Let no one be offended
because of the wicked. This the Scripture taught from the beginning.
What then, if the good be in prosperity, and the wicked be punished? The
one is likely to happen, the other not so. For the wicked will possibly be
punished, but the good cannot always be rejoicing. No one was equal to Paul, yet