SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.0, C.10.

of truth, is come, He will teach you all truth." Now the symbol is
published by the authority of the universal Church. Therefore it
contains nothing defective.
I answer that, As the Apostle says (Heb. 11:6), "he that cometh to
God, must believe that He is." Now a man cannot believe, unless the
truth be proposed to him that he may believe it. Hence the need for
the truth of faith to be collected together, so that it might the more
easily be proposed to all, lest anyone might stray from the truth
through ignorance of the faith. It is from its being a collection of
maxims of faith that the symbol takes its name.
Reply to Objection 1: The truth of faith is contained in Holy Writ,
diffusely, under various modes of expression, and sometimes
obscurely, so that, in order to gather the truth of faith from Holy Writ,
one needs long study and practice, which are unattainable by all
those who require to know the truth of faith, many of whom have no
time for study, being busy with other affairs. And so it was
necessary to gather together a clear summary from the sayings of
Holy Writ, to be proposed to the belief of all. This indeed was no
addition to Holy Writ, but something taken from it.
Reply to Objection 2: The same doctrine of faith is taught in all the
symbols. Nevertheless, the people need more careful instruction
about the truth of faith, when errors arise, lest the faith of simpleminded persons be corrupted by heretics. It was this that gave rise
to the necessity of formulating several symbols, which nowise differ
from one another, save that on account of the obstinacy of heretics,
one contains more explicitly what another contains implicitly.
Reply to Objection 3: The confession of faith is drawn up in a symbol
in the person, as it were, of the whole Church, which is united
together by faith. Now the faith of the Church is living faith; since
such is the faith to be found in all those who are of the Church not
only outwardly but also by merit. Hence the confession of faith is
expressed in a symbol, in a manner that is in keeping with living
faith, so that even if some of the faithful lack living faith, they should
endeavor to acquire it.
Reply to Objection 4: No error about the descent into hell had arisen
among heretics, so that there was no need to be more explicit on
that point. For this reason it is not repeated in the symbol of the

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.0, C.10.

Fathers, but is supposed as already settled in the symbol of the
Apostles. For a subsequent symbol does not cancel a preceding
one; rather does it expound it, as stated above (ad 2).
Reply to Objection 5: If we say: "'In' the holy Catholic Church," this
must be taken as verified in so far as our faith is directed to the Holy
Ghost, Who sanctifies the Church; so that the sense is: "I believe in
the Holy Ghost sanctifying the Church." But it is better and more in
keeping with the common use, to omit the 'in,' and say simply, "the
holy Catholic Church," as Pope Leo [Rufinus, Comm. in Sym. Apost.]
observes.
Reply to Objection 6: Since the symbol of the Fathers is an
explanation of the symbol of the Apostles, and was drawn up after
the faith was already spread abroad, and when the Church was
already at peace, it is sung publicly in the Mass. On the other hand
the symbol of the Apostles, which was drawn up at the time of
persecution, before the faith was made public, is said secretly at
Prime and Compline, as though it were against the darkness of past
and future errors.