## Homily 12 on Romans

Rom. VI. 19
"I speak after the manner of men because of the infirmity of your flesh: for
as you have yielded your members (so 4 manuscripts Sav. the members of your
flesh) servants to uncleanness and to iniquity unto iniquity; even so now yield
your members servants to righteousness unto holiness."
Since he had required great strictness of life, charging us to be dead to the
world, and to have died unto wickedness, and to abide with no notion towards
the workings of sin, and seemed to be saying something great and burdensome,
and too much for human nature; through a desire to show that he is not making
any exorbitant demand, nor even as much as might be expected of one who
enjoyed so great a gift, but one quite moderate and light, he proves it from
contraries, and says, "I speak after the manner of men," as much as to say, Going
by human reasonings; by such as one usually meets with. For he signifies either
this, or the moderateness of it, by the term applied, "after the manner of men."
For elsewhere he uses the same word. "There has no temptation taken you but
such as is common to man" [1 Corinthians 10:13], that is, moderate and small.
"For as you have yielded your members servants to uncleanness and to iniquity
unto iniquity; even so now yield your members servants to righteousness unto
holiness." And truly the masters are very different ones, but still it is an equal
amount of servitude that I ask. For men ought to give a much larger one, and so
much the larger as this is a greater and better mastership than the other.
Nevertheless I make no greater demand "because of the infirmity," and that, he
does not say of your free will or readiness of spirit, but "of your flesh," so
making what he says the less severe. And yet on one side there is uncleanness,
on the other holiness: on the one iniquity, and on the other righteousness. And
who is so wretched, he says, and in such straits as not to spend as much

earnestness upon the service of Christ, as upon that of sin and the devil? Hear
then what follows, and you will see clearly that we do not even spend this little.
For when (stated in this naked way) it does not seem credible or easy to admit,
and nobody would endure to hear that he does not serve Christ so much as he did
serve the devil, he proves it by what follows, and renders it credible by bringing
that slavery before us, and saying how they did serve him.
Ver. 20. "For when you were the servants of sin, you were free from
righteousness."
Now what he says is somewhat of this kind, When ye lived in wickedness,
and impiety, and the worst of evils, the state of compliance ye lived in was such
that you did absolutely no good thing at all. For this is, "you were free from
righteousness." That is you were not subject to it, but estranged from it wholly.
For you did not even so much as divide the manner of servitude between
righteousness and sin, but gave yourselves wholly up to wickedness. Now,
therefore, since you have come over to righteousness, give yourselves wholly up
to virtue, doing nothing at all of vice, that the measure you give may be at least
equal. And yet it is not the mastership only that is so different, but in the
servitude itself there is a vast difference. And this too he unfolds with great
perspicuity, and shows what conditions they served upon then, and what now.
And as yet he says nothing of the harm accruing from the thing, but hitherto
speaks of the shame.
Ver. 21. "What fruit had ye then in those things whereof you are now
ashamed?"
So great was the slavery, that even the recollection of it now makes you
ashamed; but if the recollection makes one ashamed, the reality would much
more. And so you gained now in two ways, in having been freed from the
shame; and also in having come to know the condition you were in; just as then
you were injured in two ways, in doing things deserving shame, and in not even
knowing to be ashamed. And this is worse than the former. Yet still ye kept in a
state of servitude. Having then proved most abundantly the harm of what took