out of season, for it is unseasonable not to be continually approaching. For of
Him who desires to give it is always seasonable to ask: yea, as breathing is never
out of season, so neither is praying unseasonable, but rather not praying. Since as
we need this breath, so do we also the help that comes from Him; and if we be
willing, we shall easily draw Him to us. And the prophet, to manifest this, and to
point out the constant readiness of His beneficence, said, "We shall find Him
prepared as the morning." For as often as we may draw near, we shall see Him
awaiting our movements. And if we fail to draw from out of His ever-springing
goodness, the blame is all ours. This, for example, was His complaint against
certain Jews, when He said, "My mercy is as a morning cloud, and as the early
dew it goes away." And His meaning is like this; "I indeed have supplied all my
part, but you, as a hot sun coming over scatters both the cloud and the dew, and
makes them vanish, so have ye by your great wickedness restrained the
unspeakable Beneficence."
Which also itself again is an instance of providential care: that even when
He sees us unworthy to receive good, He withholds His benefits, lest He render
us careless. But if we change a little, even but so much as to know that we have
sinned, He gushes out beyond the fountains, He is poured forth beyond the
ocean; and the more you receive, so much the more does He rejoice; and in this
way is stirred up again to give us more. For indeed He accounts it as His own
wealth, that we should be saved, and that He should give largely to them that
ask. And this, it may seem, Paul was declaring when He said, that He is "rich
unto all and over all that call upon Him." Because when we pray not, then He is
angry; when we pray not, then does He turn away from us. For this cause "He
became poor, that He might make us rich;" for this cause He underwent all those
sufferings, that He might incite us to ask.
Let us not therefore despair, but having so many motives and good hopes,
though we sin every day, let us approach Him, entreating, beseeching, asking the
forgiveness of our sins. For thus we shall be more backward to sin for the time to
come; thus shall we drive away the devil, and shall call forth the lovingkindness

of God, and attain unto the good things to come, by the grace and love towards
man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and might forever and ever.
Amen.

## Homily 23 on Matthew

Matt. VII. 1.
"Judge not, that you be not judged."
What then? Ought we not to blame them that sin? Because Paul also says
this selfsame thing: or rather, there too it is Christ, speaking by Paul, and saying,
[Romans 14:10] "Why do you judge your brother? And thou, why do you set at
nought your brother?" and, "Who are you that judgest another man's servant?"
[Romans 14:4] And again, "Therefore judge nothing before the time, until the
Lord come." [1 Corinthians 4:5]
How then does He say elsewhere, "Reprove, rebuke, exhort,"
[2 Timothy 4:2] and, "Them that sin rebuke before all?" And Christ too to Peter,
"Go and tell him his fault between you and him alone," and if he neglect to hear,
add to yourself another also; and if not even so does he yield, declare it to the
church likewise? And how has He set over us so many to reprove; and not only
to reprove, but also to punish? For him that hearkens to none of these, He has
commanded to be "as a heathen man and a publican." [Matthew 18:17] And
how gave He them the keys also? Since if they are not to judge, they will be
without authority in any matter, and in vain have they received the power to bind
and to loose.
And besides, if this were to obtain, all would be lost alike, whether in
churches, or in states, or in houses. For except the master judge the servant, and
the mistress the maid, and the father the son, and friends one another, there will
be an increase of all wickedness. And why say I, friends? Unless we judge our
enemies, we shall never be able to put an end to our enmity, but all things will be
turned upside down.
What then can the saying be? Let us carefully attend, lest the medicines of
salvation, and the laws of peace, be accounted by any man laws of overthrow