say, "Make time for the assembles of the Church," it is worldly cares. If I say,
"Give heed to what is spoken, and consider the power of what is taught," it is
want of learning. If I say, "Correct another," you say, "When counsel is given
him, he takes no heed, for I have often spoken, and been scorned." Frigid, as
such pretences are, yet you have some pretences to allege. But suppose I say,
"Dismiss your anger," which of these will you then allege? For neither infirmity
of body, nor poverty, nor lack of culture, nor want of leisure, nor any other thing
of that kind have you to advance; but this sin is above all other the most
inexcusable. How will you be able to stretch your hands toward heaven, or how
to move your tongue, or to ask pardon? For although God be desirous to pardon
your sins, you yourself dost not suffer Him, while you retain that of your fellowservant! But suppose that he is cruel, fierce, and savage, and greedy of revenge
and retaliation? Why for this reason you ought especially to grant forgiveness.
Have you been wronged much, and robbed, and slandered, and injured in matters
of the first importance; and do you wish to see your enemy punished? Yet even
for this, it will be of use to you to pardon him. For suppose that you yourself
takest vengeance, and prosecutest it, either by words, by deeds, or imprecation
against the adversary; then God will not afterwards prosecute it too, inasmuch as
you have taken your revenge; and not only will He not prosecute the matter for
you, but will also demand a penalty of you as a despiser of Himself. For if this
same thing takes place among mankind, viz. that if we beat the servant of
another, the master is indignant, and calls the act an insult (for although we be
treated injuriously, whether by slaves, or by freemen, it is fitting that we should
await the legal decisions of magistrates or masters); if then even among men, to
avenge ourselves would not be safe, how much more so when God is the
avenger!
9. Hath your neighbour wronged and grieved you, and involved you in a
thousand ills? Be it so, yet do not prosecute vengeance on your own part, lest
you do desire to your Lord! Yield the matter to God, and He will dispose of it
much better than you can desire. To you He has given charge simply to pray for

the injurer; but how to deal with him, He has ordered you to leave to Himself.
Never can you so avenge yourself, as He is prepared to avenge you, if you give
place to Him alone, and dost not utter imprecations on him who has aggrieved
you; but sufferest God to be sole arbiter of the sentence. For although we may
pardon those who have aggrieved us; although we may be reconciled; although
we may pray for them; yet God does not pardon, unless they themselves are
converted, and become better. And He withholds pardon, with a view to their
own advantage. For He praises you, and approves you for your spiritual wisdom;
but visits him, in order that he may not grow worse by your wisdom. So that the
common saying on this subject is not to the point. For many there are, who when
I reproach them because after being exhorted to be reconciled to their enemies,
they will not be persuaded to it, think fit to proffer this apology, which is nothing
less than a cloak for their iniquity. "I am unwilling," says one, "to be reconciled,
lest I should make the man worse, more ill-tempered, and more disposed to treat
me contemptuously hereafter." Besides this, they also make this plea: "Many
people," say they, "think it is weakness in me to come first to a reconciliation,
and to entreat my enemy." All these things are foolish; for the Eye that slumbers
not has seen your good intention; wherefore, it behooves you to make no account
of the opinion of your fellow-servants, when you have gained the opinion of the
Judge, Who is about to try your cause.
10. But if your concern be, lest your enemy should become worse by your
clemency learn this—that it is not thus he is made worse; but far rather if you are
unreconciled. For although he were the vilest of men; although he might neither
confess nor publish it openly; yet he will silently approve your Christian
wisdom, and in his own conscience will respect your gentleness. Should he,
however, persist in the same iniquity, while you are endeavouring to soften and
conciliate, he will have to abide the heaviest punishment from God. And that
you may know, that although we should pray for our enemies, and for those who
have injured us, God does not pardon, if they are likely to become worse by our
forbearance, I will mention to you an ancient piece of history. Miriam once