THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.16, C.8.

Reply to Objection 4: A term placed in the subject is taken materially,
i.e. for the suppositum; placed in the predicate it is taken formally, i.
e. for the nature signified. Hence when it is said that "Man was made
God," the being made is not attributed to the human nature but to the
suppositum of the human nature, Which is God from eternity, and
hence it does not befit Him to be made God. But when it is said that
"God was made Man," the making is taken to be terminated in the
human nature. Hence, properly speaking, this is true: "God was
made Man," and this is false: "Man was made God"; even as if
Socrates, who was already a man, were made white, and were
pointed out, this would be true: "This man was made white today,"
and this would be false; "This white thing was made man today."
Nevertheless, if on the part of the subject there is added some word
signifying human nature in the abstract, it might be taken in this way
for the subject of the making, e.g. if it were said that "human nature
was made the Son of God's."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.16, C.9.

### ARTICLE 8. Whether this is true: "Christ is a creature"?

Objection 1: It would seem that this is true: "Christ is a creature." For
Pope Leo says [Append. Opp. August., Serm. xii de Nativ.]: "A new
and unheard of covenant: God Who is and was, is made a creature."
Now we may predicate of Christ whatever the Son of God became by
the Incarnation. Therefore this is true; Christ is a creature.
Objection 2: Further, the properties of both natures may be
predicated of the common hypostasis of both natures, no matter by
what word they are signified, as stated above (Article 5). But it is the
property of human nature to be created, as it is the property of the
Divine Nature to be Creator. Hence both may be said of Christ, viz.
that He is a creature and that he is uncreated and Creator.
Objection 3: Further, the principal part of a man is the soul rather
than the body. But Christ, by reason of the body which He took from
the Virgin, is said simply to be born of the Virgin. Therefore by
reason of the soul which is created by God, it ought simply to be
said that He is a creature.
On the contrary, Ambrose says (De Trin. i): "Was Christ made by a
word? Was Christ created by a command?" as if to say: "No!" Hence
he adds: "How can there be a creature in God? For God has a simple
not a composite Nature." Therefore it must not be granted that
"Christ is a creature."
I answer that, As Jerome [Gloss, Ord. in Osee 2:16] says, "words
spoken amiss lead to heresy"; hence with us and heretics the very
words ought not to be in common, lest we seem to countenance
their error. Now the Arian heretics said that Christ was a creature
and less than the Father, not only in His human nature, but even in
His Divine Person. And hence we must not say absolutely that Christ
is a "creature" or "less than the Father"; but with a qualification, viz.
"in His human nature." But such things as could not be considered
to belong to the Divine Person in Itself may be predicated simply of
Christ by reason of His human nature; thus we say simply that Christ
suffered, died and was buried: even as in corporeal and human
beings, things of which we may doubt whether they belong to the
whole or the part, if they are observed to exist in a part, are not
predicated of the whole simply, i.e. without qualification, for we do