FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.33, C.2.

Reply to Objection 1: In metaphorical expressions nothing hinders
one and the same thing from being attributed to different things
according to different likenesses. And in this way expansion pertains
to love by reason of a certain spreading out, in so far as the affection
of the lover spreads out to others, so as to care, not only for his own
interests, but also for what concerns others. On the other hand
expansion pertains to pleasure, in so far as a thing becomes more
ample in itself so as to become more capacious.
Reply to Objection 2: Desire includes a certain expansion arising
from the imagination of the thing desired; but this expansion
increases at the presence of the pleasurable object: because the
mind surrenders itself more to that object when it is already taking
pleasure in it, than when it desires it before possessing it; since
pleasure is the end of desire.
Reply to Objection 3: He that takes pleasure in a thing holds it fast,
by clinging to it with all his might: but he opens his heart to it that he
may enjoy it perfectly.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.33, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether pleasure causes thirst or desire for

itself?
Objection 1: It would seem that pleasure does not cause desire for
itself. Because all movement ceases when repose is reached. But
pleasure is, as it were, a certain repose of the movement of desire,
as stated above (Question 23, Article 4; Question 25, Article 2).
Therefore the movement of desire ceases when pleasure is reached.
Therefore pleasure does not cause desire.
Objection 2: Further, a thing does not cause its contrary. But
pleasure is, in a way, contrary to desire, on the part of the object:
since desire regards a good which is not yet possessed, whereas
pleasure regards the good that is possessed. Therefore pleasure
does not cause desire for itself.
Objection 3: Further, distaste is incompatible with desire. But
pleasure often causes distaste. Therefore it does not cause desire.
On the contrary, Our Lord said (Jn. 4:13): "Whosoever drinketh of
this water, shall thirst again": where, according to Augustine (Tract.
xv in Joan.), water denotes pleasures of the body.
I answer that, Pleasure can be considered in two ways; first, as
existing in reality; secondly, as existing in the memory. Again thirst,
or desire, can be taken in two ways; first, properly, as denoting a
craving for something not possessed; secondly, in general, as
excluding distaste.
Considered as existing in reality, pleasure does not of itself cause
thirst or desire for itself, but only accidentally; provided we take
thirst or desire as denoting a craving for some thing not possessed:
because pleasure is an emotion of the appetite in respect of
something actually present. But it may happen that what is actually
present is not perfectly possessed: and this may be on the part of
the thing possessed, or on the part of the possessor. On the part of
the thing possessed, this happens through the thing possessed not
being a simultaneous whole; wherefore one obtains possession of it
successively, and while taking pleasure in what one has, one desires
to possess the remainder: thus if a man is pleased with the first part
of a verse, he desires to hear the second part, as Augustine says