Joseph the worse, and this, though they proceeded even unto blood? Had not
they to endure famine, and encounter peril to the utmost, whereas he became
king of all Egypt? For the more you envy, the more do you become a procurer of
greater blessing to the object of your envy. For there is a God who beholds these
things; and when He sees him injured, that does no injury, him He exalts the
more, and so makes him glorious, but you He punishes.
For if them that exult over their enemies, He suffer not to go unpunished
("For rejoice not," it is said, "when your enemies fall, lest at any time the Lord
see it, and it displease Him" ); much more such as envy those who have done no
wrong.
Let us then extirpate the many-headed wild beast. For in truth many are the
kinds of envy. Thus, if he that loves one that is a friend to him has no more than
the publican, where shall he stand who hates him that does him no wrong? And
how shall he escape hell, becoming worse than the heathens? Wherefore also I
do exceedingly grieve, that we who are commanded to copy the angels, or rather
the Lord of the angels, emulate the devil. For indeed there is much envy, even in
the church; and more among us, than among those under authority. Wherefore
we must even discourse unto ourselves.
5. Tell me then, why do you envy your neighbor? Because you see him
reaping honor, and words of good report? Then do you not bear in mind how
much evil honors bring on the unguarded? Lifting them up to pride, to vainglory,
to arrogance, to contemptuousness; making them more careless? And besides
these evils, they wither also lightly away. For the most grievous thing is this, that
the evils arising therefrom abide immortal, but the pleasure at the moment of its
appearing, is flown away. For these things then do you envy? Tell me.
"But he has great influence with the Ruler, and leads and drives all things
which way he will, and inflicts pain on them that offend him, and benefits his
flatterers, and has much power." These are the sayings of secular persons, and of
men that are riveted to the earth. For the spiritual man nothing shall be able to
hurt.

For what serious harm shall he do to him? Vote him out of his office? And
what of that? For if it be justly done, he is even profited; for nothing so provokes
God, as for one to hold the priest's office unworthily. But if unjustly, the blame
again falls on the other, not on him; for he who has suffered anything unjustly,
and borne it nobly, obtains in this way the greater confidence towards God.
Let us not then aim at this, how we may be in places of power, and honor,
and authority, but that we may live in virtue and self denial. For indeed places of
authority persuade men to do many things which are not approved of God; and
great vigor of soul is needed, in order to use authority aright. For as he that is
deprived thereof, practises self restraint, whether with or against his will, so he
that enjoys it is in some such condition, as if any one living with a graceful and
beautiful damsel were to receive rules never to look upon her unchastely. For
authority is that kind of thing. Wherefore many, even against their will, has it
induced to show insolence; it awakens wrath, and removes the bridle from the
tongue, and tears off the door of the lips; fanning the soul as with a wind, and
sinking the bark in the lowest depth of evils. Him then who is in so great danger
do you admire, and do you say he is to be envied? Nay, how great madness is
here! Consider, at any rate (besides what we have mentioned), how many
enemies and accusers, and how many flatterers this person has besieging him.
Are these then, I pray you, reasons for calling a man happy? Nay, who can say
so?
"But the people," you say, "hold high account of him." And what is this?
For the people surely is not God, to whom he is to render account: so that in
naming the people, you are speaking of nothing else than of other breakers, and
rocks, and shoals, and sunken ridges. For to be in favor with the people, the
more it makes a man illustrious, the greater the dangers, the cares, the
despondencies it brings with it. For such an one has no power at all to take
breath or stand still, having so severe a master. And why say I, "stand still and
take breath"? Though such an one have never so many good works, hardly does
he enter into the kingdom. For nothing is so wont to overthrow men, as the