quick and dead. To Him give all the prophets witness, that, through His name, every one that
believeth in Him does receive remission of sins." The apostles, therefore, did preach the Son of
God, of whom men were ignorant; and His advent, to those who had been already instructed as to
God; but they did not bring in another god. For if Peter had known any such thing, he would have
preached freely to the Gentiles, that the God of the Jews was indeed one, but the God of the
Christians another; and all of them, doubtless, being awe-struck because of the vision of the angel,
would have believed whatever he told them. But it is evident from Peter's words that he did indeed
still retain the God who was already known to them; but he also bare witness to them that Jesus
Christ was the Son of God, the Judge of quick and dead, into whom he did also command them to
be baptized for the remission of sins; and not this alone, but he witnessed that Jesus was Himself
the Son of God, who also, having been anointed with the Holy Spirit, is called Jesus Christ. And
He is the same being that was born of Mary, as the testimony of Peter implies. Can it really be, that
Peter was not at that time as yet in possession of the perfect knowledge which these men discovered
afterwards? According to them, therefore, Peter was imperfect, and the rest of the apostles were
imperfect; and so it would be fitting that they, coming to life again, should become disciples of
these men, in order that they too might be made perfect. But this is truly ridiculous. These men, in
fact, are proved to be not disciples of the apostles, but of their own wicked notions. To this cause
also are due the various opinions which exist among them, inasmuch as each one adopted error just
as he was capable [of embracing it]. But the Church throughout all the world, having its origin
firm from the apostles, perseveres in one and the same opinion with regard to God and His Son.
8. But again: Whom did Philip preach to the eunuch of the queen of the Ethiopians, returning
from Jerusalem, and reading Esaias the prophet, when he and this man were alone together? Was
it not He of whom the prophet spoke: "He was led as a sheep to the slaughter, and as a lamb dumb
before the shearer, so He opened not the mouth?" "But who shall declare His nativity? for His life
shall be taken away from the earth." [Philip declared] that this was Jesus, and that the Scripture
was fulfilled in Him; as did also the believing eunuch himself: and, immediately requesting to be
baptized, he said, "I believe Jesus Christ to be the Son of God." This man was also sent into the
regions of Ethiopia, to preach what he had himself believed, that there was one God preached by
the prophets, but that the Son of this [God] had already made [His] appearance in human nature
(secundum hominem), and had been led as a sheep to the slaughter; and all the other statements
which the prophets made regarding Him.
9. Paul himself also—after that the Lord spoke to him out of heaven, and showed him that, in
persecuting His disciples, he persecuted his own Lord, and sent Ananias to him that he might recover
his sight, and be baptized—"preached," it is said, "Jesus in the synagogues at Damascus, with all