Homily 21 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts IX. 26, 27
"And when Saul had come to Jerusalem, he assayed to join himself to the
disciples: but they were all afraid of him, and believed not that he was a disciple.
But Barnabas took him, and brought him to the Apostles, and declared unto them
how he had seen the Lord in the way."
One may well be much at a loss here to understand how it is that, whereas
in the Epistle to the Galatians Paul says, "I went not to Jerusalem," but "into
Arabia" and "to Damascus," and, "After three years I went up to Jerusalem," and
"to see Peter" [(ἱ] [στορἥσαι] Cat.) here the writer says the contrary. (There, Paul
says,) "And none of the Apostles saw I; but here, it is said (Barnabas), brought
him to the Apostles."— Well, then, either (Paul) means, I went not up with intent
to refer or attach myself to them ([ἀ] [ναθέσθαι])— for what says he? "I referred
not myself, neither went I to Jerusalem to those who were Apostles before me:"
or else, that the laying await for him in Damascus was after his return from
Arabia; or else, again, that the visit to Jerusalem was after he came from Arabia.
Certainly of his own accord he went not to the Apostles, but "assayed to join
himself unto the disciples"— as being a teacher, not a disciple— "I went not," he
says, "for this purpose, that I should go to those who were Apostles before me:
certainly, I learned nothing from them." Or, he does not speak of this visit, but
passes it by, so that the order is, "I went into Arabia, then I came to Damascus,
then to Jerusalem, then to Syria:" or else, again, that he went up to Jerusalem,
then was sent to Damascus, then to Arabia, then again to Damascus, then to
Cæsarea. Also, the visit "after fourteen years," probably, was when he brought
up the [alms to the] brethren together with Barnabas: [or else he means a
different occasion. Acts 11:30] For the Historian for conciseness, often omits
incidents, and condenses the times. Observe how unambitious the writer is, and

how he does not even relate [related in Acts 22:17-21] that vision, but passes it
by. "He assayed," it says, "to join himself to the disciples. And they were afraid
of him." By this again is shown the ardor of Paul's character: not (only) from the
mouth of Ananias, and of those who wondered at him there, but also of those in
Jerusalem: "they believed not that he was a disciple:" for truly that was beyond
all human expectation. He was no longer a wild beast, but a man mild and
gentle! And observe how he does not go to the Apostles, such is his forbearance,
but to the disciples, as being a disciple. He was not thought worthy of credit.
"But Barnabas"— "Son of Consolation" is his appellation, whence also he
makes himself easy of access to the man: for "he was a kind man" [Acts 11:24],
exceedingly, and this is proved both by the present instance, and in the affair of
John (Mark)— "having taken him, brought him to the Apostles, and related to
them how he had seen the Lord in the way." [Acts 15:39] It is likely that at
Damascus also he had heard all about him: whence he was not afraid but the
others were, for he was a man whose glance inspired fear. "How," it says, "he
had seen the Lord in the way, and that He had spoken unto him, and how in
Damascus he had spoken boldly in the name of the Lord. And he was with them
coming in and going out at Jerusalem, and speaking boldly in the name of Jesus"
[Acts 9:28]: these things were demonstrative of the former, and by his acts he
made good what was spoken of him. "And he spoke, and disputed with the
Hellenists." [Acts 9:29] So then the disciples were afraid of him, and the
Apostles did not trust him; by this therefore he relieves them of their fear. "With
the Hellenists:" he means those who used the Greek tongue: and this he did, very
wisely; for those others, those profound Hebrews had no mind even to see him.
"But they," it says, "went about to slay him:" a token, this, of his energy, and
triumphant victory, and of their exceeding annoyance at what had happened.
Thereupon, fearing lest the issue should be the same as in the case of Stephen,
they sent him to Cæsarea. For it says, "When the brethren were aware of this,
they brought him down to Cæsarea, and sent him forth to Tarsus" [Acts 9:30], at
the same time to preach, and likely to be more in safety, as being in his own