THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.55, C.5.

Resurrection Christ appeared in His own shape to some who were
well disposed to belief, while He appeared in another shape to them
who seemed to be already growing tepid in their faith: hence these
said (Lk. 24:21): "We hoped that it was He that should have
redeemed Israel." Hence Gregory says (Hom. xxiii in Evang.), that
"He showed Himself to them in body such as He was in their minds:
for, because He was as yet a stranger to faith in their hearts, He
made pretense of going on farther," that is, as if He were a stranger.
Reply to Objection 1: As Augustine says (De Qq. Evang. ii), "not
everything of which we make pretense is a falsehood; but when what
we pretend has no meaning then is it a falsehood. But when our
pretense has some signification, it is not a lie, but a figure of the
truth; otherwise everything said figuratively by wise and holy men,
or even by our Lord Himself, would be set down as a falsehood,
because it is not customary to take such expressions in the literal
sense. And deeds, like words, are feigned without falsehood, in
order to denote something else." And so it happened here. as has
been said.
Reply to Objection 2: As Augustine says (De Consens. Evang. iii):
"Our Lord could change His flesh so that His shape really was other
than they were accustomed to behold; for, before His Passion He
was transfigured on the mountain, so that His face shone like the
sun. But it did not happen thus now." For not without reason do we
"understand this hindrance in their eyes to have been of Satan's
doing, lest Jesus might be recognized." Hence Luke says (24:16) that
"their eyes were held, that they should not know Him."
Reply to Objection 3: Such an argument would prove, if they had not
been brought back from the sight of a strange shape to that of
Christ's true countenance. For, as Augustine says (De Consens.
Evang. iii): "The permission was granted by Christ," namely, that
their eyes should be held fast in the aforesaid way, "until the
Sacrament of the bread; that when they had shared in the unity of
His body, the enemy's hindrance may be understood to have been
taken away, so that Christ might be recognized." Hence he goes on
to say that "'their eyes were opened, and they knew Him'; not that
they were hitherto walking with their eyes shut; but there was
something in them whereby they were not permitted to recognize
what they saw. This could be caused by the darkness or by some
kind of humor."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.55, C.5.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.55, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether Christ should have demonstrated the

truth of His Resurrection by proofs?
Objection 1: It would seem that Christ should not have demonstrated
the truth of His Resurrection by proofs. For Ambrose says (De Fide,
ad Gratian. i): "Let there be no proofs where faith is required." But
faith is required regarding the Resurrection. Therefore proofs are out
of place there.
Objection 2: Further, Gregory says (Hom. xxvi): "Faith has no merit
where human reason supplies the test." But it was no part of Christ's
office to void the merit of faith. Consequently, it was not for Him to
confirm the Resurrection by proofs.
Objection 3: Further, Christ came into the world in order that men
might attain beatitude through Him, according to Jn. 10:10: "I am
come that they may have life, and may have it more abundantly." But
supplying proofs seems to be a hindrance in the way of man's
beatitude; because our Lord Himself said (Jn. 20:29): "Blessed are
they that have not seen, and have believed." Consequently, it seems
that Christ ought not to manifest His Resurrection by any proofs.
On the contrary, It is related in Acts 1:3, that Christ appeared to His
disciples "for forty days by many proofs, speaking of the Kingdom of
God."
I answer that, The word "proof" is susceptible of a twofold meaning:
sometimes it is employed to designate any sort "of reason in
confirmation of what is a matter of doubt" [Tully, Topic. ii]: and
sometimes it means a sensible sign employed to manifest the truth;
thus also Aristotle occasionally uses the term in his works [Prior.
Anal. ii; Rhetor. i]. Taking "proof" in the first sense, Christ did not
demonstrate His Resurrection to the disciples by proofs, because
such argumentative proof would have to be grounded on some
principles: and if these were not known to the disciples, nothing
would thereby be demonstrated to them, because nothing can be
known from the unknown. And if such principles were known to
them, they would not go beyond human reason, and consequently
would not be efficacious for establishing faith in the Resurrection,
which is beyond human reason, since principles must be assumed
which are of the same order, according to 1 Poster. But it was from