your eyes? Render them then good and sound and quicksighted. He has showed
you the true light; if you shun it, and runnest back again into the darkness, what
shall be your excuse? What sort of allowance shall be made for you? None from
that moment. For this is a mark of unspeakable enmity. When indeed you knew
not God, then if you were at enmity with Him, you had, be it how it might, some
excuse. But when you have tasted the goodness and the honey, if you again
abandonest them, and turnest to your own vomit, what else are you doing but
bringing forward evidence of excessive hatred and contempt? 'Nay,' you will say,
'but I am constrained to it by nature. I love Christ indeed, but I am constrained
by nature.' If you are under the power and force of constraint, you will have
allowance made; but if you yield from indolence, not for a moment.
Now then, come, let us examine this very question, whether sins are the
effect of force and constraint, or of indolence and great carelessness. The law
says, "You shall not kill." What sort of force, what sort of violence, is there here?
Violence indeed must one use to force himself to kill, for who among us would
as a matter of choice plunge his sword into the throat of his neighbor, and stain
his hand with blood? Not one. You see then that, on the contrary, sin is more
properly matter of violence and constraint. For God has implanted in our nature
a charm, which binds us to love one another. "Every beast (it says) loves his like,
and every man loves his neighbor." [Sirach 13:15] Do you see that we have from
our nature seeds which tend to virtue; whereas those of vice are contrary to
nature? And if these latter predominate, this is but an evidence of our exceeding
indolence.
Again, what is adultery? What sort of necessity is there to bring us to this?
Doubtless, it will be said, the tyranny of lust. But why, tell me, should this be?
What, is it not in every one's power to have his own wife, and thus to put a stop
to this tyranny? True, he will say, but a sort of passion for my neighbor's wife
seizes hold on me. Here the question is no longer one of necessity. Passion is no
matter of necessity, no one loves of necessity, but of deliberate choice and free
will. Indulgence of nature, indeed, is perhaps matter of necessity, but to love one

woman rather than another is no matter of necessity. Nor is the point with you
natural desire, but vanity, and wantonness, and unbounded licentiousness. For
which is according to reason, that a man should have an espoused wife, and her
the mother of his children, or one not acknowledged? Do you not know that it is
intimacy that breeds attachment. This, therefore, is not the fault of nature. Blame
not natural desire. Natural desire was bestowed with a view to marriage; it was
given with a view to the procreation of children, not with a view to adultery and
corruption. The laws, too, know how to make allowance for those sins which are
of necessity,— or rather nothing is sin when it arises from necessity but all sin
rises from wantonness. God has not so framed man's nature as that he should
have any necessity to sin, since were this the case, there would be no such thing
as punishment. We ourselves exact no account of things done of necessity and by
constraint, much less would God, so full of mercy and loving-kindness.
Again, what is stealing? Is it matter of necessity? Yes, a man will say,
because poverty causes this. Poverty, however, rather compels us to work, not to
steal. Poverty, therefore, has in fact the contrary effect. Theft is the effect of
idleness; whereas poverty produces usually not idleness, but a love of labor. So
that this sin is the effect of indolence, as you may learn from hence. Which, I
ask, is the more difficult, the more distasteful, to wander about at night without
sleep, to break open houses, and walk about in the dark, and to have one's life in
one's hand, and to be always prepared for murder, and to be shivering and dead
with fear; or to be attending to one's daily task, in full enjoyment of safety and
security? This last is the easier task; and it is because this is easier, that the
majority practise it rather than the other. You see then that it is virtue which is
according to nature, and vice which is against nature, in the same way as disease
and health are.
What, again, are falsehood and perjury? What necessity can they possibly
imply? None whatever, nor any compulsion; it is a matter to which we proceed
voluntarily. We are distrusted, it will be said. True, distrusted we are, because we
choose it. For we might, if we would, be trusted more upon our character, than