FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.18, C.7.

commit adultery, is strictly speaking, more adulterer than thief."
Reply to Objection 1: The end also has the character of an object, as
stated above.
Reply to Objection 2: Although it is accidental to the external action
to be ordained to some particular end, it is not accidental to the
interior act of the will, which act is compared to the external act, as
form to matter.
Reply to Objection 3: When many actions, differing in species, are
ordained to the same end, there is indeed a diversity of species on
the part of the external actions; but unity of species on the part of
the internal action.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.18, C.8.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether the species derived from the end is

contained under the species derived from the object, as under
its genus, or conversely?
Objection 1: It would seem that the species of goodness derived
from the end is contained under the species of goodness derived
from the object, as a species is contained under its genus; for
instance, when a man commits a theft in order to give alms. For an
action takes its species from its object, as stated above (Articles
2,6). But it is impossible for a thing to be contained under another
species, if this species be not contained under the proper species of
that thing; because the same thing cannot be contained in different
species that are not subordinate to one another. Therefore the
species which is taken from the end, is contained under the species
which is taken from the object.
Objection 2: Further, the last difference always constitutes the most
specific species. But the difference derived from the end seems to
come after the difference derived from the object: because the end is
something last. Therefore the species derived from the end, is
contained under the species derived from the object, as its most
specific species.
Objection 3: Further, the more formal a difference is compared to
genus, as form to matter. But the species derived from the end, is
more formal than that which is derived from the object, as stated
above (Article 6). Therefore the species derived from the end is
contained under the species derived from the object, as the most
specific species is contained under the subaltern genus.
On the contrary, Each genus has its determinate differences. But an
action of one same species on the part of its object, can be ordained
to an infinite number of ends: for instance, theft can be ordained to
an infinite number of good and bad ends. Therefore the species
derived from the end is not contained under the species derived
from the object, as under its genus.
I answer that, The object of the external act can stand in a twofold
relation to the end of the will: first, as being of itself ordained
thereto; thus to fight well is of itself ordained to victory; secondly, as
being ordained thereto accidentally; thus to take what belongs to