FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.18, C.12.

good or evil, except on the supposition of another previous
circumstance, from which the moral action takes its species of good
or evil. Thus to take something in a large or small quantity, does not
regard the order of reason in respect of good or evil, except a certain
other condition be presupposed, from which the action takes its
malice or goodness; for instance, if what is taken belongs to
another, which makes the action to be discordant with reason.
Wherefore to take what belongs to another in a large or small
quantity, does not change the species of the sin. Nevertheless it can
aggravate or diminish the sin. The same applies to other evil or good
actions. Consequently not every circumstance that makes a moral
action better or worse, changes its species.
Reply to Objection 1: In things which can be more or less intense,
the difference of more or less does not change the species: thus by
differing in whiteness through being more or less white a thing is not
changed in regard to its species of color. In like manner that which
makes an action to be more or less good or evil, does not make the
action differ in species.
Reply to Objection 2: A circumstance that aggravates a sin, or adds
to the goodness of an action, sometimes has no goodness or malice
in itself, but in regard to some other condition of the action, as
stated above. Consequently it does not add a new species, but adds
to the goodness or malice derived from this other condition of the
action.
Reply to Objection 3: A circumstance does not always involve a
distinct defect of its own; sometimes it causes a defect in reference
to something else. In like manner a circumstance does not always
add further perfection, except in reference to something else. And,
for as much as it does, although it may add to the goodness or
malice, it does not always change the species of good or evil.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.19, C.1.

## QUESTION 19 — OF THE GOODNESS AND MALICE OF THE INTERIOR

ACT OF THE WILL

Prologue
We must now consider the goodness of the interior act of the will;
under which head there are ten points of inquiry:
(1) Whether the goodness of the will depends on the subject?
(2) Whether it depends on the object alone?
(3) Whether it depends on reason?
(4) Whether it depends on the eternal law?
(5) Whether erring reason binds?
(6) Whether the will is evil if it follows the erring reason against the
law of God?
(7) Whether the goodness of the will in regard to the means, depends
on the intention of the end?
(8) Whether the degree of goodness or malice in the will depends on
the degree of good or evil in the intention?
(9) Whether the goodness of the will depends on its conformity to the
Divine Will?
(10) Whether it is necessary for the human will, in order to be good,
to be conformed to the Divine Will, as regards the thing willed?