us, I should be of the same mind with him. But after a short time, when one who
was to ordain us arrived, I kept myself concealed, but Basil, ignorant of this, was
taken away on another pretext, and made to take the yoke, hoping from the
promises which I had made to him that I should certainly follow, or rather
supposing that he was following me. For some of those who were present, seeing
that he resented being seized, deceived him by exclaiming how strange it was
that one who was generally reputed to be the more hot tempered (meaning me),
had yielded very mildly to the judgment of the Fathers, whereas he, who was
reckoned a much wiser and milder kind of man, had shown himself hotheaded
and conceited, being unruly, restive, and contradictory. Having yielded to these
remonstrances, and afterwards having learned that I had escaped capture, he
came to me in deep dejection, sat down near me and tried to speak, but was
hindered by distress of mind and inability to express in words the violence to
which he had been subjected. No sooner had he opened his mouth than he was
prevented from utterance by grief cutting short his words before they could pass
his lips. Seeing, then, his tearful and agitated condition, and knowing as I did the
cause, I laughed for joy, and, seizing his right hand, I forced a kiss on him, and
praised God that my plan had ended so successfully, as I had always prayed it
might. But when he saw that I was delighted and beaming with joy, and
understood that he had been deceived by me, he was yet more vexed and
distressed.
7. And when he had a little recovered from this agitation of mind, he began:
If you have rejected the part allotted to you, and have no further regard for me (I
know not indeed for what cause), you ought at least to consider your own
reputation; but as it is you have opened the mouths of all, and the world is saying
that you have declined this ministry through love of vainglory, and there is no
one who will deliver you from this accusation. As for me, I cannot bear to go
into the market place; there are so many who come up to me and reproach me
every day. For, when they see me anywhere in the city, all my intimate friends
take me aside, and cast the greater part of the blame upon me. Knowing his

intention, they say, for none of his affairs could be kept secret from you, you
should not have concealed it, but ought to have communicated it to us, and we
should have been at no loss to devise some plan for capturing him. But I am too
much ashamed and abashed to tell them that I did not know you had long been
plotting this trick, lest they should say that our friendship was a mere pretence.
For even if it is so, as indeed it is— nor would you yourself deny it after what
you have done to me— yet it is well to hide our misfortune from the outside
world, and persons who entertain but a moderate opinion of us. I shrink from
telling them the truth, and how things really stand with us, and I am compelled
in future to keep silence, and look down on the ground, and turn away to avoid
those whom I meet. For if I escape the condemnation on the former charge, I am
forced to undergo judgment for speaking falsehood. For they will never believe
me when I say that you ranged Basil among those who are not permitted to know
your secret affairs. Of this, however, I will not take much account, since it has
seemed agreeable to you, but how shall we endure the future disgrace? For some
accuse you of arrogance, others of vainglory: while those who are our more
merciful accusers, lay both these offenses to our charge, and add that we have
insulted those who did us honor, although had they experienced even greater
indignity it would only have served them right for passing over so many and
such distinguished men and advancing mere youths, who were but yesterday
immersed in the interests of this world, to such a dignity as they never have
dreamed of obtaining, in order that they may for a brief season knit the
eyebrows, wear dusky garments, and put on a grave face. Those who from the
dawn of manhood to extreme old age have diligently practised self-discipline,
are now to be placed under the government of youths who have not even heard
the laws which should regulate their administration of this office. I am
perpetually assailed by persons who say such things and worse, and am at a loss
how to reply to them; but I pray you tell me: for I do not suppose that you took
to flight and incurred such hatred from such distinguished men without cause or
consideration, but that your decision was made with reasoning and