of one who remits joyfully.
"Having put off from himself the principalities and the powers." He means
the diabolical powers; because human nature had arrayed itself in these, or
because they had, as it were, a hold, when He became Man He put away from
Himself that hold. What is the meaning of "He made a show of them"? And well
said he so; never yet was the devil in so shameful a plight. For while expecting
to have Him, he lost even those he had; and when That Body was nailed to the
Cross, the dead arose. There death received his wound, having met his deathstroke from a dead body. And as an athlete, when he thinks he has hit his
adversary, himself is caught in a fatal grasp; so truly does Christ also show, that
to die with confidence is the devil's shame.
For he would have done everything to persuade men that He did not die,
had he had the power. For seeing that of His Resurrection indeed all succeeding
time was proof demonstrative; while of His death, no other time save that
whereat it happened could ever furnish proof; therefore it was, that He died
publicly in the sight of all men, but He arose not publicly, knowing that the
aftertime would bear witness to the truth. For, that while the world was looking
on, the serpent should be slain on high upon the Cross, herein is the marvel. For
what did not the devil do, that He might die in secret? Hear Pilate saying, "Take
ye Him away, and crucify Him, for I find no fault in Him" [John 19:6], and
withstanding them in a thousand ways. And again the Jews said unto Him, "If
You are the Son of God, come down from the Cross." [Matthew 27:40] Then
further, when He had received a mortal wound, and He came not down, for this
reason He was also committed to burial; for it was in His power to have risen
immediately: but He did not, that the fact might be believed. And yet in cases of
private death indeed, it is possible to impute them to a swoon, but here, it is not
possible to do this either. For even the soldiers broke not His legs, like those of
the others, that it might be made manifest that He was dead. And those who
buried The Body are known; and therefore too the Jews themselves seal the
stone along with the soldiers. For, what was most of all attended to, was this very

thing, that it should not be in obscurity. And the witnesses to it are from enemies,
from the Jews. Hear them saying to Pilate, "That deceiver said, while he was yet
alive, After three days I rise again. Command therefore that the sepulchre"
[Matthew 26:63-64] be guarded by the soldiers. This was accordingly done,
themselves also sealing it. Hear them further saying even afterwards to the
Apostles, "You intend to bring this Man's blood upon us." [Acts 5:28] He
suffered not the very fashion of His Cross to be put to shame. For since the
Angels have suffered nothing like it, He therefore does everything for this,
showing that His death achieved a mighty work. There was, as it were, a single
combat. Death wounded Christ: but Christ, being wounded, did afterwards kill
death. He that seemed to be immortal, was destroyed by a mortal body; and this
the whole world saw. And what is truly wonderful is, that He committed not this
thing to another. But there was made again a second bond of another kind than
the former.
Beware then lest we be condemned by this, after saying, I renounce Satan,
and array myself with You, O Christ. Rather however this should not be called
"a bond," but a covenant. For that is "a bond," whereby one is held accountable
for debts: but this is a covenant. It has no penalty, nor says it, If this be done or if
this be not done: what Moses said when he sprinkled the blood of the covenant,
by this God also promised everlasting life. All this is a covenant. There, it was
slave with master, here it is friend with friend: there, it is said, "In the day that
you eat thereof you shall die" [Genesis 2:17]; an immediate threatening; but here
is nothing of the kind. God arrives, and here is nakedness, and there was
nakedness; there, however, one that had sinned was made naked, because he
sinned, but here, one is made naked, that he may be set free. Then, man put off
the glory which he had; now, he puts off the old man; and before going up (to the
contest), puts him off as easily, as it were his garments. He is anointed, as
wrestlers about to enter the lists. For he is born at once; and as that first man
was, not little by little, but immediately. (He is anointed,) not as the priests of old
time, on the head alone, but rather in more abundant measure. For he indeed was