SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.183, C.6.

Reply to Objection 3: Martyrdom is the most perfect act of charity.
But an act of perfection does not suffice to make the state of
perfection, as stated above (Article 4).

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.183, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether all ecclesiastical prelates are in the state

of perfection?
Objection 1: It would seem that all ecclesiastical prelates are in a
state of perfection. For Jerome commenting on Titus 1:5, "Ordain . . .
in every city," etc. says: "Formerly priest was the same as bishop,"
and afterwards he adds: "Just as priests know that by the custom of
the Church they are subject to the one who is placed over them, so
too, bishops should recognize that, by custom rather than by the
very ordinance of our Lord, they are above the priests, and are
together the rightful governors of the Church." Now bishops are in
the state of perfection. Therefore those priests also are who have the
cure of souls.
Objection 2: Further, just as bishops together with their consecration
receive the cure of souls, so also do parish priests and archdeacons,
of whom a gloss on Acts 6:3, "Brethren, look ye out . . . seven men of
good reputation," says: "The apostles decided here to appoint
throughout the Church seven deacons, who were to be of a higher
degree, and as it were the supports of that which is nearest to the
altar." Therefore it would seem that these also are in the state of
perfection.
Objection 3: Further, just as bishops are bound to "lay down their life
for their sheep," so too are parish priests and archdeacons. But this
belongs to the perfection of charity, as stated above (Article 2, ad 3).
Therefore it would seem that parish priests and archdeacons also
are in the state of perfection.
On the contrary, Dionysius says (Eccl. Hier. v): "The order of pontiffs
is consummative and perfecting, that of the priests is illuminative
and light-giving, that of the ministers is cleansing and discretive."
Hence it is evident that perfection is ascribed to bishops only.
I answer that, In priests and deacons having cure of souls two things
may be considered, namely their order and their cure. Their order is
directed to some act in the Divine offices. Wherefore it has been
stated above (Question 183, Article 3, ad 3) that the distinction of
orders is comprised under the distinction of offices. Hence by
receiving a certain order a man receives the power of exercising
certain sacred acts, but he is not bound on this account to things

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.183, C.7.

pertaining to perfection, except in so far as in the Western Church
the receiving of a sacred order includes the taking of a vow of
continence, which is one of the things pertaining to perfection, as we
shall state further on (Question 186, Article 4). Therefore it is clear
that from the fact that a man receives a sacred order a man is not
placed simply in the state of perfection, although inward perfection
is required in order that one exercise such acts worthily.
In like manner, neither are they placed in the state of perfection on
the part of the cure which they take upon themselves. For they are
not bound by this very fact under the obligation of a perpetual vow to
retain the cure of souls; but they can surrender it---either by entering
religion, even without their bishop's permission (cf. Decret. xix, qu.
2, can. Duae sunt)---or again an archdeacon may with his bishop's
permission resign his arch-deaconry or parish, and accept a simple
prebend without cure, which would be nowise lawful, if he were in
the state of perfection; for "no man putting his hand to the plough
and looking back is fit for the kingdom of God" (Lk. 9:62). On the
other hand bishops, since they are in the state of perfection, cannot
abandon the episcopal cure, save by the authority of the Sovereign
Pontiff (to whom alone it belongs also to dispense from perpetual
vows), and this for certain causes, as we shall state further on
(Question 185, Article 4). Wherefore it is manifest that not all prelates
are in the state of perfection, but only bishops.
Reply to Objection 1: We may speak of priest and bishop in two
ways. First, with regard to the name: and thus formerly bishops and
priests were not distinct. For bishops are so called "because they
watch over others," as Augustine observes (De Civ. Dei xix, 19);
while the priests according to the Greek are "elders." Hence the
Apostle employs the term "priests" in reference to both, when he
says (1 Tim. 5:17): "Let the priests that rule well be esteemed worthy
of double honor"; and again he uses the term "bishops" in the same
way, wherefore addressing the priests of the Church of Ephesus he
says (Acts 20:28): "Take heed to yourselves" and "to the whole flock,
wherein the Holy Ghost hath placed you bishops, to rule the church
of God."
But as regards the thing signified by these terms, there was always a
difference between them, even at the time of the apostles. This is
clear on the authority of Dionysius (Eccl. Hier. v), and of a gloss on
Lk. 10:1, "After these things the Lord appointed," etc. which says:
"Just as the apostles were made bishops, so the seventy-two