voice and all the rest of your demeanour you exhibit to the men who have been
left behind the gain which you have brought away with you, this is sufficient for
exhortation and advice. For we ought to go out from this place as it were from
some sacred shrine, as men who have descended from heaven itself, who have
become sedate, and philosophical, who do and say everything in proper measure:
and when a wife sees her husband returning from the assembly, and a father his
son, and a friend his friend, and an enemy his enemy, let them all receive an
impression of the benefit which you have derived from coming here: and they
will receive it, if they perceive that you have become milder, more philosophical,
more devout. Consider what privileges you enjoy who hast been initiated into
the mysteries, with what company you offer up that mystic hymn, with what
company you cry aloud the "Ter sanctus." Teach "them that are without" that
you have joined the chorus of the Seraphim, that you are ranked as a citizen of
the commonwealth above, that you have been enrolled in the choir of Angels,
that you have conversed with the Lord, that you have been in the company of
Christ. If we regulate ourselves in this way we shall not need to say anything,
when we go out to those who are left behind: but from our advantage they will
perceive their own loss and will hasten hither, so as to enjoy the same benefits
themselves. For when, merely by the use of their senses, they see the beauty of
your soul shining forth, even if they are the most stupid of men, they will
become enamoured of your goodly appearance. For if corporeal beauty excites
those who behold it, much more will symmetry of soul be able to move the
spectator, and stimulate him to equal zeal. Let us then adorn our inward man,
and let us be mindful of the things which are said here, when we go out: for there
especially is it a proper time to remember them; and just as an athlete displays in
the lists the things which he has learned in the training school: even so ought we
to display in our transactions in the world without the things which we have
heard here.
5. Bear in mind then the things which are said here, that when you have
gone out and the devil lays hold of you either by means of anger or vainglory, or

any other passion, you may call to remembrance the teaching which you have
received here and may be able easily to shake off the grasp of the evil one. Do
you not see the wrestling-masters in the practising grounds, who, after countless
contests having obtained exemption from wrestling on account of their age, sit
outside the lines by the side of the dust and shout to those who are wrestling
inside, telling one to grasp a hand, or drag a leg, or seize upon the back, and by
many other directions of that kind, saying, "if you do so and so you will easily
throw your antagonist," they are of the greatest service to their pupils? Even so
do thou look to your training master, the blessed Paul, who after countless
victories is now sitting outside the boundary, I mean this present life, and cries
aloud to us who are wrestling, shouting out by means of his Epistles, when he
sees us overcome by wrath and resentment of injuries, and choked by passion;
"if your enemy hunger feed him, if he thirst give him drink;" [Romans 12:20] —
a beautiful precept full of spiritual wisdom, and serviceable both to the doer and
the receiver. But the reminder of the passage causes much perplexity, and does
not seem to correspond to the sentiment of him who uttered the former words.
And what is the nature of this? The saying that "by so doing you shall heap coals
of fire on his head." For by these words he does a wrong both to the doer and the
receiver: to the latter by setting his head on fire, and placing coals upon it; for
what good will he get from receiving food and drink in proportion to the evil he
will suffer from the heaping of coals on his head? Thus then the recipient of the
benefit is wronged, having a greater vengeance inflicted on him, but the
benefactor also is injured in another way. For what can he gain from doing good
to his enemies when he acts in the hope of revenge? For he who gives meat and
drink to his enemy for the purpose of heaping coals of fire on his head would not
become merciful and kind, but cruel and harsh, having inflicted an enormous
punishment by means of a small benefit. For what could be more unkind than to
feed a person for the purpose of heaping coals of fire on his head? This then is
the contradiction: and now it remains that the solution should be added, in order
that by those very things which seem to do violence to the letter of the law you