but when himself has failed; and not even then does He send forth a multitude
against him; but makes the addition no further than two, or even one; but when
he has contemned these too, then and not till then He brings him out to the
church.
So much earnestness does He show, that our neighbor's sins be not exposed
by us. And indeed He might have commanded this from the first, but that this
might not be, He did not command it, but after a first and second admonition He
appoints this.
But what is, "In the mouth of two or three witnesses every word shall be
established?" You have a sufficient testimony. His meaning is, that you have
done all your part, that you have left undone none of the things which it
pertained to you to do.
"But if he shall neglect to hear them also, tell it to the church," that is, to
the rulers of it; "but if he neglect to hear the church, let him be to you as an
heathen man and a publican." For after this such a one is incurably diseased.
But mark thou, I pray you, how everywhere He puts the publican for an
example of the greatest wickedness. For above too He says, "Do not even the
publicans the same?" [Matthew 5:46] And further on again, "Even the publicans
and the harlots shall go before you into the Kingdom of Heaven,"
[Matthew 21:31] that is, they who are utterly reprobated and condemned. Let
them hearken, who are rushing upon unjust gains, who are counting up usuries
upon usuries.
But why did He set him with these? To soothe the person wronged, and to
alarm him. Is this only then the punishment? Nay, but hear also what follows.
"Whatsoever you shall bind on earth shall be bound in Heaven." And He did not
say to the ruler of the church, "Bind such a man," but, "If you bind," committing
the whole matter to the person himself, who is aggrieved, and the bonds abide
indissoluble. Therefore he will suffer the utmost ills; but not he who has brought
him to account is to blame, but he who has not been willing to be persuaded.
Do you see how He has bound him down with twofold constraint, both by

the vengeance here, and by the punishment hereafter? But these things has He
threatened, that these circumstances may not arise, but that fearing, at once the
being cast out of the church, and the danger from the bond, and the being bound
in Heaven, he may become more gentle. And knowing these things, if not at the
beginning, at any rate in the multitude of the tribunals he will put off his anger.
Wherefore, I tell you, He has set over him a first, and a second, and a third court,
so that though he should neglect to hear the first, he may yield to the second; and
even if he should reject that, he may fear the third; and though he should make
no account of this, he may be dismayed at the vengeance to come, and at the
sentence and judgment to proceed from God.
"And again I say unto you, that if two of you shall agree on earth as
touching anything that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father
which is in Heaven. For where two or three are gathered together in my name,
there am I in the midst of them." [Matthew 18:19-20]
Do you see how by another motive also He puts down our enmities, and
takes away our petty dissensions, and draws us one to another, and this not from
the punishment only which has been mentioned, but also from the good things
which spring from charity? For having denounced those threats against
contentiousness, He puts here the great rewards of concord, if at least they who
are of one accord do even prevail with the Father, as touching the things they
ask, and have Christ in the midst of them.
"Are there then indeed nowhere two of one accord?" Nay, in many places,
perchance even everywhere. "How then do they not obtain all things?" Because
many are causes of their failing. For either they often ask things inexpedient.
And why do you marvel, if this is the case with some others, whereas it was so
even with Paul, when he heard, "My grace is sufficient for you; for my strength
is perfected in weakness." Or they are unworthy to be reckoned with them that
heard these words, and contribute not their own part, but He seeks for such as
are like them; therefore He says "of you," of the virtuous, of them that show
forth an angelic rule of life. Or they pray against them that have aggrieved them,