What then says He? "Verily, I say unto you, that you which have followed
me, in the regeneration when the Son of Man shall sit on the throne of His glory,
you also shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel."
[Matthew 19:28] What then, one may say, shall Judas sit there? By no means.
How, then, does He say, "You shall sit on twelve thrones?" how shall the terms of
the promise be fulfilled?
Hear how, and on what principle. There is a law ordained of God, recited by
Jeremiah, the prophet to the Jews, and in these words: "At what instant I shall
speak a sentence concerning a nation and kingdom, to pluck up and destroy; if
that nation turn from their evil deeds, I also will repent of the evils, which I
thought to do unto them. And at what instant I shall speak concerning a nation
and kingdom to build and to plant it; and if they do evil in my sight, that they
obey not my voice, I also will repent of the good, which I said I would do unto
them." [Jeremiah 18:7-10]
For the same custom do I observe with respect to the good things as well,
says He. For though I spoke of building up, should they show themselves
unworthy of the promise, I will no longer do it. Which sort of thing was done
with respect to man upon his creation, "For the dread of you," it is said, "and the
fear of you shall be on the wild beasts," [Genesis 9:2] and it came not to pass, for
he proved himself unworthy of the sovereignty, even as did Judas also.
For in order that neither at the denunciations of punishment any men should
despair and become more hardened, nor by the promises of good things be
rendered causelessly more remiss, He remedies both these evils, by that which I
have before mentioned, saying in this way: Though I should threaten, do not
despair; for you are able to repent, and to reverse the denunciation, like the
Ninevites. Though I should promise any good thing, grow not remiss because of
the promise. For should you appear unworthy, the fact of my having promised
will not advantage you, but will rather bring punishment. For I promise you
being worthy.
Therefore even then in His discourse with His disciples He did not promise

to them simply, for neither did He say, "you," only, but added, "which have
followed me," that He might both cast out Judas, and draw towards Him those
that should come afterwards. For neither to them only was it said, nor to Judas
any more, when he had become unworthy.
Now to the disciples He promised things to come, saying, "You shall sit on
twelve thrones," for they were now of a higher stamp, and sought after none of
the things of the present world, but to the rest He promises also what are here.
For "every one," He says, "that has forsaken brethren, or sisters, or father,
or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, or house, for my name's sake, shall
receive an hundredfold in this world, and shall inherit eternal life."
For lest any after having heard the word "ye," should suppose this a thing
peculiar to the disciples (I mean now the enjoying the greatest and first honors in
the things to come), He extended the word, and spread the promise over the
whole earth, and from the things present establishes the things to come also. And
to the disciples also at the beginning, when they were in a more imperfect state,
He reasoned from the things present. For when He drew them from the sea, and
took them from their trade, and commanded them to forsake the ships, He made
mention not of Heaven, not of thrones, but of the things here, saying, "I will
make you fishers of men;" but when He had wrought them to be of higher views,
then after that He discourses of the things to come also.
2. But what is, "Judging the twelve tribes of Israel?" This is, "condemning
them." For they are not surely to sit as judges, but like as He said the Queen of
the South should condemn that generation, and the Ninevites shall condemn
them; so now these also. Therefore He said not, the nations, and the world, but
the tribes of Israel. For since both the Jews alike and the apostles had been
brought up under the same laws, and customs, and polity; when the Jews said,
that for this cause they could not believe in Christ, because the law forbade to
receive His commandments, by bringing forward these men, who had received
the same law, and yet had believed, He condemns all those; like as even already
He had said, "therefore they shall be your judges." [Matthew 12:27]