Reply to Objection 2: The Jewish people were chosen by God that
Christ might be born of them. Consequently the entire state of that
people had to be prophetic and figurative, as Augustine states
(Contra Faust. xxii, 24). For this reason even the judicial precepts
that were given to this people were more figurative that those which
were given to other nations. Thus, too, the wars and deeds of this
people are expounded in the mystical sense: but not the wars and
deeds of the Assyrians or Romans, although the latter are more
famous in the eyes of men.
Reply to Objection 3: In this people the direction of man in regard to
his neighbor, considered in itself, was subject to reason. But in so
far as it was referred to the worship of God, it was above reason: and
in this respect it was figurative.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.104, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the judicial precepts of the Old Law bind

for ever?
Objection 1: It would seem that the judicial precepts of the Old Law
bind for ever. Because the judicial precepts relate to the virtue of
justice: since a judgment is an execution of the virtue of justice. Now
"justice is perpetual and immortal" (Wis. 1:15). Therefore the judicial
precepts bind for ever.
Objection 2: Further, Divine institutions are more enduring than
human institutions. But the judicial precepts of human laws bind for
ever. Therefore much more do the judicial precepts of the Divine
Law.
Objection 3: Further, the Apostle says (Heb. 7:18) that "there is a
setting aside of the former commandment, because of the weakness
and unprofitableness thereof." Now this is true of the ceremonial
precept, which "could not, as to the conscience, make him perfect
that serveth only in meats and in drinks, and divers washings and
justices of the flesh," as the Apostle declares (Heb. 9:9,10). On the
other hand, the judicial precepts were useful and efficacious in
respect of the purpose for which they were instituted, viz. to
establish justice and equity among men. Therefore the judicial
precepts of the Old Law are not set aside, but still retain their
efficacy.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (Heb. 7:12) that "the priesthood
being translated it is necessary that a translation also be made of the
Law." But the priesthood was transferred from Aaron to Christ.
Therefore the entire Law was also transferred. Therefore the judicial
precepts are no longer in force.
I answer that, The judicial precepts did not bind for ever, but were
annulled by the coming of Christ: yet not in the same way as the
ceremonial precepts. For the ceremonial precepts were annulled so
far as to be not only "dead," but also deadly to those who observe
them since the coming of Christ, especially since the promulgation
of the Gospel. On the other hand, the judicial precepts are dead
indeed, because they have no binding force: but they are not deadly.
For if a sovereign were to order these judicial precepts to be
observed in his kingdom, he would not sin: unless perchance they