died in sins. They deserve wailing; they deserve beating of the breast and tears.
For tell me what hope is there, when our sins accompany us Thither, where there
is no putting off sins? As long as they were here, perchance there was great
expectation that they would change, that they would become better; but when
they are gone to Hades, where nought can be gained from repentance (for it is
written, "In Sheol who shall give you thanks?") [Psalm 6:5], are they not worthy
of our lamentation? Let us wail for those who depart hence in such sort; let us
wail, I hinder you not; yet in no unseemly way, not in tearing our hair, or baring
our arms, or lacerating our face, or wearing black apparel, but only in soul,
shedding in quiet the bitter tear. For we may weep bitterly without all that
display. And not as in sport only. For the laments which many make differ not
from sport. Those public mournings do not proceed from sympathy, but from
display, from emulation and vainglory. Many women do this as of their craft.
Weep bitterly; moan at home, when no one sees you; this is the part of true
sympathy; by this you profit yourself too. For he who laments another in such
sort, will be much the more earnest never to fall into the same sins. Sin
henceforth will be an object of dread to you. Weep for the unbelievers; weep for
those who differ in nowise from them, those who depart hence without the
illumination, without the seal! They indeed deserve our wailing, they deserve
our groans; they are outside the Palace, with the culprits, with the condemned:
for, "Verily I say unto you, Unless a man be born of water and the Spirit, he shall
not enter into the kingdom of Heaven." Mourn for those who have died in
wealth, and did not from their wealth think of any solace for their soul, who had
power to wash away their sins and would not. Let us all weep for these in private
and in public, but with propriety, with gravity, not so as to make exhibitions of
ourselves; let us weep for these, not one day, or two, but all our life. Such tears
spring not from senseless passion, but from true affection. The other sort are of
senseless passion. For this cause they are quickly quenched, whereas if they
spring from the fear of God, they always abide with us. Let us weep for these; let
us assist them according to our power; let us think of some assistance for them,

small though it be, yet still let us assist them. How and in what way? By praying
and entreating others to make prayers for them, by continually giving to the poor
on their behalf. This deed has some consolation; for hear the words of God
Himself, when He says, "I will defend this city for My own sake, and for My
servant David's sake." [2 Kings 20:6] If the remembrance only of a just man had
so great power when deeds are done for one, how great power will it not have?
Not in vain did the Apostles order that remembrance should be made of the dead
in the dreadful Mysteries. They know that great gain results to them, great
benefit; for when the whole people stands with uplifted hands, a priestly
assembly, and that awful Sacrifice lies displayed, how shall we not prevail with
God by our entreaties for them? And this we do for those who have departed in
faith, while the catechumens are not thought worthy even of this consolation, but
are deprived of all means of help save one. And what is this? We may give to the
poor on their behalf. This deed in a certain way refreshes them. For God wills
that we should be mutually assisted; else why has He ordered us to pray for
peace and the good estate of the world? Why on behalf of all men? Since in this
number are included robbers, violaters of tombs, thieves, men laden with untold
crimes; and yet we pray on behalf of all; perchance they may turn. As then we
pray for those living, who differ not from the dead, so too we may pray for them.
Job offered sacrifice for his children, and freed them from their sins. "It may be,"
said he, "that they have renounced God in their hearts." [Job 1:5] Thus does one
provide for one's children! He said not, as many do nowadays, I will leave them
property; he said not, I will procure them honor; he said not, I will purchase an
office; he said not, I will buy them land; but, "it may be that they have renounced
God in their hearts." For what profit is there in those things? None at all, in
those that remain here. I will make the King of all things favorable to them, and
then they will no more want any thing. "The Lord," says one, "is my Shepherd, I
shall not want." [Psalm 23:4] This is great wealth, this is treasure. If we have the
fear of God, we want nothing; if we have not this, though we have royalty itself,
we are the poorest of all men. Nothing is like the man that fears the Lord. For