so. Therefore, natural science treats of them.

Moreover, the fact is clear from the statements of the Philosopher in the Metaphysics and the
Physics.

Reply: It was the difficulty of this problem that drove Plato to posit Ideas. Believing that all
sensible things were always in flux, as Cratylus and Heraclitus taught, he thought there can be no
science concerning them, as the Philosopher says in the Metaphysics. So he claimed that there
were substances separated from the sense world, which might serve as the objects of science and
of definitions. He made this mistake because he failed to distinguish what is essential from what
is accidental. For it happens that by accident even the wise often fall into error, as is said in the
Sophistic Refutations. Now, as is shown in the Metaphysics, we find in a sensible substance both
the whole or the composite itself, and also its nature (ratio) or form; and it is the composite that
is essentially generated and corrupted and not the nature or form, except accidentally. As the
Metaphysics says, "It is not house that is made, but this house.

Now anything can be thought of without all the items that are not essentially related to it.
Consequently, forms and natures, though belonging to things existing in motion, are without
motion when they are considered in themselves; and so they can be the objects of sciences and of
definitions, as the Philosopher says. As he proves, the sciences of sensible reality are not based
upon the knowledge of certain substances separated from the sense world.

Natures of this kind, which are the objects of the sciences of real beings, are thought of without
motion; and so they must be thought of without those conditions by reason of which motion
belongs to mobile things. Now, because every motion is measured by time, and the primary
motion is local motion (for without it there is no other motion), a thing must be subject to motion
inasmuch as it exists here and now; and it exists under these conditions insofar as it is
individuated by matter having determinate dimensions. Consequently, natures of this kind, which
make possible sciences of things subject to motion, must be thought of without determinate
matter and everything following upon such matter; but not without indeterminate matter, because
on its notion depends the notion of form that determines matter to itself. Thus the nature of man,
which his definition signifies and which is the object of science, is considered without this flesh
and these bones, but not absolutely without flesh and bones. And because individuals include
determinate matter in their nature, whereas universals include common matter, as is said in the
Metaphysics, the above-mentioned abstraction is not said to be the abstraction of form from
matter absolutely, but the abstraction of the universal from the particular.