211. I have always been distressed at the lot of those who are victims of various kinds of human
trafficking. How I wish that all of us would hear God’s cry: “Where is your brother?” (Gen 4:9).
Where is your brother or sister who is enslaved? Where is the brother and sister whom you are
killing each day in clandestine warehouses, in rings of prostitution, in children used for begging, in
exploiting undocumented labour? Let us not look the other way. There is greater complicity than
we think. The issue involves everyone! This infamous network of crime is now well established in
our cities, and many people have blood on their hands as a result of their comfortable and silent
complicity.

212. Doubly poor are those women who endure situations of exclusion, mistreatment and
violence, since they are frequently less able to defend their rights. Even so, we constantly witness
among them impressive examples of daily heroism in defending and protecting their vulnerable
families.

213. Among the vulnerable for whom the Church wishes to care with particular love and concern

are unborn children, the most defenceless and innocent among us. Nowadays efforts are made to
deny them their human dignity and to do with them whatever one pleases, taking their lives and
passing laws preventing anyone from standing in the way of this. Frequently, as a way of ridiculing
the Church’s effort to defend their lives, attempts are made to present her position as ideological,
obscurantist and conservative. Yet this defence of unborn life is closely linked to the defence of
each and every other human right. It involves the conviction that a human being is always sacred
and inviolable, in any situation and at every stage of development. Human beings are ends in
themselves and never a means of resolving other problems. Once this conviction disappears, so
do solid and lasting foundations for the defence of human rights, which would always be subject to
the passing whims of the powers that be. Reason alone is sufficient to recognize the inviolable
value of each single human life, but if we also look at the issue from the standpoint of faith, “every
violation of the personal dignity of the human being cries out in vengeance to God and is an
offence against the creator of the individual”.

214. Precisely because this involves the internal consistency of our message about the value of
the human person, the Church cannot be expected to change her position on this question. I want
to be completely honest in this regard. This is not something subject to alleged reforms or
“modernizations”. It is not “progressive” to try to resolve problems by eliminating a human life. On
the other hand, it is also true that we have done little to adequately accompany women in very
difficult situations, where abortion appears as a quick solution to their profound anguish, especially
when the life developing within them is the result of rape or a situation of extreme poverty. Who
can remain unmoved before such painful situations?