F. 1. But this aptitude depends on those faculties only as remote conditions: so it also
depends on the complexion of the body, as Aristotle says that men of delicate touch and
soft flesh are clever. But the proximate principle of the act of speculative
understanding is the habit of scientific knowledge: for this habit must perfect the power
of understanding to act readily at will, as other habits perfect the powers in which they
are.
F. 2. The dispositions of the cogitative faculty and the phantasy regard the object: they
regard the phantasm, which is prepared by the efficiency of these faculties readily to
become a term of actual understanding under the action of the active intellect. But
habits do not condition objects: they condition faculties. Thus conditions that take the
edge off terrors are not the habit of fortitude: fortitude is a disposition of the
conative part of the soul to meet terrors. Hence it appears that the habit of knowledge is
not in the passive but in the potential intellect.
F. 3. If the potential intellect of all men is one, we must suppose that the potential
intellect has always existed, if men have always existed, as Averroists suppose; and
much more the active intellect, because agent is more honourable than patient, as
Aristotle says (De anima, III, v). But if the agent is eternal, and the recipient
eternal, the contents received must be eternal also. Therefore the intellectual
impressions have been from eternity in the potential intellect: therefore it will be
impossible for it to receive afresh any new intellectual impressions. But the only use of
sense and phantasy in the process of understanding is that intellectual impressions may
be gathered from them. At this rate then neither sense nor phantasy will be needed for
understanding; and we come back to the opinion of Plato, that we do not acquire
knowledge by the senses, but are merely roused by them to remember what we knew
before.
G. But to this the Commentator replies that intellectual presentations reside in a twofold
subject: in one subject, from which they have everlasting being, namely, the potential
intellect; in another subject, from which they have a recurring new existence, namely,
the phantasm, or impression in phantasy. He illustrates this by the comparison of a
sight-presentation, which has also a twofold subject, the one subject being the thing
outside the soul, the other the visual faculty. But this answer cannot stand.
G. 1. For it is impossible that the action and perfection of the eternal should depend on
anything temporal. But phantasms are temporal things, continually springing up afresh
in us from the experience of the senses. Therefore the intellectual impressions, whereby
the potential intellect is actuated and brought to activity, cannot possibly depend on
phantasms in the way that visual impressions depend on things outside the soul.
G. 2. Nothing receives what it has already got. But before any sensory experience of
mine or yours there were intellectual impressions in the potential intellect: for the
generations before us could not have understood had not the potential intellect been
reduced to act by intellectual impressions. Nor can it be said that those impressions,
formerly received in the potential intellect, have ceased to be: because the potential