so as to prevent my having the least sensation of cold. And if I may form a
conjecture from the outset of my experience, the climate now seems to me
oriental in character, no less than that of Antioch. So great is the warmth, so
pleasant is the temperature. But you have grieved me much by saying, "perhaps
you are annoyed with me as having neglected you," yet I dispatched a letter
many days ago to your honour begging you not to move me from this place.
Now I have had occasion to consider that you need a strong defence and much
toil and labour to be able to make a satisfactory apology for this expression. But
perhaps you have made a partial apology, by saying "I am generally occupied in
thinking how to increase my affliction." But I in my turn reckon it as the greatest
accusation that you should say "I take a pride in increasing my sorrow by
thinking over it:" for when you ought to make every possible effort to dispel
your affliction you do the devil's will, by increasing your despondency and
sorrow. Are you not aware how great an evil despondency is?
As to the Isaurians, dismiss your fears in future concerning them: for they
have returned into their own country: and the governor has done everything
necessary in this respect; and I am in far greater security here than when I was in
Cæsarea. For in future I have no one to fear so much as the bishops, with a few
exceptions. On account of the Isaurians then fear nothing: for they have
retreated, and when winter has set in they are confined to their own homes,
although they may possibly come out after Whitsuntide. And what do you mean
by saying that you have not the benefit of letters from me? I have already sent
you three long letters, one by the proconsular soldiers, one by Antonius, and the
third by Anatolius my servant; two of them were a salutary medicine capable of
reviving any one who was desponding or stumbling, and conducting him into a
healthy state of serenity. When you have received these letters then go over them
constantly and thoroughly, and you will perceive their force and enjoy
experience of their healing power, and benefit, and will inform me that you have
derived much advantage therefrom. I have also a third letter ready, similar to
these, which I do not choose to send at the present time having been exceedingly

vexed at your saying "I accumulate sorrowful thoughts, even inventing things
which do not exist," an utterance unworthy of yourself, which makes me hide my
head for shame. But read those letters which I have sent, and you will no longer
say these things, even if you are infinitely bent on being despondent. I at least
have not ceased, and will not cease saying that sin is the only thing which is
really distressing; and that all other things are but dust and smoke. For what is
there grievous in inhabiting a prison and wearing a chain? Or in being ill-treated
when it is the occasion of so much gain? Or why should exile be grievous or
confiscation of goods? These are mere words, destitute of any terrible reality,
words void of sorrow. For if you speak of death you only mention that which is
the debt of nature: a thing which must in any case be undergone even if no one
hastens it: and if you speak of exile you mention that which only involves a
change of country and the sight of many cities: or if you speak of confiscation of
goods you mention what is only freedom and emancipation from care.
5. Do not cease to pay attention to Maruthas the Bishop, as far as it
concerns you, so as to lift him up out of the pit. For I have special need of him
on account of the affairs in Persia. And ascertain from him, if you can, what has
been accomplished there through his agency, and for what purpose he has come
home, and let me know whether you have delivered the two epistles which I sent
to him: and if he is willing to write to me, I will write again to him: but if he
should not be willing let him at least signify to your prudence whether any thing
more has taken place there, and whether he is likely to accomplish anything by
going there again. For on this account I was anxious to have an interview with
him. Nevertheless let all things which depend on you be done, and take care to
fulfill your own part, even if all men are rushing headlong to ruin. For your
reward will thus be perfected. By all means therefore make friends with him as
far as it is possible. I beseech you not to neglect what I am about to say, but to
pay diligent heed to it. The Marsian and Gothic monks where the Bishop
Serapion has constantly been concealed have informed me that Moduarius the
deacon has come bringing word that Unilas, that excellent bishop whom I lately