Have you enjoyed a royal Table? Have you been filled with the Holy Ghost?
Have you joined in the choir of the Seraphim? Have you become partaker of the
powers above? Cast not away so great a joy, waste not the treasure, bring not in
drunkenness, the mother of dejection, the joy of the devil, the parent of ten
thousand evils. For hence is a sleep like death, and heaviness of head, and
disease, and obliviousness, and an image of dead men's condition. Further, if you
would not choose to meet with a friend when intoxicated, when you have Christ
within, dared thou, tell me, to thrust in upon Him so great an excess?
But do you love enjoyment? Then, on this very account cease being
drunken. For I, too, would have you enjoy yourself, but with the real enjoyment,
that which never fades. What then is the real enjoyment, ever blooming? Invite
Christ to sup [Revelation 2:20] with you; give Him to partake of yours, or rather
of His own. This brings pleasure without limit, and in its prime everlastingly.
But the things of sense are not such; rather as soon as they appear they vanish
away; and he that has enjoyed them will be in no better condition than he who
has not, or rather in a worse. For the one is settled as it were in a harbor, but the
other exposes himself to a kind of torrent, a besieging army of distempers, and
has not even any power to endure the first swell of the sea.
That these things be therefore not so, let us follow after moderation. For
thus we shall both be in a good state of body, and we shall possess our souls in
security, and shall be delivered from evils both present and future: from which
may we all be delivered, and attain unto the kingdom, through the grace and
mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father, together with the Holy
Spirit, be glory, power, and honor, now and ever, and world without end. Amen.

## Homily 28 on First Corinthians

1 Corinthians 11:28
But let a man prove himself, and so let him eat of the bread, and drink of
the cup.
What mean these words, when another object is proposed to us? This is
Paul's custom, as also I said before, not only to treat of those things which he had
proposed to himself, but also if an argument incidental to his purpose occur, to
proceed upon this also with great diligence, and especially when it relates to very
necessary and urgent matters. Thus, when he was discoursing with married
persons, and the question about the servants fell in his way, he handled it very
strenuously and at great length. Again, when he was speaking of the duty of not
going to law before those courts, then also having fallen upon the admonition
respecting covetousness, he discoursed at length concerning this subject
likewise. Now the same thing he has also done here: in that having once found
occasion to remind them of the Mysteries, he judged it necessary to proceed with
that subject. For indeed it was no ordinary one. Wherefore also he discoursed
very awfully concerning it, providing for that which is the sum of all good
things, viz. their approaching those Mysteries with a pure conscience. Whence
neither was he content with the things said before alone, but adds these also,
saying,
"But let a man prove himself:" which also he says in the second Epistle: "try
your own selves, prove your own selves:" [2 Corinthians 13:5] not as we do now,
approaching because of the season rather than from any earnestness of mind. For
we do not consider how we may approach prepared, with the ills that were
within us purged out, and full of compunction, but how we may come at festivals
and whenever all do so. But not thus did Paul bid us come: he knows only one