THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.3, C.8.

singular human nature, they would be said to be one man, as stated
(Article 6, ad 1), not from the unity of suppositum, but because they
have some one thing in common.
Reply to Objection 3: The Divine and human natures do not bear the
same relation to the one Divine Person, but the Divine Nature is
related first of all thereto, inasmuch as It is one with It from eternity;
and afterwards the human nature is related to the Divine Person,
inasmuch as it is assumed by the Divine Person in time, not indeed
that the nature is the Person, but that the Person of God subsists in
human nature. For the Son of God is His Godhead, but is not His
manhood. And hence, in order that the human nature may be
assumed by the Divine Person, the Divine Nature must be united by
a personal union with the whole nature assumed, i.e. in all its parts.
Now in the two natures assumed there would be a uniform relation to
the Divine Person, nor would one assume the other. Hence it would
not be necessary for one of them to be altogether united to the other,
i.e. all the parts of one with all the parts of the other.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.3, C.9.

### ARTICLE 8. Whether it was more fitting that the Person of the

Son rather than any other Divine Person should assume
human nature?
Objection 1: It would seem that it was not more fitting that the Son of
God should become incarnate than the Father or the Holy Ghost. For
by the mystery of the Incarnation men are led to the true knowledge
of God, according to Jn. 18:37: "For this was I born, and for this
came I into the world, to give testimony to the truth." But by the
Person of the Son of God becoming incarnate many have been kept
back from the true knowledge of God, since they referred to the very
Person of the Son what was said of the Son in His human nature, as
Arius, who held an inequality of Persons, according to what is said
(Jn. 14:28): "The Father is greater than I." Now this error would not
have arisen if the Person of the Father had become incarnate, for no
one would have taken the Father to be less than the Son. Hence it
seems fitting that the Person of the Father, rather than the Person of
the Son, should have become incarnate.
Objection 2: Further, the effect of the Incarnation would seem to be,
as it were, a second creation of human nature, according to Gal.
6:15: "For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision availeth anything, nor
uncircumcision, but a new creature." But the power of creation is
appropriated to the Father. Therefore it would have been more
becoming to the Father than to the Son to become incarnate.
Objection 3: Further, the Incarnation is ordained to the remission of
sins, according to Mt. 1:21: "Thou shalt call His name Jesus. For He
shall save His people from their sins." Now the remission of sins is
attributed to the Holy Ghost according to Jn. 20:22,23: "Receive ye
the Holy Ghost. Whose sins you shall forgive, they are forgiven
them." Therefore it became the Person of the Holy Ghost rather than
the Person of the Son to become incarnate.
On the contrary, Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii, 1): "In the
mystery of the Incarnation the wisdom and power of God are made
known: the wisdom, for He found a most suitable discharge for a
most heavy debt; the power, for He made the conquered conquer."
But power and wisdom are appropriated to the Son, according to 1
Cor. 1:24: "Christ, the power of God and the wisdom of God."
Therefore it was fitting that the Person of the Son should become