Now by "the world" does he mean here the people, or the creation itself?
Both: for the Scripture is wont to use the word of both. If the whole creation, he
would say, with the human beings that belong to it, were put in the balance, they
yet would not be of equal value with these; and with reason. For as ten thousand
measures of chaff and hay would not be of equal value to ten pearls, so neither
they; for "better is one that does the will of the Lord, than ten thousand
transgressors" [Sirach 16:3]; meaning by "ten thousand" not [merely] many, but
an infinite multitude.
Consider of how great value is the righteous man. Joshua the son of Nun
said, "Let the sun stand still at Gibeon, the moon at the valley of Elom" [Joshua
10:12], and it was so. Let then the whole world come, or rather two or three, or
four, or ten, or twenty worlds, and let them say and do this; yet shall they not be
able. But the friend of God commanded the creatures of his Friend, or rather he
besought his Friend, and the servants yielded, and he below gave command to
those above. Do you see that these things are for service fulfilling their
appointed course?
This was greater than the [miracles] of Moses. Why (I ask)? Because it is
not a like thing to command the sea and the heavenly [bodies]. For that indeed
was also a great thing, yea very great, nevertheless it was not at all equal [to the
other].
Why was this? The name of Joshua [Jesus], was a type. For this reason
then, and because of the very name, the creation reverenced him. What then!
Was no other person called Jesus? [Yes]; but this man was on this account so
called in type; for he used to be called Hoshea. Therefore the name was changed:
for it was a prediction and a prophecy. He brought in the people into the
promised land, as Jesus [does] into heaven; not the Law; since neither did Moses
[bring them in], but remained without. The Law has not power to bring in, but
grace. Do you see the types which have been before sketched out from the
beginning? He laid his commands on the creation, or rather, on the chief part of
the creation, on the very head itself as he stood below; that so when you see

Jesus in the form of Man saying the same, you may not be disturbed, nor think it
strange. He, even while Moses was living, turned back wars. Thus, even while
the Law is living, He directs all things; but not openly.
7. But let us consider how great is the virtue of the saints. If here they work
such things, if here they do such things, as the angels do, what then above? How
great is the splendor they have?
Perhaps each of you might wish to be such as to be able to command the
sun and moon. (At this point what would they say who assert that the heaven is a
sphere? For why did he not [merely] say, "Let the sun stand still," but added "Let
the sun stand still at the valley of Elom," that is, he will make the day longer?
This was done also in the time of Hezekiah. The sun went back. This again is
more wonderful than the other, to go the contrary way, not having yet gone
round his course.)
We shall attain to greater things than these if we will. For what has Christ
promised us? Not that we shall make the sun stand still, or the moon, nor that the
sun shall retrace his steps, but what? "I and the Father will come unto him," He
says, "and We will make our abode with him." [John 14:23] What need have I of
the sun and the moon, and of these wonders, when the Lord of all Himself comes
down and abides with me? I need these not. For what need I any of these things?
He Himself shall be to me for Sun and for Light. For, tell me, if you had entered
into a palace, which would you choose, to be able to rearrange some of the
things which have been fixed there, or so to make the king a familiar friend, as to
persuade him to take up his abode with you? Much rather the latter than the
former.
8. But what wonder is it, says some one, that what a man commands, Christ
should also? But Christ (you say) needs not the Father, but acts of His own
authority, you say. Well. Therefore first confess and say, that he needs not the
Father, and acts of His own authority: and then I will ask you, whether His
prayer is not in the way of condescension and arrangement (for surely Christ was
not inferior to Joshua the son of Nun), and that He might teach us? For as when