THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.83, C.4.

As to the commandment to make the altar of earth, or of unhewn
stones, this was given in order to remove idolatry.
Reply to Objection 6: As is laid down in the same distinction,
"formerly the priests did not use golden but wooden chalices; but
Pope Zephyrinus ordered the mass to be said with glass patens; and
subsequently Pope Urban had everything made of silver."
Afterwards it was decided that "the Lord's chalice with the paten
should be made entirely of gold, or of silver or at least of tin. But it is
not to be made of brass, or copper, because the action of the wine
thereon produces verdigris, and provokes vomiting. But no one is to
presume to sing mass with a chalice of wood or of glass," because
as the wood is porous, the consecrated blood would remain in it;
while glass is brittle and there might arise danger of breakage; and
the same applies to stone. Consequently, out of reverence for the
sacrament, it was enacted that the chalice should be made of the
aforesaid materials.
Reply to Objection 7: Where it could be done without danger, the
Church gave order for that thing to be used which more expressively
represents Christ's Passion. But there was not so much danger
regarding the body which is placed on the corporal, as there is with
the blood contained in the chalice. And consequently, although the
chalice is not made of stone, yet the corporal is made of linen, since
Christ's body was wrapped therein. Hence we read in an Epistle of
Pope Silvester, quoted in the same distinction: "By a unanimous
decree we command that no one shall presume to celebrate the
sacrifice of the altar upon a cloth of silk, or dyed material, but upon
linen consecrated by the bishop; as Christ's body was buried in a
clean linen winding-sheet." Moreover, linen material is becoming,
owing to its cleanness, to denote purity of conscience, and, owing to
the manifold labor with which it is prepared, to denote Christ's
Passion.
Reply to Objection 8: The dispensing of the sacraments belongs to
the Church's ministers; but their consecration is from God Himself.
Consequently, the Church's ministers can make no ordinances
regarding the form of the consecration, and the manner of
celebrating. And therefore, if the priest pronounces the words of
consecration over the proper matter with the intention of
consecrating, then, without every one of the things mentioned
above---namely, without house, and altar, consecrated chalice and
corporal, and the other things instituted by the Church---he

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.83, C.4.

consecrates Christ's body in very truth; yet he is guilty of grave sin,
in not following the rite of the Church.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.83, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the words spoken in this sacrament are