## Homily 30 on Second Corinthians

2 Corinthians 13:10
For this cause I write these things while absent, that I may not when present
deal sharply, according to the authority which the Lord gave me for building up,
and not for casting down.
He was sensible he had spoken more vehemently than his wont, and
especially towards the end of the Epistle. For he said before, "Now I Paul myself
entreat you by the meekness and gentleness of Christ; I who in your presence am
lowly among you, but being absent am of good courage towards you: Yea, I
beseech you, that I may not be bold when I am present, with the confidence
wherewith I count to be bold against some which count of us as if we walked
according to the flesh;" [Chap. 10:1, 2] and, "being in readiness to avenge all
disobedience when your obedience shall be fulfilled:" [2 Corinthians 10:6] and,
"I fear lest when I come, I should find you not such as I would, and should
myself be found of you such as you would not;" [2 Corinthians 12:20] and again,
"lest when I come my God should humble me before you, and that I should
mourn many of them which have sinned heretofore, and repented not of the
lasciviousness and uncleanness which they committed:" [2 Corinthians 12:21]
and afterwards, "I told you before and foretell you, as if I were present the
second time, and being absent now I write, that, if I come again, I will not spare;
seeing that you seek a proof of Christ, that speaks in me." [Chap. 13:2, 3] Since
then he had said these things and more besides, terrifying, shaming, reproaching,
lashing them, he says, in excuse for all, "For this cause I write these things while
absent, that I may not when present deal sharply." For I am desirous the
sharpness should lie in my letters and not in my deeds. I wish my threats to be
vehement, that they may continue threats and never go forth into action. Again

even in this his apology he makes what he says more terrible, showing that it is
not himself who is to punish, but God; for he added, "according to the authority
which the Lord gave me;" and again, to show that he desires not to use his power
to their punishment, he added, "not for casting down, but for building up." And
he hinted indeed this now, as I said, but he left it to them to draw the conclusion
that if they should continue unamended, even this again is building up, to punish
those that are of such a mind. For so it is, and he knew it and showed it by his
deeds.

2 Corinthians 13:11
"For the rest, brethren, rejoice, be perfected, be comforted, be of the same
mind, live in peace, and the God of love and peace shall be with you."
What means, "for the rest, brethren, rejoice?" You have pained, terrified,
thrown them into an agony, made them to tremble and fear, and how do you bid
them rejoice? 'Why, for this very reason I bid them rejoice. For,' he says, 'if what
is your part follow' upon mine, there will be nothing to prevent that joy. For all
my part has been done; I have suffered long, I have delayed, I have forborne to
cut off, I have besought, I have advised, I have alarmed, I have threatened, so as
by every means to gather you in unto the fruit of repentance. And now it
behooves that your part be done, and so your joy will be unfading.'
"Be perfected." What is, "be perfected?" 'Be complete, fill up what is
deficient.'
"Be comforted." For, since their trials were numerous, and their perils great,
he says, '"be comforted," both by one another, and by us, and by your change
unto the better. For if you should have joy of conscience and become complete,
nothing is wanting unto your cheerfulness and comfort. For nothing does so
produce comfort as a pure conscience, yea, though innumerable trials surround.'
"Be of the same mind, live in peace." The request he made in the former
Epistle also, at the opening. For it is possible to be of one mind, and yet not to
live in peace, [for instance], when people agree in doctrine, but in their dealings
with each other are at variance. But Paul requires both.
"And the God of love and peace shall be with you." For truly he not only
recommends and advises, but also prays. For either he prays for this, or else
foretells what shall happen; or rather, both. 'For if you do these things,' he says,
'for instance, if you be "of one mind" and "live in peace," God also will be with
you, for He is "the God of love and of peace," and in these things He delights,