converted her, she spent her whole time in the exercise of public confession, weeping over and
lamenting the defilement which she had received from this magician.
6. Some of his disciples, too, addicting themselves to the same practices, have deceived many
silly women, and defiled them. They proclaim themselves as being "perfect," so that no one can
be compared to them with respect to the immensity of their knowledge, nor even were you to
mention Paul or Peter, or any other of the apostles. They assert that they themselves know more
than all others, and that they alone have imbibed the greatness of the knowledge of that power
which is unspeakable. They also maintain that they have attained to a height above all power, and
that therefore they are free in every respect to act as they please, having no one to fear in anything.
For they affirm, that because of the "Redemption" it has come to pass that they can neither be
apprehended, nor even seen by the judge. But even if he should happen to lay hold upon them, then
they might simply repeat these words, while standing in his presence along with the "Redemption:"
"O thou, who sittest beside God, and the mystical, eternal Sige, thou through whom the angels
(mightiness), who continually behold the face of the Father, having thee as their guide and introducer,
do derive their forms from above, which she in the greatness of her daring inspiring with mind
on account of the goodness of the Propator, produced us as their images, having her mind then
intent upon the things above, as in a dream,— behold, the judge is at hand, and the crier orders me
to make my defence. But do thou, as being acquainted with the affairs of both, present the cause
of both of us to the judge, inasmuch as it is in reality but one cause." Now, as soon as the Mother
hears these words, she puts the Homeric helmet of Pluto upon them, so that they may invisibly
escape the judge. And then she immediately catches them up, conducts them into the bridal chamber,
and hands them over to their consorts.
to the form of thanksgiving employed night and morning by the Jews for their redemption from Egypt. Harvey refers the word
to the second baptism practised among these and other heretics, by which it was supposed they were removed from the cognizance
of the Demiurge, who is styled the "judge" in the close of the above sentence.
and attained at last to the Pleroma.

7. Such are the words and deeds by which, in our own district of the Rhone, they have deluded
many women, who have their consciences seared as with a hot iron. Some of them, indeed, make
a public confession of their sins; but others of them are ashamed to do this, and in a tacit kind of
way, despairing of [attaining to] the life of God, have, some of them, apostatized altogether; while
others hesitate between the two courses, and incur that which is implied in the proverb, "neither
without nor within;" possessing this as the fruit from the seed of the children of knowledge.