wonderful advantage. For he who has not acted rightly after hearing once, may
perhaps do so after hearing a second time; and he who has passed by the second
time, may do right after the third. God grant that we, being delivered from all
evil things, may have the sweet savor of Christ; for to Him, with the Father and
the Holy Ghost is glory, now and ever and world without end. Amen.

Homily 53 on the Gospel of John
John 8:20
"These words spoke Jesus in the treasury, as He taught in the Temple; and no
man laid hands on Him, for His hour was not yet come."
1. Oh the folly of the Jews! seeking Him as they did before the Passover,
and then having found Him in the midst of them, and having often attempted to
take Him by their own or by others' hands without being able; they were not
even so awed by His power, but set themselves to their wickedness, and desisted
not. For it says, that they continually made the attempt; "These words spoke He
in the treasury, teaching in the Temple; and no man laid hands on Him." He
spoke in the Temple, and in the character of teacher, which was more adapted to
rouse them, and He spoke those things because of which they were stung, and
charged Him with making Himself equal to the Father. For "the witness of two
men is true," proves this. Yet still "He spoke these words," It says, "in the
Temple," in the character of teacher, "and no man laid hands on Him, for His
hour was not yet come"; that is, it was not yet the fitting time at which He would
be crucified. So that even then the deed done was not of their power, but of His
dispensation, for they had long desired, but had not been able, nor would they
even then have been able, except He had consented.

John 8:21
"Then said Jesus unto them, I go My way, and you shall seek Me."
Why says He this continually? To shame and terrify their souls; for observe
what fear this saying caused in them. Although they desired to kill Him that they
might be rid of Him, they yet ask, "whither He goes," such great things did they
imagine from the matter. He desired also to show them another thing, that the
deed would not be effected through their force; but He showed it to them in a
figure beforehand, and already foretold the Resurrection by these words.

John 8:22
"Then said the Jews, Will he kill himself?"
What then does Christ? To remove their suspicion, and to show that such an
act is sin, He says,

John 8:23
"You are from beneath."
What He says, is of this kind: It is no wonder that you imagine such things,
you who are carnal men, and have no spiritual thoughts, but I shall not do
anything of the kind, for,
"I am from above; you are of the world."
Here again He speaks of their worldly and carnal imaginations, whence it is
clear that the, "I am not of this world," does not mean that He had not taken upon
Him flesh, but that He was far removed from their wickedness. For He even
says, that His disciples were "not of the world" [John 15:19], yet they had flesh.
As then Paul, when he says, "You are not in the flesh" [Romans 8:9], does not
mean that they are incorporeal, so Christ when He says, that His disciples are
"not of the world," does nothing else than testify to their heavenly wisdom.