and even to words, and even to thoughts, and even in everything observes
extreme strictness. It is open to you too, even without showing such strictness, to
have a share in the rewards that are laid up for him for these things. How? If you
aid him both in word and deed. If you encourage him both by supplying his
needs, and by doing him every possible service. For then the smoother of that
rugged path will be yourself. So then if you admire those in the deserts that have
adopted the angelic life, those in the churches that practice the same virtues with
them; if you admire, and are grieved that you are far behind them; ye may, in
another way, share with them, by waiting on them, and aiding them. For indeed
this too is of God's lovingkindness, to bring those that are less zealous, and are
not able to undertake the hard and rugged and strict life, to bring, I say, even
those, by another way, into the same rank with the others. And this Paul means
by "fellowship." They give a share to us, he means, in carnal things, and we give
a share to them in spiritual things. For if God for little and worthless things
grants the kingdom, His servants too, for little and material things, give a share
in spiritual things: or rather it is He that gives both the one and the other by
means of them. You can not fast, nor be alone, nor lie on the ground, nor watch
all night? Yet may thou gain the reward of all these things, if you go about the
matter another way, by attending on him that labors in them, and refreshing and
anointing him constantly, and lightening the pains of these works. He, for his
part, stands fighting and taking blows. Do thou wait on him when he returns
from the combat, receive him in your arms, wipe off the sweat, and refresh him;
comfort, soothe, restore his wearied soul. If we will but minister to the saints
with such readiness, we shall be partakers of their rewards. This Christ also tells
us. "Make to yourselves friends by means of the mammon of unrighteousness,
that they may receive you into their eternal tabernacles." [Luke 16:9] Do you
see that they have become sharers? "From the first day," he says, "even until
now." And "I rejoice" not only for what is past, but also for the future; for from
the past I guess that too.
Ver. 6. "Being confident of this very thing, that He which began a good

work in you will perfect it until the day of Jesus Christ."
See how he also teaches them to be unassuming. For since he had witnessed
a great thing of them, that they may not feel as men are apt to do, he presently
teaches them to refer both the past and the future to Christ. How? By saying, not,
"Being confident that as you began you will also finish," but what? "He which
began a good work in you will perfect it." He did not rob them of the
achievement, (for he said, "I rejoice for your fellowship," clearly as if making it
their act,) nor did he call their good deeds solely their own, but primarily of God.
"For I am confident," says he, "that He which began a good work in you will
perfect it until the day of Jesus Christ." That is, God will. And it is not about
yourselves, he implies, but about those descending from you that I feel thus. And
indeed it is no small praise, that God should work in one. For if He is "no
respecter of persons," as indeed He is none, but is looking to our purpose when
He aids us in good deeds, it is evident that we are agents in drawing Him to us;
so that even in this view he did not rob them of their praise. Since if His in
working were indiscriminate, there would have been nothing to hinder but that
even Heathens and all men might have Him working in them, that is, if He
moved us like logs and stones, and required not our part. So that in saying "God
will perfect it," this also again is made their praise, who have drawn to them the
grace of God, so that He aids them in going beyond human nature. And in
another way also a praise, as that "such are your good deeds that they cannot be
of man, but require the divine impulse." But if God will perfect, then neither
shall there be much labor, but it is right to be of good courage, for that they shall
easily accomplish all, as being assisted by Him.
Ver. 7. "Even as it is right for me to be thus minded on behalf of you all,
because I have you in my heart, inasmuch as both in my bonds, and in the
defence and confirmation of the Gospel, you all are partakers with me of grace."
Greatly still does he show here his longing desire, in that he had them in his
heart; and in the very prison, and though bound, he remembered the Philippians.
And it is not a little to the praise of these men, since it is not of prejudice that