errors. For some denied all action to bodies. This is the opinion of
Avicebron in his book on The Fount of Life, where, by the arguments
mentioned above, he endeavors to prove that no bodies act, but that
all the actions which seem to be the actions of bodies, are the
actions of some spiritual power that penetrates all bodies: so that,
according to him, it is not fire that heats, but a spiritual power which
penetrates, by means of the fire. And this opinion seems to be
derived from that of Plato. For Plato held that all forms existing in
corporeal matter are participated thereby, and determined and
limited thereto; and that separate forms are absolute and as it were
universal; wherefore he said that these separate forms are the
causes of forms that exist in matter. Therefore inasmuch as the form
which is in corporeal matter is determined to this matter
individualized by quantity, Avicebron held that the corporeal form is
held back and imprisoned by quantity, as the principle of
individuality, so as to be unable by action to extend to any other
matter: and that the spiritual and immaterial form alone, which is not
hedged in by quantity, can issue forth by acting on something else.
But this does not prove that the corporeal form is not an agent, but
that it is not a universal agent. For in proportion as a thing is
participated, so, of necessity, must that be participated which is
proper thereto; thus in proportion to the participation of light is the
participation of visibility. But to act, which is nothing else than to
make something to be in act, is essentially proper to an act as such;
wherefore every agent produces its like. So therefore to the fact of
its being a form not determined by matter subject to quantity, a thing
owes its being an agent indeterminate and universal: but to the fact
that it is determined to this matter, it owes its being an agent limited
and particular. Wherefore if the form of fire were separate, as the
Platonists supposed, it would be, in a fashion, the cause of every
ignition. But this form of fire which is in this corporeal matter, is the
cause of this ignition which passes from this body to that. Hence
such an action is effected by the contact of two bodies.
But this opinion of Avicebron goes further than that of Plato. For
Plato held only substantial forms to be separate; while he referred
accidents to the material principles which are "the great" and "the
small," which he considered to be the first contraries, by others
considered to the "the rare" and "the dense." Consequently both
Plato and Avicenna, who follows him to a certain extent, held that
corporeal agents act through their accidental forms, by disposing
matter for the substantial form; but that the ultimate perfection

attained by the introduction of the substantial form is due to an
immaterial principle. And this is the second opinion concerning the
action of bodies; of which we have spoken above when treating of
the creation (Question 45, Article 8).
The third opinion is that of Democritus, who held that action takes
place through the issue of atoms from the corporeal agent, while
passion consists in the reception of the atoms in the pores of the
passive body. This opinion is disproved by Aristotle (De Gener. i,
8,9). For it would follow that a body would not be passive as a whole,
and the quantity of the active body would be diminished through its
action; which things are manifestly untrue.
We must therefore say that a body acts forasmuch as it is in act, on a
body forasmuch as it is in potentiality.
Reply to Objection 1: This passage of Augustine is to be understood
of the whole corporeal nature considered as a whole, while thus has
no nature inferior to it, on which it can act; as the spiritual nature
acts on the corporeal, and the uncreated nature on the created.
Nevertheless one body is inferior to another, forasmuch as it is in
potentiality to that which the other has in act.
From this follows the solution of the second objection. But it must be
observed, when Avicebron argues thus, "There is a mover who is not
moved, to wit, the first maker of all; therefore, on the other hand,
there exists something moved which is purely passive," that this is
to be conceded. But this latter is primary matter, which is a pure
potentiality, just as God is pure act. Now a body is composed of
potentiality and act; and therefore it is both active and passive.
Reply to Objection 3: Quantity does not entirely hinder the corporeal
form from action, as stated above; but from being a universal agent,
forasmuch as a form is individualized through being in matter
subject to quantity. The proof taken from the weight of bodies is not
to the purpose. First, because addition of quantity does not cause
weight; as is proved (De Coelo et Mundo iv, 2). Secondly, it is false
that weight retards movement; on the contrary, the heavier a thing,
the greater its movement, if we consider the movement proper
thereto. Thirdly, because action is not effected by local movement,
as Democritus held: but by something being reduced from
potentiality to act.