stranger is abashed, and feels ashamed; and unless (his host) show excessive joy,
he is as (if) slighted, and goes away, and it becomes worse than not to have
received him, his being received in this way. Therefore he worships them,
therefore he welcomes them with speech, therefore with a seat. For who would
have hesitated, knowing that this work was done unto Him? "But we are not in a
foreign land." If we will, we shall be able to imitate him. How many of the
brethren are strangers? There is a common apartment, the Church, which we call
the "Xenon." Be inquisitive ([περιεργάζεσθε]), sit before the doors, receive those
who come yourselves; though you may not wish to take them into your houses,
at any rate in some other way (receive them), by supplying them with
necessaries. "Why, has not the Church means" you will say? She has: but what is
that to you? That they should be fed from the common funds of the Church, can
that benefit you? If another man prays, does it follow that you are not bound to
pray? Wherefore do you not say, "Do not the priests pray? Then why should I
pray?" "But I," you will say, "give to him who cannot be received there." Give,
though it be to that one: for what we are anxious for is this, that you should give
at any rate. Hear what Paul says: "That it may relieve them that are widows
indeed, and that the Church be not burdened." [1 Timothy 5:16] Be it how you
will, only do it. But I put it, not, "that the Church be not burdened," but, "that
thou be not burdened;" for at this rate you will do nothing, leaving all to the
Church. This is why there is a common room set apart by the Church, that you
may not say these things. "The Church," say you, "has lands, has money, and
revenues." And has she not charges? I ask; and has she not a daily expenditure?
"No doubt," you will say. Why then do you not lend aid to her moderate means?
I am ashamed indeed to say these things: however, I compel no man, if any one
imagines what I am saying to be for gain. Make for yourself a guest-chamber in
your own house: set up a bed there, set up a table there and a candlestick. [cf. 2
Kings 4:10] For is it not absurd, that whereas, if soldiers should come, you have
rooms set apart for them, and show much care for them, and furnish them with
everything, because they keep off from you the visible war of this world, yet

strangers have no place where they might abide? Gain a victory over the Church.
Would you put us to shame? This do: surpass us in liberality: have a room, to
which Christ may come; say, "This is Christ's cell; this building is set apart for
Him." Be it but an underground chamber, and mean, He disdains it not. "Naked
and a stranger," Christ goes about, it is but a shelter He wants: afford it, though
but this. Be not uncompassionate, nor inhuman; be not so earnest in worldly
matters, so cold in spiritual. Let also the most faithful of your servants be the one
entrusted with this office, and let him bring in the maimed, the beggars, and the
homeless. These things I say to shame you. For you ought indeed to receive
them in the upper part of your house; but if you will not do this, then though it
be below, though but where your mules are housed, and your servants, there
receive Christ. Perchance you shudder at hearing this. What then, when you do
not even this? Behold, I exhort, behold, I bid you; let this be a matter to be taken
up in earnest. But ye do not wish it thus, perhaps? Do it some other way. There
are many poor men and poor women: set apart some one (of these) constantly to
remain there: let the poor man be (your inmate) though but as a guard to your
house: let him be to you wall and fence, shield and spear. Where alms are, the
devil dares not approach, nor any other evil thing. Let us not overlook so great a
gain. But now a place is set apart for a chariot, and for litters ([βαστερνίοις])
another; but for Christ Who is wandering, not even one! Abraham received the
strangers in the place where he abode himself; his wife stood in the place of a
servant, the guests in the place of masters. He knew not that he was receiving
Christ; knew not that he was receiving Angels; so that had he known it, he would
have lavished his whole substance. But we, who know that we receive Christ,
show not even so much zeal as he did who thought that he was receiving men.
"But they are impostors," you will say, "many of them, and unthankful." And for
this the greater your reward, when you receive for the sake of Christ's name. For
if you know indeed that they are impostors, receive them not into your house:
but if you dost not know this, why do you accuse them lightly? "Therefore I tell
them to go to the receiving house." But what kind of excuse is there for us, when