Homily 66 on the Gospel of John
John 12:8
"Much people of the Jews therefore knew that He was there, and they came, not
for Jesus' sake only, but that they might see Lazarus also, whom He had raised
from the dead."
1. As wealth is wont to hurl into destruction those who are not heedful, so
also is power; the first leads into covetousness, the second into pride. See, for
instance, how the subject multitude of the Jews is sound, and their rulers corrupt;
for that the first of these believed Christ, the Evangelists continually assert,
saying, that "many of the multitude believed on Him" [John 7:31-48]; but they
who were of the rulers, believed not. And they themselves say, not the multitude,
"Hath any of the rulers believed on Him?" But what says one? "The multitude
who know not God are accursed" [John 7:49]; the believers they call accursed,
and themselves the slayers, wise. In this place also, having beheld the miracle,
the many believed; but the rulers were not contented with their own evil deeds,
they also attempted to kill Lazarus. Suppose they did attempt to slay Christ
because He broke the Sabbath, because He made Himself equal to the Father,
and because of the Romans whom you allege, yet what charge had they against
Lazarus, that they sought to kill him? Is the having received a benefit a crime?
Do you see how murderous is their will? Yet He had worked many miracles; but
none exasperated them so much as this one, not the paralytic, not the blind. For
this was more wonderful in its nature, and was wrought after many others, and it
was a strange thing to see one, who had been dead four days, walking and
speaking. An honorable action, in truth, for the feast, to mix up the solemn
assembly with murders. Besides, in the one case they thought to charge Him
concerning the Sabbath, and so to draw away the multitudes; but here, since they
had no fault to find with Him, they make the attempt on the man who had been

healed. For here they could not even say that He was opposed to the Father,
since the prayer stopped their mouths. Since then the charge which they
continually brought against Him was removed, and the miracle was evident, they
hasten to murder. So that they would have done the same in the case of the blind
man, had it not been in their power to find fault respecting the Sabbath. Besides,
that man was of no note, and they cast him out of the temple; but Lazarus was a
person of distinction, as is clear, since many came to comfort his sisters; and the
miracle was done in the sight of all, and most marvelously. On which account all
ran to see. This then stung them, that while the feast was going on, all should
leave it and go to Bethany. They set their hand therefore to kill him, and thought
they were not daring anything, so murderous were they. On this account the Law
at its commencement opens with this, "You shall not kill" [Exodus 20:13]; and
the Prophet brings this charge against them, "Their hands are full of blood."
[Isaiah 1:15]
But how, after not walking openly in Jewry, and retiring into the wilderness,
does He again enter openly? Having quenched their anger by retiring, He comes
to them when they were stilled. Moreover, the multitude which went before and
which followed after was sufficient to cast them into an agony; for no sign so
much attracted the people as that of Lazarus. And another Evangelist says, that
they strewed their garments under His feet [Matthew 21:8], and that "the whole
city was moved" [Matthew 21:10]; with so great honor did He enter. And this He
did, figuring one prophecy and fulfilling another; and the same act was the
beginning of the one and the end of the other. For the, "Rejoice, for your King
comes unto you meek" [Zechariah 9:9], belonged to Him as fulfilling a prophecy,
but the sitting upon an ass was the act of one prefiguring a future event, that He
was about to have the impure race of the Gentiles subject to Him.
But how say the others, that He sent disciples, and said, "Loose the ass and
the colt" [Matthew 21:2], while John says nothing of the kind, but that "having
found a young ass, He sat upon it"? Because it is likely that both circumstances
took place, and that He after the ass was loosed, while the disciples were