18:36; the fearful things they would not have mentioned, whether they related to
the present life or the future. For so deceivers and flatterers act. Nothing harsh,
nor galling, nor burdensome, do they hold out, but altogether the contrary. For
this is the nature of deceit.
18. But "the folly," it will be said, "of the greater part caused them to
believe what they were told." How do you say? When they were under Greeks,
they were not foolish; but when they came over to us, did their folly then begin?
And yet they were not men of another sort nor out of another world, that the
Apostles took and persuaded: they were men too who simply held the opinions
of the Greeks, but ours they received with the accompaniment of dangers. So
that if with better reason they had maintained the former, they would not have
swerved from them, now that they had so long time been educated therein; and
especially as not without danger was it possible to swerve. But when they came
to know from the very nature of the things that all on that side was mockery and
delusion, upon this, even under menaces of sundry deaths, they sprang off
([ἀπεπήδησαν]) from their customary ways, and came over voluntarily unto the
new; inasmuch as the latter doctrine was according to nature, but the other
contrary to nature.
But "the persons convinced," it is said, "were slaves, and woman, and
nurses, and midwives, and eunuchs." Now in the first place, not of these alone
does our Church consist; and this is plain unto all. But be it of these; this is what
especially makes the Gospel worthy of admiration; that such doctrines as Plato
and his followers could not apprehend, the fishermen had power on a sudden to
persuade the most ignorant sort of all to receive. For if they had persuaded wise
men only, the result would not have been so wonderful; but in advancing slaves,
and nurses, and eunuchs unto such great severity of life as to make them rivals to
angels, they offered the greatest proof of their divine inspiration. Again; had they
enjoined I know not what trifling matters, it were reasonable perhaps to bring
forward the conviction wrought in these persons, to show the trifling nature of
the things which were spoken: but if things great, and high, and almost

transcending human nature, and requiring high thoughts, were the matter of their
lessons of wisdom; the more foolishness you show in those who were convinced,
by so much the more do you show clearly that they who wrought the conviction
were wise and filled with divine grace.
But, you will say, they prevailed on them through the excessive greatness of
the promises. But tell me, is not this very thing a wonder to you, how they
persuaded men to expect prizes and recompenses after death? For this, were
there nothing else, is to me matter of amazement. But this, too, it will be said,
came of folly. Inform me wherein is the folly of these things: that the soul is
immortal; that an impartial tribunal will receive us after the present life; that we
shall render an account of our deeds and words and thoughts unto God that
knows all secrets; that we shall see the evil undergoing punishment, and the
good with crowns on their heads. Nay, these things are not of folly, but the
highest instruction of wisdom. The folly is in the contrary opinions to these.
19. Were this then the only thing, the despising of things present, the setting
much by virtue, the not seeking rewards here, but advancing far beyond in
hopes, and the keeping the soul so intent and faithful as by no present terror to
be hindered in respect of the hope of what shall be; tell me, to what high
philosophy must this belong? But would you also learn the force of the promises
and predictions in themselves, and the truth of those uttered both before and after
this present state of things? Behold, I show you a golden chain, woven cunningly
from the beginning! He spoke some things to them about Himself, and about the
churches, and about the things to come; and as He spoke, He wrought mighty
works. By the fulfilment therefore of what He said, it is plain that both the
wonders wrought were real, and the future and promised things also.
But that my meaning may be yet plainer, let me illustrate it from the actual
case. He raised up Lazarus by a single word merely, and showed him alive.
Again, He said, The gates of Hades shall not prevail against the Church
[Matthew 16:18] and, "He that forsakes father or mother, shall receive an
hundred-fold in this life, and shall inherit everlasting life." [Matthew 19:29] The