And if a man choose, he will find that poverty affords us more resources
even for pleasure. How? Because it is freed from cares, hatred, fighting,
contention, strife, from evils out of number.
Therefore let us not follow after wealth, nor be forever envying those who
possess much. But let those of us who have wealth, use it aright; and those who
have not, let us not grieve for this, but give thanks for all things unto God,
because He enables us to receive with little labor the same reward with the rich,
or even (if we will) a greater: and from small means we shall have great gains.
For so he that brought the two talents, was admired and honored equally with
him who brought the five. Now why? Because he was entrusted with [but] two
talents, yet he accomplished all that in him lay, and brought in what was
entrusted to him, doubled. Why then are we eager to have much entrusted to us,
when we may by a little reap the same fruits, or even greater? When the labor
indeed is less, but the reward much more? For more easily will a poor man part
with his own, than a rich man who has many and great possessions. What, know
ye not, that the more things a man has, the more he sets his love upon?
Therefore, lest this befall us, let us not seek after wealth, nor let us be impatient
of poverty, nor make haste to be rich: and let those of us who have [riches] so
use them as Paul commanded. ["They that have," says he, "as though they had
not, and they that use this world as not abusing it" 1 Corinthians 7:29-31]: that
we may obtain the good things promised. And may it be granted to us all to
obtain them, by the grace and love of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom to the
Father together with the Holy Ghost, be glory, power, honor, now, and for ever,
and world without end. Amen.

## Homily 3 on Hebrews

Hebrews 1:6-8
"And again when He brings in the First-Begotten into the world, He says,
And let all the angels of God worship Him. And of the Angels He says, Who
makes His angels spirits, and His ministers a flame of fire. But unto the Son He
says, Your throne, O God, is for ever and ever."
1. Our Lord Jesus Christ calls His coming in the flesh an exodus [or going
out]: as when He says, "The sower went out to sow." [Matthew 13:3] And again,
"I went out from the Father, and have come." [John 16:28] And in many places
one may see this. But Paul calls it an [eisodus or] coming in, saying, "And when
again He brings in the First-Begotten into the world," meaning by this Bringing
in, His taking on Him flesh.
Now why has he so used the expression? The things signified [thereby] are
manifest, and in what respect it is [thus] said. For Christ indeed calls it a Going
out, justly; for we were out from God. For as in royal palaces, prisoners and
those who have offended the king, stand without, and he who desires to reconcile
them, does not bring them in, but himself going out discourses with them, until
having made them meet for the king's presence, he may bring them in, so also
Christ has done. Having gone out to us, that is, having taken flesh, and having
discoursed to us of the King's matters, so He brought us in, having purged the
sins, and made reconciliation. Therefore he calls it a Going out.
But Paul names it a Coming in, from the metaphor of those who come to an
inheritance and receive any portion or possession. For the saying, "and when
again He brings in the First-Begotten into the world," means this, "when he puts
the world into His hand." For when He was made known, then also He obtained
possession of the whole thereof, He says not these things concerning God The