This sentence is very obscure in the Latin text.

by man in this world? And how could He (Christ) have been greater than Solomon, or greater
than Jonah, or have been the Lord of David, who was of the same substance as they were? How,
too, could He have subdued him who was stronger than men, who had not only overcome
man, but also retained him under his power, and conquered him who had conquered, while he set
free mankind who had been conquered, unless He had been greater than man who had thus been
vanquished? But who else is superior to, and more eminent than, that man who was formed after
the likeness of God, except the Son of God, after whose image man was created? And for this
reason He did in these last days exhibit the similitude; [for] the Son of God was made man,
assuming the ancient production [of His hands] into His own nature, as I have shown in the
immediately preceding book.
5. He shall also judge those who describe Christ as [having become man] only in [human]
opinion. For how can they imagine that they do themselves carry on a real discussion, when their
Master was a mere imaginary being? Or how can they receive anything stedfast from Him, if He
was a merely imagined being, and not a verity? And how can these men really be partaken of
salvation, if He in whom they profess to believe, manifested Himself as a merely imaginary being?
Everything, therefore, connected with these men is unreal, and nothing [possessed of the character
of] truth; and, in these circumstances, it may be made a question whether (since, perchance, they
themselves in like manner are not men, but mere dumb animals) they do not present, in most
cases, simply a shadow of humanity.
6. He shall also judge false prophets, who, without having received the gift of prophecy from
God, and not possessed of the fear of God, but either for the sake of vainglory, or with a view to
some personal advantage, or acting in some other way under the influence of a wicked spirit, pretend
to utter prophecies, while all the time they lie against God.
7. He shall also judge those who give rise to schisms, who are destitute of the love of God, and
who look to their own special advantage rather than to the unity of the Church; and who for trifling
reasons, or any kind of reason which occurs to them, cut in pieces and divide the great and glorious
body of Christ, and so far as in them lies, [positively] destroy it,—men who prate of peace while
they give rise to war, and do in truth strain out a gnat, but swallow a camel. For no reformation
of so great importance can be effected by them, as will compensate for the mischief arising from

Literally, "who was strong against men."

In semetipsum: lit. "unto Himself."

their schism. He shall also judge all those who are beyond the pale of the truth, that is, who are
outside the Church; but he himself shall be judged by no one. For to him all things are consistent:
he has a full faith in one God Almighty, of whom are all things; and in the Son of God, Jesus Christ
our Lord, by whom are all things, and in the dispensations connected with Him, by means of which
the Son of God became man; and a firm belief in the Spirit of God, who furnishes us with a
knowledge of the truth, and has set forth the dispensations of the Father and the Son, in virtue of
which He dwells with every generation of men, according to the will of the Father.
8. True knowledge is [that which consists in] the doctrine of the apostles, and the ancient
constitution of the Church throughout all the world, and the distinctive manifestation of the
body of Christ according to the successions of the bishops, by which they have handed down
that Church which exists in every place, and has come even unto us, being guarded and preserved
without any forging of Scriptures, by a very complete system of doctrine, and neither receiving
addition nor [suffering] curtailment [in the truths which she believes]; and [it consists in] reading
[the word of God] without falsification, and a lawful and diligent exposition in harmony with the
Scriptures, both without danger and without blasphemy; and [above all, it consists in] the pre-eminent
gift of love, which is more precious than knowledge, more glorious than prophecy, and which
excels all the other gifts [of God].
9. Wherefore the Church does in every place, because of that love which she cherishes towards
God, send forward, throughout all time, a multitude of martyrs to the Father; while all others
not only have nothing of this kind to point to among themselves, but even maintain that such
witness-bearing is not at all necessary, for that their system of doctrines is the true witness [for
Christ], with the exception, perhaps, that one or two among them, during the whole time which has
elapsed since the Lord appeared on earth, have occasionally, along with our martyrs, borne the
4$.567%83: the Latin is, "Secundum quas (dispositiones) aderat generi humano." We have endeavoured to express the meaning
of both.
considerably both as to the construction and the interpretation. We have done our best to represent the meaning in English, but
may not have been altogether successful.