but bridling the shameless tongue of them that dare so to speak.
But see, throughout all, His authority: "I say unto you, You are Peter; I will
build the Church; I will give you the keys of Heaven."
4. And then, when He had so said, "He charged them that they should tell
no man that He was the Christ." [Matthew 16:20]
And why did He charge them? That when the things which offend are taken
out of the way, and the cross is accomplished, and the rest of His sufferings
fulfilled, and when there is nothing any more to interrupt and disturb the faith of
the people in Him, the right opinion concerning Him may be engraven pure and
immovable in the mind of the hearers. For, in truth, His power had not yet
clearly shone forth. Accordingly it was His will then to be preached by them,
when both the plain truth of the facts, and the power of His deeds were pleading
in support of the assertions of the apostles. For it was by no means the same
thing to see Him in Palestine, now working miracles, and now insulted and
persecuted (and especially when the very cross was presently to follow the
miracles that were happening); and to behold him everywhere in the world,
adored and believed, and no more suffering anything, such as He had suffered.
Therefore He bids them "tell no man." For that which has been once rooted
and then plucked up, would hardly, if planted, again be retained among the
many; but that which, once fixed, has remained immovable, and has suffered
injury from no quarter, easily mounts up, and advances to a greater growth.
And if they who had enjoyed the benefit of many miracles, and had had part
in so many unutterable mysteries, were offended by the mere hearing of it; or
rather not these only, but even the leader of them all, Peter; consider what it was
likely the common sort should feel, being first told that He is the Son of God,
then seeing Him even crucified and spit upon, and that without knowledge of the
secret of those mysteries, or participation in the gift of the Holy Ghost. For if to
His disciples He said, "I have many things to say unto you, but you cannot bear
them now;" [John 16:12] much more would the rest of the people have utterly
failed, had the chiefest of these mysteries been revealed to them before the

proper time. Accordingly He forbids them to tell.
And to instruct you how great a thing it was, their afterwards learning His
doctrine complete, when the things that offend had passed by; learn it from this
same leader of theirs. For this very Peter, he who after so many miracles proved
so weak as even to deny Him, and to be in fear of a mean damsel; after the cross
had come forth, and he had received the certain proofs of the resurrection, and
there was nothing more to offend and trouble him, retained the teaching of the
Spirit so immovable, that more vehemently than a lion he sprang upon the
people of the Jews, for all the dangers and innumerable deaths which were
threatened.
With reason then did He bid them not tell the many before the crucifixion,
since not even to them that were to teach did He venture to commit all before the
crucifixion. "For I have many things to say unto you," says He, "but you cannot
bear them now."
And of the things too that He did say, they do not understand many, which
He did not make plain before the crucifixion. At least when He was risen from
the dead, then and not before they knew some of His sayings.
5. "From that time forth began He to show unto them that He must suffer.
[Matthew 16:21] From that time." What time? When He had fixed the doctrine
in them; when He had brought in the beginning of the Gentiles.
But not even so did they understand what He said. "For the saying," it is
said, "was hid from them;" [Luke 18:34] and they were as in a kind of perplexity,
not knowing that He must rise again. Therefore He rather dwells on the
difficulties, and enlarges His discourse, that He may open their mind, and they
may understand what it can be that He speaks of.
"But they understood not, but the saying was hid from them, and they feared
to ask this;" [Luke 9:45] not whether He should die, but how, and in what
manner, and what this mystery could be. For they did not even know what was
this same rising again, and supposed it much better not to die. Therefore, the rest
being troubled and in perplexity, Peter again, in his ardor, alone ventures to