predicted anything. With us there are prophets, and they do not fail. They do not
speak truth in one instance and falsehood in another, but always declare the
truth; for this is the privilege of foreknowledge.
Cease, then, from this madness, I beseech you, if at least you believe in
Christ; and if you believe not, why do you expose yourselves? Why do you
deceive? "How long will you halt on both your hips?" [1 Kings 18:21,
Septuagint] Why do you go to them? Why enquire of them? The instant you go
to them, the instant you enquire, you put yourself in slavery to them. For you
enquire, as if you believed. "No," you say, "I do not enquire, as believing, but
making trial of them." But to make trial, whether they speak the truth, is the part
not of one who believes that they are false, but of one who still doubts.
Wherefore then do you enquire what will happen? For if they answered, "This
will happen, but do so and so, and you will escape it"; even in that case you
ought by no means to be an idolater; yet your madness were not so great. But if
they foretell future events, he that listens to them will gain nothing more than
unavailing sorrow. The event does not happen, but he suffers the uneasiness, and
torments, himself.
If it were for our good, God would not have grudged us this foreknowledge.
He who has revealed to us things in heaven, would not have envied us. For, "All
things," He says, "that I have heard of the Father I have made known unto you";
and, "I call you not servants, but friends. You are my friends." [John 15:15] Why
then did He not make these things known unto us? Because He would not have
us concerned about them. And as a proof that He does not envy us this
knowledge, such things were revealed to the ancients, because they were babes,
even about an ass, and the like. But to us, because He would not have us
concerned about such things, He has not cared to reveal them. But what do we
learn? Things which they never knew, for little indeed were all those things of
old. But what we are taught is this, that we shall rise again, that we shall be
immortal, and incorruptible, that our life shall have no end, that all things will
pass away, that we shall be caught up in the clouds, that the wicked shall suffer

punishment, and numberless other things, and in all these there is no falsehood.
Is it not better to know these than to hear that the ass that was lost is found? Lo,
you have gotten your ass! Lo, you have found him! What is your gain? Will he
not soon be lost again some other way? For if he leave you not, at least you will
lose him in your death. But the things which I have mentioned, if we will but
hold them fast, we shall retain perpetually. These therefore let us pursue. To
these stable and enduring goods let us attach ourselves. Let us not give heed to
soothsayers, fortune-tellers, and jugglers, but to God who knows all things
certainly, whose knowledge is universal. Thus we shall know all that it befits us
to know, and shall obtain all good things, through the grace and lovingkindness,
etc.