SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.100, C.3.

Reply to Objection 2: Since a father stands in the relation of
principle, and his son in the relation of that which is from a principle,
it is essentially fitting for a father to support his son: and
consequently he is bound to support him not only for a time, but for
all his life, and this is to lay by. On the other hand, for the son to
bestow something on his father is accidental, arising from some
momentary necessity, wherein he is bound to support him, but not to
lay by as for a long time beforehand, because naturally parents are
not the successors of their children, but children of their parents.
Reply to Objection 3: As Tully says (De Invent. Rhet. ii), "we offer
homage and duty to all our kindred and to the well-wishers of our
country"; not, however, equally to all, but chiefly to our parents, and
to others according to our means and their personal claims.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.100, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether piety is a special virtue distinct from

other virtues?
Objection 1: It seems that piety is not a special virtue distinct from
other virtues. For the giving of service and homage to anyone
proceeds from love. But it belongs to piety. Therefore piety is not a
distinct virtue from charity.
Objection 2: Further, it is proper to religion to give worship to God.
But piety also gives worship to God, according to Augustine (De Civ.
Dei x). Therefore piety is not distinct from religion.
Objection 3: Further, piety, whereby we give our country worship
and duty, seems to be the same as legal justice, which looks to the
common good. But legal justice is a general virtue, according to the
Philosopher (Ethic. v, 1,2). Therefore piety is not a special virtue.
On the contrary, It is accounted by Tully (De Invent. Rhet. ii) as a part
of justice.
I answer that, A special virtue is one that regards an object under a
special aspect. Since, then, the nature of justice consists in
rendering another person his due, wherever there is a special aspect
of something due to a person, there is a special virtue. Now a thing
is indebted in a special way to that which is its connatural principle
of being and government. And piety regards this principle, inasmuch
as it pays duty and homage to our parents and country, and to those
who are related thereto. Therefore piety is a special virtue.
Reply to Objection 1: Just as religion is a protestation of faith, hope
and charity, whereby man is primarily directed to God, so again piety
is a protestation of the charity we bear towards our parents and
country.
Reply to Objection 2: God is the principle of our being and
government in a far more excellent manner than one's father or
country. Hence religion, which gives worship to God, is a distinct
virtue from piety, which pays homage to our parents and country.
But things relating to creatures are transferred to God as the summit
of excellence and causality, as Dionysius says (Div. Nom. i):
wherefore, by way of excellence, piety designates the worship of