inflict death upon the weak, not because of their own nature but because of his
weakness? God made the heaven in order that you may wonder at the work, and
worship the master. But others leaving the creator alone, have worshipped the
heaven; and this from their own carelessness and senselessness. But why do I
speak of the creation? Assuredly what could be more conducive to salvation than
the Cross? But this Cross has become an offense to the weak. "For the word of
the Cross is to them that are perishing, foolishness: but to those which are being
saved, it is the power of God." And again, "we preach Christ crucified, unto
Jews a stumbling-block and unto Gentiles foolishness." What could be more fit
for teaching than Paul, and the apostles? But the Apostles became a savour of
death to many. He says at least "to one a savour from death unto death: to the
other a savour from life unto life." Do you see that the weak is hurt even by Paul,
but the strong is injured not even by the Devil?
4. Do you wish that we should exercise the argument in the case of Jesus
Christ? What is equal to that salvation? What more profitable than that presence?
But this very saving presence, so profitable, became an additional means of
chastening to many. "For for judgment" says he "came I into this world, that
they which see not may see, and that they which see may become blind." What
do you say? The light became a cause of blindness? The light did not become a
cause of blindness, but the weakness of the eyes of the soul was not able to
entertain the light. You have seen that a weak man is hurt on all sides, but the
strong is benefited on all sides. For in every case, the purpose is the cause, in
every case the disposition is master. Since the Devil, if you wouldest understand
it, is even profitable to us, if we use him aright, and benefits us greatly, and we
gain no ordinary advantages; and this, we showed in a small degree from the
case of Job. And it is possible also to learn this from Paul: for writing about the
fornicator he thus speaks "Deliver such an one unto Satan for the destruction of
the flesh, that the spirit may be saved." Behold even the Devil has become a
cause of salvation, but not because of his own disposition, but because of the
skill of the Apostle. For as the physicians taking serpents and cutting off their

destructive members, prepare medicines for antidotes; so also did Paul. He took
whatever was profitable of the chastening that proceeds from the Devil, and left
the rest alone; in order that you may learn that the Devil is not the cause of
salvation, but that he hasted to destroy and devour mankind. But that the Apostle
through his own wisdom cut his throat: hear in the second epistle to the
Corinthians, what he saith about this very fornicator, "confirm your love towards
him," "lest by any means such an one should be swallowed up by over much
sorrow." And, "we be taken advantage of by Satan." We have snatched
beforehand the man from the gullet of the wild beast, he saith. For the Apostle
often used the Devil as an executioner. For the executioners punish those who
have done wrong, not as they choose, but as the judges allow. For this is the rule
for the executioner, to take vengeance, giving heed to the command of the judge.
Do you see to what a dignity the Apostle mounted? He who was invested with a
body, used the bodiless as an executioner; and that which their common master
saith to the Devil, concerning Job: charging him thus, "Touch his flesh, but you
shall not touch his life;" giving him a limit, and measure of vengeance, in order
that the wild beast might not be impetuous and leap upon him too shamelessly;
this too the Apostle does. For delivering the fornicator over to him he says "For
the destruction of the flesh," that is "you shall not touch his life." Do you see the
authority of the servant? Fear not therefore the Devil, even if he be bodiless: for
he has come in contact with him. And nothing is weaker than he who has come
into such contact even though he be not invested with a body, as then nothing is
stronger than he who has boldness even though he bear about a mortal body.
5. All these things have been now said by me, not in order that I may
discharge the Devil from blame, but that I may free you from slothfulness. For
he wishes extremely to attribute the cause of our sins to himself, in order that we
being nourished by these hopes, and entering on all kinds of evil, may increase
the chastening in our own case, and may meet with no pardon from having
transferred the cause to him. Just as Eve met with none. But let us not do this.
But let us know ourselves. Let us know our wounds. For thus shall we be able to