greater testimony, namely that by facts.

Hebrews 12:25-29
"See that you refuse not Him that speaks. For if they escaped not, who
refused him that spoke on earth, much more shall not we escape, if we turn away
from Him that speaks from heaven. Whose voice then shook the earth: but now
has He promised, saying, Yet once more I shake not the earth only, but also
heaven. And this word, Yet once more, signifies the removing of those things that
are shaken, as of things that are made, that those which cannot be shaken may
remain. Wherefore we receiving a kingdom which cannot be moved, let us have
grace whereby we serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear. For our
God is a consuming fire."
3. Fearful were those things, but these are far more admirable and glorious.
For here there is not "darkness," nor "blackness," nor "tempest." It seems to me
that by these words he hints at the obscurity of the Old [Testament], and the
overshadowed and veiled character of the Law. And besides the Giver of the
Law appears in fire terrible, and apt to punish those who transgress.
But what are "the sounds of the trumpet"? Probably it is as though some
King were coming. This at all events will also be at the second coming. "At the
last trump" [1 Corinthians 15:52] all must be raised. But it is the trumpet of His
voice which effects this. At that time then all things were objects of sense, and
sights, and sounds; now all are objects of understanding, and invisible.
And, it says, "there was much smoke." [See Exodus 19:18] For since God is
said to be fire, and appeared thus in the bush, He indicates the fire even by the
smoke. And what is "the blackness and the darkness"? He again expresses its
fearfulness. Thus Isaiah also says; "And the house was filled with smoke." [Isaiah
6:4] And what is the object of "the tempest"? The human race was careless. It
was therefore needful that they should be aroused by these things. For no one
was so dull as not to have had his thoughts raised up, when these things were

done, and the Law ordained.
"Moses spoke, and God answered him by a voice" [Exodus 19:19]: for it
was necessary that the voice of God should be uttered. Inasmuch as He was
about to promulgate His Law through Moses, therefore He makes him worthy of
confidence. They saw him not, because of the thick darkness: they heard him
not, because of the weakness of his voice. What then? "God answered by a
voice," addressing the multitude: yea and his name shall be called.
"They entreated" (he says) "that the word should not be spoken to them any
more."
From the first therefore they were themselves the cause of God's being
manifested through the Flesh. Let Moses speak with us, and "Let not God speak
with us." [Exodus 20:9] They who make comparisons elevate the one side the
more, that they may show the other to be far greater. In this respect also our
[privileges] are more gentle and more admirable. For they are great in a twofold
respect: because while they are glorious and greater, they are more accessible.
This he says also in the Epistle to the Corinthians: "with unveiled countenance"
[2 Corinthians 3:18], and, "not as Moses put a veil over his face." [2 Corinthians
3:13] They, he means, were not counted worthy of what we [are]. For of what
were they thought worthy? They saw "darkness, blackness"; they heard "a
voice." But thou also hast heard a voice, not through darkness, but through flesh.
You have not been disturbed, neither troubled, but you have stood and held
discourse with the Mediator.
And in another way, by the "darkness" he shows the invisibleness. "And
darkness" (it says) "was under His feet." [Psalm 18:9]
Then even Moses feared, but now no one.
As the people then stood below, so also do we. They were not below, but
below Heaven. The Son is near to God, but not as Moses.
There was a wilderness, here a city.
4. "And to an innumerable company of angels." Here he shows the joy, the
delight, in place of the "blackness" and "darkness" and "tempest."