Some such expression of disapproval must evidently be supplied, though wanting in the Latin text.

3. But since parables admit of many interpretations, what lover of truth will not acknowledge,
that for them to assert God is to be searched out from these, while they desert what is certain,
indubitable, and true, is the part of men who eagerly throw themselves into danger, and act as if
destitute of reason? And is not such a course of conduct not to build one's house upon a rock
which is firm, strong, and placed in an open position, but upon the shifting sand? Hence the
overthrow of such a building is a matter of ease.

### Chapter XXVIII.—Perfect knowledge cannot be attained in the present life: many questions
must be submissively left in the hands of God.
1. Having therefore the truth itself as our rule and the testimony concerning God set clearly
before us, we ought not, by running after numerous and diverse answers to questions, to cast away
the firm and true knowledge of God. But it is much more suitable that we, directing our inquiries
after this fashion, should exercise ourselves in the investigation of the mystery and administration
of the living God, and should increase in the love of Him who has done, and still does, so great
things for us; but never should fall from the belief by which it is most clearly proclaimed that this
Being alone is truly God and Father, who both formed this world, fashioned man, and bestowed
the faculty of increase on His own creation, and called him upwards from lesser things to those
greater ones which are in His own presence, just as He brings an infant which has been conceived
in the womb into the light of the sun, and lays up wheat in the barn after He has given it full strength
on the stalk. But it is one and the same Creator who both fashioned the womb and created the sun;
and one and the same Lord who both reared the stalk of corn, increased and multiplied the wheat,
and prepared the barn.
2. If, however, we cannot discover explanations of all those things in Scripture which are made
the subject of investigation, yet let us not on that account seek after any other God besides Him
who really exists. For this is the very greatest impiety. We should leave things of that nature to
God who created us, being most properly assured that the Scriptures are indeed perfect, since they
were spoken by the Word of God and His Spirit; but we, inasmuch as we are inferior to, and later
in existence than, the Word of God and His Spirit, are on that very account destitute of the
knowledge of His mysteries. And there is no cause for wonder if this is the case with us as respects
things spiritual and heavenly, and such as require to be made known to us by revelation, since many
even of those things which lie at our very feet (I mean such as belong to this world, which we
handle, and see, and are in close contact with) transcend our knowledge, so that even these we must
leave to God. For it is fitting that He should excel all [in knowledge]. For how stands the case, for
instance, if we endeavour to explain the cause of the rising of the Nile? We may say a great deal,