commissioned [messengers] to call people to the marriage, but they who did not obey Him deprived
themselves of the royal supper. The skill of God, therefore, is not defective, for He has power
of the stones to raise up children to Abraham; but the man who does not obtain it is the cause to
himself of his own imperfection. Nor, [in like manner], does the light fail because of those who
have blinded themselves; but while it remains the same as ever, those who are [thus] blinded are
involved in darkness through their own fault. The light does never enslave any one by necessity;
nor, again, does God exercise compulsion upon any one unwilling to accept the exercise of His
skill. Those persons, therefore, who have apostatized from the light given by the Father, and
transgressed the law of liberty, have done so through their own fault, since they have been created
free agents, and possessed of power over themselves.
4. But God, foreknowing all things, prepared fit habitations for both, kindly conferring that
light which they desire on those who seek after the light of incorruption, and resort to it; but for
the despisers and mockers who avoid and turn themselves away from this light, and who do, as it
were, blind themselves, He has prepared darkness suitable to persons who oppose the light, and
He has inflicted an appropriate punishment upon those who try to avoid being subject to Him.
Submission to God is eternal rest, so that they who shun the light have a place worthy of their flight;
and those who fly from eternal rest, have a habitation in accordance with their fleeing. Now, since
all good things are with God, they who by their own determination fly from God, do defraud
themselves of all good things; and having been [thus] defrauded of all good things with respect to
God, they shall consequently fall under the just judgment of God. For those persons who shun rest
shall justly incur punishment, and those who avoid the light shall justly dwell in darkness. For as
in the case of this temporal light, those who shun it do deliver themselves over to darkness, so that
they do themselves become the cause to themselves that they are destitute of light, and do inhabit
darkness; and, as I have already observed, the light is not the cause of such an [unhappy] condition
of existence to them; so those who fly from the eternal light of God, which contains in itself all
good things, are themselves the cause to themselves of their inhabiting eternal darkness, destitute
of all good things, having become to themselves the cause of [their consignment to] an abode of
that nature.

### Chapter XL.—One and the same God the Father inflicts punishment on the reprobate, and
bestows rewards on the elect.
1. It is therefore one and the same God the Father who has prepared good things with Himself
for those who desire His fellowship, and who remain in subjection to Him; and who has the eternal
fire for the ringleader of the apostasy, the devil, and those who revolted with him, into which [fire]