seems to me that she also longed for this. And observe how Paul immediately
discourses not only about faith, nor about remission of sins, but also about
practical points of duty. "Go your way," he says, "for this time: when I have a
convenient season, I will call for you." [Acts 24:25] Observe his hardness of
heart: hearing such things, "he hoped that he should receive money from him!"
[Acts 24:26] And not only so, but even after conversing with him— for it was
towards the end of his government— he left him bound, "willing to show the
Jews a pleasure" [Acts 24:27]: so that he not only coveted money, but also glory.
How, O wretch, can you look for money from a man who preaches the contrary?
But that he did not get it, is evident from his leaving him bound; he would have
loosed him, had he received it. "Of temperance," it says, he reasoned; but the
other was hankering to receive money from him who discoursed these things!
And to ask indeed he did not dare: for such is wickedness: but he hoped it. "And
when two years were completed," etc., so that it was but natural that he showed
them a pleasure, as he had been so long governor there. "Now when Festus had
come into the province," etc. [ch. 25:1, 2] At the very beginning, the priests
came to him, who would not have hesitated to go even to Cæsarea, unless he had
been seen immediately coming up, since immediately on his arrival they come to
him. And he spends ten days, in order, I suppose, to be open to those who
wished to corrupt him with bribes. But Paul was in the prison. "They besought
him," it says, "that he would send for him:" why did they desire it as a favor, if
he was deserving of death? But thus their plotting became evident even to him,
so that discoursing of it (to Agrippa), he says, "desiring to have judgment
against him." They wanted to induce him to pass sentence now immediately,
being afraid of Paul's tongue. What are you afraid of? What are you in such a
hurry? In fact, that expression, "that he should be kept" [Acts 25:4], shows this.
Does he want to escape? "Let them therefore," he says, "which among you are
able, accuse him." [Acts 25:5] Again accusers, again at Cæsarea, again Paul is
brought forth. And having come, immediately "he sat on the judgment-seat"
[Acts 25:6]; with all his haste: they so drove, so hurried him. While as yet he had

not got acquainted with the Jews, nor experienced the honor paid to him by
them, he answered rightly: but now that he had been in Jerusalem ten days, he
too wants to pleasure them (by sacrificing Paul to them): then, also to receive
Paul, "Will you," says he, "be judged there of these things by me?" [Acts 25:9] I
am not giving you up to them— but this was the fact— and he leaves the point
to his own choice, that by this mark of respect he might get him to yield: since
his was the sentence, and it would have been too barefaced, when he had been
convicted of nothing here, to take him back there. "But Paul said, At Cæsar's
tribunal am I standing," etc. [Acts 25:10]: he did not say, I will not, lest he
should make the judge more vehement, but (here) again is his great boldness:
They cast me out once for all, themselves, and by this they think to condemn me,
by their showing that I have offended against Cæsar: at his bar I choose to be
judged, at the bar of the injured person himself. "To the Jews have I done no
wrong, as thou also very well know." Here now he reproved him, that he too
wished to sacrifice him to the Jews: then, on the other hand, he relaxes (the
sternness of) his speech: "if then I be an offender, or have committed anything
worthy of death, I refuse not to die." I utter sentence against myself. For along
with boldness of speech there must be also justness of cause, so as to abash (the
hearer). "But if there be nothing in the things whereof these accuse me, no
man"— however he may wish it— "no man may sacrifice me to please them."
He said, not, I am not worthy of death, nor, I am worthy to be acquitted, but, I
am ready to take my trial before Cæsar. At the same time too, remembering the
dream, he was the more confident to appeal. [Acts 23:11] And he said not, Thou
(may not), but, neither any other man may sacrifice me, that it might be no
affront to him. "Then Festus, when he had conferred with the council"— do you
observe how he seeks to gratify them? For this is favor— "having conferred," it
says, "with the council, he said, Have you appealed unto Cæsar? Unto Cæsar
shall you go." [Acts 25:12] See how his trial is again lengthened out, and how
the plot against him becomes an occasion for the preaching: so that with ease
and in safe custody he should be taken away to Rome, with none to plot evil