house, when you do in the market place such things, as being related by yourself
to your wife at home, overwhelm her with shame, and put to shame also your
daughter if present, and more than them, surely, yourself? For you must
necessarily either be silent, or behave yourself so unseemly, that it would be just
for your very servants to be scourged for it. What plea then will you have, I pray
you, beholding, as you do, with great eagerness, things which even to name is
disgraceful; preferring to all sights these, which even to recount is intolerable?
Now then for a season, in order not to be too burdensome, I will here bring
my discourse to an end. But if you continue in the same courses, I will make the
knife sharper, and the cut deeper; and I will not cease, till I have scattered the
theatre of the devil, and so purified the assembly of the Church. For in this way
we shall both be delivered from the present disgrace, and shall reap the fruit of
the life to come, by the grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to
whom be glory and might for ever and ever. Amen.

## Homily 8 on Matthew

Matt. II. 2.
"And when they had come into the house, they saw the young Child with
Mary His mother."
How then says Luke, that He was lying in the manger? Because at the birth
indeed she presently laid Him there (for, as was not unlikely, in that large
assemblage for the taxing, they could find no house; which Luke also signifies,
by saying, "Because there was no room, she laid Him" there); but afterwards she
took Him up, and held Him on her knees. For no sooner was she arrived at
Bethlehem than she brought her pangs to an end, that you may thence also learn
the whole dispensation, and that these things were not done at random, or by
chance, but that they all were in course of accomplishment, according to some
Divine foreknowledge, and prophetic order.
But what was it that induced them to worship? For neither was the Virgin
conspicuous, nor the house distinguished, nor was any other of the things which
they saw apt to amaze or attract them. Yet they not only worship, but also "open
their treasures," and "offer gifts;" and gifts, not as to a man, but as to God. For
the frankincense and the myrrh were a symbol of this. What then was their
inducement? That which wrought upon them to set out from home and to come
so long a journey; and this was both the star, and the illumination wrought of
God in their mind, guiding them little by little to the more perfect knowledge.
For, surely, had it not been so, all that was in sight being ordinary, they would
not have shown so great honor. Therefore none of the outward circumstances
was great in that instance, but it was a manger, and a shed, and a mother in poor
estate; to set before your eyes, naked and bare, those wise men's love of wisdom,
and to prove to you, that not as mere man they approached Him, but as a God,
and Benefactor. Wherefore neither were they offended by ought of what they