5. In 1 Tim. 6:15, the Apostle says: "Which in His times He shall show, who is the Blessed and
only Mighty, the King of kings, and Lord of lords. Who only has immortality and inhabits light
inaccessible." Therefore all these titles belong only to the'Father, and so the conclusion is as
before.

6. In Mark 13:32 it is said: "But of that day or hour no man knoweth, neither the angels in
heaven, nor the Son, but the Father." Therefore the Father's knowledge is greater than that of the
Son. Consequently His essence also is greater, and thus the conclusion is the same.

7. Matt. 20:23 says: "To sit on My right or left hand, is not Mine to give to you, but to them for
whom it is prepared by My Father." Therefore the power of the Son is not equal to that of the
Father.

8. In Col. 1:15, it is said of the Son that He is "the firstborn of every creature." But this
comparison would not be made unless of beings of one genus; therefore the Son is a creature.

9. In Sirach 24:14 it is said in the person of divine Wisdom, "From the beginning, and before the
world, was I created." Thus the conclusion is the same.

10. He who is revealed is less than he who reveals; but the Son is revealed by the Father, as is
evident in John, chap. 12; therefore, the Son is less than the Father.

11. The one sending is greater than the one sent. But the Father sends the Son, as is clear from
Gal. 4:4, "God sent His Son," etc. And He also sends the Holy Spirit, according to John 14:26,
"The Paraclete, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in My name." Therefore the Father is
greater than the Son and the Holy Spirit. And thus the aforesaid doctrine does not seem to be in
accordance with the Catholic faith.

#### Sed contra

But on the contrary it is said in John 1:1, 3: "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was
with God, and the Word was God.... All things were made by Him," etc. From this it is to be
held that the Son is eternal, for otherwise He could not have been in the beginning: and that He is
equal to the Father, for otherwise He would not be God: and that He is not a creature, for
otherwise all things would riot have been made by Him.

Again, since the Son is truth, He could not lie concerning Himself. But the Son said that He was
equal to the Father (John 5: 18): "He also said God was His Father, making Himself equal to
God." Therefore He is equal to the Father.

Again, Phil. 2:6 says: "He thought it not robbery to be equal with God." But it would have been
robbery if He thought that was so which was not. Therefore He is equal to God.

Again, John 10:30, "I and the Father are one." And John 14:11, "I am in the Father, and the
Father in Me." Therefore one is not greater than the other.

Again, Rom. 9:5: "And of whom is Christ, according to the flesh, who is over all things, God
blessed forever." Therefore no one is superior to Him; and thus He is not less than the Father.