shall come a failing away first, and the man of sin shall be revealed, the son of perdition, who
opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped; so that he sitteth
in the temple of God, showing himself as if he were God." The apostle therefore clearly points out
his apostasy, and that he is lifted up above all that is called God, or that is worshipped—that is,
above every idol —for these are indeed so called by men, but are not [really] gods; and that he will
endeavour in a tyrannical manner to set himself forth as God.
2. Moreover, he (the apostle) has also pointed out this which I have shown in many ways, that
the temple in Jerusalem was made by the direction of the true God. For the apostle himself, speaking
in his own person, distinctly called it the temple of God. Now I have shown in the third book, that
no one is termed God by the apostles when speaking for themselves, except Him who truly is God,
the Father of our Lord, by whose directions the temple which is at Jerusalem was constructed for
those purposes which I have already mentioned; in which [temple] the enemy shall sit, endeavouring
to show himself as Christ, as the Lord also declares: "But when ye shall see the abomination of
desolation, which has been spoken of by Daniel the prophet, standing in the holy place (let him
that readeth understand), then let those who are in Judea flee into the mountains; and he who is
upon the house-top, let him not come down to take anything out of his house: for there shall then
be great hardship, such as has not been from the beginning of the world until now, nor ever shall
be."
3. Daniel too, looking forward to the end of the last kingdom, i.e., the ten last kings, amongst
whom the kingdom of those men shall be partitioned, and upon whom the son of perdition shall
come, declares that ten horns shall spring from the beast, and that another little horn shall arise in
the midst of them, and that three of the former shall be rooted up before his face. He says: "And,
behold, eyes were in this horn as the eyes of a man, and a mouth speaking great things, and his
look was more stout than his fellows. I was looking, and this horn made war against the saints, and
prevailed against them, until the Ancient of days came and gave judgment to the saints of the most
high God, and the time came, and the saints obtained the kingdom." Then, further on, in the
interpretation of the vision, there was said to him: "The fourth beast shall be the fourth kingdom
upon earth, which shall excel all other kingdoms, and devour the whole earth, and tread it down,
and cut it in pieces. And its ten horns are ten kings which shall arise; and after them shall arise
another, who shall surpass in evil deeds all that were before him, and shall overthrow three kings;
and he shall speak words against the most high God, and wear out the saints of the most high God,
and shall purpose to change times and laws; and [everything] shall be given into his hand until a
time of times and a half time," that is, for three years and six months, during which time, when
he comes, he shall reign over the earth. Of whom also the Apostle Paul again, speaking in the
second [Epistle] to the Thessalonians, and at the same time proclaiming the cause of his advent,