and began at the same Scripture, and preached unto him Jesus." [Acts 8:32-35]
Observe how it is Providentially ordered. First he reads and does not understand;
then he reads the very text in which was the Passion and the Resurrection and
the Gift. "And as they went on their way, they came unto a certain water: and the
eunuch said, See, here is water; what does hinder me to be baptized?" [Acts
8:36] Mark the eager desire, mark the exact knowledge. "And he commanded the
chariot to stand still: and they went down both into the water, both Philip and
the eunuch; and he baptized him. And when they had come up out of the water,
the Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip, that the eunuch saw him no more: and
he went on his way rejoicing." (v. 38, 39.) But why did the Spirit of the Lord
bear him away? (Hereby) the occurrence was shown to be more wonderful. Even
then, the eunuch did not know him. Consequently this was done, that Philip
might afterwards be a subject of wonder to him. "For," it says, "he went on his
way rejoicing. But Philip was found at Azotus: and passing through he preached
in all the cities, till he came to Cæsarea." [Acts 8:40] This (Philip, therefore)
was one of the seven; for there in fact he is afterwards found at Cæsarea. It was
well and expedient therefore that the Spirit caught Philip away; else the eunuch
would have desired to go with him, and Philip would have grieved him by
declining to comply with his request, the time being not yet come. (a) But at the
same time here was an encouraging assurance for them that they shall also
prevail over the heathen: for indeed the high character ([τὸ ἀξιόπιστον]) of the
(first) believers was enough to move them. If however the eunuch had stayed
there, what fault could have been found? [But he knew him not]: for this is why
it says, "he went on his way rejoicing:" so that had he known him, he would not
have been (so) delighted.
"And the Angel of the Lord," etc. [Recapitulation, Acts 8:26] (b) See Angels
assisting the preaching, and not themselves preaching, but calling these (to the
work). But the wonderful nature of the occurrence is shown also by this: that
what of old was rare, and hardly done, here takes place with ease, and see with
what frequency! (c) "An eunuch," it says, "a man of great authority, under

Candace, queen of the Ethiopians." [Acts 8:27] For there women bore rule of
old, and this was the law among them. Philip did not yet know for whose sake he
had come into the desert: (d) but what was there to hinder his learning all (these
particulars) accurately, while in the chariot? "Was reading the prophet Esaias."
[Acts 8:28] For the road was desert, and there was no display in the matter.
Observe also at what time: in the most violent heat (of the day). (e) "And the
Spirit said unto him." [Acts 8:29] Not now the Angel but the Spirit urges him.
Why is this? "Then," the vision took place, in grosser form, through the Angel,
for this is for them that are more of the body, but the Spirit is for the more
spiritual. And how did He speak to him? Of course, suggested it to him. Why
does not the Angel appear to the other, and bring him to Philip? Because it is
likely he would not have been persuaded, but rather terrified. Observe the
wisdom of Philip: he did not accuse him, not say, "I know these things exactly:"
did not pay court to him, and say, "Blessed are you that readest." But mark his
speech, how far it is from harshness alike and from adulation; the speech rather
of a kind and friendly man. "Do you understand what you read?" [Acts 8:30] For
it was needful that he should himself ask, himself have a longing desire. He
plainly intimates, that he knows that the other knew nothing: and says, "Do you
understand what you read?" at the same time he shows him that great was the
treasure that lay therein. It tells well also, that the eunuch looked not to the
outward appearance ([σχἥμα]) (of the man), said not, "Who are you?" did not
chide, not give himself airs, not say that he did know. On the contrary, he
confesses his ignorance: wherefore also he learns. He shows his hurt to the
physician: sees at a glance, that he both knows the matter, and is willing to teach.
Look how free he is from haughtiness; the outward appearance announced
nothing splendid. So desirous was he of learning, and gave heed to his words;
and that saying, "He that seeks, finds," [Matthew 7:8] was fulfilled in him.
"And," it says, "he besought Philip, that he would come up and sit with him."
[Acts 8:31] Do you mark the eagerness, the longing desire? But should any say
he ought to have waited for Philip (to speak), (the answer is), he does not know