SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.3, C.5.

We might also reply that it is accidental, namely on account of the
disposition of the subject, that grace does not cause faith in one who
has it already: just as, on the other hand, a second mortal sin does
not take away grace from one who has already lost it through a
previous mortal sin.
Reply to Objection 4: When living faith becomes lifeless, faith is not
changed, but its subject, the soul, which at one time has faith
without charity, and at another time, with charity.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.3, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether faith is a virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that faith is not a virtue. For virtue is
directed to the good, since "it is virtue that makes its subject good,"
as the Philosopher states (Ethic. ii, 6). But faith is directed to the
true. Therefore faith is not a virtue.
Objection 2: Further, infused virtue is more perfect than acquired
virtue. Now faith, on account of its imperfection, is not placed among
the acquired intellectual virtues, as the Philosopher states (Ethic. vi,
3). Much less, therefore, can it be considered an infused virtue.
Objection 3: Further, living and lifeless faith are the same species, as
stated above (Article 4). Now lifeless faith is not a virtue, since it is
not connected with the other virtues. Therefore neither is living faith
a virtue.
Objection 4: Further, the gratuitous graces and the fruits are distinct
from the virtues. But faith is numbered among the gratuitous graces
(1 Cor. 12:9) and likewise among the fruits (Gal. 5:23). Therefore faith
is not a virtue.
On the contrary, Man is justified by the virtues, since "justice is all
virtue," as the Philosopher states (Ethic. v, 1). Now man is justified
by faith according to Rm. 5:1: "Being justified therefore by faith let
us have peace," etc. Therefore faith is a virtue.
I answer that, As shown above, it is by human virtue that human acts
are rendered good; hence, any habit that is always the principle of a
good act, may be called a human virtue. Such a habit is living faith.
For since to believe is an act of the intellect assenting to the truth at
the command of the will, two things are required that this act may be
perfect: one of which is that the intellect should infallibly tend to its
object, which is the true; while the other is that the will should be
infallibly directed to the last end, on account of which it assents to
the true: and both of these are to be found in the act of living faith.
For it belongs to the very essence of faith that the intellect should
ever tend to the true, since nothing false can be the object of faith,
as proved above (Question 1, Article 3): while the effect of charity,
which is the form of faith, is that the soul ever has its will directed to
a good end. Therefore living faith is a virtue.