this reason he is left to be subject to the rules of medicine, that he may be
humbled, and others may not be offended, but may learn that they who
performed such excellent actions were men of the same nature as themselves. In
other respects also Timothy seems to have been subject to disease, which is
implied by that expression, "Your often infirmities," as well of other parts as of
the stomach. He does not however allow him to indulge freely in wine, but as
much as was for health and not for luxury.
Ver. 24. "Some men's sins are open beforehand, going before to judgment;
and some they follow after."
In speaking of ordination, he had said, "Be not partaker of other men's
sins." But what, he might say, if I be ignorant of them? Why, "some men's sins
are open beforehand, going before them to judgment, and some they follow
after." Some men's, he means, are manifest, because they, go before, while
others' are unknown, because they follow after.
Ver. 25. "Likewise also the good works of some are manifest beforehand,
and they that are otherwise cannot be hid."
Chap. vi. ver. 1. "Let as many servants as are under the yoke count their
masters worthy of all honor, that the Name of God and His doctrine be not
blasphemed."
Let them count them "worthy of all honor," he says; for do not suppose,
because you are a believer, that you are therefore a free man: since your freedom
is to serve the more faithfully. For if the unbeliever sees slaves conducting
themselves insolently on account of their faith, he will blaspheme, as if the
Doctrine produced insubordination. But when he sees them obedient, he will be
more inclined to believe, and will the rather attend to our words. But God, and
the Gospel we preach, will be blasphemed, if they are disobedient. But what if
their own master be an unbeliever? Even in that case they ought to submit, for
God's Name's sake.
Ver. 2. "And they that have believing masters, let them not despise them
because they are brethren, but rather do them service, because they are faithful

and beloved partakers of the benefit."
As though he had said, If you are thought worthy of so great a benefit, as to
have your masters for your brethren, on this account you ought more especially
to submit.
"Going before to judgment." This he had said, implying that of evil actions
here some are concealed, and some are not; but there neither the good nor the
bad can be concealed. And what is that going before to judgment? When one
commits offenses that already condemn him, or when he is incorrigible, and
when one thinks to set him right and cannot succeed. What then? What is the use
of mentioning this? Because if here any escape detection, they will not hereafter.
There all things are laid open; and this is the greatest consolation to those who
do well.
Then because he had said, "Do nothing by partiality," as if under the
necessity of interpreting it, he adds, "As many servants as are under the yoke."
But you will say, What has a Bishop to do with this? Much surely, for it is his
office to exhort and to teach these too. And here he makes excellent regulations
with respect to them. For we see him everywhere commanding the servants
rather than their masters, showing them the ways of submission, and treating
them with great regard. He exhorts them therefore to submit with great
meekness. But the masters he recommends to forbear the use of terror.
"Forbearing threatening" [Ephesians 6:9], he says. And why does he thus
command? In the case of unbelievers, naturally, because it would have been
unreasonable to address those who would pay no heed to him; but where
believers were concerned, what was his reason? Because masters contribute
greater benefits to their servants, than servants to their masters. For the former
furnish the money to purchase for them sufficient food and clothing; and bestow
much care upon them in other respects, so that the masters pay them the larger
service, which is here intimated, when he says, "they are faithful and beloved,
partakers of the benefit." They suffer much toil and trouble for your repose,
ought they not in return to receive much honor from their servants?