instances of the child's untimely death, (and there are many,) great laughter on
the devil's part will ensue, at his having made sport of them as if they were silly
children. What shall we say about the amulets and the bells which are hung upon
the hand, and the scarlet woof, and the other things full of such extreme folly;
when they ought to invest the child with nothing else save the protection of the
Cross. But now that is despised which has converted the whole world and given
the sore wound to the devil and overthrown all his power: while the thread, and
the woof, and the other amulets of that kind are entrusted with the child's safety.
May I mention another thing yet more ridiculous than this? Only let no one
tax us with speaking out of season, should our argument proceed with that
instance also. For he that would cleanse an ulcer will not hesitate first to pollute
his own hands. What then is this so very ridiculous custom? It is counted indeed
as nothing; (and this is why I grieve;) but it is the beginning of folly and
madness in the extreme. The women in the bath, nurses and waiting-maids, take
up mud and smearing it with the finger make a mark on the child's forehead; and
if one ask, What means the mud, and the clay? The answer is, "It turns away an
evil eye, witchcraft and envy. " Astonishing! What power in the mud! What
might in the clay! What mighty force is this which it has? It averts all the host of
the devil. Tell me, can you help hiding yourselves for shame? Will you never
come to understand the snares of the devil, how from earliest life he gradually
brings in the several evils which he has devised? For if the mud has this effect,
why do you not yourself also do the same to your own forehead, when you are a
man and your character is formed; and you are likelier than the child to have
such as envy you? Why do you not as well bemire the whole body? I say, if on
the forehead its virtue be so great, why not anoint yourself all over with mud?
All this is mirth and stage-play to Satan, not mockery only but hell-fire being the
consummation to which these deceived ones are tending.
14. Now that among Greeks such things should be done is no wonder: but
among the worshippers of the Cross, ([τὸν σταυρὸν προσκυνοῦσι]) and partakers
in unspeakable mysteries, and professors of such high morality, ([τοσαῦτα

φιλοσοφοῦσιν]) that such unseemliness should prevail, this is especially to be
deplored again and again. God has honored you with spiritual anointing; and do
you defile your child with mud? God has honored you, and do you dishonor
yourself? And when you should inscribe on his forehead the Cross which affords
invincible security; do you forego this, and cast yourself into the madness of
Satan?
If any look on these things as trifles, let them know that they are the source
of great evils; and that not even unto Paul did it seem right to overlook the lesser
things. For, tell me, what can be less than a man's covering his head? Yet observe
how great a matter he makes of this and with how great earnestness he forbids it;
saying, among many things, "He dishonors his head." [1 Corinthians 11:4] Now
if he that covers himself "dishonors his head"; he that besmears his child with
mud, how can it be less than making it abominable? For how, I want to know,
can he bring it to the hands of the priest? How can you require that on that
forehead the seal should be placed by the hand of the presbyter, where you have
been smearing the mud? Nay, my brethren, do not these things, but from earliest
life encompass them with spiritual armor and instruct them to seal the forehead
with the hand ([τῇ χειρὶ παιδεύτε σφραγίζειν τὸ μέτωπον]): and before they are
able to do this with their own hand , do you imprint upon them the Cross.
Why should one speak of the other satanical observances in the case of
travail-pangs and childbirths, which the midwives introduce with a mischief on
their own heads? Of the outcries which take place at each person's death, and
when he is carried to his burial; the irrational wailings, the folly enacted at the
funerals; the zeal about men's monuments; the importunate and ridiculous swarm
of the mourning women ; the observances of days; the days, I mean, of entrance
into the world and of departure?
15. Are these then, I beseech you, the persons whose good opinion you
follow after? And what can it be but the extreme of folly to seek earnestly the
praise of men, so corrupt in their ideas, men whose conduct is all at random?
When we ought always to resort to the unsleeping Eye, and look to His sentence