knowing that they would slay Him, He sent Him. But He says, "They will
reverence," declaring what ought to have been done, that it was their duty to
have reverenced Him. Since elsewhere also He says, "if perchance they will
hear;" [Ezekiel 2:5] not in this case either being ignorant, but lest any of the
obstinate should say, that His prediction was the thing that necessitated their
disobedience, therefore He frames His expressions in this way, saying, "Whether
they will," and, "It may be." For though they had been obstinate towards His
servants, yet ought they to have reverenced the dignity of the Son.
What then do these? When they ought to have run unto Him, when they
ought to have asked pardon for their offenses, they even persist more strongly in
their former sins, they proceed to add unto their pollutions, forever throwing into
the shade their former offenses by their later; as also He Himself declared when
He said, "Fill ye up the measure of your fathers." [Matthew 23:32] For from the
first the prophets used to charge them with these things, saying, "Your hands are
full of blood;" [Isaiah 1:15] and, "They mingle blood with blood;" [Hosea 4:2]
and, "They build up Sion with blood." [Micah 3:10]
But they did not learn self-restraint, albeit they received this commandment
first, "You shall not kill;" and had been commanded to abstain from countless
other things because of this, and by many and various means urged to the
keeping of this commandment.
Yet, for all that, they put not away that evil custom; but what say they, when
they saw Him? Come, let us kill Him. With what motive, and for what reason?
What of any kind had they to lay to His charge, either small or great? Is it that
He honored you, and being God became man for your sakes, and wrought His
countless miracles? Or that He pardoned your sins? Or that He called you unto a
kingdom?
But see together with their impiety great was their folly, and the reason of
His murder was full of much madness. "For let us kill Him," it is said, "and the
inheritance shall be ours."
And where do they take counsel to kill Him? "Out of the vineyard."

2. Do you see how He prophesies even the place where He was to be slain.
"And they cast Him out, and slew Him."
And Luke indeed says, that He declared what these men should suffer; and
they said, "God forbid;" and He added the testimony [of Scripture]. For "He
beheld them, and said, What is it then that is written? The stone which the
builders rejected, the same has become the head of the corner; and every one
that falls upon it shall be broken." [Luke 20:17-18] But Matthew, that they
themselves delivered the sentence. But this is not a contradiction. For indeed
both things were done, both themselves passed the sentence against themselves;
and again, when they perceived what they had said, they added, "God forbid;"
and He set up the prophet against them, persuading them that certainly this
would be.
Nevertheless, not even so did He plainly reveal the Gentiles, that He might
afford them no handle, but signified it darkly by saying, "He will give the
vineyard to others." For this purpose then did He speak by a parable, that
themselves might pass the sentence, which was done in the case of David also,
when He passed judgment on the parable of Nathan. But do thou mark, I pray
you, even hereby how just is the sentence, when the very persons that are to be
punished condemn themselves.
Then that they might learn that not only the nature of justice requires these
things, but even from the beginning the grace of the Spirit had foretold them, and
God had so decreed, He both added a prophecy, and reproves them in a way to
put them to shame, saying, "Did ye never read, The stone which the builders
rejected, the same has become the head of the corner? This is the Lord's doing,
and it is marvellous in our eyes;" by all things showing, that they should be cast
out for unbelief, and the Gentiles brought in. This He darkly intimated by the
Canaanitish woman also; this again by the ass, and by the centurion, and by
many other parables; this also now.
Wherefore He added too, "This is the Lord's doing, and it is marvellous in
our eyes," declaring beforehand that the believing Gentiles, and as many of the