FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.31, C.6.

in knowing something by perceiving it with his sense. Because
intellectual knowledge is more perfect; and because it is better
known, since the intellect reflects on its own act more than sense
does. Moreover intellectual knowledge is more beloved: for there is
no one who would not forfeit his bodily sight rather than his
intellectual vision, as beasts or fools are deprived thereof, as
Augustine says in De Civ. Dei (De Trin. xiv, 14).
If, however, intellectual spiritual pleasures be compared with
sensible bodily pleasures, then, in themselves and absolutely
speaking, spiritual pleasures are greater. And this appears from the
consideration of the three things needed for pleasure, viz. the good
which is brought into conjunction, that to which it is conjoined, and
the conjunction itself. For spiritual good is both greater and more
beloved than bodily good: a sign whereof is that men abstain from
even the greatest bodily pleasures, rather than suffer loss of honor
which is an intellectual good. Likewise the intellectual faculty is
much more noble and more knowing than the sensitive faculty. Also
the conjunction is more intimate, more perfect and more firm. More
intimate, because the senses stop at the outward accidents of a
thing, whereas the intellect penetrates to the essence; for the object
of the intellect is "what a thing is." More perfect, because the
conjunction of the sensible to the sense implies movement, which is
an imperfect act: wherefore sensible pleasures are not perceived all
at once, but some part of them is passing away, while some other
part is looked forward to as yet to be realized, as is manifest in
pleasures of the table and in sexual pleasures: whereas intelligible
things are without movement: hence pleasures of this kind are
realized all at once. More firm; because the objects of bodily
pleasure are corruptible, and soon pass away; whereas spiritual
goods are incorruptible.
On the other hand, in relation to us, bodily pleasures are more
vehement, for three reasons. First, because sensible things are more
known to us, than intelligible things. Secondly, because sensible
pleasures, through being passions of the sensitive appetite, are
accompanied by some alteration in the body: whereas this does not
occur in spiritual pleasures, save by reason of a certain reaction of
the superior appetite on the lower. Thirdly, because bodily pleasures
are sought as remedies for bodily defects or troubles, whence
various griefs arise. Wherefore bodily pleasures, by reason of their
succeeding griefs of this kind, are felt the more, and consequently
are welcomed more than spiritual pleasures, which have no contrary

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.31, C.6.

griefs, as we shall state farther on (Question 35, Article 5).
Reply to Objection 1: The reason why more seek bodily pleasures is
because sensible goods are known better and more generally: and,
again, because men need pleasures as remedies for many kinds of
sorrow and sadness: and since the majority cannot attain spiritual
pleasures, which are proper to the virtuous, hence it is that they turn
aside to seek those of the body.
Reply to Objection 2: Bodily transmutation arises more from bodily
pleasures, inasmuch as they are passions of the sensitive appetite.
Reply to Objection 3: Bodily pleasures are realized in the sensitive
faculty which is governed by reason: wherefore they need to be
tempered and checked by reason. But spiritual pleasures are in the
mind, which is itself the rule: wherefore they are in themselves both
sober and moderate.