THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.53, C.4.

reasons seem to be much more cogent.
Reply to Objection 3: As everything preceding Christ's coming was
preparatory for Christ, so is grace a disposition for glory.
Consequently, it behooved all things appertaining to glory, whether
they regard the soul, as the perfect fruition of God, or whether they
regard the body, as the glorious resurrection, to be first in Christ as
the author of glory: but that grace should be first in those that were
ordained unto Christ.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.53, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether Christ was the cause of His own

Resurrection?
Objection 1: It seems that Christ was not the cause of His own
Resurrection. For whoever is raised up by another is not the cause
of his own rising. But Christ was raised up by another, according to
Acts 2:24: "Whom God hath raised up, having loosed the sorrows of
hell": and Rm. 8:11: "He that raised up Jesus Christ from the dead,
shall quicken also your mortal bodies." Therefore Christ is not the
cause of His own Resurrection.
Objection 2: Further, no one is said to merit, or ask from another,
that of which he is himself the cause. But Christ by His Passion
merited the Resurrection, as Augustine says (Tract. civ in Joan.):
"The lowliness of the Passion is the meritorious cause of the glory of
the Resurrection." Moreover He asked the Father that He might be
raised up again, according to Ps. 40:11: "But thou, O Lord, have
mercy on me, and raise me up again." Therefore He was not the
cause of His rising again.
Objection 3: Further, as Damascene proves (De Fide Orth. iv), it is
not the soul that rises again, but the body, which is stricken by
death. But the body could not unite the soul with itself, since the
soul is nobler. Therefore what rose in Christ could not be the cause
of His Resurrection.
On the contrary, Our Lord says (Jn. 10:18): "No one taketh My soul
from Me, but I lay it down, and I take it up again." But to rise is
nothing else than to take the soul up again. Consequently, it appears
that Christ rose again of His own power.
I answer that, As stated above (Question 50, Articles 2,3) in
consequence of death Christ's Godhead was not separated from His
soul, nor from His flesh. Consequently, both the soul and the flesh of
the dead Christ can be considered in two respects: first, in respect of
His Godhead; secondly, in respect of His created nature. Therefore,
according to the virtue of the Godhead united to it, the body took
back again the soul which it had laid aside, and the soul took back
again the body which it had abandoned: and thus Christ rose by His
own power. And this is precisely what is written (2 Cor. 13:4): "For
although He was crucified through" our "weakness, yet He liveth by

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.53, C.5.