renewing of your mind." He says not change the fashion, but "be transformed"
([μεταμορφοὕ]), to show that the world's ways are a fashion, but virtue's not a
fashion, but a kind of real form, with a natural beauty of its own, lacking not the
trickeries and fashions of outward things, which no sooner appear than they go
to nought. For all these things, even before they come to light, are dissolving. If
then you throw the fashion aside, you will speedily come to the form. For
nothing is more strengthless than vice, nothing so easily wears old. Then since it
is likely that being men they would sin every day, he consoles his hearer by
saying, "renew yourself" from day to day. This is what we do with houses, we
keep constantly repairing them as they wear old, and so do thou unto yourself.
Have you sinned today? Have you made your soul old? Despair not, despond
not, but renew it by repentance, and tears [Hilary on Psalm 119], and confession,
and by doing of good things. And never fail of doing this. And how are we to do
this?
"That ye may prove (things more expedient ([διαφέροντα]), and know )
what is that good, and acceptable, and perfect will of God."
Either he means by this, be renewed, that you may learn what is more
expedient for you, and what the will of God. Or rather, that you can get so
renewed if you learn the things expedient, and what God may will. For if you see
this, and know how to distinguish the nature of things, you are in possession of
the whole way of virtue. And who, it may be said, is ignorant of what is
expedient, and what is the will of God? They that are flurried with the things of
this world, they that deem riches an enviable thing, they that make light of
poverty, they that follow after power, they that are gaping after outward glory,
they that think themselves great men when they raise fine houses, and buy costly
sepulchres, and keep herds of slaves, and carry a great swarm of eunuchs about
with them; these know not what is expedient for them, or what the will of God
is. For both of these are but one thing. For God wills what things are expedient
for us, and what God wills, that is also expedient for us. What then are the things
which God wills? To live in poverty, in lowliness of mind, in contempt of glory;

in continency, not in self-indulgence; in tribulation, not in ease; in sorrow, not in
dissipation and laughter; in all the other points whereon He has given us laws.
But the generality do even think these things of ill omen; so far are they from
thinking them expedient, and the will of God. This then is why they never can
come near even to the labors for virtue's sake. For they that do not know so
much even as what virtue may be, but reverence vice in its place, and take unto
their bed the harlot instead of the modest wife, how are they to be able to stand
aloof from the present world? Wherefore we ought above all to have a correct
estimate of things, and even if we do not follow after virtue, to praise virtue, and
even if we do not avoid vice, to stigmatize vice, that so far we may have our
judgments uncorrupted. For so as we advance on our road, we shall be able to
lay hold on the realities. This then is why he also bids you be renewed, "that you
may prove what is the will of God." But here he seems to me to be attacking the
Jews too, who cling to the Law. For the old dispensation was a will of God, yet
not the ultimate purpose, but allowed owing to their feebleness. But that which is
a perfect one, and well-pleasing, is the new conversation. So too when he called
it "a reasonable service," it was to set it in contrast with that other (v. note p.
496) that he gave it such a name.
Ver. 3. "For I say, through the grace given unto me, to every man that is
among you, not to think of himself more highly than he ought to think, but to
think soberly, according as God has dealt to every man the measure of faith."
After saying above, "I beseech you by the mercies," here he says again, "by
the grace." Observe the teacher's lowliness of mind, observe a spirit quite
subdued! He means to say that he is in no respect worthy to be trusted in such an
exhortation and counsel. But at one time he takes the mercies of God along with
him, at another His grace. It is not my word, he would say, that I am speaking,
but one from God. And he does not say, For I say unto you by the wisdom of
God, or, for I say unto you by the Law given of God, but, "by the grace," so
reminding them continually of the benefits done them, so as to make them more
submissive, and to show that even on this account, they were under an obligation