Now if any man is obstinate and contemptuous, let him hear Christ saying
even now, "If any one trespass against you, go, tell him his fault between you
and him alone"; but if he will not be persuaded, "take with you one or two." But
if even so he contradict, "tell it to the Church, but if he shall also refuse to hear
the Church, let him be unto you as a heathen man and a publican." [Matthew
18:15-17] Now if when a man trespasses against me, and will not be persuaded,
[the Lord] commands me thus to turn away from him, judge ye in what light I
ought to hold him who trespasses against himself, and against God. For do not
you yourselves condemn us when we come down so gently upon you?
If however any man disregard the bonds which we inflict, again let Christ
instruct him, saying, "Whatsoever you shall bind on earth shall be bound in
heaven; and whatsoever you shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven."
[Matthew 18:18] For though we ourselves be miserable and good for nothing
and worthy to be despised, as indeed we are; yet are we not avenging ourselves
nor warding off anger, but are caring for your salvation.
Be influenced by reverence, I beseech you, and respect. For if a man bear
with a friend when he attacks him more vehemently than he ought, ascertaining
his object, and that he does it with kind intention, and not out of insolence; much
more [should he bear with] a teacher when rebuking him, and a teacher who
does not himself say these things as of authority, nor as one in the position of a
ruler, but in that of a kindly guardian. For we do not say these things as wishing
to exhibit our authority, (for how could we, praying that we may never come to
the trial of them?) but grieving and lamenting for you.
Forgive me then, and let no man disregard the bonds of the Church. For it is
not man who binds, but Christ who has given unto us this authority, and makes
men lords of this so great dignity. For we indeed wish to use this power for
loosing; or rather, we wish to have no need even of that, for we wish that there
should not be any bound among us— we are not so miserable and wretched [as
that] even though some of us are extreme good-for-nothings. If however we be
compelled [so to act], forgive us. For it is not of our own accord, nor wishing it,

but rather out of sorrow for you that are bound that we put the chains around
you. But if any man despise these chains, the time of judgment will come, which
shall teach him. And what comes after I do not wish to speak of, lest I should
wound your minds. For in the first place indeed we do not wish to be brought
into this necessity; but if we are so brought, we fulfill our own part, we cast
around the chains. And if any man burst through them, I have done my part, and
am henceforth free from blame, and you will have to give account to Him who
commanded me to bind.
For neither, when a king is sitting in public, if any of the guard who stand
beside him be commanded to bind one of the attendants, and to put the chains
around [him], and he should not only thrust this man away, but also break the
bonds in pieces, is it the guard who suffers the insult, and not much more the
King who gave the order. For if He claim as His own, the things which are done
to the faithful, much more will He feel as if Himself insulted when he is insulted
who has been appointed to teach.
But God grant that none of those who are over this Church should be driven
to the necessity of [inflicting] these bonds. For as it is a good thing not to sin, so
is it profitable to endure reproof. Let us then endure the rebuke, and earnestly
endeavor not to sin; and if we should sin let us bear the rebuke. For as it is an
excellent thing not to be wounded, but, if this should happen, to apply the
remedy to the wound, so also in this case.
But God forbid that any man should need such remedies as these. "But we
are persuaded better things of you, and things that accompany salvation, though
we thus speak." [Hebrews 6:9] But we have discoursed more vehemently for the
sake of greater security. For it is better that I should be suspected by you of being
a harsh, and severe, and self-willed person, than that you should do things not
approved of God. But we trust in God, that this reproof will not be unserviceable
to you, but that you will be so changed, that these discourses may be devoted to
encomiums on you and to praises: that we may all be counted worthy to attain to
those good things, which God has promised to them that love Him in Christ