THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.13, C.3.

to raise the dead; the third is inasmuch as every creature may be
brought to nothing.
The second distinction has to do with Christ's soul, which may be
looked at in two ways: first in its proper nature and with its power of
nature or of grace; secondly, as it is the instrument of the Word of
God, personally united to Him. Therefore if we speak of the soul of
Christ in its proper nature and with its power of nature or of grace, it
had power to cause those effects proper to a soul (e.g. to rule the
body and direct human acts, and also, by the fulness of grace and
knowledge to enlighten all rational creatures falling short of its
perfection), in a manner befitting a rational creature. But if we speak
of the soul of Christ as it is the instrument of the Word united to Him,
it had an instrumental power to effect all the miraculous
transmutations ordainable to the end of the Incarnation, which is "to
re-establish all things that are in heaven and on earth" [Eph. 1:10].
But the transmutation of creatures, inasmuch as they may be
brought to nothing, corresponds to their creation, whereby they were
brought from nothing. And hence even as God alone can create, so,
too, He alone can bring creatures to nothing, and He alone upholds
them in being, lest they fall back to nothing. And thus it must be said
that the soul of Christ had not omnipotence with regard to the
transmutation of creatures.
Reply to Objection 1: As Jerome says (on the text quoted): "Power is
given Him," i.e. to Christ as man, "Who a little while before was
crucified, buried in the tomb, and afterwards rose again." But power
is said to have been given Him, by reason of the union whereby it
was brought about that a Man was omnipotent, as was said above
(Article 1, ad 1). And although this was made known to the angels
before the Resurrection, yet after the Resurrection it was made
known to all men, as Remigius says (cf. Catena Aurea). Now, "things
are said to happen when they are made known" [Hugh of St. Victor:
Qq. in Ep. ad Philip.]. Hence after the Resurrection our Lord says
"that all power is given" to Him "in heaven and on earth."
Reply to Objection 2: Although every creature is transmutable by
some other creature, except, indeed, the highest angel, and even it
can be enlightened by Christ's soul; yet not every transmutation that
can be made in a creature can be made by a creature; since some
transmutations can be made by God alone. Yet all transmutations
that can be made in creatures can be made by the soul of Christ, as
the instrument of the Word, but not in its proper nature and power,

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.13, C.3.

since some of these transmutations pertain to the soul neither in the
order of nature nor in the order of grace.
Reply to Objection 3: As was said in the SS, Question 178, Article 1,
ad 1, the grace of mighty works or miracles is given to the soul of a
saint, so that these miracles are wrought not by his own, but by
Divine power. Now this grace was bestowed on Christ's soul most
excellently, i.e. not only that He might work miracles, but also that He
might communicate this grace to others. Hence it is written (Mt. 10:1)
that, "having called His twelve disciples together, He gave them
power over unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all manner
of diseases, and all manner of infirmities."