4. This manner of proceeding all the provincials discussed at their congregation held in September 1990 at Loyola and approved by general consent, since experts had already prepared a sort of first draft of the project.

5. Consultation was then undertaken with experts from the worldwide Society, nominated by the provincials, in regard to this first draft of the schema. Their discussions generated very many suggestions, which were made available to (and, indeed, provided considerable help to) those who were preparing the new draft. This latter, completed at the beginning of 1993, was sent to the provinces, so that their province congregations could examine it and could send to the general congregation postulata, as well as all manner of related suggestions about the project.

6. Nearly all the provinces scrutinized the schema in one way or other and made known their thinking about it in a very positive fashion. They called for the completion of a revision along the lines of the proposed schema (albeit appropriately revised), so that the general congregation could approve it. Many provinces, however, at the same time, sent along postulata and comments of great import and of great usefulness, which contributed to the fact that a "Final Proposal," written by a special commission and incorporating clear improvements, could be offered for the consideration of the general congregation.

7. The task of revising our own law deeply occupied General Congregation 34. For, on the one hand, it reserved certain points of the "Final Proposal" for its own discussion and decision, those that seemed of greater moment. On the other hand, each commission took on the part of the "Final Proposal" that it was to consider, along with the material related to it. Finally, a special commission was set up and made aware of all the suggestions that had occurred to everyone (commissions and individuals alike); it prepared the text to be voted upon, and over the space of an entire month proposed it to the congregation for a final vote piece by piece. On March 18 the congregation took a final comprehensive vote, with the greatest consensus and the greatest joy in the Spirit. It thus brought to a happy conclusion work stretching out over several years, in which, in diverse fashion, virtually the entire Society had taken part.

8. Most gladly, then, my dearest brothers, do I now present to you our renewed Constitutions and their Complementary Norms, to be considered in your personal and communal prayer and to be observed in the spirit in which they have been written. Thus, with the help of God, may these, as Master Ignatius proposed, be "a certain path to him" in our enthusiastic following out of our mission in the Church, as "servants of the mission of Christ" under the leadership of the Roman Pontiff, for the greater praise and glory of Christ and for the good, the salvation, and the consolation of our fellow men and women, to whom we are sent in any region of the world whatsoever.