corruption of composite things. Now it was shown above (Articles
2,3) that the souls of brutes are not self-subsistent, whereas the
human soul is; so that the souls of brutes are corrupted, when their
bodies are corrupted; while the human soul could not be corrupted
unless it were corrupted "per se." This, indeed, is impossible, not
only as regards the human soul, but also as regards anything
subsistent that is a form alone. For it is clear that what belongs to a
thing by virtue of itself is inseparable from it; but existence belongs
to a form, which is an act, by virtue of itself. Wherefore matter
acquires actual existence as it acquires the form; while it is
corrupted so far as the form is separated from it. But it is impossible
for a form to be separated from itself; and therefore it is impossible
for a subsistent form to cease to exist.
Granted even that the soul is composed of matter and form, as some
pretend, we should nevertheless have to maintain that it is
incorruptible. For corruption is found only where there is contrariety;
since generation and corruption are from contraries and into
contraries. Wherefore the heavenly bodies, since they have no
matter subject to contrariety, are incorruptible. Now there can be no
contrariety in the intellectual soul; for it receives according to the
manner of its existence, and those things which it receives are
without contrariety; for the notions even of contraries are not
themselves contrary, since contraries belong to the same
knowledge. Therefore it is impossible for the intellectual soul to be
corruptible. Moreover we may take a sign of this from the fact that
everything naturally aspires to existence after its own manner. Now,
in things that have knowledge, desire ensues upon knowledge. The
senses indeed do not know existence, except under the conditions
of "here" and "now," whereas the intellect apprehends existence
absolutely, and for all time; so that everything that has an intellect
naturally desires always to exist. But a natural desire cannot be in
vain. Therefore every intellectual substance is incorruptible.
Reply to Objection 1: Solomon reasons thus in the person of the
foolish, as expressed in the words of Wisdom 2. Therefore the
saying that man and animals have a like beginning in generation is
true of the body; for all animals alike are made of earth. But it is not
true of the soul. For the souls of brutes are produced by some power
of the body; whereas the human soul is produced by God. To signify
this it is written as to other animals: "Let the earth bring forth the
living soul" (Gn. 1:24): while of man it is written (Gn. 2:7) that "He
breathed into his face the breath of life." And so in the last chapter of

Ecclesiastes (12:7) it is concluded: "(Before) the dust return into its
earth from whence it was; and the spirit return to God Who gave it."
Again the process of life is alike as to the body, concerning which it
is written (Eccles. 3:19): "All things breathe alike," and (Wis. 2:2),
"The breath in our nostrils is smoke." But the process is not alike of
the soul; for man is intelligent, whereas animals are not. Hence it is
false to say: "Man has nothing more than beasts." Thus death comes
to both alike as to the body, by not as to the soul.
Reply to Objection 2: As a thing can be created by reason, not of a
passive potentiality, but only of the active potentiality of the Creator,
Who can produce something out of nothing, so when we say that a
thing can be reduced to nothing, we do not imply in the creature a
potentiality to non-existence, but in the Creator the power of ceasing
to sustain existence. But a thing is said to be corruptible because
there is in it a potentiality to non-existence.
Reply to Objection 3: To understand through a phantasm is the
proper operation of the soul by virtue of its union with the body.
After separation from the body it will have another mode of
understanding, similar to other substances separated from bodies,
as will appear later on (Question 89, Article 1).