FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.58, C.2.

Now "moral" virtue is so called from "mos" in the sense of a natural
or quasi-natural inclination to do some particular action. And the
other meaning of "mos," i.e. "custom," is akin to this: because
custom becomes a second nature, and produces an inclination
similar to a natural one. But it is evident that inclination to an action
belongs properly to the appetitive power, whose function it is to
move all the powers to their acts, as explained above (Question 9,
Article 1). Therefore not every virtue is a moral virtue, but only those
that are in the appetitive faculty.
Reply to Objection 1: This argument takes "mos" in the sense of
"custom."
Reply to Objection 2: Every act of virtue can be done from choice:
but no virtue makes us choose aright, save that which is in the
appetitive part of the soul: for it has been stated above that choice is
an act of the appetitive faculty (Question 13, Article 1). Wherefore a
habit of choosing, i.e. a habit which is the principle whereby we
choose, is that habit alone which perfects the appetitive faculty:
although the acts of other habits also may be a matter of choice.
Reply to Objection 3: "Nature is the principle of movement" (Phys. ii,
text. 3). Now to move the faculties to act is the proper function of the
appetitive power. Consequently to become as a second nature by
consenting to the reason, is proper to those virtues which are in the
appetitive faculty.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.58, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether moral virtue differs from intellectual

virtue?
Objection 1: It would seem that moral virtue does not differ from
intellectual virtue. For Augustine says (De Civ. Dei iv, 21) "that virtue
is the art of right conduct." But art is an intellectual virtue. Therefore
moral and intellectual virtue do not differ.
Objection 2: Further, some authors put science in the definition of
virtues: thus some define perseverance as a "science or habit
regarding those things to which we should hold or not hold"; and
holiness as "a science which makes man to be faithful and to do his
duty to God." Now science is an intellectual virtue. Therefore moral
virtue should not be distinguished from intellectual virtue.
Objection 3: Further, Augustine says (Soliloq. i, 6) that "virtue is the
rectitude and perfection of reason." But this belongs to the
intellectual virtues, as stated in Ethic. vi, 13. Therefore moral virtue
does not differ from intellectual.
Objection 4: Further, a thing does not differ from that which is
included in its definition. But intellectual virtue is included in the
definition of moral virtue: for the Philosopher says (Ethic. ii, 6) that
"moral virtue is a habit of choosing the mean appointed by reason as
a prudent man would appoint it." Now this right reason that fixes the
mean of moral virtue, belongs to an intellectual virtue, as stated in
Ethic. vi, 13. Therefore moral virtue does not differ from intellectual.
On the contrary, It is stated in Ethic. i, 13 that "there are two kinds of
virtue: some we call intellectual; some moral."
I answer that, Reason is the first principle of all human acts; and
whatever other principles of human acts may be found, they obey
reason somewhat, but in various ways. For some obey reason
blindly and without any contradiction whatever: such are the limbs
of the body, provided they be in a healthy condition, for as soon as
reason commands, the hand or the foot proceeds to action. Hence
the Philosopher says (Polit. i, 3) that "the soul rules the body like a
despot," i.e. as a master rules his slave, who has no right to rebel.
Accordingly some held that all the active principles in man are
subordinate to reason in this way. If this were true, for man to act