brought forth the grievous famine; but this sheepskin effected a liberation from
that calamity! It divided the Jordan! It made Elisha a two-fold Elias! O how
great is the virtue of the Saints! Not only their words; not only their bodies, but
even their very garments are always esteemed venerable by the whole creation.
The sheepskin of this man divided the Jordan! The sandals of the Three Children
trampled down the fire! The word of Elisha changed the waters, so that it made
them to bear the iron on their surface! The rod of Moses divided the Red Sea and
cleft the rock! The garments of Paul expelled diseases! The shadow of Peter put
death to flight! The ashes of the holy Martyrs drive away demons! For this
reason they do all things with authority, even as Elias did. For he looked not on
the diadem, nor the outward pomp of the king, but he looked on the soul clad in
rags, squalid, begrimed, and in a more wretched condition than that of any
criminal; and seeing him the captive and slave of his passions, he despised his
power. For he seemed to see a king but in a scene, and not a real one. For what
was the advantage of outward abundance, when the poverty within was so great?
And what harm could outward poverty do, when there was such a treasure of
wealth within? Such a lion also was the blessed Paul; for when he had entered
into the prison, and only raised his voice, he shook all the foundations; he
gnawed in pieces the fetters, employing not his teeth, but words; on which
account it were fitting to call such men not merely lions, but something more
than lions; for a lion ofttimes, after he has fallen into a net, is taken; but the
Saints when they are bound, become still more powerful; just as this blessed man
did then in the prison, having loosed the prisoners, shaken the walls, and bound
the keeper, and overcome him by the word of godliness. The lion utters his
voice, and puts all the wild beasts to flight. The Saint utters his voice, and drives
away the demons on every side! The weapons of the lion are a hairy mane,
pointed claws, and sharp teeth. The weapons of the righteous man are spiritual
wisdom, temperance, patience, contempt of all present things. Whoever has
these weapons shall not only be able to deride wicked men, but even the adverse
powers themselves.

4. Study then, O man, the life according to God, and no one shall conquer
you at any time; and although you may be accounted the most insignificant of
men, you shall be more powerful than all. On the other hand, if you are
indifferent about virtue of soul, though thou were the most powerful of men, you
will easily be worsted by all that assail you. And the examples already quoted
proved this. But if you are desirous, I will also endeavour to teach you by actual
facts the unconquerableness of the righteous, and the vulnerable condition of
sinners. Hear then how the prophet intimates both these particulars. "The
ungodly," says he, "are not so, but are like the chaff which the wind scatters
away from the face of the earth." For even as chaff lies exposed to the gusts of
wind, and is easily caught up and swept along, so is also the sinner driven about
by every temptation; for while he is at war with himself, and bears the warfare
about with him, what hope of safety does he possess; betrayed as he is at home,
and carrying with him that conscience, which is a constant enemy? Such,
however, is not the nature of the righteous man. But what manner of man is he?
Hear the same prophet, saying, "They that trust in the Lord are as Mount Zion."
What means then, "As Mount Zion?" "He shall not be shaken," says he, "for
ever." For whatever engines you bring up, whatever darts you hurl, desiring to
overturn a mountain, you will never be able to prevail; for how can you? You
will break in pieces all your engines, and exhaust your own strength. Such also is
the righteous man. Whatever blows he may receive, he suffers no evil therefrom;
but destroys the power of those who take counsel against him, and not of men
only, but of demons. You have heard often what engines the Devil brought up
against Job; but not only did he fail to overthrow that mountain, but drew back
exhausted, his darts broken to pieces, and his engines rendered useless, by that
assault!
5. Knowing these things, let us take heed to our life; and let us not be
earnest as to the goods that perish; neither as to the glory that goes out; nor as to
that body which grows old; nor as to that beauty which is fading; nor as to that
pleasure which is fleeting; but let us expend all our care about the soul; and let