for as you are one in substance, and in the honor which comes of God, it follows
that the matter is one of estimation. Now in the case of those who are greater and
lesser, he would not have said "counting," but honor them that are better than
yourselves, as he says in another place, "Obey them that have the rule over you,
and submit to them." [Hebrews 13:17] In that instance subjection is the result of
the nature of the case, in this of our own judgment. "In lowliness of mind," he
says, "each counting other better than themselves," as Christ also did.
Thus are their explanations overthrown. It remains that I speak of our own
after I have first spoken of theirs summarily. When exhorting to lowliness of
mind, Paul would never have brought forward a lesser one, as obedient to a
greater. If he were exhorting servants to obey their masters, he might have done
so with propriety, but when exhorting the free to obey the free, to what purpose
could he bring forward the subjection of a servant to a master? Of a lesser to a
greater? He says not, "Let the lesser be subject to the greater," but you who are
of equal honor with each other be ye subject, "each counting other better than
themselves." Why then did he not bring forward even the obedience of the wife,
and say, As the wife obeys her husband, so do ye also obey. Now if he did not
bring forward that state in which there is equality and liberty, since in that the
subjection is but slight, how much less would he have brought forward the
subjection of a slave? I said above, that no one so praises a man for abstaining
from evil, nor even mentions him at all; no one who desires to praise a man for
continence would say, he has not committed adultery, but, he has abstained from
his own wife; for we do not consider abstinence from evil as a matter of praise at
all, it would be ridiculous.
I said that the "form of a servant" was a true form, and nothing less.
Therefore "the form of God" also is perfect, and no less. Why says he not, "being
made in the form of God," but "being in the form of God"? This is the same as
the saying, "I am that I am." [Exodus 3:14] "Form" implies unchangeableness,
so far as it is form. It is not possible that things of one substance should have the
form of another, as no man has the form of an angel, neither has a beast the form

of a man. How then should the Son?
Now in our own case, since we men are of a compound nature, form
pertains to the body, but in the case of a simple and altogether uncompounded
nature it is of the substance. But if you contend that he speaks not of the Father,
because the word is used without the article, in many places this is meant,
though the word be used without the article. Why say I, in many places? For in
this very place he says, "He counted it not a prize to be on an equality with
God," using the word without the article, though speaking of God the Father.
I would add our own explanation, but I fear that I shall overwhelm your
minds. Meanwhile remember what has been said for their refutation; meanwhile
let us root out the thorns, and then we will scatter the good seed after that the
thorns have been rooted out, and a little rest has been given to the land; that
when rid of all the evil thence contracted, it may receive the divine seed with full
virtue.
Let us give thanks to God for what has been spoken; let us entreat Him to
grant us the guarding and safe keeping thereof, that both we and you may
rejoice, and the heretics may be put to shame. Let us beseech Him to open our
mouth for what follows, that we may with the same earnestness lay down our
own views. Let us supplicate Him to vouchsafe us a life worthy of the faith, that
we may live to His glory, and that His name may not be blasphemed through us.
For, "woe unto you," it is written, "through whom the name of God is
blasphemed." [Isaiah 52:5, Septuagint. nearly] For if, when we have a son, (and
what is there more our own than a son,) if therefore when we have a son, and are
blasphemed through him, we publicly renounce him, turn away from him, and
will not receive him; how much more will God, when He has ungrateful servants
who blaspheme and insult Him, turn away from them and hate them? And who
will take up him whom God hates and turns away from, but the Devil and the
demons? And whomsoever the demons take, what hope of salvation is left for
him? What consolation in life?
As long as we are in the hand of God, "no one is able to pluck us out" [John