Hebrews 6:17
God, however, ought to have been believed even without an oath: [Hebrews
6:17] "wherein" (he says) God willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of
promise the immutability of His counsel, confirmed it [lit. "mediated" ] by an
oath. In these words he comprehends also the believers, and therefore mentions
this "promise" which was made to us in common [with them]. "He mediated" (he
says) "by an oath." Here again he says that the Son was mediator between men
and God.

Hebrews 6:18
"That by two immutable things, in which it was impossible that God should
lie." What are these two? The speaking and promising; and the adding an oath to
the promise. For since among men that which is [confirmed] by an oath is
thought more worthy of credit, on this account He added that also.
Do you see that He regards not His own dignity, but how He may persuade
men, and endures to have unworthy things said concerning Himself. That is He
wishes to impart full assurance. And in the case of Abraham indeed [the
Apostle] shows that the whole was of God, not of his patient endurance, since
He was even willing to add an oath, for He by whom men swear, by Him also
God "swore," that is "by Himself." They indeed as by one greater, but He not as
by one greater. And yet He did it. For it is not the same thing for man to swear
by himself, as for God. For man has no power over himself. You see then that
this is said not more for Abraham than for ourselves: "that we" (he says) "might
have strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold on the hope set
before us." Here too again, "after he had patiently endured he obtained the
promise."
"Now" he means, and he did not say "when He swore." But what the oath is,
he showed, by speaking of swearing by a greater. But since the race of men is
hard of belief, He condescends to the same [things] with ourselves. As then for
our sake He swears, although it be unworthy of Him that He should not be
believed, so also did [the Apostle] make that other statement: "He learned from
the things which He suffered" [Hebrews 5:8], because men think the going
through experience more worthy of reliance.
What is "the hope set before us"? From these [past events] (he says) we
conjecture the future. For if these came to pass after so long a time, so certainly
the others will. So that the things which happened in regard to Abraham give us

confidence also concerning the things to come.

Hebrews 6:19-20
3. "Which [hope] we have as an anchor of the soul both sure and steadfast,
and which enters into that within the veil: whither the forerunner is for us
entered, even Jesus, made High Priest forever after the order of Melchisedec."
He shows, that while we are still in the world, and not yet departed from [this]
life, we are already among the promises. For through hope we are already in
heaven. He said, "Wait; for it shall surely be." Afterwards giving them full
assurance, he says, "nay rather by hope." And he said not, "We are within," but
'It has entered within,' which was more true and more persuasive. For as the
anchor, dropped from the vessel, does not allow it to be carried about, even if ten
thousand winds agitate it, but being depended upon makes it steady, so also does
hope.
And see how very suitable an image he has discovered: For he said not,
Foundation; which was not suitable; but, "Anchor." For that which is on the
tossing sea, and seems not to be very firmly fixed, stands on the water as upon
land, and is shaken and yet is not shaken. For in regard to those who are very
firm, and philosophic, Christ with good reason made that statement, saying,
"Whosoever has built his house on a rock." [Matthew 7:24] But in respect of
those who are giving way, and who ought to be carried through by hope, Paul
has suitably set down this. For the surge and the great storm toss the boat; but
hope suffers it not to be carried hither and there, although winds innumerable
agitate it: so that, unless we had this [hope] we should long ago have been sunk.
Nor is it only in things spiritual, but also in the affairs of this life, that one may
find the power of hope great. Whatever it may be, in merchandise, in husbandry,
in a military expedition, unless one sets this before him, he would not even touch
the work. But he said not simply "Anchor," but "sure and steadfast" [i.e.] not
shaken. "Which enters into that within the veil"; instead of 'which reaches