the Scripture. Yea, and elsewhere also He says, "God has given them eyes that
they should not see:" [Romans 11:8] and here He speaks in this way, in order
that having, as I said before, exercised themselves in these words, they might not
be confounded on suffering reproaches and insults.
But if any think these things intolerable, let them be reminded of an ancient
history. For in times of old also this came to pass, which thing especially shows
the old covenant to be akin to the new, and Him who is here speaking, the same
with the giver of those commands. I mean that in the case of the Jews also, when
each had slain his neighbor, then He laid aside His anger against them; both
when they made the calf, and when they were joined to Baal Peor. Where then
are they that say, "That God is evil, and this good?" For behold He has filled the
world with blood, shed by kinsmen. Nevertheless even this we affirm to be a
work of great love towards man.
Therefore, you see, implying that it was He who approved those other acts
also, He makes mention also of a prophecy, which if not spoken for this end, yet
involves the same meaning. And what is this?
"A man's foes shall be they of his own household." [Matthew 10:36]
For indeed among the Jews also something of the kind took place. That is,
there were prophets, and false prophets, and the people was divided, and families
were in dissension; and some believed the one, and some the other. Wherefore
the prophet admonishes, saying, "Trust ye not in friends, have not hope in
guides; yea, even of her that lies in your bosom beware, in respect of
communicating anything to her:" and, "A man's enemies are the men that are in
his own house." [Micah 7:5-6]
And this He said, preparing him that should receive the word to be above
all. For to die is not evil, but to die an evil death. On this account He said
moreover, "I have come to cast fire upon the earth." [Luke 12:49] And this He
said, to declare the vehemence and warmth of the love which He required. For,
because He loved us very much, so He will likewise be loved of us. And these
sayings would strengthen the persons present also, and lift them higher. "For if

those others," says He, "are to despise kinsmen, and children, and parents,
imagine what manner of men ye their teachers ought to be. Since neither will the
hardships stop with you, but will also pass on to the rest. For since I have come
bringing great blessings, I demand also great obedience, and purpose of heart."
3. "He that loves father or mother more than me, is not worthy of me; and
he that loves son or daughter more than me, is not worthy of me; and he that
takes not his cross and follows after me, is not worthy of me." [Matthew 10:3738]
Do you see a teacher's dignity? Do you see, how He signifies himself a true
Son of Him that begot Him, commanding us to let go all things beneath, and to
take in preference the love of Him?
"And why speak I," says He, "of friends and kinsmen? Even if it be your
own life which you prefer to my love, your place is far from my disciples." What
then? Are not these things contrary to the Old Testament? Far from it, rather they
are very much in harmony therewith. For there too He commands not only to
hate the worshippers of idols, but even to stone them; and in Deuteronomy
again, admiring these, He says, "Who said unto his father, and to his mother, I
have not seen you; neither did he acknowledge his brethren, and his own sons he
disowned: he kept Your oracles." [Deuteronomy 33:9] And if Paul gives many
directions touching parents, commanding us to obey them in all things, marvel
not; for in those things only does he mean us to obey, as many as do not hinder
godliness. For indeed it is a sacred duty to render them all other honors: but
when they demand more than is due, one ought not to obey. For this reason Luke
says, "If any man come to me, and hate not his father, and mother, and wife, and
children, and brethren, and sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my
disciple;" [Luke 14:26] not commanding simply to hate them, since this were
even quite contrary to the law; but "when one desires to be loved more than I am,
hate him in this respect. For this ruins both the beloved himself, and the lover."
And these things He said, both to render the children more determined, and to
make the fathers more gentle, that would hinder them. For when they saw He