showed. It is then clear, that this Mary was not the harlot. "But wherefore," says
some one, "did Christ admit that harlot?" That He might put away her iniquity;
that He might show His lovingkindness; that you might learn that there is no
malady which prevails over His goodness. Look not therefore at this only, that
He received her, but consider the other point also, how He changed her. But, (to
return,) why does the Evangelist relate this history to us? Or rather, what does he
desire to show us by saying,

John 11:5
"Jesus loved Martha, and her sister, and Lazarus."
That we should never be discontented or vexed if any sickness happen to
good men, and such as are dear to God.

John 11:3
"Behold, he whom you love is sick."
They desired to draw on Christ to pity, for they still gave heed to Him as to
a man. This is plain from what they say, "If you had been here, he had not died,"
and from their saying, not, "Behold, Lazarus is sick," but "Behold, he whom you
love is sick." What then said Christ?

John 11:4
"This sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God, that the Son of God
might be glorified thereby."
Observe how He again asserts that His glory and the Father's is One; for
after saying "of God," He has added, "that the Son of God might be glorified."
"This sickness is not unto death." Since He intended to tarry two days
where He was, He for the present sends away the messengers with this answer.
Wherefore we must admire Lazarus' sisters, that after hearing that the sickness
was "not unto death," and yet seeing him dead, they were not offended, although
the event had been directly contrary. But even so they came to Him, and did not
think that He had spoken falsely.
The expression "that" in this passage denotes not cause, but consequence;
the sickness happened from other causes, but He used it for the glory of God.

John 11:6
"And having said this, He tarried two days."
Wherefore tarried He? That Lazarus might breathe his last, and be buried;
that none might be able to assert that He restored him when not yet dead, saying
that it was a lethargy, a fainting, a fit, but not death. On this account He tarried
so long, that corruption began, and they said, "He now stinks."

John 11:7
"Then says He to his disciples, Let us go into Judea."
Why, when He never in other places told them beforehand where He was
going, does He tell them here? They had been greatly terrified, and since they
were in this way disposed, He forewarns them, that the suddenness might not
trouble them. What then say the disciples?

John 11:8
"The Jews of late sought to stone You, and You are going there again?"
They therefore had feared for Him also, but for the more part rather for
themselves; for they were not yet perfect. So Thomas, shaking with fear, said,
"Let us go, that we also may die with Him" [John 11:16], because Thomas was
weaker and more unbelieving than the rest. But see how Jesus encourages them
by what He says.