he that has Christ, even though he have not fulfilled the Law aright, has received
the whole. For the end of the physician's art is health. As then he that can make
whole, even though he has not the physician's art, has everything; but he that
knows not how to heal, though he seem to be a follower of the art, comes short
of everything: so is it in the case of the Law and of faith. He that has this has the
end of that likewise, but he that is without this is an alien from both. For what
was the object of the Law? To make man righteous. But it had not the power, for
no one fulfilled it. This then was the end of the Law and to this it looked
throughout, and for this all its parts were made, its feasts, and commandments,
and sacrifices, and all besides, that man might be justified. But this end Christ
gave a fuller accomplishment of through faith. Be not then afraid, he says, as if
transgressing the Law in having come over to the faith. For then do you
transgress it, when for it thou dost not believe Christ. If you believe in Him, then
you have fulfilled it also, and much more than it commanded. For you have
received a much greater righteousness. Next, since this was an assertion, he
again brings proof of it from the Scriptures.
Ver. 5. "For Moses," he says, "describes the righteousness which is of the
Law."
What he means is this. Moses shows us the righteousness ensuing from the
Law, what sort it is of, and whence. What sort is it then of, and what does it
consist in? In fulfilling the commandments. "He (R.T. the man), that does these
things," He says, "shall live by (or in), them." [Leviticus 18:5] And there is no
other way of becoming righteous in the Law save by fulfilling the whole of it.
But this has not been possible for any one, and therefore this righteousness has
failed them. ([διαπέπτωκεν]). But tell us, Paul, of the other righteousness also,
that which is of grace. What is that then, and of what does it consist? Hear the
words in which he gives a clear sketch of it. For after he had refuted the other, he
next goes on to this, and says,
Ver. 6, 7, 8, 9. But the righteousness which is of faith speaks on this wise,
Say not in your heart, Who shall ascend into heaven (that is, to bring Christ

down from above): or, Who shall descend into the deep? (that is, to bring up
Christ again from the dead.) But what says it? The word is near you, even in
your mouth, and in your heart, that is, the word of faith which we preach. That if
you shall confess with your mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in your heart
that God has raised Him from the dead, you shall be saved.
To prevent the Jews then from saying, How came they who had not found
the lesser righteousness to find the greater? He gives a reason there was no
answering, that this way was easier than that. For that requires the fulfilment of
all things (for when you do all, then you shall live); but the righteousness which
is of faith does not say this, but what?
"If you confess with your mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe in your heart
that God has raised Him from the dead, you shall be saved." Then again that we
may not seem to be making it contemptible by showing it to be easy and cheap,
observe how he expands his account of it. For he does not come immediately to
the words just given, but what does he say? "But the righteousness which is of
faith says on this wise; Say not in your heart, Who shall go up into heaven? (that
is, to bring Christ down); or, Who shall descend into the deep? (that is, to bring
up Christ again from the dead.") For as to the virtue manifested in works there is
opposed a listlessness, which relaxes our labors, and it requires a very wakeful
soul not to yield to it: thus, when one is required to believe, there are reasonings
which confuse and make havoc of the minds of most men, and it wants a soul of
some vigor to shake them thoroughly off. And this is just why he brings the
same before one. And as he did in Abraham's case, so he does here also. For
having there shown that he was justified by faith, lest he should seem to have
gotten so great a crown by a mere chance, as if it were a thing of no account, to
extol the nature of faith, he says, "Who against hope believed in hope, that he
might become the father of many nations. And being not weak in faith, he
considered his own body now dead, and the deadness of Sarah's womb. He
staggered not at the promise of God through unbelief; but was strong in faith,
giving glory to God; and being fully persuaded that what He had promised He