saved by grace. For when he says, "Even so then at this present time also there is
a remnant according to the election of grace;" he shows that they also were
saved by grace. And not hereby only, but likewise by saying, "I have reserved
unto Myself." For this is the language of One Who shows that He Himself was
the chief Contributor. And if by grace, it will be said, how came we all not to be
saved? Because ye would not. For grace, though it be grace, saves the willing,
not those who will not have it, and turn away from it, who persist in fighting
against it, and opposing themselves to it. Observe how throughout the point he is
proving is, "Not as though the Word of God had taken none effect," by showing
that the worthy were those to whom the promise came, and that these, few
though they be, may yet be the people of God; and indeed he had stated it in the
beginning of the Epistle with much force, where he says, "For what if some did
not believe" [Romans 3:3], and did not even stop at this, but proceeded, "Yea, let
God be true, and every man a liar." [Romans 3:4] And here again he confirms it
another way, and shows the force of grace, and that always the one were being
saved, the other perished. Let us then give thanks, that we belong to them that
are being saved, and not having been able to save ourselves by works, were
saved by the gift of God. But in giving thanks, let us not do this in words only,
but in works and actions. For this is the genuine thanksgiving, when we do those
things whereby God is sure to be glorified, and flee from those from which we
have been set free. For if we, after insulting the King, instead of being punished
have been honored, and then go and insult Him afresh, since we are detected in
the utmost ingratitude, we should with justice have to suffer the utmost
punishment, one greater far than the former. For the former insolence did not
show us so ungrateful as that committed after honor and much attention shown
us. Let us then flee those things from which we have been set free, and not give
thanks with our mouths only, lest it be said of us also, "This people honors Me
with their lips, but with their heart is far from Me." [Isaiah 29:13] For how is it
else than unseemly, when the "heavens declare the glory of God" [Psalm 19:1],
and thou, for whom the heavens were made that glorify Him, doest such things

that through you the God that made you is blasphemed? It is for this that not
only he that blasphemes, but yourself also, will be liable to punishment. For the
heavens also do not glorify God by sending forth a voice but by putting others
upon doing it at the sight of them, and yet they are said "to declare the glory of
God." Thus too they that furnish a life to be wondered at, even though they hold
their peace, yet glorify God, when others through them glorify Him. For He is
not so much reverenced because of the heaven, as of a spotless life. When then
we are discoursing with the Gentiles, we cite (4 manuscripts read or point to the
reading, "let us not cite") not the heavens before them, but the men, whom
though they were in worse plight than brutes, He has persuaded to be the Angels'
competitors. And we (1 manuscripts "let us") stop their mouths by speaking of
this change. For far better than the heaven is man, and a soul brighter than their
beauty may he possess. For it, though visible for so long a time, did not persuade
much. But Paul, after preaching a short time, drew the whole world unto him.
[St. Augustine on Psalm 19:4] For he possessed a soul no less than the heaven,
which was able to draw all men unto him. Our soul is not a match even for the
earth: but his is equal to the heavens. That stands indeed keeping to its own
boundary and rule; but the loftiness of his soul transcended all the heavens, and
conversed with Christ Himself. [2 Corinthians 10:15; Romans 15:19, etc.] And
the beauty of it was so great, that even God heralds it forth. For the stars did the
angels marvel at when they were made. [Job 38:7] But this He marvelled at
when He says, "He is a chosen vessel unto Me." [Acts 9:15] And this Heaven
does a cloud many times overshadow. But Paul's soul no temptation
overshadowed but even in storms he was clearer to the sight than the hard sky
([σταθερἅς] [μεσημβρίας] [)] at noon, and shone constantly as it had done before
the clouds came on. For the Sun who shone in him sent not forth such rays as to
be over-clouded by the concourse of temptations, but even then shone forth the
more. Wherefore he says, "My grace is sufficient for you, for My Strength is
made perfect in weakness." [2 Corinthians 12:9] Let us then strive to be like him,
and then even to what we are this heaven will be as nothing, if we wish it, nor