wickedness. And if you become depraved, because of His goodness, you are
rather belying Him before men. I see many persons thus impugning the longsuffering of God; so that if you use it not aright, you shall pay the penalty. Is
God a God of loving-kindness? Yes, but He is also a righteous Judge. Is He one
who makes allowance for sins? True, yet renders He to every man according to
his works. Does He pass by iniquity and blot out transgressions? True, yet makes
He inquisition also. How then is it, that these things are not contradictions?
Contradictions they are not, if we distinguish them by their times. He does away
iniquity here, both by the laver of Baptism, and by penitence. There He makes
inquisition of what we have done by fire and torment. "If then," some man may
say, "I am cast out, and forfeit the kingdom, whether I have wrought ten
thousand evil deeds or only one, wherefore may I not do all sorts of evil deeds?"
This is the argument of an ungrateful servant; still nevertheless, we will proceed
to solve even this. Never do that which is evil in order to do yourself good; for
we shall, all alike fall short of the kingdom, yet in Hell we shall not all undergo
the same punishment, but one a severer, another a milder one. For now, if you
and another have "despised God's goodness," [Romans 2:4] the one in many
instances, and the other in a few, you will alike forfeit the kingdom. But if you
have not alike despised Him, but the one in a greater, the other in a less degree,
in Hell you shall feel the difference.
Now then, why, it may be said, does He threaten them who have not done
works of mercy, that they shall depart into the fire, and not simply into the fire,
but into that which is "prepared for the devil and his angels?" [Matthew 25:41]
Why and wherefore is this? Because nothing so provokes God to wrath. He puts
this before all terrible things; for if it is our duty to love our enemies, of what
punishment shall not he be worthy, who turns away even from them that love
him, and is in this respect worse than the heathen? So that in this case the
greatness of the sin will make such an one go away with the devil. Woe to him, it
is said, who does not alms; and if this was the case under the Old Covenant,
much more is it under the New. If, where the getting of wealth was allowed, and

the enjoyment of it, and the care of it, there was such provision made for the
succoring the poor, how much more in that Dispensation, where we are
commanded to surrender all we have? For what did not they of old do? They
gave tithes, and tithes again upon tithes for orphans, widows, and strangers;
whereas some one was saying to me in astonishment at another, "Why, such an
one gives tithes." What a load of disgrace does this expression imply, since what
was not a matter of wonder with the Jews has come to be so in the case of the
Christians? If there was danger then in omitting tithes, think how great it must be
now.
Again, drunkenness shall not inherit the kingdom. Yet what is the language
of most people? "Well, if both I and he are in the same case, that is no little
comfort." What then? First of all, that you and he shall not reap the same
punishment; but were it otherwise, neither is that any comfort. Fellowship in
sufferings has comfort in it, when the miseries have any proportion in them; but
when they exceed all proportion, and carry us beyond ourselves, no longer do
they allow of our receiving any comfort at all. For tell the man that is being
tortured, and has entered into the flames, that such an one is undergoing the
same, still he will not feel the comfort. Did not all the Israelites perish together?
What manner of comfort did that afford them? Rather, did not this very thing
distress them? And this was why they kept saying, We are lost, we are perished,
we are wasted away. What manner of comfort then is there here? In vain do we
comfort ourselves with such hopes as these. There is but one only comfort, to
avoid falling into that unquenchable fire; but it is not possible for one who has
fallen into it to find comfort, where there is the gnashing of teeth, where there is
the weeping, where is the worm that dies not, and the fire that is not quenched.
For shall you conceive any comfort at all, tell me, when you are in so great
tribulation and distress? Will you then be any longer yourself? Let us not, I pray
and entreat you, let us not vainly deceive ourselves and comfort ourselves with
arguments like these; no, let us practise those virtues, which shall avail to save
us. The object before us is to sit together with Christ, and are you trifling about