lower than the Angels." Of the love of God, "Like as a father pities his own
children, even so is the Lord merciful to them that fear Him." [Psalm 103:13]
And of the things that are to meet us after our present life, and of that
undisturbed condition, he teaches, "Return unto your rest, O my soul." [Psalm
116:7] Why the Heaven is so great, this he will also say. For it is because "the
heavens declare the glory of God." [Psalm 19:1] Why day and night were made
—not that they may shine and give us rest only, but also that they may instruct
us. "For there are no speeches nor words, the sounds of which (i.e. day and
night) are not heard." [Psalm 18:3] How the sea lies round about the earth, this
too you will learn from hence. "The deep as a garment is the envelopment
thereof." For so the Hebrew has it.
But having a sample in what I have mentioned, you will have a notion of all
the rest besides, the things about Christ, about the resurrection, about the life to
come, about the resting, about punishment, about moral matters, all that
concerns doctrines, and you will find the book filled with countless blessings.
And if you fall into temptations, you will gain much comfort from hence. If you
fall into sins even, you will find countless remedies stored up here, or if into
poverty or tribulation, you will see many havens. And if you be righteous you
will gain much security hence, and if a sinner much relief. For if you be just and
art ill-treated, you will hear him say, "For Your sake are we killed all the day
long, we are counted as sheep for the slaughter." [Psalm 44:22] "All these things
have come upon us, and yet have we not forgotten You." [Psalm 43:17] And if
your well-doings make you high, you will hear him say, "Enter not into
judgment with Your servant, for in Your sight shall no man living be justified"
[Psalm 143:2], and you will be straightway made lowly. And if you be a sinner,
and hast despaired of yourself, you will hear him continually singing, "Today, if
you will hear His voice, harden not your hearts, as in the provocation" (ib. 95:7,
8), and you will be stayed up speedily. And if you have a crown even on your
head, and art high-minded, you will learn that "a king is not saved by a great
host, neither shall a giant be saved by the greatness of his might" [Psalm 33:16]:

and you will find yourself able to be reasonable. If you be rich, and in reputation,
again you will hear him singing, "Woe to them that trust in their own might, and
boast themselves in the multitude of their riches," [Psalm 48:6] And, "As for
man, his days are as grass" [Psalm 103:15], And "His glory shall not go down
with him, after him" [Psalm 49:17]: and you will not think any of the things upon
the earth are great. For when what is more splendid than all, even glory and
power, is so worthless, what else of things on earth is worth accounting of? But
are you in despondency? Hear him saying, "Why are you so sorrowful, O my
soul, and why do you so disturb me? Trust in God, for I will confess unto Him."
[Psalm 42:5] Or do you see men in honor who deserve it not? "Fret not yourself
at them that do wickedly. For as the grass shall they be dried up, and as the
green herb shall they soon fall away." (ib. 37:1, 2) Do you see both righteous
and sinners punished? Be told that the cause is not the same. For "many" he says,
"are the plagues of sinners." [Psalm 32:10] But in the case of the righteous, he
does not say plagues, but, "Many are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord
delivers them out of them all." [Psalm 34:19] And again, "The death of the sinner
is evil." [Psalm 33:21] And, "Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His
saints." [Psalm 116:15] These things do thou say continually: by these be
instructed. For every single word of this has in it an indiscoverable ocean of
meaning. For we have been just running over them only: but if you were minded
to give these passages accurate investigation, you will see the riches to be great.
But at present it is possible even by what I have given, to get cleared of the
passions that lie on you. For since he forbids our envying, or being grieved, or
despondent out of season, or thinking that riches are anything, or tribulation, or
poverty, or fancying life itself to be anything, he frees you from all passions. So
for this let us give thanks to God, and let us have our treasure always in hand,
"that by patience and comfort of the Scriptures we may have hope" [Romans
15:4], and enjoy the good things to come. Which God grant that we may all
attain, by the grace and love toward man of our Lord Jesus Christ. By Whom
and with Whom, etc.