two ways; first, by God's predestination, and thus no one loses his
crown: secondly, by the merit of grace; for what we merit, in a
certain way is ours; and thus anyone may lose his crown by mortal
sin. Another person receives that crown thus lost, inasmuch as he
takes the former's place. For God does not permit some to fall,
without raising others; according to Job 34:24: "He shall break in
pieces many and innumerable, and make others to stand in their
stead." Thus men are substituted in the place of the fallen angels;
and the Gentiles in that of the Jews. He who is substituted for
another in the state of grace, also receives the crown of the fallen in
that in eternal life he will rejoice at the good the other has done, in
which life he will rejoice at all good whether done by himself or by
others.
Reply to Objection 2: Although it is possible for one who is
predestinated considered in himself to die in mortal sin; yet it is not
possible, supposed, as in fact it is supposed. that he is
predestinated. Whence it does not follow that predestination can fall
short of its effect.
Reply to Objection 3: Since predestination includes the divine will as
stated above (Article 4): and the fact that God wills any created thing
is necessary on the supposition that He so wills, on account of the
immutability of the divine will, but is not necessary absolutely; so
the same must be said of predestination. Wherefore one ought not to
say that God is able not to predestinate one whom He has
predestinated, taking it in a composite sense, thought, absolutely
speaking, God can predestinate or not. But in this way the certainty
of predestination is not destroyed.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether the number of the predestined is certain?

Objection 1: It seems that the number of the predestined is not
certain. For a number to which an addition can be made is not
certain. But there can be an addition to the number of the
predestined as it seems; for it is written (Dt. 1:11): "The Lord God
adds to this number many thousands," and a gloss adds, "fixed by
God, who knows those who belong to Him." Therefore the number of
the predestined is not certain.
Objection 2: Further, no reason can be assigned why God preordains to salvation one number of men more than another. But
nothing is arranged by God without a reason. Therefore the number
to be saved pre-ordained by God cannot be certain.
Objection 3: Further, the operations of God are more perfect than
those of nature. But in the works of nature, good is found in the
majority of things; defect and evil in the minority. If, then, the
number of the saved were fixed by God at a certain figure, there
would be more saved than lost. Yet the contrary follows from Mt.
7:13,14: "For wide is the gate, and broad the way that leadeth to
destruction, and many there are who go in thereat. How narrow is the
gate, and strait is the way that leadeth to life; and few there are who
find it!" Therefore the number of those pre-ordained by God to be
saved is not certain.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Corr. et Grat. 13): "The number
of the predestined is certain, and can neither be increased nor
diminished."
I answer that, The number of the predestined is certain. Some have
said that it was formally, but not materially certain; as if we were to
say that it was certain that a hundred or a thousand would be saved;
not however these or those individuals. But this destroys the
certainty of predestination; of which we spoke above (Article 6).
Therefore we must say that to God the number of the predestined is
certain, not only formally, but also materially. It must, however, be
observed that the number of the predestined is said to be certain to
God, not by reason of His knowledge, because, that is to say, He
knows how many will be saved (for in this way the number of drops
of rain and the sands of the sea are certain to God); but by reason of