he says also in writing to the Thessalonians, "Warn them that are unruly" [1
Thessalonians 5:14], but in speaking of the feeble-minded, not so, but what?
"Comfort the feeble-minded, support the weak, be patient toward all men"; that
is, do not cease to hope; do not despair. For he that does not encourage one who
is straightened by affliction, makes him more hardened.
9. "Lest any of you," he says, "be hardened by the deceitfulness of sin." He
means either the deceit of the devil (for it is indeed a deceit, not to look for the
things to come, to think that we are without responsibility, and that we shall not
pay the penalty for our deeds here, neither will there be a resurrection); or in
another sense insensibility [or] despairing is deceit. For to say, 'What is there
left? I have sinned once for all, I have no hope of recovering myself,' is deceit.
Then he suggests hopes to them, saying [Hebrews 3:14], "We are made
partakers of Christ"; All but saying, He that so loved us, He that counted us
worthy of so great things, as to make us His Body, will not suffer us to perish.
Let us consider (he says) of what we have been thought worthy: we and Christ
are One: let us not then distrust Him. And again, he hints at that which had been
said in another place, that "If we suffer, we shall also reign with Him." [2
Timothy 2:12] For this is [implied in] "We are made partakers," we partake of
the same things whereof Christ also partakes.
He urges them on from the good things; "for we are," he says, "partakers of
Christ." Then, again, from gloomy ones [Hebrews 4:1], "Let us fear, lest at any
time a promise being left us of entering into His rest, any of you should seem to
come short of it." For that is manifest and confessed.
[Hebrews 3:9] "They proved Me," He says, "and saw My works forty
years." Do you see that it is not right to call God to account, but whether He
defend [our cause] or not, to trust Him? For against those [of old] he now brings
this charge, that "they tempted God." For he that will have proof either of His
power, or of His providence, or of His tender care, does not yet believe, either
that He is powerful or kind to man. This he hints also in writing to these
[Hebrews] who probably already wished, in their trials, to obtain experience and

positive evidence of His power and His providential care for them. You see that
in all cases the provocation and the angering arises from unbelief.
What then does he say? [Hebrews 4:9] "There remains therefore a rest for
the people of God." And see how he has summed up the whole argument. "He
swore," says he, to those former ones, "that they should not enter into" the
"rest," and they did not enter in. Then long after their time discoursing to the
Jews, he says, "Harden not your hearts," as your fathers, showing that there is
another rest. For of Palestine we have not to speak: for they were already in
possession of it. Nor can he be speaking of the seventh [day]; for surely he was
not discoursing about that which had taken place long before. It follows
therefore that he hints at some other, that which is rest indeed.
10. For that is indeed rest, where "pain, sorrow and sighing are fled away"
[Isaiah 35:10]: where there are neither cares, nor labors, nor struggle, nor fear
stunning and shaking the soul; but only that fear of God which is full of delight.
There is not, "In the sweat of your face you shall eat your bread," nor "thorns
and thistles" [Genesis 3:19]; no longer, "In sorrow you shall bring forth children,
and to your husband shall be your desire and he shall rule over you." [Genesis
3:16] All is peace, joy, gladness, pleasure, goodness, gentleness. There is no
jealousy, nor envy, no sickness, no death whether of the body, or that of the soul.
There is no darkness nor night; all [is] day, all light, all things are bright. It is not
possible to be weary, it is not possible to be satiated: we shall always persevere
in the desire of good things.
Would you that I should also give you some image of the condition there? It
is impossible. But yet, so far as it is possible, I will try to give you some image.
Let us look up into the heaven when without any intervening cloud it shows
forth its crown [of stars]. Then when we have dwelt long on the beauty of its
appearance, let us think that we too shall have a pavement, not indeed such [as
this], but as much more beautiful as the gold is than the clay, and [let us think]
on the higher roof which is again beyond; then on the Angels, the Archangels,
the infinite multitude of unbodied powers, the very palace of God itself, the