dialectic art, the student of natural science whose gaze pierces the
heavens, walks in vanity of understanding and darkness of mind?"
Now vanity of understanding and darkness of mind are sinful.
Therefore curiosity about intellective sciences may be sinful.
I answer that, As stated above (Question 166, Article 2, ad 2)
studiousness is directly, not about knowledge itself, but about the
desire and study in the pursuit of knowledge. Now we must judge
differently of the knowledge itself of truth, and of the desire and
study in the pursuit of the knowledge of truth. For the knowledge of
truth, strictly speaking, is good, but it may be evil accidentally, by
reason of some result, either because one takes pride in knowing the
truth, according to 1 Cor. 8:1, "Knowledge puffeth up," or because
one uses the knowledge of truth in order to sin.
On the other hand, the desire or study in pursuing the knowledge of
truth may be right or wrong. First, when one tends by his study to
the knowledge of truth as having evil accidentally annexed to it, for
instance those who study to know the truth that they may take pride
in their knowledge. Hence Augustine says (De Morib. Eccl. 21):
"Some there are who forsaking virtue, and ignorant of what God is,
and of the majesty of that nature which ever remains the same,
imagine they are doing something great, if with surpassing curiosity
and keenness they explore the whole mass of this body which we
call the world. So great a pride is thus begotten, that one would think
they dwelt in the very heavens about which they argue." In like
manner, those who study to learn something in order to sin are
engaged in a sinful study, according to the saying of Jer. 9:5, "They
have taught their tongue to speak lies, they have labored to commit
iniquity."
Secondly, there may be sin by reason of the appetite or study
directed to the learning of truth being itself inordinate; and this in
four ways. First, when a man is withdrawn by a less profitable study
from a study that is an obligation incumbent on him; hence Jerome
says [Epist. xxi ad Damas]: "We see priests forsaking the gospels
and the prophets, reading stage-plays, and singing the love songs of
pastoral idylls." Secondly, when a man studies to learn of one, by
whom it is unlawful to be taught, as in the case of those who seek to
know the future through the demons. This is superstitious curiosity,
of which Augustine says (De Vera Relig. 4): "Maybe, the
philosophers were debarred from the faith by their sinful curiosity in
seeking knowledge from the demons."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.166, C.2.

Thirdly, when a man desires to know the truth about creatures,
without referring his knowledge to its due end, namely, the
knowledge of God. Hence Augustine says (De Vera Relig. 29) that "in
studying creatures, we must not be moved by empty and perishable
curiosity; but we should ever mount towards immortal and abiding
things."
Fourthly, when a man studies to know the truth above the capacity of
his own intelligence, since by so doing men easily fall into error:
wherefore it is written (Ecclus. 3:22): "Seek not the things that are
too high for thee, and search not into things above thy ability . . . and
in many of His works be not curious," and further on (Ecclus. 3:26),
"For . . . the suspicion of them hath deceived many, and hath
detained their minds in vanity."
Reply to Objection 1: Man's good consists in the knowledge of truth;
yet man's sovereign good consists, not in the knowledge of any
truth, but in the perfect knowledge of the sovereign truth, as the
Philosopher states (Ethic. x, 7,8). Hence there may be sin in the
knowledge of certain truths, in so far as the desire of such
knowledge is not directed in due manner to the knowledge of the
sovereign truth, wherein supreme happiness consists.
Reply to Objection 2: Although this argument shows that the
knowledge of truth is good in itself, this does not prevent a man from
misusing the knowledge of truth for an evil purpose, or from desiring
the knowledge of truth inordinately, since even the desire for good
should be regulated in due manner.
Reply to Objection 3: The study of philosophy is in itself lawful and
commendable, on account of the truth which the philosophers
acquired through God revealing it to them, as stated in Rm. 1:19.
Since, however, certain philosophers misuse the truth in order to
assail the faith, the Apostle says (Col. 2:8): "Beware lest any man
cheat you by philosophy and vain deceit, according to the tradition
of men . . . and not according to Christ": and Dionysius says (Ep. vii
ad Polycarp.) of certain philosophers that "they make an unholy use
of divine things against that which is divine, and by divine wisdom
strive to destroy the worship of God."