which the members have not; and in this the members differ from the
head and agree with one another. Hence Christ's resurrection is an
exemplar of ours, and through our faith therein there arises in us the
hope of our own resurrection. But the resurrection of one of Christ's
members is not the cause of the resurrection of other members, and
consequently Christ's resurrection had to precede the resurrection
of others who have all to rise again at the consummation of the
world.
Reply to Objection 2: Although among the members some rank
higher than others and are more conformed to the Head, they do not
attain to the character of headship so as to be the cause of others.
Consequently greater conformity to Christ does not give them a right
to rise again before others as though they were exemplar and the
others exemplate, as we have said in reference to Christ's
resurrection: and if it has been granted to others that their
resurrection should not be delayed until the general resurrection,
this has been by special privilege of grace, and not as due on
account of conformity to Christ.
Reply to Objection 3: Jerome, in a sermon on the Assumption [Ep. x
ad Paul. et Eustoch.], seems to be doubtful of this resurrection of the
saints with Christ, namely as to whether, having been witnesses to
the resurrection, they died again, so that theirs was a resuscitation
(as in the case of Lazarus who died again) rather than a resurrection
such as will be at the end of the world---or really rose again to
immortal life, to live for ever in the body, and to ascend bodily into
heaven with Christ, as a gloss says on Mt. 27:52. The latter seems
more probable, because, as Jerome says, in order that they might
bear true witness to Christ's true resurrection, it was fitting that they
should truly rise again. Nor was their resurrection hastened for their
sake, but for the sake of bearing witness to Christ's resurrection:
and that by bearing witness thereto they might lay the foundation of
the faith of the New Testament: wherefore it was more fitting that it
should be borne by the fathers of the Old Testament, than by those
who died after the foundation of the New. It must, however, be
observed that, although the Gospel mentions their resurrection
before Christ's, we must take this statement as made in anticipation,
as is often the case with writers of history. For none rose again with
a true resurrection before Christ, since He is the "first-fruits of them
that sleep" (1 Cor. 15:20), although some were resuscitated before
Christ's resurrection, as in the case of Lazarus.

Reply to Objection 4: On account of these words, as Augustine
relates (De Civ. Dei xx, 7), certain heretics asserted that there will be
a first resurrection of the dead that they may reign with Christ on
earth for a thousand years; whence they were called "chiliasts" or
"millenarians." Hence Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xx, 7) that these
words are to be understood otherwise, namely of the spiritual
resurrection, whereby men shall rise again from their sins to the gift
of grace: while the second resurrection is of bodies. The reign of
Christ denotes the Church wherein not only martyrs but also the
other elect reign, the part denoting the whole; or they reign with
Christ in glory as regards all, special mention being made of the
martyrs, because they especially reign after death who fought for the
truth, even unto death. The number of a thousand years denotes not
a fixed number, but the whole of the present time wherein the saints
now reign with Christ, because the number 1,000 designates
universality more than the number 100, since 100 is the square of 10,
whereas 1,000 is a cube resulting from the multiplication of ten by its
square, for 10 X 10 = 100, and 100 X 10 = 1,000. Again in Ps. 104:8,
"The word which He commanded to a thousand," i.e. all,
"generations."