THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.22, C.4.

produces both these effects. For by its virtue grace is given to us, by
which our hearts are turned to God, according to Rm. 3:24,25: "Being
justified freely by His grace, through the redemption that is in Christ
Jesus, Whom God hath proposed to be a propitiation, through faith
in His blood." Moreover, He satisfied for us fully, inasmuch as "He
hath borne our infirmities and carried our sorrows" (Is. 53:4).
Wherefore it is clear that the priesthood of Christ has full power to
expiate sins.
Reply to Objection 1: Although Christ was a priest, not as God, but
as man, yet one and the same was both priest and God. Wherefore in
the Council of Ephesus [Part III, ch. i, anath. 10] we read: "If anyone
say that the very Word of God did not become our High-Priest and
Apostle, when He became flesh and a man like us, but altogether
another one, the man born of a woman, let him be anathema." Hence
in so far as His human nature operated by virtue of the Divine, that
sacrifice was most efficacious for the blotting out of sins. For this
reason Augustine says (De Trin. iv, 14): "So that, since four things
are to be observed in every sacrifice---to whom it is offered, by
whom it is offered, what is offered, for whom it is offered; the same
one true Mediator reconciling us to God by the sacrifice of peace,
was one with Him to Whom it was offered, united in Himself those for
whom He offered it, at the same time offered it Himself, and was
Himself that which He offered."
Reply to Objection 2: Sins are commemorated in the New Law, not
on account of the inefficacy of the priesthood of Christ, as though
sins were not sufficiently expiated by Him: but in regard to those
who either are not willing to be participators in His sacrifice, such as
unbelievers, for whose sins we pray that they be converted; or who,
after taking part in this sacrifice, fall away from it by whatsoever kind
of sin. The Sacrifice which is offered every day in the Church is not
distinct from that which Christ Himself offered, but is a
commemoration thereof. Wherefore Augustine says (De Civ. De. x,
20): "Christ Himself both is the priest who offers it and the victim:
the sacred token of which He wished to be the daily Sacrifice of the
Church."
Reply to Objection 3: As Origen says (Sup. Joan. i, 29), though
various animals were offered up under the Old Law, yet the daily
sacrifice, which was offered up morning and evening, was a lamb, as
appears from Num. 38:3,4. By which it was signified that the offering
up of the true lamb, i.e. Christ, was the culminating sacrifice of all.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.22, C.4.

Hence (Jn. 1:29) it is said: "Behold the Lamb of God, behold Him
Who taketh away the sins of the world."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.22, C.5.