has also made us meet objects of His love. It is as though one were to take a
leper, wasted by distemper, and disease, by age, and poverty, and famine, and
were to turn him all at once into a graceful youth, surpassing all mankind in
beauty, shedding a bright lustre from his cheeks, and eclipsing the sun-beams
with the glances of his eyes; and then were to set him in the very flower of his
age, and after that array him in purple and a diadem and all the attire of royalty.
It is thus that God has arrayed and adorned this soul of ours, and clothed it with
beauty, and rendered it an object of His delight and love. Such a soul Angels
desire to look into, yea, Archangels, and all the holy ones. Such grace has He
shed over us, so dear has He rendered us to Himself. "The King," says the
Psalmist, "shall greatly desire your beauty." [Psalm 45:11] Think what injurious
words we uttered heretofore, and look, what gracious words we utter now.
Wealth has no longer charms for us, nor the things that are here below, but only
heavenly things, the things that are in the heavens. When a child has outward
beauty, and has besides a pervading grace in all its sayings, do we not call it a
beautiful child? Such as this are the faithful. Look, what words the initiated
utter! What can be more beautiful than that mouth that breathes those wondrous
words, and with a pure heart and pure lips, and beaming with cheerful
confidence, partakes of such a mystical table? What more beautiful than the
words, with which we renounce the service of the Devil, and enlist in the service
of Christ? Than both that confession which is before the Baptismal laver, and
that which is after it? Let us reflect as many of us as have defiled our Baptism,
and weep that we may be able again to repair it.
Ver. 6. "In the Beloved," he says, "in whom we have our redemption through
His Blood."
And how is this? Not only is there this marvel, that He has given His Son,
but yet further that He has given Him in such a way, as that the Beloved One
Himself should be slain!
Yea, and more transcendent still! He has given the Beloved for them that
were hated. See, how high a price he sets upon us. If, when we hated Him and

were enemies, He gave the Beloved, what will He not do now, when we are
reconciled by Him through grace?
Ver. 7. "The forgiveness," says he, "of our trespasses."
Again he descends from high to low: first speaking of adoption, and
sanctification, and blamelessness, and then of the Passion, and in this not
lowering his discourse and bringing it down from greater things to lesser, no
rather, he was heightening it, and raising it from the lesser to the greater. For
nothing is so great as that the blood of this Son should be shed for us. Greater
this than both the adoption, and all the other gifts of grace, that He spared not
even the Son. For great indeed is the forgiveness of sins, yet this is the far
greater thing, that it should be done by the Lord's blood. For that this is far
greater than all, look how here again he exclaims,
Ver. 7, 8. "According to the riches of His grace, which He made to abound
toward us."
The abovementioned gifts are riches, yet is this far more so. "Which," says
he, "He made to abound toward us." They are both "riches" and "they have
abounded," that is to say, were poured forth in ineffable measure. It is not
possible to represent in words what blessings we have in fact experienced. For
riches indeed they are, abounding riches, and He has given in abundance riches
not of man but of God, so that on all hands it is impossible that they should be
expressed. And to show us how He gave it to such abundance, he adds,
Ver. 8, 9. "In all wisdom and prudence, having made known unto us the
mystery of His will."
That is to say, Making us wise and prudent, in that which is true wisdom,
and that which is true prudence. Strange! What friendship! For He tells us His
secrets; the mysteries, says he, of His will, as if one should say, He has made
known to us the things that are in His heart. For here is indeed the mystery
which is full of all wisdom and prudence. For what will you mention equal to
this wisdom! Those that were worth nothing, it has discovered a way of raising
them to wealth and abundance. What can equal this wise contrivance? He that