Natures of this sort, thus abstracted, can be considered in two ways. First, in themselves; and
then they are thought of without motion and determinate matter. This happens to them only by
reason of the being they have in the intellect. Second, they can be viewed in relation to the things
of which they are the natures; and these things exist with matter and motion. Thus they are
principles by which we know these things, for everything is known through its form.
Consequently, in natural science we know mutable and material things existing outside the soul
through natures of this kind; that is to say, natures that are immobile and considered without
particular matter.

#### Replies to opposing arguments:

Reply to 1. Matter is the principle of individuation only insofar as it exists with determinate
dimensions, and in this sense natural science indeed abstracts from matter.

Reply to 2. The intelligible form is a thing's quiddity, for, as the De Anima says, the object of
the intellect is the quiddity of a thing. Now, as is said in the Metaphysics, the quiddity of a
universal composite, like man or animal, includes within itself common but not particular matter.
So the intellect regularly abstracts from determinate matter and its conditions; but in natural
science it does not abstract from common matter, although matter itself is considered in natural
science only in relation to form. For this reason the natural scientist is more concerned with form
than with matter.

Reply to 3. Natural science does not treat of the First Mover as its subject or as part of its
subject, but as the end to which natural science leads. Now the end does not belong to the nature
of the thing of which it is the end, but it has a relation to it; as the end of a line is not the line but
is related to it. So also the First Mover is of a different nature from natural things, but it is related
to them because it moves them. So it falls under the consideration of natural science, not in itself,
but insofar as it is a mover.

Reply to 4. Science treats of something in two ways: in one way, primarily and principally; and
in this sense science is concerned universal natures, which are its very foundation. In another
way it treats of something secondarily, as by a sort of reflection; and in this sense it is concerned
with the things whose natures they are, inasmuch as, using the lower powers, it relates those
natures to the particular things possessing them. For a knower uses a universal nature both as a
thing known and as a means of knowing. Thus, through the universal nature of man we can
judge of this or that particular man. Now, all universal natures of things are immutable; and so, in
this respect, all science is concerned with what is necessary. But some of the things possessing
these natures are necessary and immutable, whereas others are contingent and subject to
movement, and in this respect sciences are said to be concerned with the contingent and mutable.