speaking of, we do not show in our actions, and this too though we should be
greatest gainers thereby. For if we let our moderation be seen, we shall be
invincible to any man; and there is nobody either great or small, who will have
the power of doing us any hurt. For if any one abuses you, he has not hurt you at
all, but himself severely. And if again he wrong you, the harm will be with the
person who does the wrong. Did you never notice that even in the courts of law
those who have had wrong done them are honored, and stand and speak out with
entire freedom, but those who have done the wrong, are bowed down with
shame and fear? And why do I talk of evil-speaking (Sav. conj. and 5
manuscripts [κακηγορίαν]) and of wrong? For were he even to whet his sword
against you, and to stain his right hand in your life-blood ([εἰς τὸν λαιμὸν], as p.
505), it is not you that he has done any harm to, but himself that he has
butchered. And he will witness what I say who was first taken off thus by a
brother's hand. For he went away to the haven without a billow, having gained a
glory that dies not away; but the other lived a life worse than any death,
groaning, and trembling, and in his body bearing about the accusation of what he
had done. Let us not follow after this then, but that. For he that has ill done him,
has not an evil that takes up its constant abode with him, since he is not the
parent of it; but as he received it from others, he makes it good by his patient
endurance. But he that does ill, has the well of the mischief in himself. Was not
Joseph in prison, but the harlot that plotted against him in a fine and splendid
house? Which then would you wish to have been? And let me not hear yet of the
requital, but examine the things that had taken place by themselves. For in this
way you will rate Joseph's prison infinitely above the house with the harlot in it.
For if you were to see the souls of them both, you would find the one full of
enlargement and boldness, but that of the Egyptian woman in straitness, shame,
dejection, confusion, and great despondency. And yet she seemed to conquer;
but this was no real victor. Knowing all this then, let us fit ourselves for bearing
ills, even that we may be freed from bearing ills, and may attain to the blessings
to come. Which that we may all attain to, God grant, by the grace and love

toward man, etc.

## Homily 23 on Romans

Rom. XIII. 1
"Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers."
Of this subject he makes much account in other epistles also, setting
subjects under their rulers as household servants are under their masters. And
this he does to show that it was not for the subversion of the commonwealth that
Christ introduced His laws, but for the better ordering of it, and to teach men not
to be taking up unnecessary and unprofitable wars. For the plots that are formed
against us for the truth's sake are sufficient and we have no need to be adding
temptations superfluous and unprofitable. And observe too how well-timed his
entering upon this subject is. For when he had demanded that great spirit of
heroism, and made men fit to deal either with friends or foes, and rendered them
serviceable alike to the prosperous and those in adversity and need, and in fact to
all, and had planted a conversation worthy of angels, and had discharged anger,
and taken down recklessness, and had in every way made their mind even, he
then introduces his exhortation upon these matters also. For if it be right to
requite those that injure us with the opposite, much more is it our duty to obey
those that are benefactors to us. But this he states toward the end of his
exhortation, and hitherto does not enter on these reasonings which I mention, but
those only that enjoin one to do this as a matter of debt. And to show that these
regulations are for all, even for priests, and monks, and not for men of secular
occupations only, he has made this plan at the outset, by saying as follows: "let
every soul be subject unto the higher powers," if you be an Apostle even, or an
Evangelist, or a Prophet, or anything whatsoever, inasmuch as this subjection is
not subversive of religion. And he does not say merely "obey," but "be subject."
And the first claim such an enactment has upon us, and the reasoning that suits
the faithful, is, that all this is of God's appointment.