the imposition of rates. And if the departed one should have left a child, even if
it be a girl, great anxiety will be caused to the mother, although free from much
expense and fear: but a boy fills her with ten thousand alarms and many
anxieties every day, to say nothing of the great expense which one is compelled
to incur if she wishes to bring him up in a liberal way. None of these things,
however, induced me to enter into a second marriage, or introduce a second
husband into your father's house: but I held on as I was, in the midst of the storm
and uproar, and did not shun the iron furnace of widowhood. My foremost help
indeed was the grace from above; but it was no small consolation to me under
those terrible trials to look continually on your face and to preserve in you a
living image of him who had gone, an image indeed which was a fairly exact
likeness.
On this account, even when you were an infant, and had not yet learned to
speak, a time when children are the greatest delight to their parents, you afforded
me much comfort. Nor indeed can you complain that, although I bore my
widowhood bravely, I diminished your patrimony, which I know has been the
fate of many who have had the misfortune to be orphans. For, besides keeping
the whole of it intact, I spared no expense which was needful to give you an
honorable position, spending for this purpose some of my own fortune, and of
my marriage dowry. Yet do not think that I say these things by way of
reproaching you; only in return for all these benefits I beg one favor: do not
plunge me into a second widowhood; nor revive the grief which is now laid to
rest: wait for my death: it may be in a little while I shall depart. The young
indeed look forward to a distant old age; but we who have grown old have
nothing but death to wait for. When, then, you shall have committed my body to
the ground, and mingled my bones with your father's, embark for a long voyage,
and set sail on any sea you will: then there will be no one to hinder you: but as
long as my life lasts, be content to live with me. Do not, I pray you, oppose God
in vain, involving me without cause, who have done you no wrong, in these
great calamities. For if you have any reason to complain that I drag you into

worldly cares, and force you to attend to business, do not be restrained by any
reverence for the laws of nature, for training or custom, but fly from me as an
enemy; but if, on the contrary, I do everything to provide leisure for your journey
through this life, let this bond at least if nothing else keep you by me. For could
thou say that ten thousand loved you, yet no one will afford you the enjoyment
of so much liberty, seeing there is no one who is equally anxious for your
welfare.
6. These words, and more, my mother spoke to me, and I related them to
that noble youth. But he, so far from being disheartened by these speeches, was
the more urgent in making the same request as before. Now while we were thus
situated, he continually entreating, and I refusing my assent, we were both of us
disturbed by a report suddenly reaching us that we were about to be advanced to
the dignity of the episcopate. As soon as I heard this rumor I was seized with
alarm and perplexity: with alarm lest I should be made captive against my will,
and perplexity, inquiring as I often did whence any such idea concerning us
could have entered the minds of these men; for looking to myself I found
nothing worthy of such an honor. But that noble youth having come to me
privately, and having conferred with me about these things as if with one who
was ignorant of the rumor, begged that we might in this instance also as formerly
shape our action and our counsels the same way: for he would readily follow me
whichever course I might pursue, whether I attempted flight or submitted to be
captured. Perceiving then his eagerness, and considering that I should inflict a
loss upon the whole body of the Church if, owing to my own weakness, I were to
deprive the flock of Christ of a young man who was so good and so well
qualified for the supervision of large numbers, I abstained from disclosing to him
the purpose which I had formed, although I had never before allowed any of my
plans to be concealed from him. I now told him that it would be best to postpone
our decision concerning this matter to another season, as it was not immediately
pressing, and by so doing persuaded him to dismiss it from his thoughts, and at
the same time encouraged him to hope that, if such a thing should ever happen to