SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.140, C.2.

Reply to Objection 2: The temperance which fulfils the conditions of
perfect virtue is not without prudence, while this is lacking to all who
are in sin. Hence those who lack other virtues, through being subject
to the opposite vices, have not the temperance which is a virtue,
though they do acts of temperance from a certain natural
disposition, in so far as certain imperfect virtues are either natural to
man, as stated above (FS, Question 63, Article 1), or acquired by
habituation, which virtues, through lack of prudence, are not
perfected by reason, as stated above (FS, Question 65, Article 1).
Reply to Objection 3: Temperance also has a corresponding gift,
namely, fear, whereby man is withheld from the pleasures of the
flesh, according to Ps. 118:120: "Pierce Thou my flesh with Thy
fear." The gift of fear has for its principal object God, Whom it avoids
offending, and in this respect it corresponds to the virtue of hope, as
stated above (Question 19, Article 9, ad 1). But it may have for its
secondary object whatever a man shuns in order to avoid offending
God. Now man stands in the greatest need of the fear of God in order
to shun those things which are most seductive, and these are the
matter of temperance: wherefore the gift of fear corresponds to
temperance also.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.140, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether temperance is a special virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that temperance is not a special virtue.
For Augustine says (De Morib. Eccl. xv) that "it belongs to
temperance to preserve one's integrity and freedom from corruption
for God's sake." But this is common to every virtue. Therefore
temperance is not a special virtue.
Objection 2: Further, Ambrose says (De Offic. i, 42) that "what we
observe and seek most in temperance is tranquillity of soul." But this
is common to every virtue. Therefore temperance is not a special
virtue.
Objection 3: Further, Tully says (De Offic. i, 27) that "we cannot
separate the beautiful from the virtuous," and that "whatever is just
is beautiful." Now the beautiful is considered as proper to
temperance, according to the same authority (Tully, De Offic. i, 27).
Therefore temperance is not a special virtue.
On the contrary, The Philosopher (Ethic. ii, 7; iii, 10) reckons it a
special virtue.
I answer that, It is customary in human speech to employ a common
term in a restricted sense in order to designate the principal things
to which that common term is applicable: thus the word "city" is
used antonomastically to designate Rome. Accordingly the word
"temperance" has a twofold acceptation. First, in accordance with its
common signification: and thus temperance is not a special but a
general virtue, because the word "temperance" signifies a certain
temperateness or moderation, which reason appoints to human
operations and passions: and this is common to every moral virtue.
Yet there is a logical difference between temperance and fortitude,
even if we take them both as general virtues: since temperance
withdraws man from things which seduce the appetite from obeying
reason, while fortitude incites him to endure or withstand those
things on account of which he forsakes the good of reason.
On the other hand, if we take temperance antonomastically, as
withholding the appetite from those things which are most seductive
to man, it is a special virtue, for thus it has, like fortitude, a special
matter.