For reproof is sharper even than fire and knife, and makes [men] start. On this
account surgeons take great pains to make them bear the cutting quietly, and
apply it as tenderly as possible, even giving in a little, then giving time to take
breath.
So ought we also to offer reproofs, that the reproved may not start away.
Even if therefore, it be necessary to be insulted, yea even to be struck, let us not
decline it. For those also who are cut [by the surgeons] utter numberless cries
against those who are cutting them; they however heed none of these things, but
only the health of the patients. So indeed in this case also we ought to do all
things that our reproof may be effectual, to bear all things, looking to the reward
which is in store.
"Bear ye one another's burdens," says he, "and so fulfill the law of Christ."
[Galatians 6:2] So then, both reproving and bearing with one another, shall we
be able to fulfill edification. And thus will you make the labor light for us, in all
things taking a part with us, and stretching out a hand, and becoming sharers and
partakers, both in one another's salvation, and each one in his own. Let us then
endure patiently, both bearing "one another's burdens," and reproving: that we
may attain to the good things promised in Christ Jesus our Lord, with whom to
the Father together with the Holy Ghost, be glory, might, honor, now and for
ever and world without end. Amen.

## Homily 31 on Hebrews

Hebrews 12:14-15
"Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which no one shall see
the Lord."
1. There are many things characteristic of Christianity: but more than all,
and better than all, Love towards one another, and Peace. Therefore Christ also
says, "My peace I give unto you." [John 14:27] And again, "By this shall all men
know that you are My disciples, if you love one another." [John 13:35] Therefore
Paul too says, "Follow peace with all men, and holiness," that is, purity, "without
which no man shall see the Lord ."
"Looking diligently lest any man fail of the grace of God." As if they were
traveling together on some long journey, in a large company, he says, Take heed
that no man be left behind: I do not seek this only, that you should arrive
yourselves, but also that you should look diligently after the others.
"Lest any man" (he says) "fail of the grace of God." (He means the good
things to come, the faith of the gospel, the best course of life: for they all are of
"the Grace of God.") Do not tell me, It is [but] one that perishes. Even for one
Christ died. Have you no care for him "for whom Christ died"? [1 Corinthians
8:11]
"Looking diligently," he says, that is, searching carefully, considering,
thoroughly ascertaining, as is done in the case of sick persons, and in all ways
examining, thoroughly ascertaining. "Lest any root of bitterness springing up
trouble you." [Deuteronomy 29:18] This is found in Deuteronomy; and he
derived it from the metaphor of plants. "Lest any root of bitterness," he says;
which he said also in another place when he writes, "A little leaven leavens the
whole lump." [1 Corinthians 5:6] Not for his sake alone do I wish this, he means,