FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.96, C.2.

Reply to Objection 1: The Philosopher (Ethic. v, 7) divides the legal
just, i.e. positive law, into three parts. For some things are laid down
simply in a general way: and these are the general laws. Of these he
says that "the legal is that which originally was a matter of
indifference, but which, when enacted, is so no longer": as the fixing
of the ransom of a captive. Some things affect the community in one
respect, and individuals in another. These are called "privileges," i.e.
"private laws," as it were, because they regard private persons,
although their power extends to many matters; and in regard to
these, he adds, "and further, all particular acts of legislation." Other
matters are legal, not through being laws, but through being
applications of general laws to particular cases: such are decrees
which have the force of law; and in regard to these, he adds "all
matters subject to decrees."
Reply to Objection 2: A principle of direction should be applicable to
many; wherefore (Metaph. x, text. 4) the Philosopher says that all
things belonging to one genus, are measured by one, which is the
principle in that genus. For if there were as many rules or measures
as there are things measured or ruled, they would cease to be of use,
since their use consists in being applicable to many things. Hence
law would be of no use, if it did not extend further than to one single
act. Because the decrees than to one single act. Because the
decrees of prudent men are made for the purpose of directing
individual actions; whereas law is a general precept, as stated above
(Question 92, Article 2, Objection 2).
Reply to Objection 3: "We must not seek the same degree of
certainty in all things" (Ethic. i, 3). Consequently in contingent
matters, such as natural and human things, it is enough for a thing
to be certain, as being true in the greater number of instances,
though at times and less frequently it fail.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.96, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether it belongs to the human law to repress all

vices?
Objection 1: It would seem that it belongs to human law to repress
all vices. For Isidore says (Etym. v, 20) that "laws were made in order
that, in fear thereof, man's audacity might be held in check." But it
would not be held in check sufficiently, unless all evils were
repressed by law. Therefore human laws should repress all evils.
Objection 2: Further, the intention of the lawgiver is to make the
citizens virtuous. But a man cannot be virtuous unless he forbear
from all kinds of vice. Therefore it belongs to human law to repress
all vices.
Objection 3: Further, human law is derived from the natural law, as
stated above (Question 95, Article 2). But all vices are contrary to the
law of nature. Therefore human law should repress all vices.
On the contrary, We read in De Lib. Arb. i, 5: "It seems to me that the
law which is written for the governing of the people rightly permits
these things, and that Divine providence punishes them." But Divine
providence punishes nothing but vices. Therefore human law rightly
allows some vices, by not repressing them.
I answer that, As stated above (Question 90, Articles 1,2), law is
framed as a rule or measure of human acts. Now a measure should
be homogeneous with that which it measures, as stated in Metaph. x,
text. 3,4, since different things are measured by different measures.
Wherefore laws imposed on men should also be in keeping with their
condition, for, as Isidore says (Etym. v, 21), law should be "possible
both according to nature, and according to the customs of the
country." Now possibility or faculty of action is due to an interior
habit or disposition: since the same thing is not possible to one who
has not a virtuous habit, as is possible to one who has. Thus the
same is not possible to a child as to a full-grown man: for which
reason the law for children is not the same as for adults, since many
things are permitted to children, which in an adult are punished by
law or at any rate are open to blame. In like manner many things are
permissible to men not perfect in virtue, which would be intolerable
in a virtuous man.