should leave him that gave him being, him that begot him, and that brought him
up, and her that travailed with him and had sorrow, those that have bestowed
upon him so many and great benefits, those with whom he has been in familiar
intercourse, and be joined to one who was never even seen by him and who has
nothing in common with him, and should honor her before all others. A mystery
it is indeed. And yet are parents not distressed when these events take place, but
rather, when they do not take place; and are delighted when their wealth is spent
and lavished upon it.— A great mystery indeed! And one that contains some
hidden wisdom. Such Moses prophetically showed it to be from the very first;
such now also Paul proclaims it, where he says, "concerning Christ and the
Church."
However not for the husband's sake alone it is thus said, but for the wife's
sake also, that "he cherish her as his own flesh, as Christ also the Church," and,
"that the wife fear her husband." He is no longer setting down the duties of love
only, but what? "That she fear her husband." The wife is a second authority; let
not her then demand equality, for she is under the head; nor let him despise her
as being in subjection, for she is the body; and if the head despise the body, it
will itself also perish. But let him bring in love on his part as a counterpoise to
obedience on her part. For example, let the hands and the feet, and all the rest of
the members be given up for service to the head, but let the head provide for the
body, seeing it contains every sense in itself. Nothing can be better than this
union.
And yet how can there ever be love, one may say, where there is fear? It
will exist there, I say, preëminently. For she that fears and reverences, loves also;
and she that loves, fears and reverences him as being the head, and loves him as
being a member, since the head itself is a member of the body at large. Hence he
places the one in subjection, and the other in authority, that there may be peace;
for where there is equal authority there can never be peace; neither where a
house is a democracy, nor where all are rulers; but the ruling power must of
necessity be one. And this is universally the case with matters referring to the

body, inasmuch as when men are spiritual, there will be peace. There were "five
thousand souls," and not one of them said, "that anything of the things which he
possessed was his own" [Acts 4:32], but they were subject one to another; an
indication this of wisdom, and of the fear of God. The principle of love,
however, he explains; that of fear he does not. And mark, how on that of love he
enlarges, stating the arguments relating to Christ and those relating to one's own
flesh, the words, "For this cause shall a man leave his father and mother."
[Ephesians 5:31] Whereas upon those drawn from fear he forbears to enlarge.
And why so? Because he would rather that this principle prevail, this, namely, of
love; for where this exists, everything else follows of course, but where the other
exists, not necessarily. For the man who loves his wife, even though she be not a
very obedient one, still will bear with everything. So difficult and impracticable
is unanimity, where persons are not bound together by that love which is
founded in supreme authority; at all events, fear will not necessarily effect this.
Accordingly, he dwells the more upon this, which is the strong tie. And the wife
though seeming to be the loser in that she was charged to fear, is the gainer,
because the principal duty, love, is charged upon the husband. "But what," one
may say, "if a wife reverence me not?" Never mind, you are to love, fulfill your
own duty. For though that which is due from others may not follow, we ought of
course to do our duty. This is an example of what I mean. He says, "submitting
yourselves one to another in the fear of Christ." And what then if another submit
not himself? Still obey thou the law of God. Just so, I say, is it also here. Let the
wife at least, though she be not loved, still reverence notwithstanding, that
nothing may lie at her door; and let the husband, though his wife reverence him
not, still show her love notwithstanding, that he himself be not wanting in any
point. For each has received his own.
This then is marriage when it takes place according to Christ, spiritual
marriage, and spiritual birth, not of blood, nor of travail, nor of the will of the
flesh. Such was the birth of Christ, not of blood, nor of travail. Such also was
that of Isaac. Hear how the Scripture says, "And it ceased to be with Sarah after