For such indeed are all things that profit. For medicines too, and food, at
first annoy the sick, and then do him good. And if we cannot bear the severity of
words, it is manifest that we shall not be able to bear affliction in very deed. If
no one endures a discourse concerning hell, it is evident, that if persecution came
on, no one would ever stand firm against fire, against sword. Let us exercise our
ears not to be over soft and tender: for from this we shall come to endure even
the things themselves. If we be habituated to hear of dreadful things, we shall be
habituated also to endure dreadful things. But if we be so relaxed as not to
endure even words, when shall we stand against things? Do you see how the
blessed Paul despises all things here, and dangers one after another, as not even
temptations? Wherefore? Because he had been in the practice of despising hell,
for the sake of what was God's will. He thought even the experience of hell to be
nothing for the sake of the love of Christ; while we do not even endure a
discourse concerning it for our own advantage. Now therefore having heard a
little, go your ways; but I beseech you if there is any love in you, constantly to
revert to discourses concerning these things. They can do you no harm, even if
they should not benefit, but assuredly they will benefit you too. For according to
our discourses, the soul is qualified. For evil communications, he says, "corrupt
good manners." Therefore also good communications improve it; therefore also
fearful discourses make it sober. For the soul is a sort of wax. For if you apply
cold discourses, you harden and make it callous; but if fiery ones, you melt it;
and having melted it, you form it to what you will, and engrave the royal image
upon it. Let us therefore stop up our ears to discourses that are vain. It is no little
evil; for from it arise all evils.
If our mind had been practiced to apply to divine discourses, it would not
apply to others; and not applying to others, neither would it betake itself to evil
actions. For words are the road to works. First we think, then we speak, then we
act. Many men, even when before sober, have often from disgraceful words gone
on to disgraceful actions. For our soul is neither good nor evil by nature, but
becomes both the one and the other from choice. As therefore the sail carries the

ship wherever the wind may blow, or rather as the rudder moves the ship, if the
wind be favorable, so also thought will sail without danger, if good words from a
favorable quarter waft it. But if the contrary, often they will even overwhelm the
reason. For what winds are to ships, that discourses are to souls. Wherever you
will, you may move and turn it. For this reason one exhorting says, "Let your
whole discourse be in the law of the Most High." [Sirach 20:20] Wherefore, I
exhort you, when we receive children from the nurse, let us not accustom them
to old wives' stories, but let them learn from their first youth that there is a
Judgment, that there is a punishment; let it be instilled in their minds. This fear
being rooted in them produces great good effects. For a soul that has learned
from its first youth to be subdued by this expectation, will not soon shake off this
fear. But like a horse obedient to the bridle, having the thought of hell seated
upon it, walking orderly, it will both speak and utter things profitable; and
neither youth nor riches, nor an orphan state, nor any other thing, will be able to
injure it, having its reason so firm and able to hold out against everything.
By these discourses let us regulate as well ourselves as our wives too, our
servants, our children, our friends, and, if possible, our enemies. For with these
discourses we are able to cut off the greater part of our sins, and it is better to
dwell upon things grievous than upon things agreeable, and it is manifest from
hence. For, tell me, if you should go into a house where a marriage is celebrated,
for a season you are delighted at the spectacle, but afterwards having gone away,
you pine with grief that you have not so much. But if you enter the house of
mourners, even though they are very rich, when you go away you will be rather
refreshed. For there you have not conceived envy, but comfort and consolation in
your poverty. You have seen by facts, that riches are no good, poverty no evil,
but they are things indifferent. So also now, if you talk about luxury, you the
more vex your soul, that is not able perhaps to be luxurious. But if you are
speaking against luxury, and introduce discourse concerning hell, the thing will
cheer you, and beget much pleasure. For when you consider that luxury will not
be able to defend us at all against that fire, you will not seek after it; but if you