Reply to Objection 2: The absolute properties in God, such as
goodness and wisdom, are not mutually opposed; and hence,
neither are they really distinguished from each other. Therefore,
although they subsist, nevertheless they are not several subsistent
realities---that is, several persons. But the absolute properties in
creatures do not subsist, although they are really distinguished from
each other, as whiteness and sweetness; on the other hand, the
relative properties in God subsist, and are really distinguished from
each other (Question 28, Article 3). Hence the plurality of persons in
God.
Reply to Objection 3: The supreme unity and simplicity of God
exclude every kind of plurality of absolute things, but not plurality of
relations. Because relations are predicated relatively, and thus the
relations do not import composition in that of which they are
predicated, as Boethius teaches in the same book.
Reply to Objection 4: Number is twofold, simple or absolute, as two
and three and four; and number as existing in things numbered, as
two men and two horses. So, if number in God is taken absolutely or
abstractedly, there is nothing to prevent whole and part from being
in Him, and thus number in Him is only in our way of understanding;
forasmuch as number regarded apart from things numbered exists
only in the intellect. But if number be taken as it is in the things
numbered, in that sense as existing in creatures, one is part of two,
and two of three, as one man is part of two men, and two of three;
but this does not apply to God, because the Father is of the same
magnitude as the whole Trinity, as we shall show further on
(Question 42, Articles 1, 4).

### ARTICLE 2. Whether there are more than three persons in

God?
Objection 1: It would seem that there are more than three persons in
God. For the plurality of persons in God arises from the plurality of
the relative properties as stated above (Article 1). But there are four
relations in God as stated above (Question 28, Article 4), paternity,
filiation, common spiration, and procession. Therefore there are four
persons in God.
Objection 2: The nature of God does not differ from His will more
than from His intellect. But in God, one person proceeds from the
will, as love; and another proceeds from His nature, as Son.
Therefore another proceeds from His intellect, as Word, besides the
one Who proceeds from His nature, as Son; thus again it follows that
there are not only three persons in God.
Objection 3: Further, the more perfect a creature is, the more interior
operations it has; as a man has understanding and will beyond other
animals. But God infinitely excels every creature. Therefore in God
not only is there a person proceeding from the will, and another from
the intellect, but also in an infinite number of ways. Therefore there
are an infinite number of persons in God.
Objection 4: Further, it is from the infinite goodness of the Father
that He communicates Himself infinitely in the production of a divine
person. But also in the Holy Ghost is infinite goodness. Therefore
the Holy Ghost produces a divine person; and that person another;
and so to infinity.
Objection 5: Further, everything within a determinate number is
measured, for number is a measure. But the divine persons are
immense, as we say in the Creed of Athanasius: "The Father is
immense, the Son is immense, the Holy Ghost is immense."
Therefore the persons are not contained within the number three.
On the contrary, It is said: "There are three who bear witness in
heaven, the father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost" (1 Jn. 5:7). To
those who ask, "Three what?" we answer, with Augustine (De Trin.
vii, 4), "Three persons." Therefore there are but three persons in
God.