Slighting, as did some later heretics, the Pauline Epistles.

communion of the brethren. We must conclude, moreover, that these men (the Montanists) can not
admit the Apostle Paul either. For, in his Epistle to the Corinthians, he speaks expressly of
prophetical gifts, and recognises men and women prophesying in the Church. Sinning, therefore,
in all these particulars, against the Spirit of God, they fall into the irremissible sin. But those
who are from Valentinus, being, on the other hand, altogether reckless, while they put forth their
own compositions, boast that they possess more Gospels than there really are. Indeed, they have
arrived at such a pitch of audacity, as to entitle their comparatively recent writing "the Gospel of
Truth," though it agrees in nothing with the Gospels of the Apostles, so that they have really no
Gospel which is not full of blasphemy. For if what they have published is the Gospel of truth, and
yet is totally unlike those which have been handed down to us from the apostles, any who please
may learn, as is shown from the Scriptures themselves, that that which has been handed down from
the apostles can no longer be reckoned the Gospel of truth. But that these Gospels alone are true
and reliable, and admit neither an increase nor diminution of the aforesaid number, I have proved
by so many and such [arguments]. For, since God made all things in due proportion and adaptation,
it was fit also that the outward aspect of the Gospel should be well arranged and harmonized. The
opinion of those men, therefore, who handed the Gospel down to us, having been investigated,
from their very fountainheads, let us proceed also to the remaining apostles, and inquire into their
doctrine with regard to God; then, in due course we shall listen to the very words of the Lord.

### Chapter XII.—Doctrine of the rest of the apostles.

1. The Apostle Peter, therefore, after the resurrection of the Lord, and His assumption into the
heavens, being desirous of filling up the number of the twelve apostles, and in electing into the
place of Judas any substitute who should be chosen by God, thus addressed those who were present:
"Men [and] brethren, this Scripture must needs have been fulfilled, which the Holy Ghost, by the
mouth of David, spake before concerning Judas, which was made guide to them that took Jesus.
For he was numbered with us: É Let his habitation be desolate, and let no man dwell therein;
and, His bishoprick let another take;"—thus leading to the completion of the apostles, according
to the words spoken by David. Again, when the Holy Ghost had descended upon the disciples, that
they all might prophesy and speak with tongues, and some mocked them, as if drunken with new
wine, Peter said that they were not drunken, for it was the third hour of the day; but that this was