These praises, which in every celebration of the Eucharistic Liturgy are offered to Mary,
have molded the faith, piety and prayer of the faithful. In the course of the centuries they
have permeated their whole spiritual outlook, fostering in them a profound devotion to
the "All Holy Mother of God."

33. This year there occurs the twelfth centenary of the Second Ecumenical Council of
Nicaea (787). Putting an end to the well-known controversy about the cult of sacred
images, this Council defined that, according to the teaching of the holy Fathers and the
universal tradition of the Church, there could be exposed for the veneration of the
faithful, together with the Cross, also images of the Mother of God, of the angels and of
the saints, in churches and houses and at the roadside. This custom has been maintained
in the whole of the East and also in the West. Images of the Virgin have a place of honor
in churches and houses. In them Mary is represented in a number of ways: as the throne
of God carrying the Lord and giving him to humanity (Theotokos); as the way that leads

to Christ and manifests him (Hodegetria); as a praying figure in an attitude of intercession
and as a sign of the divine presence on the journey of the faithful until the day of the Lord
(Deesis); as the protectress who stretches out her mantle over the peoples (Pokrov), or as
the merciful Virgin of tenderness (Eleousa). She is usually represented with her Son, the
child Jesus, in her arms: it is the relationship with the Son which glorifies the Mother.
Sometimes she embraces him with tenderness (Glykophilousa); at other times she is a
hieratic figure, apparently rapt in contemplation of him who is the Lord of history (cf.
Rev. 5:9-14).

It is also appropriate to mention the icon of Our Lady of Vladimir, which continually
accompanied the pilgrimage of faith of the peoples of ancient Rus'. The first Millennium
of the conversion of those noble lands to Christianity is approaching: lands of humble
folk, of thinkers and of saints. The Icons are still venerated in the Ukraine, in Byelorussia
and in Russia under various titles. They are images which witness to the faith and spirit
of prayer of that people, who sense the presence and protection of the Mother of God. In
these Icons the Virgin shines as the image of divine beauty, the abode of Eternal
Wisdom, the figure of the one who prays, the prototype of contemplation, the image of
glory: she who even in her earthly life possessed the spiritual knowledge inaccessible to
human reasoning and who attained through faith the most sublime knowledge. I also
recall the Icon of the Virgin of the Cenacle, praying with the Apostles as they awaited the
Holy Spirit: could she not become the sign of hope for all those who, in fraternal
dialogue, wish to deepen their obedience of faith?