here. For here is grace, freely conveying liberty. But you fear lest you should
sin? Let this be your language after Baptism: and then entertain this fear, in order
to hold fast the liberty you have received; not now, to prevent your receiving
such a gift. Whereas now you are wary before baptism, and negligent after it.
But you are waiting for Lent: and why? Has that season any advantage? Nay, it
was not at the Passover that the Apostles received the grace, but at another
season; and then three thousand (Luke says,) and five thousand were baptized:
(ch. 2:41; 4:4, and ch. x.) and again Cornelius. Let us then not wait for a set
time, lest by hesitating and putting off we depart empty, and destitute of so great
gifts. What do you suppose is my anguish when I hear that any person has been
taken away unbaptized, while I reflect upon the intolerable punishments of that
life, the inexorable doom! Again, how I am grieved to behold others drawing
near to their last gasp, and not brought to their right mind even then. Hence too it
is that scenes take place quite unworthy of this gift. For whereas there ought to
be joy, and dancing, and exultation, and wearing of garlands, when another is
christened; the wife of the sick man has no sooner heard that the physician has
ordered this, than she is overcome with grief, as if it were some dire calamity;
she sets up the greatest lamentation, and nothing is heard all over the house but
crying and wailing, just as it is when condemned criminals are led away to their
doom. The sick man again is then more sorely grieved; and if he recovers from
his illness, is as vexed as if some great harm had been done to him. For since he
had not been prepared for a virtuous life, he has no heart for the conflicts which
are to follow, and shrinks at the thought of them. Do you see what devices the
devil contrives, what shame, what ridicule? Let us rid ourselves of this disgrace;
let us live as Christ has enjoined. He gave us Baptism, not that we should receive
and depart, but that we should show the fruits of it in our after life. How can one
say to him who is departing and broken down, Bear fruit? Have you not heard
that "the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace?" [Galatians 5:22] How comes it
then that the very contrary takes place here? For the wife stands there mourning,
when she ought to rejoice; the children weeping, when they ought to be glad

together; the sick man himself lies there in darkness, and surrounded by noise
and tumult, when he ought to be keeping high festival; full of exceeding
despondency at the thought of leaving his children orphans, his wife a widow,
his house desolate. Is this a state in which to draw near unto mysteries? Answer
me; is this a state in which to approach the sacred table? Are such scenes to be
tolerated? Should the Emperor send letters and release the prisoners in the jails,
there is joy and gladness: God sends down the Holy Ghost from Heaven to remit
not arrears of money, but a whole mass of sins, and do ye all bewail and lament?
Why, how grossly unsuitable is this! Not to mention that sometimes it is upon
the dead that the water has been poured, and holy mysteries flung upon the
ground. However, not we are to blame for this, but men who are so perverse. I
exhort you then to leave all, and turn and draw near to Baptism with all alacrity,
that having given proof of great earnestness at this present time, we may obtain
confidence for that which is to come; whereunto that we may attain, may it be
granted unto us all by the grace and mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, to Whom be
glory and power for ever and ever. Amen.