time intervening will be short, he will be able to endure the flame patiently. But
if he perceives that you are remiss and slow, and waitest until he shall acquire a
large income, and then you will contract a marriage for him, despairing at the
length of the time, he will readily fall into fornication. But alas! The root of evils
here also is the love of money. For since no one cares how far his son shall be
sober and modest, but all are mad for gold, for this reason no one makes this a
matter of concern. Wherefore I exhort you first to regulate well their souls. If he
find his bride chaste, and know that body alone, then will both his desire be
vehement, and his fear of God the greater, and the marriage truly honorable,
receiving bodies pure and undefiled; and the offspring will be full-charged with
blessing, and the bride and bridegroom will comply with one another, for both
being inexperienced in the manners of others, they will submit to one another.
But one that begins when younger to wax wanton, and to have experience of the
ways of harlots, for the first and second evening will praise his own wife; but
after that he will soon fall back into that wantonness, seeking that dissolute and
disorderly laughter, the words that are full of base import, the dissolute
deportment, and all the other indecency, which it is not tolerable that we should
mention. But a woman of free estate would not endure to make such exhibitions,
nor to tarnish herself. For she was espoused to her husband to be his partner in
life, and for the procreation of children, not for the purposes of indecency and
laughter; that she might keep the house, and instruct him also to be grave, not
that she might supply to him the fuel of fornication.
But the gestures of a harlot seem to you agreeable. I know it. For the
Scripture says, "The lips of a strange woman drop honey." [Proverbs 5:3] For on
this account I take all this trouble, that you may have no experience of that
honey, for it straightway turns into gall. And this also the Scripture says, "Who
for a season is smooth to your throat, but afterwards you shall find her more
bitter than gall, and sharper than a two-edged sword." [Proverbs 5:3-4,
Septuagint] What do you say? Bear with me speaking somewhat impure, if I
may say so— and expressing myself as one shameless and unblushing. For I do

not submit to this willingly, but on account of those who are shameless in their
actions, I am compelled to speak this sort of words. And many such we see even
in the Scriptures. For even Ezekiel, reproaching Jerusalem, utters many such
things, and is not ashamed. And justly. For he did not say them from his own
inclination, but from his concern. For although the words seem to be indecent,
yet his aim is not indecent, but even highly becoming one who wishes to banish
uncleanness from the soul. For if the shameless soul does not hear the very
words, it is not affected. For a physician wishing to remove a putrid sore, first
thrusts his fingers into the wound, and if he does not first defile his healing
hands, he will not be able to cure it. So it is with me. Unless I first defile my
mouth, that heals your passions, I shall not be able to heal you. But rather neither
is my mouth defiled, nor his hands. Why then? Because the uncleanness is not
that of nature, nor from our own body, as neither in that case from his hands, but
from what is another's. But if where the body is another's, he does not refuse to
dip his own hands, tell me, shall we refuse, where it is our own body? For you
are our body, sickly indeed and impure, but ours nevertheless.
What then is this which I say, and for which I have made so long a
digression? A garment indeed which your slave wears, you would not choose
ever to wear, being disgusted on account of its filth, but you would rather go
naked than make use of it. But a body that is unclean and filthy, and which is
used not only by your slave, but by numberless others, that will you abuse, and
not be disgusted? Are you ashamed at hearing this? But be ashamed of the
actions, not of the words. And I pass over all other things, the rudeness, and the
corruption of their manners, the servility and illiberality of the rest of their life.
Tell me, should you and your servant go to the same woman? And I wish it were
only your servant, and not, it may be, the executioner! And yet you could not
bear to take the executioner by the hand; but her who has been made one body
with him you kiss and embrace, and do not shudder, nor fear! Are, you not
ashamed? Are you not abashed? Are you not pierced with anguish?
I said indeed to your fathers, that they ought early to lead you to marriage: