their children beheaded, but not daring to bewail their calamity; for terror
conquered grief, and fear overcame nature! And just as when men beholding
from the land those who are shipwrecked, are deeply distressed, but are not able
to approach and to rescue the drowning, so too here, the mothers restrained
through fear of the soldiers, as it were by so many waves, not only dared not go
near to their children, and rescue them from condemnation, but were afraid even
to shed tears?
18. Assuredly ye gather from thence the mercy of God, how unspeakable,
how boundless, how transcending all description! Here indeed the person who
has been insulted is of the same nature; and only once in all his lifetime has
experienced this; and then it was not done to his face; nor while he was present
to see or hear it; and nevertheless, none of those who perpetrated these deeds
obtained pardon. But with regard to God nothing of the kind can be said; for the
interval between man and God, is so great, as no language can at all express; and
throughout every day He is insulted, although present, and seeing and hearing it:
and yet He sends not forth the lightning, nor commands the sea to overflow the
land, and submerge all men; nor does He bid the earth to cleave asunder and
swallow up all the contumelious; but He forbears, and suffers long, and still
offers to pardon those who have insulted Him, if they only repent and promise to
do these things no more! Truly now is the season to proclaim, "Who can utter the
mighty acts of the Lord? Who can show forth all His praise?" How many men
have not only cast down, but also trodden under foot the images of God! For
when you throttle a debtor, when you strip him, when you drag him away, you
trample under foot God's image. Hear for a certainty Paul saying, that "a man
ought not to cover his head, forasmuch as he is the image and glory of God."
[1 Corinthians 11:7] And again, hear God Himself saying, "Let us make man in
Our Image, after Our likeness." [Genesis 1:26] But if you say that man is not of
the same substance as God—what matters that? For neither was the brazen statue
of the same substance as the Emperor; yet nevertheless, they who defied it paid
the penalty. Thus also with regard to mankind, if men are not of the same

substance as God, (as indeed they are not), still they have been called His image;
and it were fitting they should receive honour on account of the appellation. But
thou for the sake of a little gold dost trample them under foot, dost throttle them,
and drag them away; and hast not to this day in any wise paid the penalty!
19. May there be then speedily some favourable and propitious change!
This certainly I foretell and testify, that although this cloud should pass away,
and we yet remain in the same condition of listlessness, we shall again have to
suffer much heavier evils than those we are now dreading; for I do not so much
fear the wrath of the Emperor, as your own listlessness. Surely it is not sufficient
by way of apology that we supplicate two or three days, but it is necessary that
we should make a change in our whole life, and that while abstaining from
wickedness we should persevere continually in virtue. For as those who are
sickly, unless they keep up a constant regimen, would find no advantage by their
observing a two or three days' discipline; so those who are in sin, if they do not
exercise sobriety at all times, will find no benefit in two or three days'
amendment. For as it is said, that he who is washed, and is again afterwards
polluted with the mire, has gained nothing; so he who has repented for three
days, and has again returned to his former state, has accomplished nothing. Let
us not therefore, now act as we have always done hitherto. For many times,
when we have been surprised by earthquakes, as well as famine and drought,
after becoming more sober and gentle for three or four days, we did but return
again to the former course. For this cause our present troubles have happened.
But if we have not done so before; yet, now at least let us all persevere in the
same piety; let us preserve the same meekness, that we may not again need
another stroke. Was not God able to have prevented what has taken place? He
did, however, permit it, that He might make those who despised Him more
sober-minded, through dread of a fellow-servant!
20. But let not any one say that many of the guilty escaped, and that many
of the innocent incurred punishment. For I hear of numerous persons who
frequently say this; not only in the case of the present sedition, but also in many