be full, as for example, the Israelites, "ate, and kicked" [Deuteronomy 32:15],
but I am equally well ordered in all. He shows that he neither is now elated, nor
was before grieved: or if he grieved, it was on their account, not on his own, for
he himself was similarly affected.
"In everything," says he, "and in all things I have learned the secret," i.e. I
have had experience of all things in this long time, and these things have all
succeeded with me. But since boasting might seem to have a place here, see how
quickly he checks up, and says, "I can do all things in Christ that strengthens
me." The success is not my own, but His who has given me strength. But since
they who confer benefits, when they see the receiver not well affected toward
them, but despising the gifts, are themselves rendered more remiss, (for they
considered themselves as conferring a benefit and refreshment,) if therefore Paul
despises the refreshment, they must necessarily become remiss, in order then
that this may not happen, see how he heals it again. By what he has said above,
he has brought down their proud thoughts, by what follows he makes their
readiness revive, by saying, "Howbeit ye did well, that you had fellowship with
my affliction." Do you see, how he removed himself, and again united himself to
them. This is the part of true and spiritual friendship. Think not, says he, because
I was not in want, that I had no need of this act of yours. I have need of it for
your sake. How then, did they share his afflictions? By this means. As he said
when in bonds, "You all are partakers with me of grace." [Philippians 1:7] For it
is grace to suffer for Christ, as he himself says in another place, "For to you it is
given from God not only to believe in Him, but also to suffer for Him."
[Philippians 1:29] For since those former words by themselves might have made
them regardless, for this cause he consoles them, and receives them, and praises
them again. And this in measured words. For he said not, "gave," but "had
fellowship," to show that they too were profited by becoming partakers of his
labors. He said not, you did lighten, but you did communicate with my affliction,
which was something more elevated. Do you see the humility of Paul? Do you
see his noble nature? When he has shown that he had no need of their gifts on

his own account, he afterward uses freely such lowly words as they do who
make a request; "since you are wont to give." For he refuses neither to do, nor
say anything. That is, "Think not that my words show want of shame, wherein I
accuse you, and say, 'Now at length you have revived,' or are those of one in
necessity; I speak not thus because I am in need, but why? From my exceeding
confidence in you, and of this also ye yourselves are the authors."
Do you see how he soothes them? How are you the authors? In that you
hasted to the work before all the others; and have given me confidence to remind
you of these things. And observe his elevation; he accuses them not while they
did not send, lest he should seem to regard his own benefit, but when they had
sent, then he rebuked them for the time past, and they received it, for he could
not seem after that to regard his own benefit.
Ver. 15. "You yourselves also know, you Philippians, that in the beginning
of the Gospel, when I departed from Macedonia, no Church had communicated
with me, as concerning giving and receiving, but you only."
Lo, how great is his commendation! For the Corinthians and Romans are
stirred up by hearing these things from him, while the Philippians did it without
any other Church having made a beginning. For "in the beginning of the
Gospel," says he, they manifested such zeal towards the holy Apostle, as
themselves first to begin, without having any example, to bear this fruit. And no
one can say that they did these things because he abode with them, or for their
own benefit; for he says, "When I departed from Macedonia, no Church had
fellowship with me, in the matter of giving and receiving, but you only." What
means "receiving," and what "had fellowship"? Wherefore said he not, "no
Church gave to me," but "had fellowship with me, in the matter of giving and
receiving"? Because it is a case of communication. He says, "If we sowed unto
you spiritual things, is it a great matter if we shall reap your carnal things." [1
Corinthians 9:11] And again, "That your abundance may be a supply to their
want." [2 Corinthians 8:14] How did they communicate? In the matter of giving
carnal things, and receiving spiritual. For as they who sell and buy communicate