THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.67, C.4.

Reply to Objection 2: These sacramental rites of Baptism belong to
the solemnity of, and are not essential to, Baptism. And therefore
they neither should nor can be done by a layman, but only by a
priest, whose office it is to baptize solemnly.
Reply to Objection 3: As stated above (Question 65, Articles 3,4),
Penance is not so necessary as Baptism; since contrition can supply
the defect of the priestly absolution which does not free from the
whole punishment, nor again is it given to children. Therefore the
comparison with Baptism does not stand, because its effect cannot
be supplied by anything else.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.67, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether a woman can baptize?

Objection 1: It seems that a woman cannot baptize. For we read in
the acts of the Council of Carthage (iv): "However learned and holy a
woman may be, she must not presume to teach men in the church,
or to baptize." But in no case is a woman allowed to teach in church,
according to 1 Cor. 14:35: "It is a shame for a woman to speak in the
church." Therefore it seems that neither is a woman in any
circumstances permitted to baptize.
Objection 2: Further, to baptize belongs to those having authority.
wherefore baptism should be conferred by priests having charge of
souls. But women are not qualified for this; according to 1 Tim. 2:12:
"I suffer not a woman to teach, nor to use authority over man, but to
be subject to him." Therefore a woman cannot baptize.
Objection 3: Further, in the spiritual regeneration water seems to
hold the place of the mother's womb, as Augustine says on Jn. 3:4,
"Can" a man "enter a second time into his mother's womb, and be
born again?" While he who baptizes seems to hold rather the
position of father. But this is unfitting for a woman. Therefore a
woman cannot baptize.
On the contrary, Pope Urban II says (Decreta xxx): "In reply to the
questions asked by your beatitude, we consider that the following
answer should be given: that the baptism is valid when, in cases of
necessity, a woman baptizes a child in the name of the Trinity."
I answer that, Christ is the chief Baptizer, according to Jn. 1:33: "He
upon Whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending and remaining
upon Him, He it is that baptizeth." For it is written in Col. 3 (cf. Gal.
3:28), that in Christ there is neither male nor female. Consequently,
just as a layman can baptize, as Christ's minister, so can a woman.
But since "the head of the woman is the man," and "the head of . . .
man, is Christ" (1 Cor. 11:3), a woman should not baptize if a man be
available for the purpose; just as neither should a layman in the
presence of a cleric, nor a cleric in the presence of a priest. The last,
however, can baptize in the presence of a bishop, because it is part
of the priestly office.