THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.31, C.5.

nature of God, the Creator of soul and body! . . . He is able to be
entire everywhere, and to be contained in no place. He is able to
come without moving from the place where He was; and to go
without leaving the spot whence He came."
Reply to Objection 3: There is no uncleanness in the conception of
man from a woman, as far as this is the work of God: wherefore it is
written (Acts 10:15): "That which God hath cleansed do not thou call
common," i.e. unclean. There is, however, a certain uncleanness
therein, resulting from sin, as far as lustful desire accompanies
conception by sexual union. But this was not the case with Christ, as
shown above (Question 28, Article 1). But if there were any
uncleanness therein, the Word of God would not have been sullied
thereby, for He is utterly unchangeable. Wherefore Augustine says
(Contra Quinque Haereses v): "God saith, the Creator of man: What
is it that troubles thee in My Birth? I was not conceived by lustful
desire. I made Myself a mother of whom to be born. If the sun's rays
can dry up the filth in the drain, and yet not be defiled: much more
can the Splendor of eternal light cleanse whatever It shines upon,
but Itself cannot be sullied."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.31, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether the flesh of Christ was conceived of the

Virgin's purest blood?
Objection 1: It would seem that the flesh of Christ was not conceived
of the Virgin's purest blood: For it is said in the collect (Feast of the
Annunciation) that God "willed that His Word should take flesh from
a Virgin." But flesh differs from blood. Therefore Christ's body was
not taken from the Virgin's blood.
Objection 2: Further, as the woman was miraculously formed from
the man, so Christ's body was formed miraculously from the Virgin.
But the woman is not said to have been formed from the man's
blood, but rather from his flesh and bones, according to Gn. 2:23:
"This now is bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh." It seems
therefore that neither should Christ's body have been formed from
the Virgin's blood, but from her flesh and bones.
Objection 3: Further, Christ's body was of the same species as other
men's bodies. But other men's bodies are not formed from the purest
blood but from the semen and the menstrual blood. Therefore it
seems that neither was Christ's body conceived of the purest blood
of the Virgin.
On the contrary, Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii) that "the Son of
God, from the Virgin's purest blood, formed Himself flesh, animated
with a rational soul."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 4), in Christ's conception His
being born of a woman was in accordance with the laws of nature,
but that He was born of a virgin was above the laws of nature. Now,
such is the law of nature that in the generation of an animal the
female supplies the matter, while the male is the active principle of
generation; as the Philosopher proves (De Gener. Animal. i). But a
woman who conceives of a man is not a virgin. And consequently it
belongs to the supernatural mode of Christ's generation, that the
active principle of generation was the supernatural power of God:
but it belongs to the natural mode of His generation, that the matter
from which His body was conceived is similar to the matter which
other women supply for the conception of their offspring. Now, this
matter, according to the Philosopher (De Gener. Animal.), is the
woman's blood, not any of her blood, but brought to a more perfect