read it'? This is not an apology, but even an accusation. Do you come into the
Church every day and yet art ignorant of this?
However, that you may not have even this excuse to offer, for this cause,
with a loud voice, with an awful cry, like some herald lifting up his hand on
high, standing aloft, conspicuous to all, and after that awful silence crying out
aloud, he invites some, and some he forbids, not doing this with his hand, but
with his tongue more distinctly than with his hand. For that voice, falling on our
ears, just like a hand, thrusts away and casts out some, and introduces and
presents others.
Tell me then, I beseech [you], in the Olympic games does not the herald
stand, calling out with loud and uplifted voice, saying, "Does any one accuse
this man? Is he a slave? Is he a thief? Is he one of wicked manners?" And yet,
those contests for prizes are not of the soul nor yet of good morals, but of
strength and the body. If then where there is exercise of bodies, much
examination is made about character, how much rather here, where the soul is
alone the combatant. Our herald then even now stands, not holding each person
by the head, and drawing him forward, but holding all together by the head
within; he does not set against them other accusers, but themselves against
themselves. For he says not, "Does any one accuse this man?" but what? "If any
man accuse himself." For when he says, The Holy things for the holy, he means
this: "If any is not holy, let him not draw near."
He does not simply say, "free from sins," but, "holy." For it is not merely
freedom from sins which makes a man holy, but also the presence of the Spirit,
and the wealth of good works. I do not merely wish (he says) that you should be
delivered from the mire, but also that you should be bright and beautiful. For if
the Babylonian King, when he made choice of the youths from the captives,
chose out those who were beautiful in form, and of fair countenance: much more
is it needful that we, when we stand by the royal table, should be beautiful in
form, [I mean] that of the soul, having adornment of gold, our robe pure, our
shoes royal, the face of our soul well-formed, the golden ornament put around it,

even the girdle of truth. Let such an one as this draw near, and touch the royal
cups.
But if any man clothed in rags, filthy, squalid, wish to enter in to the royal
table, consider how much he will suffer, the forty days not being sufficient to
wash away the offenses which have been committed in all the time. For if hell is
not sufficient, although it be eternal (for therefore also it is eternal), much more
this short time. For we have not shown a strong repentance, but a weak.
9. Eunuchs especially ought to stand by the King: by eunuchs, I mean those
who are clear in their mind, having no wrinkle nor spot, lofty in mind, having the
eye of the soul gentle and quick-sighted, active and sharp, not sleepy nor supine;
full of much freedom, and yet far from impudence and overboldness, wakeful,
healthful, neither very gloomy and downcast, nor yet dissolute and soft.
This eye we have it in our own power to create, and to make it quicksighted
and beautiful. For when we direct it, not to the smoke nor to the dust (for such
are all human things), but to the delicate breeze, to the light air, to things
heavenly and high, and full of much calmness and purity, and of much delight,
we shall speedily restore it, and shall invigorate it, as it luxuriates in such
contemplation. Have you seen covetousness and great wealth? Do not thou lift
up your eye thereto. The thing is mire, it is smoke, an evil vapor, darkness, and
great distress and suffocating cares. Have you seen a man cultivating
righteousness, content with his own, and having abundant space for recreation,
having anxieties, not fixing his thoughts on things here? Set [your eye] there,
and lift [it] up on high; and you will make it far the most beautiful, and more
splendid, feasting it not with the flowers of the earth, but with those of virtue,
with temperance, moderation, and all the rest. For nothing so troubles the eye as
an evil conscience ("My eye," it is said, "was troubled by reason of anger"
[Psalm 6:7]); nothing so darkens it. Set it free from this injury, and you will
make it vigorous and strong, ever nourished with good hopes.
And may we all make both it and also the other energies of the soul, such as
Christ desires, that being made worthy of the Head who is set over us, we may