Homily on Philippians
The Philippians are of a city in Macedonia, a city that is a colony, as Luke
says. Here that seller of purple was converted, a woman of uncommon piety and
heedfulness. Here the ruler of the synagogue believed. Here was Paul scourged
with Silas. Here the magistrates requested them to depart, and were afraid of
them, and the preaching had an illustrious commencement. And he bears them
many and high testimonies himself, calling them his own crown, and saying they
had suffered much. For, "To you," he says, "it has been granted of God, not only
to believe in Him, but also to suffer in His behalf." [Philippians 1:29] But when
he wrote to them, it happened that he was in bonds. Therefore he says, "So that
my bonds became manifest in Christ in the whole prætorium," calling the palace
of Nero the prætorium. But he was bound and let go again, and this he showed to
Timothy by saying, "At my first defence no one took my part, but all forsook me:
may it not be laid to their account. But the Lord stood by me and strengthened
me." [2 Timothy 4:16] He speaks of the bonds then in which he was before that
defence. For that Timothy was not present then, is evident: for, "At my first
defence," he says, "no man took my part"; and this, by writing, he was making
known to him. He would not then, had he already known it, have written thus to
him. But when he wrote this epistle, Timothy was with him. And he shows it by
what he says: "But I hope in the Lord Jesus to send Timothy shortly unto you."
[Philippians 2:19] And again, "Him I hope to send immediately so soon as I shall
see how it will go with me." For he was loosed from his bonds and again bound
after he had been to them. But if he says, "Yea, and I am offered upon the
sacrifice and service of your faith," it is not as though this were now come to
pass, but as much as to say, "and whenever this takes place I am glad," raising
them from their dejection at his bonds. For that he was not about to die at that
time is plain from what he says: "But I hope in the Lord that I myself also shall

come shortly unto you." [Philippians 2:24] And again, "And having this
confidence, I know that I shall abide, yea, and abide with you all."
2. But the Philippians had sent to him Epaphroditus, to carry him money,
and to know the things concerning him, for they were most lovingly disposed
toward him. For that they sent, hear himself, saying, "I have all things, and
abound; I am filled, having received from Epaphroditus the things that came
from you." At the same time they sent to know this. For that they sent also to
know this he shows at once in the beginning of the epistle, writing of his own
matters, and saying, "But I would have you know that the things which happened
unto me have fallen out rather unto the progress of the Gospel." [Philippians
1:12] And again, "I hope to send Timothy shortly unto you, that I also may be of
good comfort when I know your state." This, "that I also," is as if he meant "as
you for full assurance sent to know the things concerning me, so 'I also,' that I
may be of good comfort when I know the things concerning you." Since then they
had also been a long time without sending (for this he proves by saying, "Now at
length you have revived your thought for me") [Philippians 4:10], and then they
heard that he was in bonds [Philippians 2:26]; for if they heard about
Epaphroditus, that he was sick, he being no such very remarkable person as Paul
was, much more did they hear about Paul, and it was reasonable that they should
be disturbed; therefore, in the opening of the epistle he offers them much
consolation about his bonds, showing that they should not merely not be
disturbed, but even rejoice. Then he gives them counsel about unanimity and
humility, teaching them that this was their greatest safety, and that so they could
easily overcome their enemies. For it is not being in bonds that is painful to your
teachers, but their disciples not being of one mind. For the former brings even
furtherance to the Gospel, but the latter distracts.
3. So then after admonishing them to be of one mind, and showing that
unanimity comes of humility, and then aiming a shaft at those Jews who were
everywhere corrupting the doctrine under a show of Christianity, and calling
them "dogs" and "evil workers" [Philippians 3:2], and giving admonition to keep