the world, according to the words of Mt. 24:27: "As lightning cometh
out of the east, and appeareth even into the west, so shall also the
coming of the Son of man be." These rely on the authority of Gregory
[Moral. xxxi, as quoted by St. Albert the Great, Sentent. iv, D, 42,
Article 4] who says that "the sound of the trumpet is nothing else but
the Son appearing to the world as judge." According to this, the
visible presence of the Son of God is called His voice, because as
soon as He appears all nature will obey His command in restoring
human bodies: hence He is described as coming "with
commandment" (1 Thess. 4:15). In this way His appearing, in so far
as it has the force of a command, is called His voice: which voice,
whatever it be, is sometimes called a cry [Mt 25:6], as of a crier
summoning to judgment; sometimes the sound of a trumpet [1 Cor.
15:52; 1 Thess. 4:15], either on account of its distinctness, as stated
in the text (Sent. iv, D, 43), or as being in keeping with the use of the
trumpet in the Old Testament: for by the trumpet they were
summoned to the council, stirred to the battle, and called to the
feast; and those who rise again will be summoned to the council of
judgment, to the battle in which "the world shall fight . . . against the
unwise" (Wis. 5:21), and to the feast of everlasting solemnity.
Reply to Objection 1: In those words the Damascene touches on
three things respecting the material cause of the resurrection: to wit,
the Divine will which commands, the power which executes, and the
ease of execution, when he adds "bidding," in resemblance to our
own affairs: since it is very easy for us to do what is done at once at
our word. But the ease is much more evident, if before we say a
word, our servants execute our will at once at the first sign of our
will, which sign is called a nod: and this nod is a kind of cause of
that execution, in so far as others are led thereby to accomplish our
will. And the Divine nod, at which the resurrection will take place, is
nothing but the sign given by God, which all nature will obey by
concurring in the resurrection of the dead. This sign is the same as
the sound of the trumpet, as explained above.
Reply to Objection 2: As the forms of the Sacrament have the power
to sanctify, not through being heard, but through being spoken: so
this sound, whatever it be, will have an instrumental efficacy of
resuscitation, not through being perceived, but through being
uttered. Even so a sound by the pulsation of the air arouses the
sleeper, by loosing the organ of perception, and not because it is
known: since judgment about the sound that reaches the ears is
subsequent to the awakening and is not its cause.

Reply to Objection 3: This argument would avail, if the power given
to that sound were a complete being in nature: because then that
which would proceed therefrom would have for principle a power
already rendered natural. But this power is not of that kind but such
as we have ascribed above to the forms of the Sacraments (Sent. iv,
D, 1; FP, Question 62, Articles 1,4).