figure: for a square figure is prefect through being equal on all sides,
since all its sides are equal: wherefore it is adapted to virginity
wherein incorruption is found equally as to all times.
Reply to Objection 1: Fruit is not taken there in the sense in which
we are taking it now.
Reply to Objection 2: Nothing obliges us to hold that fruit is a reward
that is not common to all who will be saved. For not only the
essential reward is common to all, but also a certain accidental
reward, such as joy in those works without which one cannot be
saved. Yet it may be said that the fruits are not becoming to all who
will be saved, as is evidently the case with those who repent in the
end after leading an incontinent life, for to such no fruit is due but
only the essential reward.
Reply to Objection 3: The distinction of the fruits is to be taken
according to the species and figures of the numbers rather than
according to their quantity. Nevertheless even if we regard the
excess in point of quantity, we may find an explanation. For the
married man abstains only from one that is not his, the widow from
both hers and not hers, so that in the latter case we find the notion of
double, just as 60 is the double of 30. Again 100 is 60 X 40, which
latter number is the product of 4 X 10, and the number 4 is the first
solid and square number. Thus the addition of this number is fitting
to virginity, which adds perpetual incorruption to the perfection of
widowhood.
Reply to Objection 4: Although these numerical signs are a human
institution, they are founded somewhat on the nature of things, in so
far as the numbers are denoted in gradation, according to the order
of the aforesaid joints and contacts.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether an aureole is due on account of

virginity?
Objection 1: It would seem that an aureole is not due on account of
virginity. For where there is greater difficulty in the work, a greater
reward is due. Now widows have greater difficulty than virgins in
abstaining from the works of the flesh. For Jerome says (Ep. ad
Ageruch.) that the greater difficulty certain persons experience in
abstaining from the allurements of pleasure, the greater their reward,
and he is speaking in praise of widows. Moreover, the Philosopher
says (De Anim. Hist. vii) that "young women who have been
deflowered desire sexual intercourse the more for the recollection of
the pleasure." Therefore the aureole which is the greatest reward is
due to widows more than to virgins.
Objection 2: Further, if an aureole were due to virginity, it would be
especially found where there is the most perfect virginity. Now the
most prefect virginity is in the Blessed Virgin, wherefore she is
called the Virgin of virgins: and yet no aureole is due to her because
she experienced no conflict in being continent, for she was not
infected with the corruption of the fomes [TP, Question 27, Article 3].
Therefore an aureole is not due to virginity.
Objection 3: Further, a special reward is not due to that which has
not been at all times praiseworthy. Now it would not have been
praiseworthy to observe virginity in the state of innocence, since
then was it commanded: "Increase and multiply and fill the
earth" (Gn. 1:28): nor again during the time of the Law, since the
barren were accursed. Therefore an aureole is not due to virginity.
Objection 4: Further, the same reward is not due to virginity
observed, and virginity lost. Yet an aureole is sometimes due to lost
virginity; for instance if a maiden be violated unwillingly at the order
of a tyrant for confessing Christ. Therefore an aureole is not due to
virginity.
Objection 5: Further, a special reward is not due to that which is in
us by nature. But virginity is inborn in every man both good and
wicked. Therefore an aureole is not due to virginity.
Objection 6: Further, as widowhood is to the sixtyfold fruit, so is