THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.35, C.6.

Consequently each opinion is true to a certain extent. For if we
consider the adequate causes of filiation, we must needs say that
there are two filiations in respect of the twofold nativity. But if we
consider the subject of filiation, which can only be the eternal
suppositum, then no other than the eternal filiation in Christ is a real
relation. Nevertheless, He has the relation of Son in regard to His
Mother, because it is implied in the relation of motherhood to Christ.
Thus God is called Lord by a relation which is implied in the real
relation by which the creature is subject to God. And although
lordship is not a real relation in God, yet is He really Lord through
the real subjection of the creature to Him. In the same way Christ is
really the Son of the Virgin Mother through the real relation of her
motherhood to Christ.
Reply to Objection 1: Temporal nativity would cause a real temporal
filiation in Christ if there were in Him a subject capable of such
filiation. But this cannot be; since the eternal suppositum cannot be
receptive of a temporal relation, as stated above. Nor can it be said
that it is receptive of temporal filiation by reason of the human
nature, just as it is receptive of the temporal nativity; because human
nature would need in some way to be the subject of filiation, just as
in a way it is the subject of nativity; for since an Ethiopian is said to
be white by reason of his teeth, it must be that his teeth are the
subject of whiteness. But human nature can nowise be the subject of
filiation, because this relation regards directly the person.
Reply to Objection 2: Eternal filiation does not depend on a temporal
mother, but together with this eternal filiation we understand a
certain temporal relation dependent on the mother, in respect of
which relation Christ is called the Son of His Mother.
Reply to Objection 3: One and being are mutually consequent, as is
said Metaph. iv. Therefore, just as it happens that in one of the
extremes of a relation there is something real, whereas in the other
there is not something real, but merely a certain aspect, as the
Philosopher observes of knowledge and the thing known; so also it
happens that on the part of one extreme there is one relation,
whereas on the part of the other there are many. Thus in man on the
part of his parents there is a twofold relation, the one of paternity,
the other of motherhood, which are specifically diverse, inasmuch as
the father is the principle of generation in one way, and the mother in
another (whereas if many be the principle of one action and in the

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.35, C.6.

same way---for instance, if many. together draw a ship along---there
would be one and the same relation in all of them); but on the part of
the child there is but one filiation in reality, though there be two in
aspect, corresponding to the two relations in the parents, as
considered by the intellect. And thus in one way there is only one
real filiation in Christ, which is in respect of the Eternal Father: yet
there is another temporal relation in regard to His temporal mother.