[5] To achieve this end, the vows are pronounced with the intention of observing them with the greatest perfection, and of observing the constitutions and rules which lead to it.

[6] In addition to the three vows mentioned, the professed Society also makes an explicit vow to the present or future sovereign pontiff as the vicar of Christ our Lord. This is a vow to go anywhere His Holiness will order, whether among the faithful or the infidels, without pleading an excuse and without requesting any expenses for the journey, for the sake of matters pertaining to the worship of God and the good of the Christian religion.

[7] In other respects, for sound reasons and with attention always paid to the greater service of God, in regard to what is exterior the manner of living is ordinary. It does not have any regular penances or austerities which are to be practiced through obligation. But those may be taken up which each one, with the superior's approval, thinks likely to be more helpful for his spiritual progress, as well as those which the superiors have authority to impose upon the members for the same purpose.

[8] Since the end of the learning which is acquired in this Society is to help the souls of its members and their neighbors, it is by this norm that the decision will be made as to what subjects ours ought to learn and how far they ought to advance in them. The selection of each one's grade as well as the entire distribution of employments shall be in the power of the superior or prelate who is to be elected.

[9] The first class of members in the Society consists of those who make profession of four solemn vows. They must be persons whose life is well-known through long and thorough probations, and who are approved in learning, especially in theology. These are the ones who constitute the Society in the most proper sense.

[10] The second class consists of those who are received to become coadjutors in the service of God and to aid the Society in either spiritual or temporal matters. After their experiments and probations these are to take three simple vows of obedience, poverty, and chastity, without taking the fourth vow of obedience to the pope or any other solemn vow. They should be content with their grade, knowing that in the eyes of our Creator and Lord those gain greater merit who with greater charity give help and service to all persons through love of his Divine Majesty.

[11] The third class consists of those who are received to become scholastics, since they seem to have the ability and other qualifications suitable for studies. They are received so that after being educated they may be able to enter the Society either as professed or as coadjutors, as will be judged expedient. To become approved as scholastics of the Society, these too must undergo their experiments and probations and then pronounce the same three simple vows of poverty, chastity, and obedience, along with a promise that they will enter the Society in one of the two manners just mentioned.