SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.0, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether those things that are of faith can be an

object of science?
Objection 1: It would seem that those things that are of faith can be
an object of science. For where science is lacking there is ignorance,
since ignorance is the opposite of science. Now we are not in
ignorance of those things we have to believe, since ignorance of
such things savors of unbelief, according to 1 Tim. 1:13: "I did it
ignorantly in unbelief." Therefore things that are of faith can be an
object of science.
Objection 2: Further, science is acquired by reasons. Now sacred
writers employ reasons to inculcate things that are of faith.
Therefore such things can be an object of science.
Objection 3: Further, things which are demonstrated are an object of
science, since a "demonstration is a syllogism that produces
science." Now certain matters of faith have been demonstrated by
the philosophers, such as the Existence and Unity of God, and so
forth. Therefore things that are of faith can be an object of science.
Objection 4: Further, opinion is further from science than faith is,
since faith is said to stand between opinion and science. Now
opinion and science can, in a way, be about the same object, as
stated in Poster. i. Therefore faith and science can be about the
same object also.
On the contrary, Gregory says (Hom. xxvi in Evang.) that "when a
thing is manifest, it is the object, not of faith, but of perception."
Therefore things that are of faith are not the object of perception,
whereas what is an object of science is the object of perception.
Therefore there can be no faith about things which are an object of
science.
I answer that, All science is derived from self-evident and therefore
"seen" principles; wherefore all objects of science must needs be, in
a fashion, seen.
Now as stated above (Article 4), it is impossible that one and the
same thing should be believed and seen by the same person. Hence
it is equally impossible for one and the same thing to be an object of

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.0, C.6.

science and of belief for the same person. It may happen, however,
that a thing which is an object of vision or science for one, is
believed by another: since we hope to see some day what we now
believe about the Trinity, according to 1 Cor. 13:12: "We see now
through a glass in a dark manner; but then face to face": which
vision the angels possess already; so that what we believe, they see.
In like manner it may happen that what is an object of vision or
scientific knowledge for one man, even in the state of a wayfarer, is,
for another man, an object of faith, because he does not know it by
demonstration.
Nevertheless that which is proposed to be believed equally by all, is
equally unknown by all as an object of science: such are the things
which are of faith simply. Consequently faith and science are not
about the same things.
Reply to Objection 1: Unbelievers are in ignorance of things that are
of faith, for neither do they see or know them in themselves, nor do
they know them to be credible. The faithful, on the other hand, know
them, not as by demonstration, but by the light of faith which makes
them see that they ought to believe them, as stated above (Article 4,
ad 2,3).
Reply to Objection 2: The reasons employed by holy men to prove
things that are of faith, are not demonstrations; they are either
persuasive arguments showing that what is proposed to our faith is
not impossible, or else they are proofs drawn from the principles of
faith, i.e. from the authority of Holy Writ, as Dionysius declares (Div.
Nom. ii). Whatever is based on these principles is as well proved in
the eyes of the faithful, as a conclusion drawn from self-evident
principles is in the eyes of all. Hence again, theology is a science, as
we stated at the outset of this work (FP, Question 1, Article 2).
Reply to Objection 3: Things which can be proved by demonstration
are reckoned among the articles of faith, not because they are
believed simply by all, but because they are a necessary
presupposition to matters of faith, so that those who do not known
them by demonstration must know them first of all by faith.
Reply to Objection 4: As the Philosopher says (Poster. i), "science
and opinion about the same object can certainly be in different men,"
as we have stated above about science and faith; yet it is possible