## Homily 4 on Matthew

Matt. I. 17.
"So all the generations from Abraham to David are fourteen generations,
and from David until the carrying away into Babylon are fourteen generations,
and from the carrying away into Babylon unto Christ are fourteen generations."
He has divided all the generations into three portions, to indicate that not
even when their form of government was changed did they become better, but
alike under an aristocracy, and under a king, and under an oligarchy, they were in
the same evil ways, and whether popular leaders, or priests, or kings controlled
them, it was no advantage to them in the way of virtue.
But wherefore has he in the middle portion passed over three kings, and in
the last, having set down twelve generations, affirmed them to be fourteen? The
former question I leave for you to examine; for neither is it needful for me to
explain all things to you, lest ye should grow indolent: but the second we will
explain. To me then he seems in this place to be putting in the place of a
generation, both the time of the captivity, and Christ Himself, by every means
connecting Him with us. And full well does he put us in mind of that captivity,
making it manifest that not even when they went down there, did they become
more sober-minded; in order that from everything His coming may be shown to
be necessary.
"Why then," one may say, "does not Mark do this, nor trace Christ's
genealogy, but utter everything briefly?" It seems to me that Matthew was before
the rest in entering on the subject (wherefore he both sets down the genealogy
with exactness, and stops at those things which require it): but that Mark came
after him, which is why he took a short course, as putting his hand to what had
been already spoken and made manifest.
How is it then that Luke not only traces the genealogy, but does it through a

greater number? As was natural, Matthew having led the way, he seeks to teach
us somewhat in addition to former statements. And each too in like manner
imitated his master; the one Paul, who flows fuller than any river; the other
Peter, who studies brevity.
2. And what may be the reason that Matthew said not at the beginning, in
the same way as the prophet, "the vision which I saw," and "the word which
came unto me"? Because he was writing unto men well disposed, and
exceedingly attentive to him. For both the miracles that were done cried aloud,
and they who received the word were exceeding faithful. But in the case of the
prophets, there were neither so many miracles to proclaim them; and besides, the
tribe of the false prophets, no small one, was riotously breaking in upon them: to
whom the people of the Jews gave even more heed. This kind of opening
therefore was necessary in their case.
And if ever miracles were done, they were done for the aliens' sake, to
increase the number of the proselytes; and for manifestation of God's power, if
haply their enemies having taken them captives, fancied they prevailed, because
their own gods were mighty: like as in Egypt, out of which no small "mixed
multitude" went up; and, after that, in Babylon, what befell touching the furnace
and the dreams. And miracles were wrought also, when they were by themselves
in the wilderness; as also in our case: for among us too, when we had just come
out of error, many wonderful works were shown forth; but afterwards they
stayed, when in all countries true religion had taken root.
And what took place at a later period were few and at intervals; for
example, when the sun stood still in its course, and started back in the opposite
direction. And this one may see to have occurred in our case also. For so even in
our generation, in the instance of him who surpassed all in ungodliness, I mean
Julian, many strange things happened. Thus when the Jews were attempting to
raise up again the temple at Jerusalem, fire burst out from the foundations, and
utterly hindered them all; and when both his treasurer, and his uncle and
namesake, made the sacred vessels the subject of their open insolence, the one