to the Lord. For there is nothing to hinder our reaching the perfection of the
powers above, because we inhabit the earth; but it is possible even while abiding
here, to do all, as though already placed on high. What He says therefore is this:
"As there all things are done without hindrance, and the angels are not partly
obedient and partly disobedient, but in all things yield and obey (for He says,
'Mighty in strength, performing His word'); so vouchsafe that we men may not
do Your will by halves, but perform all things as You will."
Do you see how He has taught us also to be modest, by making it clear that
virtue is not of our endeavors only, but also of the grace from above? And again,
He has enjoined each one of us, who pray, to take upon himself the care of the
whole world. For He did not at all say, "Your will be done" in me, or in us, but
everywhere on the earth; so that error may be destroyed, and truth implanted,
and all wickedness cast out, and virtue return, and no difference in this respect
be henceforth between heaven and earth. "For if this come to pass," says He,
"there will be no difference between things below and above, separated as they
are in nature; the earth exhibiting to us another set of angels."
8. "Give us this day our daily bread." [Matthew 6:11]
What is " daily bread"? That for one day.
For because He had said thus, "Your will be done in earth as it is in
heaven," but was discoursing to men encompassed with flesh, and subject to the
necessities of nature, and incapable of the same impassibility with the angels:—
while He enjoins the commands to be practised by us also, even as they perform
them; He condescends likewise, in what follows, to the infirmity of our nature.
Thus, "perfection of conduct," says He, "I require as great, not however freedom
from passions; no, for the tyranny of nature permits it not: for it requires
necessary food." But mark, I pray you, how even in things that are bodily, that
which is spiritual abounds. For it is neither for riches, nor for delicate living, nor
for costly raiment, nor for any other such thing, but for bread only, that He has
commanded us to make our prayer. And for "daily bread," so as not to "take
thought for the morrow." [Matthew 6:34] Because of this He added, " daily

bread," that is, bread for one day.
And not even with this expression is He satisfied, but adds another too
afterwards, saying, "Give us this day;" so that we may not, beyond this, wear
ourselves out with the care of the following day. For that day, the interval before
which you know not whether you shall see, wherefore do you submit to its
cares?
This, as He proceeded, he enjoined also more fully, saying, "Take no
thought for the morrow." He would have us be on every hand unencumbered and
winged for flight, yielding just so much to nature as the compulsion of necessity
requires of us.
9. Then forasmuch as it comes to pass that we sin even after the washing of
regeneration, He, showing His love to man to be great even in this case,
commands us for the remission of our sins to come unto God who loves man,
and thus to say,
"Forgive us our debts, as we also forgive our debtors."
Do you see surpassing mercy? After taking away so great evils, and after
the unspeakable greatness of His gift, if men sin again, He counts them such as
may be forgiven. For that this prayer belongs to believers, is taught us both by
the laws of the church, and by the beginning of the prayer. For the uninitiated
could not call God Father. If then the prayer belongs to believers, and they pray,
entreating that sins may be forgiven them, it is clear that not even after the laver
is the profit of repentance taken away. Since, had He not meant to signify this,
He would not have made a law that we should so pray. Now He who both brings
sins to remembrance, and bids us ask forgiveness, and teaches how we may
obtain remission and so makes the way easy; it is perfectly clear that He
introduced this rule of supplication, as knowing, and signifying, that it is
possible even after the font to wash ourselves from our offenses; by reminding
us of our sins, persuading us to be modest; by the command to forgive others,
setting us free from all revengeful passion; while by promising in return for this
to pardon us also, He holds out good hopes, and instructs us to have high views