in heavenly things? We shall find upon examination that earthly things depend
upon it no less. For without this there would be no trade nor contracts, nor
anything of the sort. And if it be so necessary here in things that are false, how
much more in those.
This then let us pursue, to this let us adhere, so shall we banish from our
souls all destructive doctrines, such, for instance, as relate to nativity and fate. If
you believe that there is a resurrection and a judgment, you will be able to expel
from your mind all those false opinions. Believe that there is a just God, and you
will not believe that there can be an unjust nativity. Believe that there is a God,
and a Providence, and you will not believe that there can be a nativity, that holds
all things together. Believe that there is a place of punishment, and a Kingdom,
and you will not believe in a nativity that takes away our free agency, and
subjects us to necessity and force. Neither sow, nor plant, nor go to war, nor
engage in any work whatever! For whether you will or not, things will proceed
according to the course of nativity! What need have we more of Prayer? And
why should you deserve to be a Christian, if there be this nativity? For you will
not then be responsible. And whence proceed the arts of life? Are these too from
nativity? Yes, you say, and it is fated to one to become wise with labor. But can
you show me one who has learned an art without labor? You cannot. It is not
then from nativity but from labor that he derives his skill.
But why does a man who is corrupt and wicked become rich, without
inheriting it from his father, while another, amidst infinite labors, remains poor?
For such are the questions they raise, always arguing upon wealth and poverty,
and never taking the case of vice and virtue. Now in this question talk not of
that, but show me a man who has become bad, while he was striving to be good;
or one that, without striving, has become good. For if Fate has any power, its
power should be shown in the most important things; in vice and virtue, not in
poverty and riches. Again you ask, why is one man sickly and another healthy?
Why is one honored, another disgraced? Why does every thing succeed well
with this man, while another meets with nothing but failure and impediments?

Lay aside the notion of nativity, and you will know. Believe firmly that there is a
God and a Providence, and all these things will be cleared up. "But I cannot,"
you say, "conceive that there is a Providence, when there is such disorder. Can I
believe that the good God gives wealth to the fornicator, the corrupt and
dishonest man, and not to the virtuous? How can I believe this? For there must
be facts to ground belief." Well then, do these cases proceed from a nativity that
was just, or unjust? "Unjust," you say. Who then made it? "Not God," you say,
"it was unbegotten." But how can the unbegotten produce these things? For they
are contradictions. "These things are not then in any wise the works of God."
Shall we then enquire who made the earth, the sea, the heavens, the seasons?
"Nativity," you answer. Did nativity then produce in things inanimate such order
and harmony, but in us, for whom these things were made, so much disorder? As
if one, in building a house, should be careful to make it magnificent, but bestow
not a thought upon his household. But who preserves the succession of the
seasons? Who established the regular laws of nature? Who appointed the courses
of day and night? These things are superior to any such nativity. "But these," you
say, "came to be of themselves." And yet how can such a well-ordered system
spring up of itself?
"But whence," you say, "come the rich, the healthy, the renowned, and how
are some made rich by covetousness, some by inheritance, some by violence?
And why does God suffer the wicked to be prosperous?" We answer, Because the
retribution, according to the desert of each, does not take place here, but is
reserved for hereafter. Show me any such thing taking place Then! "Well," say
you, "give me here, and I do not look for hereafter." But it is because you seek
here, that you receive not. For if when earthly enjoyment is not within your
reach, you seek present things so eagerly as to prefer them to future, what would
you do if you were in possession of unmixed pleasure? God therefore shows you
that these things are nothing, and indifferent; for if they were not indifferent, He
would not bestow them on such men. You will own that it is a matter of
indifference whether one be tall or short, black or white; so is it whether one be