May the grace and peace of Christ always abide and grow in our souls.

Beloved brother in Christ Jesus, Master Francesco: You will have understood the answer to your letter if you have remained in Naples. Our Father desires every spiritual consolation for you. Because you would find consolation among your spiritual brothers and fathers in Naples, he gave you permission to remain there if your health could endure it. But since the physician thought that you should by all means seek your native air to restore your health, this benefit should be preferred to consolation. Be certain of this, my dear brother, that, though you are separated from us in body, we feel that we are intimately united in the bond of charity, and that you feel the same way. But you must be sure of being united, not only by this bond, but also by that of holy obedience, which binds all the members of our Society into one spiritual body, to which you will belong no matter where you are. Remember that it is through obedience that you are making use of all these remedies and cures and every form of acceptable recreation, even physical, that is suggested to you. Because all the sooner, then, with God's help you will be freed from your illness to give yourself entirely to the service of God. And do not think that trying to recover your health is an easy task. Your only purpose in desiring it is to serve God, and according to His holy will. Even though you use every reasonable means to get well, great resignation is required if you are to be content with whatever disposition God makes of you. As long as He visits you with illness, accept it from His hand as a very precious gift from the wisest and most affectionate of fathers and physicians. Be resolved especially both in mind and body, in work and in suffering, to be content with whatever pleases His Divine Providence. And write once in a while at least, though it be but a few lines. Master Pompilio 1 tells me that you have asked for some spiritual books. It would be good for you to read from time to time or have someone read to you, for your soul's refreshment and consolation, but do not spend much time in reading or in many devotions, especially those that require mental activity, as this would be to close the door on your recovery, which is the very reason for your going home and for the obedience that sent you. Use moderation, therefore, in every mental exercise. Remember that bodily exercise, when it is well ordered, as I have said, is also prayer by means of which you can please God our Lord. May His grace be ever abundant in your soul. We all earnestly commend ourselves to your charity.

From Rome, April 7, 1554.

1 The only thing known about this Pompilio is that he was a Roman.

# 34. TO FATHER PETER CANISIUS

On the Society's Duty to Oppose Heresy