indulgence and become unworthy of his paternal inheritance, as soon as he has
attained the royal dignity, immediately exchanges all his former raiment for the
purple robe, and the diadem and the crowd of body-guards, and assumes his state
with much confidence, having cast out of his soul thoughts of humility and
subjection, and having taken others in their place; even so will it happen then to
all the saints.
And to prove that these words are no empty vaunt let us journey in thought
to the mountain where Christ was transfigured: let us behold him shining as He
shone there; and yet even then He did not display to us all the splendour of the
world to come. For that the vision was accommodated to human eyes, and not an
exact manifestation of the reality is plain from the very words of the Evangelist.
For what says he? "He did shine as the Sun." [Matthew 17:2] But the glory of
incorruptible bodies does not emit the same kind of light as this body which is
corruptible, nor is it of a kind to be tolerable to mortal eyes, but needs
incorruptible and immortal eyes to contemplate it. But at that time on the
mountain He disclosed to them as much as it was possible for them to see
without injuring the sight of the beholders; and even so they could not endure it
but fell upon their faces. Tell me, if any one led you into some bright place,
where all were sitting arrayed in vestures of gold, and in the midst of the
multitude pointed out one other to you who alone had garments wrought with
precious stones, and a crown upon his head, and then promised to place you in
the ranks of this people, would you not do everything to obtain this promise?
Open then even now in imagination your eyes, and look on that assembly,
composed not of men such as we are, but of those who are of more value than
gold and precious stones, and the beams of the sun, and all visible radiance, and
not consisting of men only but of beings of much more dignity than men,—
angels, archangels, thrones, dominions, principalities, powers. For as concerning
the king it is not even possible to say what he is like: so completely do his
beauty, his grace, his splendour, his glory, his grandeur and magnificence elude
speech and thought. Shall we then, I ask, deprive ourselves of such great

blessings, in order to avoid suffering for a brief period? For if we had to endure
countless deaths every day, or even hell itself, for the sake of seeing Christ
coming in His glory, and being enrolled in the company of the saints, ought we
not to undergo all those things? Hear what the blessed Peter says; "it is good for
us to be here." [Matthew 17:4] But if he, when he beheld some dim image of the
things to come, immediately cast away all other things out of his soul on account
of the pleasure produced in it by that vision; what would any one say when the
actual reality of the things is presented, when the palace is thrown open and it is
permitted to gaze upon the King Himself, no longer darkly, or by means of a
mirror, [1 Corinthians 13:12] but face to face; no longer by means of faith, but
by sight?
12. The majority it is true of those who are not very sensibly minded
propose to be content with escaping hell; but I say that a far more severe
punishment than hell is exclusion from the glory of the other world, and I think
that one who has failed to reach it ought not to sorrow so much over the miseries
of hell, as over his rejection from heaven, for this alone is more dreadful than all
other things in respect of punishment. But frequently now when we see a king,
attended by a large bodyguard, enter the palace, we count those happy who are
near him, and have a share in his speech and mind, and partake of all the rest of
his glory; and even if we have countless blessings, we have no perception of any
of them, and deem ourselves miserable when we look at the glory of those who
are round about him, although we know that such splendour is slippery and
insecure, both on account of wars, and plots, and envy, and because apart from
these things it is not in itself worthy of any consideration. But where the king of
all is concerned, he who holds not a portion of the earth but the whole circuit of
it, or rather who comprehends it all in the hollow of his hand, and measures the
Heavens with a span, who upholds all things by the word of His power, by
whom all the nations are counted as nought, and as a drop of spittle—in the case
of such a king I say shall we not reckon it the most extreme punishment to miss
being enrolled in that company which is round about him, but be content if we