THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.63, C.6.

long as the thing sanctified endures. This is clear even in inanimate
things; for the consecration of a church or an altar lasts for ever
unless they be destroyed. Since, therefore, the subject of a character
is the soul as to its intellective part, where faith resides, as stated
above (Article 4, ad 3); it is clear that, the intellect being perpetual
and incorruptible, a character cannot be blotted out from the soul.
Reply to Objection 1: Both grace and character are in the soul, but in
different ways. For grace is in the soul, as a form having complete
existence therein: whereas a character is in the soul, as an
instrumental power, as stated above (Article 2). Now a complete form
is in its subject according to the condition of the subject. And since
the soul as long as it is a wayfarer is changeable in respect of the
free-will, it results that grace is in the soul in a changeable manner.
But an instrumental power follows rather the condition of the
principal agent: and consequently a character exists in the soul in an
indelible manner, not from any perfection of its own, but from the
perfection of Christ's Priesthood, from which the character flows like
an instrumental power.
Reply to Objection 2: As Augustine says (Contra Parmen. ii), "even
apostates are not deprived of their baptism, for when they repent
and return to the fold they do not receive it again; whence we
conclude that it cannot be lost." The reason of this is that a character
is an instrumental power, as stated above (ad 1), and the nature of an
instrument as such is to be moved by another, but not to move itself;
this belongs to the will. Consequently, however much the will be
moved in the contrary direction, the character is not removed, by
reason of the immobility of the principal mover.
Reply to Objection 3: Although external worship does not last after
this life, yet its end remains. Consequently, after this life the
character remains, both in the good as adding to their glory, and in
the wicked as increasing their shame: just as the character of the
military service remains in the soldiers after the victory, as the boast
of the conquerors, and the disgrace of the conquered.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.63, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether a character is imprinted by each

sacrament of the New Law?
Objection 1: It seems that a character is imprinted by all the
sacraments of the New Law: because each sacrament of the New
Law makes man a participator in Christ's Priesthood. But the
sacramental character is nothing but a participation in Christ's
Priesthood, as already stated (Articles 3,5). Therefore it seems that a
character is imprinted by each sacrament of the New Law.
Objection 2: Further, a character may be compared to the soul in
which it is, as a consecration to that which is consecrated. But by
each sacrament of the New Law man becomes the recipient of
sanctifying grace, as stated above (Question 62, Article 1). Therefore
it seems that a character is imprinted by each sacrament of the New
Law.
Objection 3: Further, a character is both a reality and a sacrament.
But in each sacrament of the New Law, there is something which is
only a reality, and something which is only a sacrament, and
something which is both reality and sacrament. Therefore a
character is imprinted by each sacrament of the New Law.
On the contrary, Those sacraments in which a character is imprinted,
are not reiterated, because a character is indelible, as stated above
(Article 5): whereas some sacraments are reiterated, for instance,
penance and matrimony. Therefore not all the sacraments imprint a
character.
I answer that, As stated above (Question 62, Articles 1,5), the
sacraments of the New Law are ordained for a twofold purpose,
namely, as a remedy for sin, and for the Divine worship. Now all the
sacraments, from the fact that they confer grace, have this in
common, that they afford a remedy against sin: whereas not all the
sacraments are directly ordained to the Divine worship. Thus it is
clear that penance, whereby man is delivered from sin, does not
afford man any advance in the Divine worship, but restores him to
his former state.
Now a sacrament may belong to the Divine worship in three ways:
first in regard to the thing done; secondly, in regard to the agent;