love Him, we shall obtain our desire, yet love Him not, but are altogether cold in
our love both to our neighbor and to God; cold in our love to God, because cold
in our love to our neighbor. For it is not, indeed it is not possible that a man, who
is a stranger to the feeling of love, should have any generosity or manly spirit,
since the foundation of all that is good is no other than love. "On this," it is said,
"hang all the law and the prophets." [Matthew 22:40] For as fire set to a forest is
wont to clear away everything, so the fire of love, wherever it is received,
consumes and makes way through everything that is hurtful to the divine
harvest, and renders the soil pure and fit for the reception of the seed. Where
there is love, all evils are removed. There is no love of money, the root of evil,
there is no self-love : there is no boasting; for why should one boast over his
friend? Nothing makes a man so humble as love. We perform the offices of
servants to our friends, and are not ashamed; we are even thankful for the
opportunity of serving them. We spare not our property, and often not our
persons; for dangers too are encountered at times for him that is loved. No envy,
no calumny is there, where there is genuine love. We not only do not slander our
friends, but we stop the mouth of slanderers. All is gentleness and mildness. Not
a trace of strife and contention appears. Everything breathes peace. For "Love,"
it is said, "is this fulfilling of the law." [Romans 13:10] There is nothing
offensive with it. How so? Because where love exists, all the sins of
covetousness, rapine, envy, slander, arrogance, perjury, and falsehood are done
away. For men perjure themselves, in order to rob, but no one would rob him
whom he loved, but would rather give him his own possessions. For we are more
obliged than if we received from him. You know this, all you that have friends,
friends, I mean, in reality, not in name only, but whoever loves as men ought to
love, whoever is really linked to another. And let those who are ignorant of it
learn from those who know.
I will now cite you from the Scriptures a wonderful instance of friendship.
Jonathan, the son of Saul, loved David, and his soul was so knit to him, that
David in mourning over him says, "Your love to me was wonderful, passing the

love of women. You were wounded unto death." [2 Samuel 1:25-26] What then?
Did he envy David? Not at all, though he had great reason. How? Because, by
the events he perceived that the kingdom would pass from himself to him, yet he
felt nothing of the kind. He did not say, "This is he that is depriving me of my
paternal kingdom," but he favored his obtaining the sovereignty; and he spared
not his father for the sake of his friend. Yet let not any one think him a parricide,
for he did not injure his father, but restrained his unjust attempts. He rather
spared than injured him. He did not permit him to proceed to an unjust murder.
He was many times willing even to die for his friend, and far from accusing him,
he restrained even his father's accusation. Instead of envying, he joined in
obtaining the kingdom for him. Why do I speak of wealth? He even sacrificed
his own life for him. For the sake of his friend, he did not even stand in awe of
his father, since his father entertained unjust designs, but his conscience was free
from all such. Thus justice was conjoined with friendship.
Such then was Jonathan. Let us now consider David. He had no opportunity
of returning the recompense, for his benefactor was taken away before the reign
of David, and slain before he whom he had served came to his kingdom. What
then? As far as it was allowed him and left in his power, let us see how that
righteous man manifested his friendship. "Very pleasant," he says, "have you
been to me, Jonathan; you were wounded unto death." [2 Samuel 1:25,
Septuagint] Is this all? This indeed was no slight tribute, but he also frequently
rescued from danger his son and his grandson, in remembrance of the kindness
of the father, and he continued to support and protect his children, as he would
have done those of his own son. Such friendship I would wish all to entertain
both towards the living and the dead.
Let women listen to this (for it is on their account especially that I refer to
the departed) who enter into a second marriage, and defile the bed of their
deceased husband, though they have loved him. Not that I forbid a second
marriage, or pronounce it a proof of wantonness, for Paul does not allow me,
stopping my mouth by saying to women, "If she marry she has not sinned." [1