SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.61, C.7.

another's property for his own profit but without committing an
injury, i.e. with the consent of the owner, as in the case of a loan:
and then, the taker is bound to restitution, not only by reason of the
thing, but also by reason of the taking, even if he has lost the thing:
for he is bound to compensate the person who has done him a favor,
and he would not be doing so if the latter were to lose thereby.
Thirdly, a man takes another's property without injury to the latter or
profit to himself, as in the case of a deposit; wherefore he that takes
a thing thus, incurs no obligation on account of the taking, in fact by
taking he grants a favor; but he is bound to restitution on account of
the thing taken. Consequently if this thing be taken from him without
any fault on his part, he is not bound to restitution, although he
would be, if he were to lose the thing through a grievous fault on his
part.
Reply to Objection 1: The chief end of restitution is, not that he who
has more than his due may cease to have it, but that he who has less
than his due may be compensated. Wherefore there is no place for
restitution in those things which one man may receive from another
without loss to the latter, as when a person takes a light from
another's candle. Consequently although he that has taken
something from another, may have ceased to have what he took,
through having transferred it to another, yet since that other is
deprived of what is his, both are bound to restitution, he that took
the thing, on account of the injurious taking, and he that has it, on
account of the thing.
Reply to Objection 2: Although a man is not bound to reveal his
crime to other men, yet is he bound to reveal it to God in confession;
and so he may make restitution of another's property through the
priest to whom he confesses.
Reply to Objection 3: Since restitution is chiefly directed to the
compensation for the loss incurred by the person from whom a thing
has been taken unjustly, it stands to reason that when he has
received sufficient compensation from one, the others are not bound
to any further restitution in his regard: rather ought they to refund
the person who has made restitution, who, nevertheless, may excuse
them from so doing.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.61, C.7.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.61, C.8.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether restitution is binding on those who have

not taken?
Objection 1: It would seem that restitution is not binding on those
who have not taken. For restitution is a punishment of the taker. Now
none should be punished except the one who sinned. Therefore
none are bound to restitution save the one who has taken.
Objection 2: Further, justice does not bind one to increase another's
property. Now if restitution were binding not only on the man who
takes a thing but also on all those who cooperate with him in any
way whatever, the person from whom the thing was taken would be
the gainer, both because he would receive restitution many times
over, and because sometimes a person cooperates towards a thing
being taken away from someone, without its being taken away in
effect. Therefore the others are not bound to restitution.
Objection 3: Further, no man is bound to expose himself to danger,
in order to safeguard another's property. Now sometimes a man
would expose himself to the danger of death, were he to betray a
thief, or withstand him. Therefore one is not bound to restitution,
through not betraying or withstanding a thief.
On the contrary, It is written (Rm. 1:32): "They who do such things
are worthy of death, and not only they that do them, but also they
that consent to them that do them." Therefore in like manner they
that consent are bound to restitution.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 6), a person is bound to
restitution not only on account of someone else's property which he
has taken, but also on account of the injurious taking. Hence
whoever is cause of an unjust taking is bound to restitution. This
happens in two ways, directly and indirectly. Directly, when a man
induces another to take, and this in three ways. First, on the part of
the taking, by moving a man to take, either by express command,
counsel, or consent, or by praising a man for his courage in thieving.
Secondly, on the part of the taker, by giving him shelter or any other
kind of assistance. Thirdly, on the part of the thing taken, by taking
part in the theft or robbery, as a fellow evil-doer. Indirectly, when a
man does not prevent another from evil-doing (provided he be able
and bound to prevent him), either by omitting the command or