THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.83, C.2.

it is true to say that Christ was sacrificed, even in the figures of the
Old Testament: hence it is stated in the Apocalypse (13:8): "Whose
names are not written in the Book of Life of the Lamb, which was
slain from the beginning of the world." But according to the second
reason, it is proper to this sacrament for Christ to be sacrificed in its
celebration.
Reply to Objection 1: As Ambrose says (commenting on Heb. 10:1),
"there is but one victim," namely that which Christ offered, and
which we offer, "and not many victims, because Christ was offered
but once: and this latter sacrifice is the pattern of the former. For,
just as what is offered everywhere is one body, and not many
bodies, so also is it but one sacrifice."
Reply to Objection 2: As the celebration of this sacrament is an
image representing Christ's Passion, so the altar is representative of
the cross itself, upon which Christ was sacrificed in His proper
species.
Reply to Objection 3: For the same reason (cf. Reply Objection 2) the
priest also bears Christ's image, in Whose person and by Whose
power he pronounces the words of consecration, as is evident from
what was said above (Question 82, Articles 1,3). And so, in a
measure, the priest and victim are one and the same.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.83, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the time for celebrating this mystery has

been properly determined?
Objection 1: It seems that the time for celebrating this mystery has
not been properly determined. For as was observed above (Article 1),
this sacrament is representative of our Lord's Passion. But the
commemoration of our Lord's Passion takes place in the Church
once in the year: because Augustine says (Enarr. ii in Ps. 21): "Is not
Christ slain as often as the Pasch is celebrated? Nevertheless, the
anniversary remembrance represents what took place in by-gone
days; and so it does not cause us to be stirred as if we saw our Lord
hanging upon the cross." Therefore this sacrament ought to be
celebrated but once a year.
Objection 2: Further, Christ's Passion is commemorated in the
Church on the Friday before Easter, and not on Christmas Day.
Consequently, since this sacrament is commemorative of our Lord's
Passion, it seems unsuitable for this sacrament to be celebrated
thrice on Christmas Day, and to be entirely omitted on Good Friday.
Objection 3: Further, in the celebration of this sacrament the Church
ought to imitate Christ's institution. But it was in the evening that
Christ consecrated this sacrament. Therefore it seems that this
sacrament ought to be celebrated at that time of day.
Objection 4: Further, as is set down in the Decretals (De Consecr.,
dist. i), Pope Leo I wrote to Dioscorus, Bishop of Alexandria, that "it
is permissible to celebrate mass in the first part of the day." But the
day begins at midnight, as was said above (Question 80, Article 8, ad
5). Therefore it seems that after midnight it is lawful to celebrate.
Objection 5: Further, in one of the Sunday Secrets (Ninth Sunday
after Pentecost) we say: "Grant us, Lord, we beseech Thee, to
frequent these mysteries." But there will be greater frequency if the
priest celebrates several times a day. Therefore it seems that the
priest ought not to be hindered from celebrating several times daily.
On the contrary is the custom which the Church observes according
to the statutes of the Canons.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), in the celebration of this