and have the daring to preach an unknown God. But they ought to hear [this] against themselves:
How is it that He is unknown, who is known by them? for, whatever is known even by a few, is
not unknown. But the Lord did not say that both the Father and the Son could not be known at all
(in totum), for in that case His advent would have been superfluous. For why did He come hither?
Was it that He should say to us, "Never mind seeking after God; for He is unknown, and ye shall
not find Him;" as also the disciples of Valentinus falsely declare that Christ said to their Æons?
But this is indeed vain. For the Lord taught us that no man is capable of knowing God, unless he
be taught of God; that is, that God cannot be known without God: but that this is the express will
of the Father, that God should be known. For they shall know Him to whomsoever the Son has
revealed Him.
5. And for this purpose did the Father reveal the Son, that through His instrumentality He might
be manifested to all, and might receive those righteous ones who believe in Him into incorruption
and everlasting enjoyment (now, to believe in Him is to do His will); but He shall righteously shut
out into the darkness which they have chosen for themselves, those who do not believe, and who
do consequently avoid His light. The Father therefore has revealed Himself to all, by making His
Word visible to all; and, conversely, the Word has declared to all the Father and the Son, since He
has become visible to all. And therefore the righteous judgment of God [shall fall] upon all who,
like others, have seen, but have not, like others, believed.
6. For by means of the creation itself, the Word reveals God the Creator; and by means of the
world [does He declare] the Lord the Maker of the world; and by means of the formation [of man]
the Artificer who formed him; and by the Son that Father who begat the Son: and these things do
indeed address all men in the same manner, but all do not in the same way believe them. But by
the law and the prophets did the Word preach both Himself and the Father alike [to all]; and all the
people heard Him alike, but all did not alike believe. And through the Word Himself who had been
made visible and palpable, was the Father shown forth, although all did not equally believe in Him;
but all saw the Father in the Son: for the Father is the invisible of the Son, but the Son the visible
of the Father. And for this reason all spake with Christ when He was present [upon earth], and they
named Him God. Yea, even the demons exclaimed, on beholding the Son: "We know Thee who
Thou art, the Holy One of God." And the devil looking at Him, and tempting Him, said: "If Thou
art the Son of God;"—all thus indeed seeing and speaking of the Son and the Father, but all not
believing [in them].
7. For it was fitting that the truth should receive testimony from all, and should become [a
means of] judgment for the salvation indeed of those who believe, but for the condemnation of
those who believe not; that all should be fairly judged, and that the faith in the Father and Son
should be approved by all, that is, that it should be established by all [as the one means of salvation],