marriage.
Reply to Objection 1: There are two things here, namely the lack of
consent---which benefits him in the tribunal of his conscience so
that he is not bound by the marriage tie, albeit not in the tribunal of
the Church where judgment is pronounced according to the
evidence---and the deceit in the words, which does not benefit him,
neither in the tribunal of his conscience nor in the tribunal of the
Church, since in both he is punished for this.
Reply to Objection 2: If mental consent is lacking in one of the
parties, on neither side is there marriage, since marriage consists in
a mutual joining together, as stated above (Question 44, Article 1).
However one may believe that in all probability there is no fraud
unless there be evident signs thereof; because we must presume
good of everyone, unless there be proof of the contrary.
Consequently the party in whom there is no fraud is excused from
sin on account of ignorance.
Reply to Objection 3: In such a case the Church compels him to hold
to his first wife, because the Church judges according to outward
appearances; nor is she deceived in justice or right, although she is
deceived in the facts of the case. Yet such a man ought to bear the
excommunication rather than return to his first wife; or else he
should go far away into another country.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether consent given secretly in words of the

present makes a marriage?
Objection 1: It would seem that consent given secretly in words of
the present does not make a marriage. For a thing that is in one
person's power is not transferred to the power of another without the
consent of the person in whose power it was. Now the maid is in her
father's power. Therefore she cannot by marriage be transferred to a
husband's power without her father's consent. Wherefore if consent
be given secretly, even though it should be expressed in words of
the present, there will be no marriage.
Objection 2: Further, in penance, just as in matrimony, our act is as it
were essential to the sacrament. But the sacrament of penance is not
made complete except by means of the ministers of the Church, who
are the dispensers of the sacraments. Therefore neither can
marriage be perfected without the priest's blessing.
Objection 3: Further, the Church does not forbid baptism to be given
secretly, since one may baptize either privately or publicly. But the
Church does forbid the celebration of clandestine marriages (cap.
Cum inhibitio, De clandest. despons.). Therefore they cannot be
done secretly.
Objection 4: Further, marriage cannot be contracted by those who
are related in the second degree, because the Church has forbidden
it. But the Church has also forbidden clandestine marriages.
Therefore they cannot be valid marriages.
On the contrary, Given the cause the effect follows. Now the
sufficient cause of matrimony is consent expressed in words of the
present. Therefore whether this be done in public or in private the
result is a marriage.
Further, wherever there is the due matter and the due form of a
sacrament there is the sacrament. Now in a secret marriage there is
the due matter, since there are persons who are able lawfully to
contract---and the due form, since there are the words of the present
expressive of consent. Therefore there is a true marriage.
I answer that, Just as in the other sacraments certain things are