rich than poor have reason to be sad. If any think this is not true, their notion is
derived not from the nature of the things, but from their own fancy. And if the
rich do enjoy some sort of pleasure, this is not to be wondered at: for even those
who are covered all over with the itch, have a good deal of pleasure. For that the
rich are for all the world like these, and their mind affected in the same sort, is
plain from this circumstance. Their cares annoy them, and they choose to be
engrossed with them for the sake of the momentary pleasure: while those who
are free from these affections, are in health and without discomfort. Whether is
more pleasant, I ask, whether of the two more safe? To have to take thought only
for a single loaf of bread and suit of clothes, or for an immense family, both
slaves and freemen, not having care about himself (only)? For as this man has
his fears for himself, so have you for those who depend on your own person.
Why, I pray you, does poverty seem a thing to be shunned? Just in the same way
as other good things are, in the judgment of many, things to be deprecated. "Yes,"
say you, "but it is not that those good things are subjects for deprecation, but
that they are hard of attainment." Well, so is poverty, not a thing to be
deprecated, but hard of attainment: so that if one could bear it, there would be no
reason to deprecate it. For how is it that the Apostles did not deprecate it? How
is it that many even choose it, and so far from deprecating, even run to it? For
that which is really a thing to be deprecated, cannot be an object of choice save
to madmen. But if it be the men of philosophic and elevated minds that betake
themselves to this, as to a safe and salubrious retreat, no wonder if to the rest it
wears a different appearance. For, in truth, the rich man seems to me to be just
like a city, unwalled, situated in a plain, inviting assailants from all sides: but
poverty, a secure fortress, strong as brass can make it, and the way up to it
difficult. "And yet," say you, "the fact is just the reverse: for these are they, who
are often dragged into courts of law, these are they who are overborne and illtreated." No: not the poor, as poor, but those who being poor want to be rich. But
I am not speaking of them, but of such as make it their study to live in poverty.
For say, how comes it that nobody ever drags the brethren of the hills into courts

of law? And yet if to be poor is to be a mark for oppression, those ought most of
all to be dragged there, since they are poorer than all others. How comes it that
nobody drags the common mendicants into the law-courts? Because they have
come to the extreme of poverty. How is it that none does violence to them, none
lays vexatious informations against them? Because they abide in a stronghold
too safe for that. How many think it a condition hard to struggle against, poverty,
I mean, and begging! What then, I ask, is it a good thing to beg? "It is good, if
there be comfort," say you; "if there be one to give: it is a life so free from
trouble and reverses, as every one knows." But I do not mean to commend this;
God forbid! What I advise is the not aiming at riches.
For say, whom would you rather call blessed? Those who find themselves
at home with virtue, ([ἐ] [πιτηδείους πρὸς ἀρετήν]) or those who stand aloof? Of
course, those who are near. Say then, which of the two is the man to learn
anything that is profitable, and to shine in the true wisdom? The former, or the
latter? The first, all must see. If you doubt it, satisfy yourself in this way. Fetch
hither from the market-place any of the poor wretches there; let him be a cripple,
lame, maimed: and then produce some other person, comely of aspect, strong in
body, full of life and vigor in every part, overflowing with riches: let him be of
illustrious birth, and possessed of great power. Then let us bring both these into
the school of philosophy: which of them, I ask, is more likely to receive the
things taught? The first precept, at the outset, "Be lowly and moderate" (for this
is Christ's command): which will be most able to fulfil it, this one or the other?
"Blessed are they that mourn" [Matthew 5:4]: which will most receive this
saying? "Blessed are the lowly:" which will most listen to this? "Blessed are the
pure in heart. Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness.
Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness' sake" (ib. 8, 6, 10).
Which will with ease receive these sayings? And, if you will, let us apply to all
of them these rules, and see how they will fit. Is not the one inflamed and
swollen all over, while the other is ever lowly minded and subdued in his whole
bearing? It is quite plain. Yes, and there is a saying to that effect among those