SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.54, C.4.

to prudence, and distinct from prudence of the flesh.
Reply to Objection 1: As Augustine observes (Contra Julian. iv, 3)
just as prudence is sometimes improperly taken in a bad sense, so is
craftiness sometimes taken in a good sense, and this on account of
their mutual resemblance. Properly speaking, however, craftiness is
taken in a bad sense, as the Philosopher states in Ethic. vi, 12.
Reply to Objection 2: Craftiness can take counsel both for a good
end and for an evil end: nor should a good end be pursued by means
that are false and counterfeit but by such as are true. Hence
craftiness is a sin if it be directed to a good end.
Reply to Objection 3: Under "worldly prudence" Gregory included
everything that can pertain to false prudence, so that it comprises
craftiness also.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.54, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether guile is a sin pertaining to craftiness?

Objection 1: It would seem that guile is not a sin pertaining to
craftiness. For sin, especially mortal, has no place in perfect men.
Yet a certain guile is to be found in them, according to 2 Cor. 12:16,
"Being crafty I caught you by guile." Therefore guile is not always a
sin.
Objection 2: Further, guile seems to pertain chiefly to the tongue,
according to Ps. 5:11, "They dealt deceitfully with their tongues."
Now craftiness like prudence is in the very act of reason. Therefore
guile does not pertain to craftiness.
Objection 3: Further, it is written (Prov. 12:20): "Guile is in the heart
of them that think evil things." But the thought of evil things does
not always pertain to craftiness. Therefore guile does not seem to
belong to craftiness.
On the contrary, Craftiness aims at lying in wait, according to Eph.
4:14, "By cunning craftiness by which they lie in wait to deceive":
and guile aims at this also. Therefore guile pertains to craftiness.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 3), it belongs to craftiness to
adopt ways that are not true but counterfeit and apparently true, in
order to attain some end either good or evil. Now the adopting of
such ways may be subjected to a twofold consideration; first, as
regards the process of thinking them out, and this belongs properly
to craftiness, even as thinking out right ways to a due end belongs to
prudence. Secondly the adopting of such like ways may be
considered with regard to their actual execution, and in this way it
belongs to guile. Hence guile denotes a certain execution of
craftiness, and accordingly belongs thereto.
Reply to Objection 1: Just as craftiness is taken properly in a bad
sense, and improperly in a good sense, so too is guile which is the
execution of craftiness.
Reply to Objection 2: The execution of craftiness with the purpose of
deceiving, is effected first and foremost by words, which hold the
chief place among those signs whereby a man signifies something
to another man, as Augustine states (De Doctr. Christ. ii, 3), hence