distinction which is common to it and all other accidents, arising
namely from the matter which is its subject. Thus then one line may
be understood as being distinct from another, either because it is in
another subject (in which case we are considering a material line), or
because it is placed at a distance from another (in which case we are
considering a mathematical line, which is understood apart from
matter). Accordingly if we remove matter, there can be no distinction
between lines save in respect of a different placing: and in like
manner neither can there be a distinction of points, nor of
superficies, nor of any dimensions whatever. Consequently
geometry cannot suppose one line to be added to another, as being
distinct therefrom unless it be distinct as to place. But supposing by
a Divine miracle a distinction of subject without a distinction of
place, we can understand a distinction of lines; and these are not
distant from one another in place, on account of the distinction of
subjects. Again we can understand a difference of points, and thus
different lines described on two bodies that are in the same place are
drawn from different points to different points; for the point that we
take is not a point fixed in the place, but in the placed body, because
a line is not said to be drawn otherwise than from a point which is its
term. In like manner the two circles described in two spherical
bodies that occupy the same place are two, not on account of the
difference of place, else they could not touch one another as a
whole, but on account of the distinction of subjects, and thus while
wholly touching one another they still remain two. Even so a circle
described by a placed spherical body touches, as a whole, the other
circle described by the locating body.
Reply to Objection 3: God could make a body not to be in a place;
and yet supposing this, it would not follow that a certain body is not
in a place, because the greater body is the place of the lesser body,
by reason of its superficies which is described by contact with the
terms of the lesser body.
Reply to Objection 4: It is impossible for one body to be
miraculously in two places locally (for Christ's body is not locally on
the altar), although it is possible by a miracle for two bodies to be in
the same place. Because to be in several places at once is
incompatible with the individual, by reason of its having being
undivided in itself, for it would follow that it is divided as to place. on
the other hand, to be in the same place with another body is
incompatible with the individual as distinct from aught else. Now the
nature of unity is perfected in indivision (Metaph. v), whereas

distinction from others is a result of the nature of unity. Wherefore
that one same body be locally in several places at once implies a
contradiction, even as for a man to lack reason, while for two bodies
to be in the same place does not imply a contradiction, as explained
above. Hence the comparison fails.