too, in the like manner, the seals and the watches made the truth to be the more
conspicuous; and the mockings, and the jeerings, and the revilings, wrought
again this self-same effect.
For such is the nature of error: it is destroyed by those things whereby it
plots; thus at least it fell out even here, for they that seemed to have conquered,
these most of all were put to shame, and defeated, and ruined; but He that
seemed to be defeated, this man above all has both shone forth, and conquered
mightily.
Let us not then everywhere seek victory, nor everywhere shun defeat. There
is an occasion when victory brings hurt, but defeat profit. For, for instance, in the
case of them that are angry; he that has been very outrageous seems to have
prevailed; but this man above all is the one subdued and hurt by the most
grievous passion; but he that has endured nobly, this man has got the better and
conquered. And while the one has not had strength to overcome so much as his
own disease; the other has removed another man's; this has been subdued by his
own, that has got the better even of another's passion; and so far from being
burnt up, he quenched the flame of another when raised to a height. But if he had
minded to gain what seems to be victory, both he himself would have been
overcome; and having inflamed the other, he would have occasioned him to have
suffered this more grievously; and, like women, both the one and the other
would have been disgracefully and miserably overthrown by their anger. But
now he that has exercised self-control is both freed from this disgrace, and has
erected a glorious trophy over anger both in himself and in his neighbor, through
his honorable defeat.
4. Let us not then everywhere seek victory. For he that has overreached has
conquered the person wronged, but with an evil victory, and one that brings
destruction to him that has won it; but he that is wronged, and seems to have
been conquered, if he have borne it with self-command, this above all is the one
that has the crown. For often to be defeated is better, and this is the best mode of
victory. For whether one overreaches, or smites, or envies, he that is defeated,

and enters not into the conflict, this is he who has the victory.
And why do I speak of overreaching and envy? For he also that is dragged
to martyrdom, thus conquers by being bound, and beaten, and maimed, and
slain. And what is in wars defeat, namely, for the combatant to fall; this with us
is victory. For nowhere do we overcome by doing wrongfully, but everywhere by
suffering wrongfully. Thus also does the victory become more glorious, when we
sufferers get the better of the doers. Hereby it is shown that the victory is of God.
For indeed it has an opposite nature to outward conquest, which fact is again
above all an infallible sign of strength. Thus also the rocks in the sea, by being
struck, break the waves; thus also all the saints were proclaimed, and crowned,
and set up their glorious trophies, winning this tranquil victory. "For stir not
yourself," He says, "neither weary yourself. God has given you this might, to
conquer not by conflict, but by endurance alone. Do not oppose yourself also as
he does, and you have conquered; conflict not, and you have gained the crown.
Why do you disgrace yourself? Allow him not to say that by conflicting you have
got the better, but suffer him to be amazed and to marvel at your invincible
power; and to say to all, that even without entering into conflict you have
conquered."
Thus also the blessed Joseph obtained a good report, everywhere by
suffering wrong getting the better of them who were doing it. For his brethren
and the Egyptian woman were among those that were plotting against him, but
over all did this man prevail. For tell me not of the prison, wherein this man
dwelt, nor of the kings' courts where she abode, but show me who it is that is
conquered, who it is that is defeated, who that is in despondency, who that is in
pleasure. For she, so far from being able to prevail over the righteous man, could
not master so much as her own passion; but this man prevailed both over her and
over that grievous disease. But if you will, hear her very words, and you shall
see the trophy. "You brought in unto us here an Hebrew servant to mock us."
[Genesis 39:17] It was not this man that mocked you, O wretched and unhappy
woman, but the devil that told you that you could break down the adamant. This