sentiments they set forth, and to write them in your minds. The Jews because
they gave no heed were commanded to suspend their books from their hands; but
we place them not even in our hands but in our house, when we ought to stamp
them on our heart. Thus cleansing our present life, we shall obtain the good
things that are to come to which may we all attain, through the grace and
lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom and with whom, to the Father
and the Holy Ghost be glory, now and ever, and world without end. Amen.

Homily 54 on the Gospel of John
John 8:31-32
"Then said Jesus to those Jews which believed on Him, If you continue in My
word, then are you My disciples indeed. And you shall know the truth, and the
truth shall make you free."
1. Beloved, our condition needs much endurance; and endurance is
produced when doctrines are deeply rooted. For as no wind is able by its assaults
to tear up the oak, which sends down its root into the lower recesses of the earth,
and is firmly clenched there; so too the soul which is nailed by the fear of God
none will be able to overturn. Since to be nailed is more than to be rooted. Thus
the Prophet prays, saying, "Nail my flesh by Your fear" [Psalm 119:120,
Septuagint]; "do Thou so fix and join me, as by a nail riveted into me." For as
men of this kind are hard to be captured, so the opposite sort are a ready prey,
and are easily thrown down. As was the case of the Jews at that time; for after
having heard and believed, they again turned out of the way. Christ therefore
desiring to deepen their faith that it might not be merely superficial, digs into
their souls by more striking words. For it was the part of believers to endure
even reproofs, but they immediately were angry. But how does He this? He first
tells them, "If you continue in My word, you are My disciples indeed: and the
truth shall make you free." All but saying, "I am about to make a deep incision,
but be not ye moved"; or rather by these expressions He allayed the pride of their
imagination. "Shall make you free": from what, tell me? From your sins. What
then say those boasters?

John 8:33
"We be Abraham's seed, and were never in bondage to any man."
Immediately their imagination dropped, and this happened from their
having been fluttered about worldly things. "If you continue in My word," was
the expression of One declaring what was in their heart, and knowing that they
had indeed believed, but had not continued. And He promises a great thing, that
they should become His disciples. For since some had gone away from Him
before this, alluding to them He says, "If you continue," because they also had
heard and believed, and departed because they could not continue. "For many of
His disciples went back, and walked no more openly with Him." [John 6:66]
"You shall know the truth," that is, "shall know Me, for I am the truth. All
the Jewish matters were types, but you shall know the truth from Me, and it shall
free you from your sins." As to those others He said, "You shall die in your sins,"
so to these He says, "shall make you free." He said not, "I will deliver you from
bondage," this He allowed them to conjecture. What then said they?
"We be Abraham's seed, and were never in bondage to any man." And yet if
they must needs have been vexed, it might have been expected that they would
have been so at the former part of His speech, at His having said, "You shall
know the truth"; and that they would have replied, "What! Do we not now know
the truth? Is then the Law and our knowledge a lie?" But they cared for none of
these things, they are grieved at worldly things, and these were their notions of
bondage. And certainly even now, there are many who feel shame at indifferent
matters, and at this kind of bondage, but who feel none for the bondage of sin,
and who would rather be called servants to this latter kind of bondage ten
thousand times, than once to the former. Such were these men, and they did not
even know of any other bondage, and they say, "Bondsmen do you call those
who are of the race of Abraham, the nobly born, who therefore ought not to be
called bondsmen? For, says one, we were never in bondage to any man." Such