happen to possess, we find the likeness of a "trace," as in other
creatures to which, in reference to such parts, the rational creature
can be likened. We may easily understand the reason of this if we
consider the way in which a "trace," and the way in which an
"image," represents anything. An "image" represents something by
likeness in species, as we have said; while a "trace" represents
something by way of an effect, which represents the cause in such a
way as not to attain to the likeness of species. For imprints which
are left by the movements of animals are called "traces": so also
ashes are a trace of fire, and desolation of the land a trace of a
hostile army.
Therefore we may observe this difference between rational creatures
and others, both as to the representation of the likeness of the
Divine Nature in creatures, and as to the representation in them of
the uncreated Trinity. For as to the likeness of the Divine Nature,
rational creatures seem to attain, after a fashion, to the
representation of the species, inasmuch as they imitate God, not
only in being and life, but also in intelligence, as above explained
(Article 2); whereas other creatures do not understand, although we
observe in them a certain trace of the Intellect that created them, if
we consider their disposition. Likewise as the uncreated Trinity is
distinguished by the procession of the Word from the Speaker, and
of Love from both of these, as we have seen (Question 28, Article 3);
so we may say that in rational creatures wherein we find a
procession of the word in the intellect, and a procession of the love
in the will, there exists an image of the uncreated Trinity, by a certain
representation of the species. In other creatures, however, we do not
find the principle of the word, and the word and love; but we do see
in them a certain trace of the existence of these in the Cause that
produced them. For in the fact that a creature has a modified and
finite nature, proves that it proceeds from a principle; while its
species points to the (mental) word of the maker, just as the shape of
a house points to the idea of the architect; and order points to the
maker's love by reason of which he directs the effect to a good end;
as also the use of the house points to the will of the architect. So we
find in man a likeness to God by way of an "image" in his mind; but
in the other parts of his being by way of a "trace."
Reply to Objection 1: Man is called to the image of God; not that he
is essentially an image; but that the image of God is impressed on
his mind; as a coin is an image of the king, as having the image of
the king. Wherefore there is no need to consider the image of God as

existing in every part of man.
Reply to Objection 2: As Augustine says (De Trin. xii, 5), some have
thought that the image of God was not in man individually, but
severally. They held that "the man represents the Person of the
Father; those born of man denote the person of the Son; and that the
woman is a third person in likeness to the Holy Ghost, since she so
proceeded from man as not to be his son or daughter." All of this is
manifestly absurd; first, because it would follow that the Holy Ghost
is the principle of the Son, as the woman is the principle of the man's
offspring; secondly, because one man would be only the image of
one Person; thirdly, because in that case Scripture should not have
mentioned the image of God in man until after the birth of the
offspring. Therefore we must understand that when Scripture had
said, "to the image of God He created him," it added, "male and
female He created them," not to imply that the image of God came
through the distinction of sex, but that the image of God belongs to
both sexes, since it is in the mind, wherein there is no sexual
distinction of sex, but that the image of God belongs to both sexes,
since it is in the mind, wherein there is no sexual distinction.
Wherefore the Apostle (Col. 3:10), after saying, "According to the
image of Him that created him," added, "Where there is neither male
nor female" [Gal. 3:28].
Reply to Objection 3: Although the image of God in man is not to be
found in his bodily shape, yet because "the body of man alone
among terrestrial animals is not inclined prone to the ground, but is
adapted to look upward to heaven, for this reason we may rightly say
that it is made to God's image and likeness, rather than the bodies of
other animals," as Augustine remarks (Questions. 83, qu. 51). But
this is not to be understood as though the image of God were in
man's body; but in the sense that the very shape of the human body
represents the image of God in the soul by way of a trace.
Reply to Objection 4: Both in the corporeal and in the imaginary
vision we may find a trinity, as Augustine says (De Trin. xi, 2). For in
corporeal vision there is first the species of the exterior body;
secondly, the act of vision, which occurs by the impression on the
sight of a certain likeness of the said species; thirdly, the intention of
the will applying the sight to see, and to rest on what is seen.
Likewise, in the imaginary vision we find first the species kept in the
memory; secondly, the vision itself, which is caused by the