SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.51, C.3.

Reply to Objection 1: To judge and command belongs not to the
thing moved, but to the mover. Wherefore, since in the gifts of the
Holy Ghost, the position of the human mind is of one moved rather
than of a mover, as stated above (Article 1; FS, Question 68, Article
1), it follows that it would be unfitting to call the gift corresponding to
prudence by the name of command or judgment rather than of
counsel whereby it is possible to signify that the counselled mind is
moved by another counselling it.
Reply to Objection 2: The gift of knowledge does not directly
correspond to prudence, since it deals with speculative matters: yet
by a kind of extension it helps it. On the other hand the gift of
counsel corresponds to prudence directly, because it is concerned
about the same things.
Reply to Objection 3: The mover that is moved, moves through being
moved. Hence the human mind, from the very fact that it is directed
by the Holy Ghost, is enabled to direct itself and others.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.51, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the gift of counsel remains in heaven?

Objection 1: It would seem that the gift of counsel does not remain in
heaven. For counsel is about what has to be done for the sake of an
end. But in heaven nothing will have to be done for the sake of an
end, since there man possesses the last end. Therefore the gift of
counsel is not in heaven.
Objection 2: Further, counsel implies doubt, for it is absurd to take
counsel in matters that are evident, as the Philosopher observes
(Ethic. iii, 3). Now all doubt will cease in heaven. Therefore there is
no counsel in heaven.
Objection 3: Further, the saints in heaven are most conformed to
God, according to 1 Jn. 3:2, "When He shall appear, we shall be like
to Him." But counsel is not becoming to God, according to Rm.
11:34, "Who hath been His counsellor?" Therefore neither to the
saints in heaven is the gift of counsel becoming.
On the contrary, Gregory says (Moral. xvii, 12): "When either the guilt
or the righteousness of each nation is brought into the debate of the
heavenly Court, the guardian of that nation is said to have won in the
conflict, or not to have won."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 2; FS, Question 68, Article 1),
the gifts of the Holy Ghost are connected with the motion of the
rational creature by God. Now we must observe two points
concerning the motion of the human mind by God. First, that the
disposition of that which is moved, differs while it is being moved
from its disposition when it is in the term of movement. Indeed if the
mover is the principle of the movement alone, when the movement
ceases, the action of the mover ceases as regards the thing moved,
since it has already reached the term of movement, even as a house,
after it is built, ceases being built by the builder. On the other hand,
when the mover is cause not only of the movement, but also of the
form to which the movement tends, then the action of the mover
does not cease even after the form has been attained: thus the sun
lightens the air even after it is lightened. In this way, then, God
causes in us virtue and knowledge, not only when we first acquire
them, but also as long as we persevere in them: and it is thus that
God causes in the blessed a knowledge of what is to be done, not as