6:11] In the case of the Apostles they were annoyed that they preached the
Resurrection, and that much people flowed unto them: but in this case, that they
were getting their diseases healed. [Acts 4:2] The things for which they ought to
give thanks, they made matter of blame: O the madness! The men who overcame
them by works, they expected to overcome by words! It is just what they did in
the case of Christ, and always they forced them to words. For they were ashamed
to seize them without more ado, having nothing to charge them with. And
observe, not the persons themselves who bring them to judgment bear witness
against them; for they would have been refuted: but they simply hire others, that
it may not seem to be an act of mere violence. It is all of a piece with their
proceeding in the case of Christ. And observe the power of the preaching, that,
though they are not only scourged but stoned, it still prevails: not only, private
individuals as they are, dragged to the bar, but assailed from all quarters: and,
their enemies themselves being witnesses, not only were these worsted, but "they
were not able" even "to resist" [Acts 6:10], though they were exceeding
shameless: so mightily did it overthrow them, for all that they could do with
their preposterous figments (as the saying that He had a devil— He that cast out
devils!). For the battle was not man's, but God's against men. And there were
many combined together; not only they in Jerusalem, but others as well. [Acts
6:9] For "we have heard him," say they, "speaking blasphemous words against
Moses and against God." [Acts 6:11] O you shameless ones! You work
blasphemous deeds, and think nothing of it. This is why Moses is added—
because the things of God were no great concern to them: and it is ever and
always Moses that they make mention of: "This Moses, which brought us out."
[Acts 7:40] "And they stirred up the people." [Acts 6:12] Fickleness of the
multitude! And yet how could a man who was a blasphemer have so succeeded?
How could a blasphemer work such miracles among the people? But the
undisciplined multitude made them strong who had the worst of it (in argument).
— This was what most annoyed them. "We have heard him," they say, "speaking
blasphemous words against Moses and against God" [Acts 6:13]: and again,

"This man ceases not to speak blasphemous words against this holy place and
the law," and with an addition, "the customs" "which Moses delivered to us"
[Acts 6:14]; Moses, not God. Upon the supposition of a design to overturn their
manner of life ([πολιτείας]), they accused him of impiety also. But to show that
it was not in the nature of such a man to speak such things, and harshly ["Then
all," it says, "which were in the council, looking steadfastly upon him, saw his
face, as it had been the face of an angel"] [Acts 6:15]: so mild was he even in
countenance. For, in cases where persons were not falsely accused, Scripture
mentions nothing of this kind: but as in this case it was all false accusation, with
reason does God rectify it by the very look of the man. For the Apostles indeed
were not falsely accused, but were forbidden: but this man is falsely accused:
and therefore before all else his countenance pleads for him. This abashed even
the priest. "And he said," etc. [Acts 7:1] He shows here, that the promise was
made before the Place, before Circumcision, before Sacrifice, before the Temple,
and that it was not of their merit that these received either Circumcision or Law,
but that the land was the reward of obedience alone. Moreover, that neither on
the giving of circumcision does the promise receive its fulfillment. Also, that
these were figures, and (so was) both the leaving his country at God's command
— not against the law (for home and country is where God shall lead): "Then
came he out," it says, "of the land of the Chaldeans" [Acts 7:4]:— and that if one
look closely into the matter, the Jews are of Persian origin: and that, without
miracles, one must do as God bids, whatever hardships be the consequence;
since the Patriarch left both the grave of his father and all that he had, in
obedience to God's command. But if Abraham's father was not allowed to take
part with him in the privilege of migrating to Palestine, because he was
unworthy: much more shall the children (be excluded at last), for all that they
may have gone a good distance on the way. "And He promised," it says, "to give
it to him, and to his seed after him." [Acts 7:5] Herein is shown the greatness
both of God's goodness and of Abraham's faith. For the expression, "when as yet
he had no child," does show his obedience and faith. "Promised to give it to him