they not only develop the dictate of nature, but also make up the deficiency of what
nature dictates, as dogmas divinely revealed surpass the capacity of natural reason.
Since then there is in the human species a natural exigency for the union of male and
female to be one and indivisible, such unity and indissolubility must needs be ordained
by human law. To that ordinance the divine law adds a supernatural reason, derived
from the significancy of marriage as a type of the inseparable union of Christ with His
Church, which is one as He is one. Thus then irregularities in the act of generation
are not only contrary to the dictate of nature, but are also transgressions of laws divine
and human: hence on this account any irregular behaviour in this matter is even a
greater sin than in the matter of taking food or the like. But since all other factors in
human life should be subordinate to that which is the best thing in man, it follows that
the union of male and female must be regulated by law, not from the mere point of view
of procreation, as in other animals, but also with an eye to good manners, or manners
conformable to right reason, as well for man as an individual, as also for man as a
member of a household or family, or again as a member of civil society. Thus
understood, good manners involve the indissolubility of the union of male and female:
for they will love one another with greater fidelity, when they know that they are
indissolubly united: each partner will take greater care of the things of the house,
reflecting that they are to remain permanently in possession of the same things:
occasions of quarrels are removed, that might otherwise arise between the husband
and the wife's relations, if the husband were to divorce his wife; and thus affinity
becomes a firmer bond of amity: also occasions of adultery are cut off, occasions which
would readily offer themselves, if husband could divorce his wife, or wife her husband.

## CHAPTER CXXIV--That Marriage ought to be between one Man and one Woman
ONE general reason holds for all animals, which is this, that every animal desires free
enjoyment of the pleasure of sexual union as of eating: which freedom is impeded by
there being either several males to one female, or the other way about: and therefore
animals fight alike for food and for sexual jealousy. But in men there is a special reason,
inasmuch as man naturally desires to be sure of his own offspring. But here a difference
comes in. Both of the above mentioned reasons hold for the case of the cohabitation of
one female with several males: but the second reason does not hold against the
cohabitation of one male with several females, -- I mean certainty in point of parentage
is not in that case prevented. But the first reason makes against it: for as the free
enjoyment of the female is taken from the male, if the female has another partner, so
the same free enjoyment is taken from the female, if the male has more than one
partner.
2. In every species of animal in which the sire takes any interest in the offspring, one
male keeps company with one female only, as in all birds that rear their young in
common: for one male could not avail for several females as a helper in the rearing of
their progeny: whereas in animals in which the males take no interest in the offspring,
one male consorts with several females promiscuously, and the female with several
males, as appears in dogs, poultry, and the like. But the male's interest in the
offspring is greater in the human species than in any other.
3 and 4. The reason why a wife is not allowed more than one husband at a time is
because otherwise paternity would be uncertain. If then while the wife has one husband
only, the husband has more than one wife, there will not be a friendship of equality on
both sides, friendship consisting in a certain equality. There will not be the friendship of
a free man with a free woman, but a sort of friendship of a slave with her master. The
husband might well be allowed a plurality of wives, if the understanding were allowable,
that the friendship of each with him was not to be that of a free woman with a free man
but of a slave with her master. And this is borne out by experience: for among men that
keep many wives the wives are counted as menials.
5. From one man having several wives there arises discord at the domestic hearth, as
experience shows.
Hence it is said: They shall be two in one flesh (Gen. ii, 24).