hebdomad; but the Cosmocrator in this our world. The corporeal elements of the world, again,
sprang, as we before remarked, from bewilderment and perplexity, as from a more ignoble source.
Thus the earth arose from her state of stupor; water from the agitation caused by her fear; air from
the consolidation of her grief; while fire, producing death and corruption, was inherent in all these
elements, even as they teach that ignorance also lay concealed in these three passions.
5. Having thus formed the world, he (the Demiurge) also created the earthy [part of] man, not
taking him from this dry earth, but from an invisible substance consisting of fusible and fluid matter,
and then afterwards, as they define the process, breathed into him the animal part of his nature. It
was this latter which was created after his image and likeness. The material part, indeed, was very
near to God, so far as the image went, but not of the same substance with him. The animal, on the
other hand, was so in respect to likeness; and hence his substance was called the spirit of life,
because it took its rise from a spiritual outflowing. After all this, he was, they say, enveloped all
round with a covering of skin; and by this they mean the outward sensitive flesh.
6. But they further affirm that the Demiurge himself was ignorant of that offspring of his mother
Achamoth, which she brought forth as a consequence of her contemplation of those angels who
waited on the Saviour, and which was, like herself, of a spiritual nature. She took advantage of this
ignorance to deposit it (her production) in him without his knowledge, in order that, being by his
instrumentality infused into that animal soul proceeding from himself, and being thus carried as in
a womb in this material body, while it gradually increased in strength, might in course of time
become fitted for the reception of perfect rationality. Thus it came to pass, then, according to
them, that, without any knowledge on the part of the Demiurge, the man formed by his inspiration
was at the same time, through an unspeakable providence, rendered a spiritual man by the
simultaneous inspiration received from Sophia. For, as he was ignorant of his mother, so neither
did he recognise her offspring. This [offspring] they also declare to be the Ecclesia, an emblem of
the Ecclesia which is above. This, then, is the kind of man whom they conceive of: he has his animal
soul from the Demiurge, his body from the earth, his fleshy part from matter, and his spiritual man
from the mother Achamoth.

### Chapter VI.—The threefold kind of man feigned by these heretics: good works needless for
them, though necessary to others: their abandoned morals.
1. There being thus three kinds of substances, they declare of all that is material (which they
also describe as being "on the left hand") that it must of necessity perish, inasmuch as it is incapable
of receiving any afflatus of incorruption. As to every animal existence (which they also denominate
than the animal soul; but, unwittingly to himself, he was made the instrument of conveying that spiritual essence from Achamoth,
which had grown up within her from the contemplation of those angels who accompanied the Saviour.