mother barren and his wife, but also his daughter-in-law, the wife of Jacob,
Rachel. What is the meaning of this band of barren ones? All were righteous, all
living in virtue, all were witnessed to by God. For it was of them that He said, "I
am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob." Of the
same persons Paul also thus speaks. "For which cause God is not ashamed to
call himself their God." [Hebrews 11:16] Many are the commendations of them
in the New, many the praises of them in the Old Testament. On all sides they
were bright and illustrious, and yet they all had barren wives, and continued in
childlessness until an advanced period. When therefore you see man and wife
living with virtue; when you see them beloved of God, caring for piety, and yet
suffering the malady of childlessness; do not suppose that the childlessness is at
all a retribution for sins. For many are God's reasons for the dispensation, and to
us inexplicable; and for all we must be heartily thankful, and think those only
wretched who live in wickedness; not those who do not possess children. Often
God does it expediently, though we know not the cause of events. On this
account in every case it is our duty to admire His wisdom, and to glorify His
unspeakable love of man.
7. Well, this consideration indeed is able to school us in moral character, but
it is necessary also to state the cause for which those women were barren. What
then was the cause? It was in order that when you have seen the Virgin bringing
forth our common Master, you might not disbelieve. Wherefore exercise your
mind in the womb of the barren; in order that when you have seen the womb,
disabled and bound as it is, being opened to the bearing of children from the
grace of God, you might not marvel at hearing that a virgin has brought forth. Or
rather even marvel and be astounded; but do not disbelieve the marvel. When the
Jew says to you, "how did the virgin bear?" say to him "how did she bear who
was barren and enfeebled by old age?" There were then two hindrances, both the
unseasonableness of her age and the unserviceableness of nature; but in the case
of the Virgin there was one hindrance only, the not having shared in marriage.
The barren one therefore prepares the way for the virgin. And that you may learn

that it was on this account that the barren ones had anticipated it, in order that
the Virgin's childbirth might be believed, hear the words of Gabriel which were
addressed to her— For when he had come and said to her, "you shall conceive in
the womb and bear a son, and you shall call his name Jesus;" the Virgin was
astonished and marvelled, and said, "how will this be to me, since I know not a
man." What then said the Angel? "The Holy Ghost shall come upon you." Seek
not the sequence of nature, he says, when that which takes place is above nature;
look not round for marriage and throes of child-birth, when the manner of the
birth is too grand for marriage. "And how will this be," she says, "since I know
not a husband." And verily on this account shall this be, since you know no
husband. For did you know a husband, you would not have been deemed worthy
to serve this ministry. So that, for the reason why you disbelieve, for this believe.
And you would not have been deemed worthy to serve this ministry, not because
marriage is an evil; but because virginity is superior; and right it was that the
entry of the Master should be more august than ours; for it was royal, and the
king enters through one more august. It was necessary that He should both share
as to birth, and be diverse from ours. Wherefore both these things are managed.
For the being born from the womb is common in respect to us, but the being
born without marriage is a thing greater than on a level with us. And the
gestation and conception in the belly belongs to human nature; but that the
pregnancy should take place without sexual intercourse is too august for human
nature. And for this purpose both these things took place, in order that you may
learn both the pre-eminence and the fellowship with you of Him who was born.
8. And pray consider the wisdom of all that was done. Neither did the preeminence injure the likeness and kinship to us, nor did the kinship to us dim the
pre-eminence; but both were displayed by all the circumstances; and the one had
our condition in its entirety, and the other what was diverse compared with us.
But just as I was saying, on this account the barren ones went before, in order
that the Virgin's child-birth might be believed, that she might be led by the hand
to faith in that promise and undertaking which she heard from the angel, saying,