2. The father and son thus both had intercourse with the woman (whom they also call the mother
of the living). When, however, she could not bear nor receive into herself the greatness of the
lights, they declare that she was filled to repletion, and became ebullient on the left side; and that
thus their only son Christ, as belonging to the right side, and ever tending to what was higher, was
immediately caught up with his mother to form an incorruptible Æon. This constitutes the true and
holy Church, which has become the appellation, the meeting together, and the union of the father
of all, of the first man, of the son, of the second man, of Christ their son, and of the woman who
has been mentioned.
3. They teach, however, that the power which proceeded from the woman by ebullition, being
besprinkled with light, fell downward from the place occupied by its progenitors, yet possessing
by its own will that besprinkling of light; and it they call Sinistra, Prunicus, and Sophia, as well as
masculo-feminine. This being, in its simplicity, descended into the waters while they were yet in
a state of immobility, and imparted motion to them also, wantonly acting upon them even to their
lowest depths, and assumed from them a body. For they affirm that all things rushed towards and
clung to that sprinkling of light, and begin it all round. Unless it had possessed that, it would perhaps
have been totally absorbed in, and overwhelmed by, material substance. Being therefore bound
down by a body which was composed of matter, and greatly burdened by it, this power regretted
the course it had followed, and made an attempt to escape from the waters and ascend to its mother:
it could not effect this, however, on account of the weight of the body lying over and around it. But
feeling very ill at ease, it endeavoured at least to conceal that light which came from above, fearing
lest it too might be injured by the inferior elements, as had happened to itself. And when it had
received power from that besprinkling of light which it possessed, it sprang back again, and was
borne aloft; and being on high, it extended itself, covered [a portion of space], and formed this
visible heaven out of its body; yet remained under the heaven which it made, as still possessing the
form of a watery body. But when it had conceived a desire for the light above, and had received
power by all things, it laid down this body, and was freed from it. This body which they speak of
that power as having thrown off, they call a female from a female.
4. They declare, moreover, that her son had also himself a certain breath of incorruption left
him by his mother, and that through means of it he works; and becoming powerful, he himself, as
they affirm, also sent forth from the waters a son without a mother; for they do not allow him either
to have known a mother. His son, again, after the example of his father, sent forth another son. This
third one, too, generated a fourth; the fourth also generated a son: they maintain that again a son
was generated by the fifth; and the sixth, too, generated a seventh. Thus was the Hebdomad,
according to them, completed, the mother possessing the eighth place; and as in the case of their
generations, so also in regard to dignities and powers, they precede each other in turn.