and throwing into the shade all harlots, virgin as she was.
And the time again contributes no little to the reproof of this enormity. For
when he ought to be thanking God, that on that day He had brought him to light,
then he ventures upon those lawless acts. When one in chains ought to have been
freed by him, then he adds slaughter to bonds.
Hearken, you virgins, or rather ye wives also, as many as consent to such
unseemliness at other person's weddings, leaping, and bounding, and disgracing
our common nature. Hearken, you men too, as many as follow after those
banquets, full of expense and drunkenness, and fear ye the gulf of the evil one.
For indeed so mightily did he seize upon that wretched person just then, that he
swore even to give the half of his kingdom: this being Mark's statement, "He
swore unto her, Whatsoever you shall ask of me, I will give it you, unto the half
of my kingdom." [Mark 6:23]
Such was the value he set upon his royal power; so was he once for all
made captive by his passion, as to give up his kingdom for a dance. vilifying,
reviling, insulting. But not so the saints; they on the contrary mourn for such as
sin, rather than curse them.
8. This then let us also do, and let us weep for Herodias, and for them that
imitate her. For many such revels now also take place, and though John be not
slain, yet the members of Christ are, and in a far more grievous way. For it is not
a head in a charger that the dancers of our time ask, but the souls of them that sit
at the feast. For in making them slaves, and leading them to unlawful loves, and
besetting them with harlots, they do not take off the head, but slay the soul,
making them adulterers, and effeminate, and whoremongers.
For you will not surely tell me, that when full of wine, and drunken, and
looking at a woman who is dancing and uttering base words, thou dost not feel
anything towards her, neither art hurried on to profligacy, overcome by your lust.
Nay, that awful thing befalls you, that you "makest the members of Christ
members of an harlot." [1 Corinthians 6:15]
For though the daughter of Herodias be not present, yet the devil, who then

danced in her person, in theirs also holds his choirs now, and departs with the
souls of those guests taken captive.
But if you are able to keep clear of drunkenness, yet are you partakers of
another most grievous sin; such revels being also full of much rapine. For look
not, I pray you, on the meats that are set before them, nor on the cakes; but
consider whence they are gathered, and you will see that it is of vexation, and
covetousness, and violence, and rapine.
"Nay, ours are not from such sources," one may say. God forbid they should
be: for neither do I desire it. Nevertheless, although they be clear of these, not
even so are our costly feasts freed from blame. Hear, at all events, how even
apart from these things the prophet finds fault with them, thus speaking, "Woe to
them that drink wine racked off, and anoint themselves with the chief ointments."
Do you see how He censures luxury too? For it is not covetousness which He
here lays to their charge, but prodigality only.
And you eat to excess, Christ not even for need; thou various cakes, He not
so much as dry bread; you drink Thasian wine, but on Him you have not
bestowed so much as a cup of cold water in His thirst. You are on a soft and
embroidered bed, but He is perishing with the cold.
Wherefore, though the banquets be clear from covetousness, yet even so are
they accursed, because, while for your part you do all in excess, to Him you give
not even His need; and that, living in luxury upon things that belong to Him.
Why, if you were guardian to a child, and having taken possession of his goods,
were to neglect him in extremities, you would have ten thousand accusers, and
wouldest suffer the punishment appointed by the laws; and now having taken
possession of the goods of Christ, and thus consuming them for no purpose, do
you not think you will have to give account?
9. And these things I say not of those who introduce harlots to their tables
(for to them I have nothing to say, even as neither have I to the dogs), nor of
those who cheat some, and pamper others (for neither with them have I anything
to do, even as I have not with the swine and with the wolves); but of those who