support of this he makes a careful distinction, saying that he was "rude in
speech, but not in knowledge." [2 Corinthians 11:6] Now were I to insist upon
the polish of Isocrates, the weight of Demosthenes, the dignity of Thucydides,
and the sublimity of Plato, in any one bishop, St. Paul would be a strong
evidence against me. But I pass by all such matters and the elaborate ornaments
of profane oratory; and I take no account of style or of delivery; yea let a man's
diction be poor and his composition simple and unadorned, but let him not be
unskilled in the knowledge and accurate statement of doctrine; nor in order to
screen his own sloth, deprive that holy apostle of the greatest of his gifts, and the
sum of his praises.
7. For how was it, tell me, that he confounded the Jews which dwelt at
Damascus, [Acts 9:22] though he had not yet begun to work miracles? How was
it that he wrestled with the Grecians and threw them? and why was he sent to
Tarsus? Was it not because he was so mighty and victorious in the word, and
brought his adversaries to such a pass that they, unable to brook their defeat,
were provoked to seek his life? At that time, as I said, he had not begun to work
miracles, nor could any one say that the masses looked upon him with
astonishment on account of any glory belonging to his mighty works, or that
they who contended with him were overpowered by the force of public opinion
concerning him. For at this time he conquered by dint of argument only. How
was it, moreover, that he contended and disputed successfully with those who
tried to Judaize in Antioch? And how was it that that Areopagite, [Acts 17:34]
an inhabitant of Athens, that most devoted of all cities to the gods, followed the
apostle, he and his wife? Was it not owing to the discourse which they heard?
And when Eutychus [Acts 20:9] fell from the lattice, was it not owing to his long
attendance even until midnight to St. Paul's preaching? How do we find him
employed at Thessalonica and Corinth, in Ephesus and in Rome itself? Did he
not spend whole nights and days in interpreting the Scriptures in their order?
And why should any one recount his disputes with the Epicureans and Stoics.
[Acts 17:18] For were we resolved to enter into every particular, our story would

grow to an unreasonable length.
When, therefore, both before working miracles, and after, St. Paul appears
to have made much use of argument, how can any one dare to pronounce him
unskillful whose sermons and disputations were so exceedingly admired by all
who heard them? Why did the Lycaonians [Acts 14:11] imagine that he was
Hermes? The opinion that he and Barnabas were gods indeed, arose out of the
sight of their miracles; but the notion that he was Hermes did not arise from this,
but was a consequence of his speech. In what else did this blessed saint excel the
rest of the apostles? And how comes it that up and down the world he is so much
on every one's tongue? How comes it that not merely among ourselves, but also
among Jews and Greeks, he is the wonder of wonders? Is it not from the power
of his epistles? Whereby not only to the faithful of today, but from his time to
this, yea and up to the end, even the appearing of Christ, he has been and will be
profitable, and will continue to be so as long as the human race shall last. For as
a wall built of adamant, so his writings fortify all the Churches of the known
world, and he as a most noble champion stands in the midst, bringing into
captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ, casting down imaginations,
and every high thing which exalts itself against the knowledge of God,
[2 Corinthians 10:5] and all this he does by those epistles which he has left to us
full of wonders and of Divine wisdom. For his writings are not only useful to us,
for the overthrow of false doctrine and the confirmation of the true, but they help
not a little towards living a good life. For by the use of these, the bishops of the
present day fit and fashion the chaste virgin, which St. Paul himself espoused to
Christ, [2 Corinthians 11:2] and conduct her to the state of spiritual beauty; with
these, too, they drive away from her the noisome pestilences which beset her,
and preserve the good health thus obtained. Such are the medicines and such
their efficacy left us by this so-called unskillful man, and they know them and
their power best who constantly use them. From all this it is evident that St. Paul
had given himself to the study of which we have been speaking with great
diligence and zeal.