1 Corinthians 11:25
"In like manner also the cup after supper, saying, This cup is the New
Covenant in My Blood: this do, as oft as you drink of it, in remembrance of Me."
What do you say? Are you making a remembrance of Christ, and do you
despise the poor and tremblest not? Why, if a son or brother had died and thou
were making a remembrance of him, you would have been smitten by your
conscience, had you not fulfilled the custom and invited the poor: and when you
are making remembrance of your Master, do you not so much as simply give a
portion of the Table?
But what is it which He says, "This cup is the New Covenant?" Because
there was also a cup of the Old Covenant; the libations and the blood of the brute
creatures. For after sacrificing, they used to receive the blood in a chalice and
bowl and so pour it out. Since then instead of the blood of beasts He brought in
His own Blood; lest any should be troubled on hearing this, He reminds them of
that ancient sacrifice.
6. Next, having spoken concerning that Supper, he connects the things
present with the things of that time, that even as on that very evening and
reclining on that very couch and receiving from Christ himself this sacrifice, so
also now might men be affected; and he says,

1 Corinthians 11:26
"For as often as you eat this bread, and drink this cup, you proclaim the
Lord's death till He come."
For as Christ in regard to the bread and the cup said, "Do this in
remembrance of Me," revealing to us the cause of the giving of the Mystery, and
besides what else He said, declaring this to be a sufficient cause to ground our
religious fear upon:— (for when you consider what your Master has suffered for
you, you will the better deny yourself:)— so also Paul says here: "as often as
you eat ye do proclaim His death." And this is that Supper. Then intimating that
it abides unto the end, he says, "till He come."

1 Corinthians 11:27
"Wherefore whosoever shall eat this bread and drink the cup of the Lord
unworthily, shall be guilty of the Body and the Blood of the Lord."
Why so? Because he poured it out, and makes the thing appear a slaughter
and no longer a sacrifice. Much therefore as they who then pierced Him, pierced
Him not that they might drink but that they might shed His blood: so likewise
does he that comes for it unworthily and reaps no profit thereby. Do you see how
fearful he makes his discourse, and inveighs against them very exceedingly,
signifying that if they are thus to drink, they partake unworthily of the elements
? For how can it be other than unworthily when it is he who neglects the hungry?
Who besides overlooking him puts him to shame? Since if not giving to the poor
casts one out of the kingdom, even though one should be a virgin; or rather, not
giving liberally: (for even those virgins too had oil, only they had it not
abundantly:) consider how great the evil will prove, to have wrought so many
impieties?
"What impieties?" say you. Why do you say, what impieties? You have
partaken of such a Table and when you ought to be more gentle than any and like
the angels, none so cruel as you have become. You have tasted the Blood of the
Lord, and not even thereupon do you acknowledge your brother. Of what
indulgence then are you worthy? Whereas if even before this you had not known
him, you ought to have come to the knowledge of him from the Table; but now
you dishonor the Table itself; he having been deemed worthy to partake of it and
thou not judging him worthy of your meat. Have you not heard how much he
suffered who demanded the hundred pence? How he made void the gift
vouchsafed to him ? Does it not come into your mind what thou were and what
you have become? Do you not put yourself in remembrance that if this man be
poor in possessions, you were much more beggarly in good works, being full of