SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.51, C.4.

though they were ignorant, but by continuing that knowledge in
them.
Nevertheless there are things which the blessed, whether angels or
men, do not know: such things are not essential to blessedness, but
concern the government of things according to Divine Providence.
As regards these, we must make a further observation, namely, that
God moves the mind of the blessed in one way, and the mind of the
wayfarer, in another. For God moves the mind of the wayfarer in
matters of action, by soothing the pre-existing anxiety of doubt;
whereas there is simple nescience in the mind of the blessed as
regards the things they do not know. From this nescience the angel's
mind is cleansed, according to Dionysius (Coel. Hier. vii), nor does
there precede in them any research of doubt, for they simply turn to
God; and this is to take counsel of God, for as Augustine says (Gen.
ad lit. v, 19) "the angels take counsel of God about things beneath
them": wherefore the instruction which they receive from God in
such matters is called "counsel."
Accordingly the gift of counsel is in the blessed, in so far as God
preserves in them the knowledge that they have, and enlightens
them in their nescience of what has to be done.
Reply to Objection 1: Even in the blessed there are acts directed to
an end, or resulting, as it were, from their attainment of the end, such
as the acts of praising God, or of helping on others to the end which
they themselves have attained, for example the ministrations of the
angels, and the prayers of the saints. In this respect the gift of
counsel finds a place in them.
Reply to Objection 2: Doubt belongs to counsel according to the
present state of life, but not to that counsel which takes place in
heaven. Even so neither have the theological virtues quite the same
acts in heaven as on the way thither.
Reply to Objection 3: Counsel is in God, not as receiving but as
giving it: and the saints in heaven are conformed to God, as
receivers to the source whence they receive.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.51, C.4.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.51, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the fifth beatitude, which is that of mercy,

corresponds to the gift of counsel?
Objection 1: It would seem that the fifth beatitude, which is that of
mercy, does not correspond to the gift of counsel. For all the
beatitudes are acts of virtue, as stated above (FS, Question 69,
Article 1). Now we are directed by counsel in all acts of virtue.
Therefore the fifth beatitude does not correspond more than any
other to counsel.
Objection 2: Further, precepts are given about matters necessary for
salvation, while counsel is given about matters which are not
necessary for salvation. Now mercy is necessary for salvation,
according to James 2:13, "Judgment without mercy to him that hath
not done mercy." On the other hand poverty is not necessary for
salvation, but belongs to the life of perfection, according to Mt.
19:21. Therefore the beatitude of poverty corresponds to the gift of
counsel, rather than to the beatitude of mercy.
Objection 3: Further, the fruits result from the beatitudes, for they
denote a certain spiritual delight resulting from perfect acts of virtue.
Now none of the fruits correspond to the gift of counsel, as appears
from Gal. 5:22, 23. Therefore neither does the beatitude of mercy
correspond to the gift of counsel.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Serm. Dom. iv): "Counsel is
befitting the merciful, because the one remedy is to be delivered
from evils so great, to pardon, and to give."
I answer that, Counsel is properly about things useful for an end.
Hence such things as are of most use for an end, should above all
correspond to the gift of counsel. Now such is mercy, according to 1
Tim. 4:8, "Godliness is profitable to all things." Therefore the
beatitude of mercy specially corresponds to the gift of counsel, not
as eliciting but as directing mercy.
Reply to Objection 1: Although counsel directs in all the acts of
virtue, it does so in a special way in works of mercy, for the reason
given above.
Reply to Objection 2: Counsel considered as a gift of the Holy Ghost