Jer. xxii. 17.

Isa. lxvi. 3.

in fervent love, offering the first-fruits of His own created things. And the Church alone offers this
pure oblation to the Creator, offering to Him, with giving of thanks, [the things taken] from His
creation. But the Jews do not offer thus: for their hands are full of blood; for they have not received
the Word, through whom it is offered to God. Nor, again, do any of the conventicles (synagogæ)
of the heretics [offer this]. For some, by maintaining that the Father is different from the Creator,
do, when they offer to Him what belongs to this creation of ours, set Him forth as being covetous
of another's property, and desirous of what is not His own. Those, again, who maintain that the
things around us originated from apostasy, ignorance, and passion, do, while offering unto Him
the fruits of ignorance, passion, and apostasy, sin against their Father, rather subjecting Him to
insult than giving Him thanks. But how can they be consistent with themselves, [when they say]
that the bread over which thanks have been given is the body of their Lord, and the cup His
blood, if they do not call Himself the Son of the Creator of the world, that is, His Word, through
whom the wood fructifies, and the fountains gush forth, and the earth gives "first the blade, then
the ear, then the full corn in the ear."
5. Then, again, how can they say that the flesh, which is nourished with the body of the Lord
and with His blood, goes to corruption, and does not partake of life? Let them, therefore, either
alter their opinion, or cease from offering the things just mentioned. But our opinion is in
accordance with the Eucharist, and the Eucharist in turn establishes our opinion. For we offer to
Him His own, announcing consistently the fellowship and union of the flesh and Spirit. For as
the bread, which is produced from the earth, when it receives the invocation of God, is no longer
common bread, but the Eucharist, consisting of two realities, earthly and heavenly; so also our
bodies, when they receive the Eucharist, are no longer corruptible, having the hope of the resurrection
to eternity.

The text here fluctuates between quod offertur Deo, and per quod offertur Deo. Massuet adopts the former, and Harvey
the latter. If the first reading be chosen, the translation will be, "the Word who is offered to God," implying, according to Massuet,
that the body of Christ is really offered as a sacrifice in the Eucharist; if the second reading be followed, the translation will be
as above. [Massuet's idea is no more to be found, even in his text, than Luther's or Calvin's. The crucial point is, how offered?
One may answer "figuratively," "corporally," "mystically," or otherwise. Irenæus gives no answer in this place. But see below.]
of flesh with spirit; i.e., that the flesh of every child of man is receptive of the Spirit." The words !"# $%&'&(&)*+,- É .(,/01*,
which here occur in the Greek text, are rejected as an interpolation by Grabe and Harvey, but defended as genuine by Massuet.
teaches. Could words be plainer,—"two realities,"—(i.) bread, (ii.) spiritual food? Bread— but not "common bread;" matter and
grace, flesh and Spirit. In the Eucharist, an earthly and a heavenly part.]