he, this makes me glad. Then, lest he should seem to take pleasure in their pain,
he says, In this respect I am glad inasmuch as I make you feel, for in another
respect I am sorry in that I am compelled to make those sorry who love me so
much, not only by this rebuke, but also by being myself in sorrow and by this
means causing you fresh sorrow.
But observe how he puts this so as to mingle praise; saying, "from them of
whom I ought to rejoice," for these are the words of one testifying kindred and
much tender affection; as if one were speaking of sons on whom he had
bestowed many benefits and for whom he had toiled. If then for this I write and
come not; it is with weighty meaning I come not, and not because I feel hate or
aversion, but rather exceeding love.
3. Next, whereas he said, he that makes me sorry makes me glad; lest they
should say 'this then is what you study, that you might be made glad and might
exhibit to all the extent of your power;' he added,

2 Corinthians 2:4
"For out of much affliction and anguish of heart I wrote unto you with many
tears, not that you should be made sorry, but that you might know the love which
I have more abundantly unto you."
What more tenderly affectioned than this man's spirit is? For he shows
himself to have been not less pained than they who had sinned, but even much
more. For he says not "out of affliction" merely, but "out of much," nor "with
tears," but "with many tears" and "anguish of heart," that is, I was suffocated, I
was choked with despondency; and when I could no longer endure the cloud of
despondency, "I wrote unto you: not that you should be grieved, but that you
might know the love," says he, "which I have more abundantly unto you." And
yet what naturally followed was to say, not that you might be grieved, but that
you might be corrected: (for indeed with this purpose he wrote.) This however
he does not say, but, (more to sweeten his words, and win them to a greater
affection,) he puts this for it, showing that he does all from love. And he says not
simply "the love," but "which I have more abundantly unto you." For hereby also
he desires to win them, by showing that he loves them more than all and feels
towards them as to chosen disciples. Whence he says, "Even if I be not an
Apostle unto others, yet at least I am to you;" [1 Corinthians 9:2] and, "Though
you have many tutors, yet have ye not many fathers;" [1 Corinthians 4:15] and
again, "By the grace of God we behaved ourselves in the world, and more
abundantly to you ward;" [2 Corinthians 1:12] and farther on, "Though the more
abundantly I love you, the less I be loved;" and here "Which I have more
abundantly unto you;" [2 Corinthians 12:15] So that if my words were full of
anger, yet out of much love and sadness was the anger; and while writing the
Epistle, I suffered, I was pained, not because ye had sinned only, but also
because I was compelled to make you sorry. And this itself was out of love. Just