THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.2, C.8.

Reply to Objection 2: The specific nature of a relation, as of motion,
depends on the subject. And since this union has its being nowhere
save in a created nature, as was said above, it follows that it has a
created being.
Reply to Objection 3: A man is called Creator and is God because of
the union, inasmuch as it is terminated in the Divine hypostasis; yet
it does not follow that the union itself is the Creator or God, because
that a thing is said to be created regards its being rather than its
relation.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.2, C.9.

### ARTICLE 8. Whether union is the same as assumption?

Objection 1: It would seem that union is the same as assumption.
For relations, as motions, are specified by their termini. Now the
term of assumption and union is one and the same, viz. the Divine
hypostasis. Therefore it seems that union and assumption are not
different.
Objection 2: Further, in the mystery of the Incarnation the same thing
seems to be what unites and what assumes, and what is united and
what is assumed. But union and assumption seem to follow the
action and passion of the thing uniting and the united, of the thing
assuming and the assumed. Therefore union seems to be the same
as assumption.
Objection 3: Further, Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii, 11): "Union
is one thing, incarnation is another; for union demands mere
copulation, and leaves unsaid the end of the copulation; but
incarnation and humanation determine the end of copulation." But
likewise assumption does not determine the end of copulation.
Therefore it seems that union is the same as assumption.
On the contrary, The Divine Nature is said to be united, not assumed.
I answer that, As was stated above (Article 7), union implies a certain
relation of the Divine Nature and the human, according as they come
together in one Person. Now all relations which begin in time are
brought about by some change; and change consists in action and
passion. Hence the "first" and principal difference between
assumption and union must be said to be that union implies the
relation: whereas assumption implies the action, whereby someone
is said to assume, or the passion, whereby something is said to be
assumed. Now from this difference another "second" difference
arises, for assumption implies "becoming," whereas union implies
"having become," and therefore the thing uniting is said to be united,
but the thing assuming is not said to be assumed. For the human
nature is taken to be in the terminus of assumption unto the Divine
hypostasis when man is spoken of; and hence we can truly say that
the Son of God, Who assumes human nature unto Himself, is man.
But human nature, considered in itself, i.e. in the abstract, is viewed
as assumed; and we do not say the Son of God is human nature.