that Pleroma which is above the three hundred and sixty-five heavens, which is above forty-five
Ogdoads. And any one, again, might bring against them the same charge, by imagining four thousand
three hundred and eighty heavens, or Æons, since the days of the year contain that number of hours.
If, again, some one adds also the nights, thus doubling the hours which have been mentioned,
imagining that [in this way] he has discovered a great multitude of Ogdoads, and a kind of
innumerable company of Æons, and thus, in opposition to Him who is above all things Father,
conceiving himself more perfect than all [others], he will bring the same charge against all, inasmuch
as they are not capable of rising to the conception of such a multitude of heavens or Æons as he
has announced, but are either so deficient as to remain among those things which are below, or
continue in the intermediate space.

### Chapter XVII.—Inquiry into the production of the Æons: whatever its supposed nature, it
is in every respect inconsistent; and on the hypothesis of the heretics, even Nous and the
Father Himself would be stained with ignorance.

1. That system, then, which has respect to their Pleroma, and especially that part of it which
refers to the primary Ogdoad being thus burdened with so great contradictions and perplexities, let
me now go on to examine the remainder of their scheme. [In doing so] on account of their madness,
I shall be making inquiry respecting things which have no real existence; yet it is necessary to do
this, since the treatment of this subject has been entrusted to me, and since I desire all men to come
to the knowledge of the truth, as well as because thou thyself hast asked to receive from me full
and complete means for overturning [the views of] these men.
2. I ask, then, in what manner were the rest of the Æons produced? Was it so as to be united
with Him who produced them, even as the solar rays are with the sun; or was it actually and
separately, so that each of them possessed an independent existence and his own special form, just
as has a man from another man, and one herd of cattle from another? Or was it after the manner of
germination, as branches from a tree? And were they of the same substance with those who produced
them, or did they derive their substance from some other [kind of] substance? Also, were they
produced at the same time, so as to be contemporaries; or after a certain order, so that some of them
were older, and others younger? And, again, are they uncompounded and uniform, and altogether
equal and similar among themselves, as spirit and light are produced; or are they compounded and
different, unlike [to each other] in their members?
is, that three hundred and sixty-five is more than forty-five Ogdoads (45 ! 8 = 360).

Efficabiliter in the Latin text is thought to correspond to *)'"$+, in the original Greek.