all, and accounting it a degradation to live with other people, seek not thou after
that to see any other proof of that man's madness. Why, he is much more
ridiculous than any natural fool, inasmuch as he absolutely creates this his
disease on purpose. And not in this only is he wretched, but because he does
without feeling it fall into the very gulf of wickedness.
For when will such an one come to due knowledge of any sin? When will
he perceive that he is offending? Nay, rather he is as a vile and captive slave,
whom the devil having caught goes off with, and makes him altogether a prey,
buffetting him on every side, and encompassing him with ten thousand insults.
For unto such great folly does he lead them in the end, as to get them to be
haughty towards their children, and wives, and towards their own forefathers.
And others, on the contrary, He causes to be puffed up by the distinction of their
ancestors. Now, what can be more foolish than this? When from opposite causes
people are alike puffed up, the one sort because they had mean persons for
fathers, grandfathers, and ancestors; and the other because theirs were glorious
and distinguished? How then may one abate in each case the swelling sore? By
saying to these last, "Go farther back than your grandfather, and immediate
ancestors, and you will find perchance many cooks, and drivers of asses, and
shopkeepers:" but to the former, that are puffed up by the meanness of their
forefathers, the contrary again; "And thou again, if you proceed farther up
among your forefathers, wilt find many far more illustrious than you are."
For that nature has this course, come let me prove it to you even from the
Scriptures. Solomon was son of a king, and of an illustrious king, but that king's
father was one of the vile and ignoble. And his grandfather on his mother's side
in like manner; for else he would not have given his daughter to a mere soldier.
And if you were to go up again higher from these mean persons, you will see the
race more illustrious and royal. So in Saul's case too, so in many others also, one
shall come to this result. Let us not then pride ourselves herein. For what is
birth? Tell me. Nothing, but a name only without a substance; and this you will
know in that day. But because that day is not yet come, let us now even from the

things present persuade you, that hence arises no superiority. For should war
overtake us, should famine, should anything else, all these inflated conceits of
noble birth are put to the proof: should disease, should pestilence come upon us,
it knows not how to distinguish between the rich and the poor, the glorious and
inglorious, the high born and him that is not such; neither does death, nor the
other reverses of fortune, but they all rise up alike against all; and if I may say
something that is even marvellous, against the rich more of the two. For by how
much they are less exercised in these things, so much the more do they perish,
when overtaken by them. And the fear too is greater with the rich. For none so
tremble at princes as they; and at multitudes, not less than at princes, yea rather
much more; many such houses in fact have been subverted alike by the wrath of
multitudes and the threatening of princes. But the poor man is exempt from both
these kinds of troubled waters.
6. Wherefore let alone this nobility, and if you would show me that you are
noble, show the freedom of your soul, such as that blessed man had (and he a
poor man), who said to Herod, "It is not lawful for you to have your brother
Philip's wife;" [Mark 6:18] such as he was possessed of, who before him was
like him, and after him shall be so again; who said to Ahab, "I do not trouble
Israel, but thou, and your father's house;" [1 Kings 18:18] such as the prophets
had, such as all the apostles.
But not like this are the souls of them that are slaves to wealth, but as they
that are under ten thousand tutors, and taskmasters, so these dare not so much as
lift up their eye, and speak boldly in behalf of virtue. For the love of riches, and
that of glory, and that of other things, looking terribly on them, make them
slavish flatterers; there being nothing which so takes away liberty, as
entanglement in worldly affairs, and the wearing what are accounted marks of
distinction. For such an one has not one master, nor two, nor three, but ten
thousand.
And if you would fain even number them, let us bring in some one of those
that are in honor in kings' courts, and let him have both very much wealth, and