might not injure the doctrine of His humanity.
Now Matthew indeed says, that "they brought him," but the others, that they
also broke up the roof, and let him down. And they put the sick man before
Christ, saying nothing, but committing the whole to Him. For though in the
beginning He Himself went about, and did not require so much faith of them that
came unto Him; yet in this case they both approached Him, and had faith
required on their part. For, "Seeing," it is said, "their faith;" that is, the faith of
them that had let the man down. For He does not on all occasions require faith
on the part of the sick only: as for instance, when they are insane, or in any other
way, through their disease, are out of their own control. Or rather, in this case the
sick man too had part in the faith; for he would not have suffered himself to be
let down, unless he had believed.
Forasmuch then as they had evinced so great faith, He also evinces His own
power, with all authority absolving his sins, and signifying in all ways that He is
equal in honor with Him that begot Him. And mark; He implied it from the
beginning, by His teaching, when He taught them as one having authority; by the
leper, when He said, "I will, be thou clean," [Matthew 8:3] by the centurion,
when upon his saying, "Speak the word only, and my servant shall be healed, He
marvelled at him," [Matthew 8:8] and celebrated him above all men; by the sea,
when He curbed it with a mere word; by the devils, when they acknowledged
Him as their judge, and He cast them out with great authority.
Here again in another and a greater way He constrains His very enemies to
confess His equality in honor, and by their own mouth He makes it manifest. For
He, to signify His indifference to honor (for there stood a great company of
spectators shutting up the entrance, wherefore also they let him down from
above), did not straightway hasten to heal the visible body, but He takes His
occasion from them; and He healed first that which is invisible, the soul, by
forgiving his sins; which indeed saved the other, but brought no great glory to
Himself. They themselves rather, troubled by their malice, and wishing to assail
Him, caused even against their will what was done to be conspicuous. He, in

fact, in His abundance of counsel, made use of their envy for the manifestation
of the miracle.
Upon their murmuring, then, and saying, "This man blasphemes; who can
forgive sins but God only?" let us see what He says. Did He indeed take away
the suspicion? And yet if He were not equal, He should have said, "Why fix upon
me a notion which is not convenient? I am far from this power." But now has He
said none of these things, but quite the contrary He has both affirmed and
ratified, as well by His own voice, as by the performance of the miracle. Thus, it
appearing that His saying certain things of Himself gave disgust to his hearers,
He affirms what He had to say concerning Himself by the others; and what is
truly marvellous, not by His friends only, but also by His enemies; for this is the
excellency of His wisdom. By His friends on the one hand, when He said, "I
will, be thou clean," [Matthew 8:3] and when He said, "I have not found so great
faith, no, not in Israel;" [Matthew 8:10] but by His enemies, now. For because
they had said, "No man can forgive sins but God only," He subjoined,
"But that you may know that the Son of Man has power to forgive sins upon
the earth (then says He to the sick of the palsy), Arise, and take up your bed, and
go unto your house."
And not here only, but also in another case again, when they were saying,
"For a good work we stone you not, but for blasphemy, and because that thou,
being a man, makest yourself God," [John 10:33] neither in that instance did He
put down this opinion, but again confirmed it, saying, "If I do not the works of
my Father, believe me not; but if I do, though ye believe not me, believe the
works." [John 10:37-38]
2. In this case indeed He discloses also another sign, and that no small one,
of His own Godhead, and of His equality in honor with the Father. For whereas
they said, "To unbind sins pertains to God only," He not only unbinds sins, but
also before this He makes another kind of display in a thing which pertained to
God only; the publishing the secrets in the heart. For neither had they uttered
what they were thinking.