intolerable calamity, and placed you even now in a state of tranquillity will also
avert impending evils; for that you will never receive another blow more severe
than this you would yourself admit. Having then so bravely borne present
troubles, and this when you were inexperienced, you will far more easily endure
future events should any of the things contrary to our wishes, which God forbid,
occur. Therefore seek Heaven, and all things which conduce to life in the other
world, and none of the things here will be able to harm you, not even the worldruler of darkness himself, if only we do not injure ourselves. For if any one
deprives us of our substance, or hews our body in pieces, none of these things
concern us, if our soul abides in its integrity.
7. Now, once for all, if you wish your property to abide with you in security
and yet further to increase I will show you the plan, and the place where none of
those who have designs upon it will be allowed to enter. What then is the place?
It is Heaven. Send away your possessions to that good husband of yours and
neither thief, nor schemer, nor any other destructive thing will be able to pounce
upon them. If you deposit these goods in the other world, you will find much
profit arising from them. For all things which we plant in Heaven yield a large
and abundant crop, such as might naturally be expected from things which have
their roots in Heaven. And if you do this, see what blessings you will enjoy, in
the first place eternal life and the things promised to those who love God, "which
eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have they entered into the heart of man,"
and in the second place perpetual intercourse with your good husband; and you
will relieve yourself from the cares and fears, and dangers, and designs, and
enmity and hatred which beset you here. For as long as you are surrounded with
this property there will probably be some to make attempts upon it; but if you
transfer it to Heaven, you will lead a life of security and safety, and much
tranquillity, enjoying independence combined with godliness. For it is very
irrational, when one wishes to buy land, and is seeking for productive ground, if,
Heaven being proposed to him instead of earth, and the possibility presented of
obtaining an estate there he abides still on earth, and puts up with the toils that

are connected with it; for it often disappoints our hopes.
But since your soul is grievously upset and vexed on account of the
expectation often entertained that your husband would attain the rank of prefect,
and the thought that he was untimely snatched away from that dignity consider
first of all this fact, that even if this hope was a very well grounded one
nevertheless it was only a human hope, which often falls to the ground; and we
see many things of this kind happening in life, those which were confidently
expected having remained unfulfilled, whereas those which never even entered
the mind have frequently come to pass, and this we constantly see occurring
everywhere in cases of governments and kingdoms, and inheritances, and
marriages. Wherefore even if the opportunity were very near at hand, yet as the
proverb says "between the cup and the lip there is many a slip" and the Scripture
says "from the morning until the evening the time is changed." [Sirach 18:26]
So also a king who is here today is dead tomorrow; and again this same
wise man illustrating the reversal of men's hopes says "many tyrants have sat
down upon the ground, and one that was never thought of has worn the crown."
[Sirach 11:5] And it was not absolutely certain that if he lived he would arrive at
this dignity; for that which belongs to the future is uncertain, and causes us to
have various suspicions. For on what grounds was it evident that had he lived he
would have attained that dignity and that things would not have turned out the
other way, and that he would have lost the office he actually held either from
falling a victim to disease, or from being exposed to the envy and ill will of
those who wished to excel him in prosperity, or from suffering some other
grievous misfortune. But let us suppose, if you please, that it was perfectly
evident that in any case had he survived he would have obtained this high
distinction; then in proportion to the magnitude of the dignity would have been
the increased dangers, and anxieties, and intrigues which he must have
encountered. Or put these even on one side, and let us suppose him to traverse
that sea of difficulties safely, and in much tranquillity; then tell me what is the
goal? Not that which he has now reached; no, not that, but something different,