the distinction between the contingent and the necessary is to be
referred only to secondary causes, this must be independent of the
divine intention and will; which is inadmissible. It is better therefore
to say that this happens on account of the efficacy of the divine will.
For when a cause is efficacious to act, the effect follows upon the
cause, not only as to the thing done, but also as to its manner of
being done or of being. Thus from defect of active power in the seed
it may happen that a child is born unlike its father in accidental
points, that belong to its manner of being. Since then the divine will
is perfectly efficacious, it follows not only that things are done,
which God wills to be done, but also that they are done in the way
that He wills. Now God wills some things to be done necessarily,
some contingently, to the right ordering of things, for the building up
of the universe. Therefore to some effects He has attached
necessary causes, that cannot fail; but to others defectible and
contingent causes, from which arise contingent effects. Hence it is
not because the proximate causes are contingent that the effects
willed by God happen contingently, but because God prepared
contingent causes for them, it being His will that they should happen
contingently.
Reply to Objection 1: By the words of Augustine we must understand
a necessity in things willed by God that is not absolute, but
conditional. For the conditional statement that if God wills a thing it
must necessarily be, is necessarily true.
Reply to Objection 2: From the very fact that nothing resists the
divine will, it follows that not only those things happen that God wills
to happen, but that they happen necessarily or contingently
according to His will.
Reply to Objection 3: Consequents have necessity from their
antecedents according to the mode of the antecedents. Hence things
effected by the divine will have that kind of necessity that God wills
them to have, either absolute or conditional. Not all things, therefore,
are absolute necessities.

### ARTICLE 9. Whether God wills evils?

Objection 1: It seems that God wills evils. For every good that exists,
God wills. But it is a good that evil should exist. For Augustine says
(Enchiridion 95): "Although evil in so far as it is evil is not a good,
yet it is good that not only good things should exist, but also evil
things." Therefore God wills evil things.
Objection 2: Further, Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iv, 23): "Evil would
conduce to the perfection of everything," i.e. the universe. And
Augustine says (Enchiridion 10,11): "Out of all things is built up the
admirable beauty of the universe, wherein even that which is called
evil, properly ordered and disposed, commends the good more
evidently in that good is more pleasing and praiseworthy when
contrasted with evil." But God wills all that appertains to the
perfection and beauty of the universe, for this is what God desires
above all things in His creatures. Therefore God wills evil.
Objection 3: Further, that evil should exist, and should not exist, are
contradictory opposites. But God does not will that evil should not
exist; otherwise, since various evils do exist, God's will would not
always be fulfilled. Therefore God wills that evil should exist.
On the contrary, Augustine says (Qq. 83,3): "No wise man is the
cause of another man becoming worse. Now God surpasses all men
in wisdom. Much less therefore is God the cause of man becoming
worse; and when He is said to be the cause of a thing, He is said to
will it." Therefore it is not by God's will that man becomes worse.
Now it is clear that every evil makes a thing worse. Therefore God
wills not evil things.
I answer that, Since the ratio of good is the ratio of appetibility, as
said before (Question 5, Article 1), and since evil is opposed to good,
it is impossible that any evil, as such, should be sought for by the
appetite, either natural, or animal, or by the intellectual appetite
which is the will. Nevertheless evil may be sought accidentally, so
far as it accompanies a good, as appears in each of the appetites.
For a natural agent intends not privation or corruption, but the form
to which is annexed the privation of some other form, and the
generation of one thing, which implies the corruption of another.
Also when a lion kills a stag, his object is food, to obtain which the