the apostolic witness of the Church share in that mysterious inheritance, and in a sense
share in Mary's faith.

Elizabeth's words "Blessed is she who believed" continue to accompany the Virgin also
at Pentecost; they accompany her from age to age, wherever knowledge of Christ's
salvific mystery spreads, through the Church's apostolic witness and service. Thus is
fulfilled the prophecy of the Magnificat: "All generations will call me blessed; for he who
is mighty has done great things for me, and holy is his name" (Lk. 1:48-49). For
knowledge of the mystery of Christ leads us to bless his Mother, in the form of special
veneration for the Theotokos. But this veneration always includes a blessing of her faith,
for the Virgin of Nazareth became blessed above all through this faith, in accordance
with Elizabeth's words. Those who from generation to generation among the different
peoples and nations of the earth accept with faith the mystery of Christ, the Incarnate
Word and Redeemer of the world, not only turn with veneration to Mary and confidently
have recourse to her as his Mother, but also seek in her faith support for their own. And it
is precisely this lively sharing in Mary's faith that determines her special place in the
Church's pilgrimage as the new People of God throughout the earth.

28. As the Council says, "Mary figured profoundly in the history of salvation.... Hence
when she is being preached and venerated, she summons the faithful to her Son and his
sacrifice, and to love for the Father." For this reason, Mary's faith, according to the
Church's apostolic witness, in some way continues to become the faith of the pilgrim
People of God: the faith of individuals and communities, of places and gatherings, and of
the various groups existing in the Church. It is a faith that is passed on simultaneously
through both the mind and the heart. It is gained or regained continually through prayer.
Therefore, "the Church in her apostolic work also rightly looks to her who brought forth
Christ, conceived by the Holy Spirit and born of the Virgin, so that through the Church
Christ may be born and increase in the hearts of the faithful also."

Today, as on this pilgrimage of faith we draw near to the end of the second Christian
Millennium, the Church, through the teaching of the Second Vatican Council, calls our
attention to her vision of herself, as the "one People of God...among all the nations of the
earth." And she reminds us of that truth according to which all the faithful, though
"scattered throughout the world, are in communion with each other in the Holy Spirit."
We can therefore say that in this union the mystery of Pentecost is continually being
accomplished. At the same time, the Lord's apostles and disciples, in all the nations of the
earth, "devote themselves to prayer together with Mary, the mother of Jesus" (Acts 1:14).
As they constitute from generation to generation the "sign of the Kingdom" which is not
of his world, they are also aware that in the midst of this world they must gather around
that King to whom the nations have been given in heritage (cf. Ps. 2:8), to whom the
Father has given "the throne of David his father," so that he "will reign over the house of
Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom there will he no end."