let us ensue it unto His glory; for to Him belongs the glory, forever. Amen.

Homily 15 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts VI. 8
"And Stephen, full of faith and power, did great wonders and miracles
among the people."
See how even among the seven one was preëminent, and won the first
prize. For though the ordination was common to him and them, yet he drew upon
himself greater grace. And observe, how he wrought no (signs and wonders)
before this time, but only when he became publicly known; to show that grace
alone is not sufficient, but there must be ordination also; so that there was a
further access of the Spirit. For if they were full of the Spirit, it was of that
which is from the Laver of Baptism. "Then there arose certain of them of the
synagogue." [Acts 6:9] Again he uses the phrase of "rising up" ([ἀ] [νάστασιν],
Hom. xiii. p. 81), to denote their exasperation and wrath. Here we have a great
multitude. And observe the difference in the form of accusation: for since
Gamaliel had stopped them from finding fault on the former plea, they bring in
another charge. "And there rose up, it says, certain of them of the synagogue of
those who are called ([τὥν λεγομένων] . Edd. [τἥς λεγομένης]) Libertines, and of
the Cyrenians and Alexandrians, and of them of Cilicia and Asia, disputing with
Stephen. And they were not able to resist the wisdom and the spirit by which he
spoke. Then they suborned men, which said, We have heard him speak
blasphemous words against Moses, and against God." [Acts 6:9-12] That they
may establish the charge, the phrase is, "he speaks against God, and against
Moses." And with this object too they disputed, that they might force him to say
somewhat. But he now discoursed more openly, and perhaps spoke of the
cessation of the Divine Law: or, spoke it not, but hinted as much: since had he
spoken plainly, there had been no need of suborned men, nor yet of false
witnesses. The synagogues were diverse: [to wit, "Of the Libertines"]: of the

Cyrenians, i.e. those in the parts beyond Alexandria ["of the Alexandrians," etc.].
There also they seem to have had synagogues according to their different
nations; for many stayed behind there, that they might not be obliged to be
continually travelling. The Libertines perhaps were freedmen of the Romans. As
there were many foreigners dwelling there, so they had their synagogues, where
the Law was to be read. "Disputing with Stephen." Observe him, not taking upon
him to teach, but forced to do so. The miracles once more brought him into illwill; but when he overcame in argument, it was false-witness! For they did not
wish to kill intolerable to them. "They could not resist, etc.: then they suborned
men." Everywhere out of hand, but by means of a sentence, that they might hurt
their reputation also: and leaving those (the Apostles), they attack these (the
disciples), thinking in this way to terrify those also. They say not, "he speaks,"
but, "he ceases not to speak. And they stirred up the people, and the elders, and
the scribes, and came upon him, and caught him, and brought him to the council,
and set up false witnesses, which said, This man ceases not to speak
blasphemous words against this holy place, and the law." (v. 12, 13.) "Ceases
not," say they, as if he made this his business. "For we have heard him say that
this Jesus of Nazareth shall destroy this place, and shall change the customs
which Moses delivered us." [Acts 6:14] "Jesus," they say, "the Nazarene," as a
term of reproach, "shall destroy this place, and shall change the customs." This
is also what they said about Christ. "Thou that destroyest this Temple." [Matthew
27:40] For great was their veneration for the Temple (as indeed they had chosen
to leave their own country ([μετοικεἴν]) in order to be near it) and for the name
of Moses. The charge is twofold. If He "shall change the customs," He will also
introduce others instead: observe how the charge is a bitter one, and fraught with
perils. "And all that sat in the council, looking steadfastly on him, saw his face
as it had been the face of an angel." [Acts 6:15] So possible is it even for one in
a lower degree to shine. For what, I ask, had this man less than the Apostles? He
lacked not miracles, and great was the boldness he exhibited. — "They saw His
face," it is said, "as it had been the face of an angel." [Exodus 34:30] For this