would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them." [Matthew 7:12] "Many
words," says He, are not necessary, nor laws of great length, nor a diversity of
instruction. Let your own will be the law. Do you wish to receive kindness? Be
kind to another. Do you wish to receive mercy? Show mercy to your neighbour.
Do you wish to be applauded? Applaud another. Do you wish to be beloved?
Exercise love. Do you wish to enjoy the first rank? First concede that place to
another. Become yourself the judge, yourself the lawgiver of your own life. And
again; "Do not to another what you hate." [Tobit 4:16] By the latter precept, he
would induce to a departure from iniquity; by the former, to the exercise of
virtue. "Do not thou to another," he says, "what you hate." Do you hate to be
insulted? Do not insult another. Do you hate to be envied? Envy not another. Do
you hate to be deceived? Do not deceive another. And, in a word, in all things, if
we hold fast these two precepts, we shall not need any other instruction. For the
knowledge of virtue He has implanted in our nature; but the practice of it and the
correction He has entrusted to our moral choice.
8. Perhaps what is thus said, is obscure; wherefore I will again endeavour to
make it more plain. In order to know that it is a good thing to exercise
temperance, we need no words, nor instruction; for we ourselves have the
knowledge of it in our nature, and there is no necessity for labour or fatigue in
going about and enquiring whether temperance is good and profitable; but we all
acknowledge this with one consent, and no man is in doubt as to this virtue. So
also we account adultery to be an evil thing, and neither is there here any need of
trouble or learning, that the wickedness of this sin may be known; but we are all
self-taught in such judgments; and we applaud virtue, though we do not follow
it; as, on the other hand, we hate vice, though we practise it. And this has been
an exceeding good work of God; that He has made our conscience, and our
power of choice already, and before the action, claim kindred with virtue, and be
at enmity with wickedness.
9. As I said then, the knowledge of each of these things resides within the
conscience of all men, and we require no teacher to instruct us in these things;

but the regulation of our conduct is left to our choice, and earnestness, and
efforts. And why was this? But because if He had made everything to be of
nature, we should have departed uncrowned and destitute of reward; and even as
the brutes, who receive no reward nor praise for those advantages which they
have naturally, so neither should we enjoy any of these things; for natural
advantages are not the praise and commendation of those who have them, but of
the Giver. For this reason, then, He did not commit all to nature; and again, He
did not suffer our will to undertake the whole burden of knowledge, and of right
regulation; lest it should despair at the labour of virtue. But conscience suggests
to it what ought to be done; and it contributes its own exertions for the
accomplishment. That it is a good thing to be temperate, we all understand
without difficulty; for the knowledge is of nature: but we should not be able
without difficulty, without bridling lust, and employing much exertion, to
practise the rule of temperance; for this does not come to us by nature as the
knowledge does, but requires also a willing mind and earnestness. And not only
in this respect has He made the burden lighter for us, but also in another way
again, by letting even some good dispositions exist naturally within us. For we
are all naturally disposed to feel indignation along with those who are
contemptuously treated, (whence it arises that we become the enemies of those
who are insolent, though we ourselves may have suffered no part of the
grievance,) and to sympathize in the pleasure of those who enjoy assistance and
protection; and we are overcome by the calamities of others, as well as by
mutual tenderness. For although calamitous events may seem to induce a certain
pusillanimity, we entertain nevertheless a common fondness for each other. And
to this effect a certain wise man speaks significantly; "Every animal loves his
like, and man his neighbour." [Ecclesiastes 13:19]
10. But God has provided many other instructors for us besides conscience;
viz., fathers for children, masters for servants, husbands for wives, teachers for
pupils, law-givers and judges for those who are to be governed, and friends for
friends. And frequently too we gain no less from enemies than friends; for when