they are, and dogs, by taking up that worthless philosophy of theirs, (for such the
Grecian philosophy is,) or rather not itself but only its mere name, and wearing
the threadbare cloak, and letting their hair grow, impress many; how much more
will he who is a true philosopher? If a false appearance, if a mere shadow of
philosophy at first sight so catches us, what if we should love the true and pure
philosophy? Will not all court it, and entrust both houses, and wives, and
children, with full confidence to such men? But there is not, no, there is not such
a philosopher existing now. And therefore, it is not possible to find an example
of the sort. Amongst recluses, indeed, there are such, but among people in the
world no longer. And that among recluses there are such, it would be possible to
adduce a number of instances. However, I will mention one out of many. You
know, doubtless, and have heard of, and some, perhaps, have also seen, the man
whom I am now about to mention. I mean, the admirable Julian. This man was a
rustic, in humble life, and of humble parentage, and totally uninstructed in all
outward accomplishments, but full of unadorned wisdom. When he came into
the cities, (and this was but rarely,) never did such a concourse take place, not
when orators, or sophists, or any one else rode in. But what am I saying? Is not
his very name more glorious than that of any king's, and celebrated even to this
day? And if these things were in this world, in the world in which the Lord
promised us no one good thing, in which He has told us we are strangers, let us
consider how great will be the blessings laid up for us in the heavens. If, where
they were sojourners they enjoyed so great honor, how great glory shall they
enjoy where their own city is! If, where He promised tribulation, they meet with
such attentive care, then where He promises true honors, how great shall be their
rest!
And now would you have me exhibit examples of secular men? At present,
indeed, we have none; still there are perhaps even secular men who are
excellent, though not arrived at the highest philosophy. I shall therefore quote
you examples from the saints of the ancient times. How many, who had wives to
keep and children to bring up, were inferior in no respect, no, in no respect to

those who have been mentioned? Now, however, it is no longer so, "by reason of
the present distress" [1 Corinthians 7:26], as this blessed Apostle says. Now then
whom would you have me mention? Noah, or Abraham? The son of the one or
of the other? Or again, Joseph? Or would you have me go to the Prophets?
Moses I mean, or Isaiah? However, if you will, let us carry our discourse to
Abraham, whom all are continually bringing forward to us above all others. Had
he not a wife? Had he not children? Yes, for I too use the same language to you,
as you do to me. He had a wife, but it was not because he had a wife that he was
so remarkable. He had riches, but it was not because he had riches that he
pleased God. He begot children, but it was not because he begot children that he
was pronounced blessed. He had three hundred and eighteen servants born in his
house, but it was not on this account that he was accounted wonderful. But
would you know why it was? It was for his hospitality, for his contempt of
riches, for his chastened conduct. For what, tell me, is the duty of a philosopher?
Is it not to despise both riches and glory? Is it not to be above both envy and
every other passion? Come now then, let us bring him forward and strip him, and
show you what a philosopher he was. First of all, he esteemed his fatherland as
nothing. God said, "Get you out of your country, and from your kindred"
[Genesis 12:1], and immediately he went forth. He was not bound to his house,
(or surely he would never have gone forth,) nor to his love of familiar friends,
nor to anything else whatever. But what? glory and money he despised above all
others. For when he had put an end to war by turning the enemy to flight, and
was requested to take the spoil, he rejected it. [Genesis 14:21-23]
Again, the son of this great man was reverenced, not because of his riches,
but for his hospitality: not because of his children, but for his obedience: not
because of his wife, but for the barrenness inflicted on his wife. [Genesis 25:21]
They looked upon the present life as nothing, they followed not after gain,
they despised all things. Tell me, which sort of plants are the best? Are not those
which have their strength from themselves and are injured neither by rains, nor
by hailstorms, nor by gusts of wind, nor by any other vicissitude of the sort, but