SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.128, C.3.

Now as regards the passions it is to be observed that the greatness
of this power of resistance to reason arises chiefly in some cases
from the passions themselves, and in others from the things that are
the objects of the passions. The passions themselves have no great
power of resistance, unless they be violent, because the sensitive
appetite, which is the seat of the passions, is naturally subject to
reason. Hence the resisting virtues that are about these passions
regard only that which is great in such passions: thus fortitude is
about very great fear and daring; temperance about the
concupiscence of the greatest pleasures, and likewise meekness
about the greatest anger. On the other hand, some passions have
great power of resistance to reason arising from the external things
themselves that are the objects of those passions: such are the love
or desire of money or of honor. And for these it is necessary to have
a virtue not only regarding that which is greatest in those passions,
but also about that which is ordinary or little: because things
external, though they be little, are very desirable, as being necessary
for human life. Hence with regard to the desire of money there are
two virtues, one about ordinary or little sums of money, namely
liberality, and another about large sums of money, namely
"magnificence."
In like manner there are two virtues about honors, one about
ordinary honors. This virtue has no name, but is denominated by its
extremes, which are philotimia, i.e. love of honor, and aphilotimia, i.
e. without love of honor: for sometimes a man is commended for
loving honor, and sometimes for not caring about it, in so far, to wit,
as both these things may be done in moderation. But with regard to
great honors there is "magnanimity." Wherefore we must conclude
that the proper matter of magnanimity is great honor, and that a
magnanimous man tends to such things as are deserving of honor.
Reply to Objection 1: Great and little are accidental to honor
considered in itself: but they make a great difference in their relation
to reason, the mode of which has to be observed in the use of honor,
for it is much more difficult to observe it in great than in little honors.
Reply to Objection 2: In anger and other matters only that which is
greatest presents any notable difficulty, and about this alone is there
any need of a virtue. It is different with riches and honors which are
things existing outside the soul.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.128, C.3.

Reply to Objection 3: He that makes good use of great things is
much more able to make good use of little things. Accordingly the
magnanimous man looks upon great honors as a thing of which he
is worthy, or even little honors as something he deserves, because,
to wit, man cannot sufficiently honor virtue which deserves to be
honored by God. Hence he is not uplifted by great honors, because
he does not deem them above him; rather does he despise them, and
much more such as are ordinary or little. In like manner he is not
cast down by dishonor, but despises it, since he recognizes that he
does not deserve it.