Matt. xxiii. 2—4.

God. For Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to every one that believeth." And how is
Christ the end of the law, if He be not also the final cause of it? For He who has brought in the end
has Himself also wrought the beginning; and it is He who does Himself say to Moses, "I have surely
seen the affliction of my people which is in Egypt, and I have come down to deliver them;" it
being customary from the beginning with the Word of God to ascend and descend for the purpose
of saving those who were in affliction.
5. Now, that the law did beforehand teach mankind the necessity of following Christ, He does
Himself make manifest, when He replied as follows to him who asked Him what he should do that
he might inherit eternal life: "If thou wilt enter into life, keep the commandments." But upon
the other asking "Which?" again the Lord replies: "Do not commit adultery, do not kill, do not
steal, do not bear false witness, honour father and mother, and thou shalt love thy neighbour as
thyself,"—setting as an ascending series (velut gradus) before those who wished to follow Him,
the precepts of the law, as the entrance into life; and what He then said to one He said to all. But
when the former said, "All these have I done" (and most likely he had not kept them, for in that
case the Lord would not have said to him, "Keep the commandments"), the Lord, exposing his
covetousness, said to him, "If thou wilt be perfect, go, sell all that thou hast, and distribute to the
poor; and come, follow me;" promising to those who would act thus, the portion belonging to the
apostles (apostolorum partem). And He did not preach to His followers another God the Father,
besides Him who was proclaimed by the law from the beginning; nor another Son; nor the Mother,
the enthymesis of the Æon, who existed in suffering and apostasy; nor the Pleroma of the thirty
Æons, which has been proved vain, and incapable of being believed in; nor that fable invented by
the other heretics. But He taught that they should obey the commandments which God enjoined
from the beginning, and do away with their former covetousness by good works, and follow
after Christ. But that possessions distributed to the poor do annul former covetousness, Zaccheus
made evident, when he said, "Behold, the half of my goods I give to the poor; and if I have defrauded
any one, I restore fourfold."

Ex. iii. 7, 8.
we are called."

### Chapter XIII.—Christ did not abrogate the natural precepts of the law, but rather fulfilled
and extended them. He removed the yoke and bondage of the old law, so that mankind, being
now set free, might serve God with that trustful piety which becometh sons.
1. And that the Lord did not abrogate the natural [precepts] of the law, by which man is
justified, which also those who were justified by faith, and who pleased God, did observe previous
to the giving of the law, but that He extended and fulfilled them, is shown from His words. "For,"
He remarks, "it has been said to them of old time, Do not commit adultery. But I say unto you,
That every one who hath looked upon a woman to lust after her, hath committed adultery with her
already in his heart." And again: "It has been said, Thou shalt not kill. But I say unto you, Every
one who is angry with his brother without a cause, shall be in danger of the judgment." And, "It
hath been said, Thou shalt not forswear thyself. But I say unto you, Swear not at all; but let your
conversation be, Yea, yea, and Nay, nay." And other statements of a like nature. For all these
do not contain or imply an opposition to and an overturning of the [precepts] of the past, as Marcion's
followers do strenuously maintain; but [they exhibit] a fulfilling and an extension of them, as He
does Himself declare: "Unless your righteousness shall exceed that of the scribes and Pharisees,
ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven." For what meant the excess referred to? In the
first place, [we must] believe not only in the Father, but also in His Son now revealed; for He it is
who leads man into fellowship and unity with God. In the next place, [we must] not only say, but
we must do; for they said, but did not. And [we must] not only abstain from evil deeds, but even
from the desires after them. Now He did not teach us these things as being opposed to the law, but
as fulfilling the law, and implanting in us the varied righteousness of the law. That would have
been contrary to the law, if He had commanded His disciples to do anything which the law had
prohibited. But this which He did command—namely, not only to abstain from things forbidden
by the law, but even from longing after them—is not contrary to [the law], as I have remarked,
neither is it the utterance of one destroying the law, but of one fulfilling, extending, and affording
greater scope to it.
2. For the law, since it was laid down for those in bondage, used to instruct the soul by means
of those corporeal objects which were of an external nature, drawing it, as by a bond, to obey its
commandments, that man might learn to serve God. But the Word set free the soul, and taught that
through it the body should be willingly purified. Which having been accomplished, it followed as
of course, that the bonds of slavery should be removed, to which man had now become accustomed,
and that he should follow God without fetters: moreover, that the laws of liberty should be extended,