great power, and a birthplace excelling others, and distinction of ancestry, and let
him be looked up to by all men. Now then let us see, if this be not the very
person to be more in slavery than all; and let us set in comparison with him, not
a slave merely, but a slave's slave, for many though servants have slaves. This
slave's slave then for his part has but one master. And what though that one be
not a freeman? Yet he is but one, and the other looks only to his pleasure. For
albeit his master's master seem to have power over him, yet for the present he
obeys one only; and if matters between them two are well, he will abide in
security all his life. But our man has not one or two only, but many, and more
grievous masters. And first he is in care about the sovereign himself. And it is
not the same to have a mean person for a master, as to have a king, whose ears
are buzzed into by many, and who becomes a property now to this set and now
to that.
Our man, though conscious of nothing, suspects all; both his comrades and
his subordinates; both his friends and his enemies.
But the other man too, you may say, fears his master. But how is it the same
thing, to have one or many, to make one timorous? Or rather, if a man inquire
carefully, he will not find so much as one. How, and in what sense? Whereas that
slave has no one that desires to put him out of that service of his, and to
introduce himself (whence neither has he any one to plot against him therein);
these have not even any other pursuit, but to unsettle him that is more approved
and more beloved by their ruler. Wherefore also he must needs flatter all, his
superiors, his equals, his friends. For where envy is, and love of glory, there even
sincere friendship has no strength. For as those of the same craft cannot love one
another with a perfect and genuine love, so is it with rivals in honor also, and
with them that long for the same among worldly objects. Whence also great is
the war within.
Do you see what a swarm of masters, and of hard masters? Will you that I
show you yet another, more grievous than this? They that are behind him, all of
them strive to get before him: all that are before him, to hinder him from coming

nearer them, and passing them by.
7. But O marvel! I undertook indeed to show you masters, but our
discourse, we find, coming on and waxing eager, has performed more than my
undertaking, pointing out foes instead of masters; or rather the same persons
both as foes and as masters. For while they are courted like masters, they are
terrible as foes, and they plot against us as enemies. When then any one has the
same persons both as masters, and as enemies, what can be worse than this
calamity? The slave indeed, though he be subject to command, yet nevertheless
has the advantage of care and good-will on the part of them who give him
orders; but these, while they receive commands, are made enemies, and are set
one against another; and that so much more grievously than those in battles, in
that they both wound secretly, and in the mask of friends they treat men as their
enemies would do, and oftentimes make themselves credit of the calamity of
others.
But not such are our circumstances; rather should another fare ill, there are
many to grieve with him: should he obtain distinction, many to find pleasure
with him. Not so again the apostle: "For whether," says he, "one member suffer,
all the members suffer with it; or one member be honored, all the members
rejoice with it." [1 Corinthians 12:26] And the words of him who gives these
admonitions, are at one time, "What is my hope or joy? Are not even ye?"
[1 Thessalonians 2:19] at another, "Now we live, if you stand fast in the Lord;"
[1 Thessalonians 3:8] at another, "Out of much affliction and anguish of heart I
wrote unto you;" [2 Corinthians 2:4] and, "Who is weak, and I am not weak?
Who is offended, and I burn not?" [2 Corinthians 11:29]
Wherefore then do we still endure the tempest and the billows of the world
without, and not run to this calm haven, and leaving the names of good things,
go on to the very things themselves? For glory, and dignity, and wealth, and
credit, and all such things, are names with them, but with us realities; just as the
grievous things, death and dishonor and poverty, and whatever else is like them,
are names indeed with us, but realities with them.