before he had glory.
But if he had no grace before entering upon beatitude, it would then
have to be said that he had beatitude without merit, even as we have
grace. This, however, is quite foreign to the idea of beatitude; which
conveys the notion of an end, and is the reward of virtue, as even the
Philosopher says (Ethic. i, 9). Or else it will have to be said, as some
others have maintained, that the angels merit beatitude by their
present ministrations, while in beatitude. This is quite contrary,
again, to the notion of merit: since merit conveys the idea of a means
to an end; while what is already in its end cannot, properly speaking,
be moved towards such end; and so no one merits to produce what
he already enjoys. Or else it will have to be said that one and the
same act of turning to God, so far as it comes of free-will, is
meritorious; and so far as it attains the end, is the fruition of
beatitude. Even this view will not stand, because free-will is not the
sufficient cause of merit; and, consequently, an act cannot be
meritorious as coming from free-will, except in so far as it is
informed by grace; but it cannot at the same time be informed by
imperfect grace, which is the principle of meriting, and by perfect
grace, which is the principle of enjoying. Hence it does not appear to
be possible for anyone to enjoy beatitude, and at the same time to
merit it.
Consequently it is better to say that the angel had grace ere he was
admitted to beatitude, and that by such grace he merited beatitude.
Reply to Objection 1: The angel's difficulty of working righteously
does not come from any contrariety or hindrance of natural powers;
but from the fact that the good work is beyond his natural capacity.
Reply to Objection 2: An angel did not merit beatitude by natural
movement towards God; but by the movement of charity, which
comes of grace.
The answer to the Third Objection is evident from what we have said.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether the angel obtained beatitude immediately

after one act of merit?
Objection 1: It would seem that the angel did not possess beatitude
instantly after one act of merit. For it is more difficult for a man to do
well than for an angel. But man is not rewarded at once after one act
of merit. Therefore neither was the angel.
Objection 2: Further, an angel could act at once, and in an instant,
from the very outset of his creation, for even natural bodies begin to
be moved in the very instant of their creation; and if the movement of
a body could be instantaneous, like operations of mind and will, it
would have movement in the first instant of its generation.
Consequently, if the angel merited beatitude by one act of his will, he
merited it in the first instant of his creation; and so, if their beatitude
was not retarded, then the angels were in beatitude in the first
instant.
Objection 3: Further, there must be many intervals between things
which are far apart. But the beatific state of the angels is very far
remote from their natural condition: while merit comes midway
between. Therefore the angel would have to pass through many
stages of merit in order to reach beatitude.
On the contrary, Man's soul and an angel are ordained alike for
beatitude: consequently equality with angels is promised to the
saints. Now the soul separated from the body, if it has merit
deserving beatitude, enters at once into beatitude, unless there be
some obstacle. Therefore so does an angel. Now an angel instantly,
in his first act of charity, had the merit of beatitude. Therefore, since
there was no obstacle within him, he passed at once into beatitude
by only one meritorious act.
I answer that, The angel was beatified instantly after the first act of
charity, whereby he merited beatitude. The reason whereof is
because grace perfects nature according to the manner of the
nature; as every perfection is received in the subject capable of
perfection, according to its mode. Now it is proper to the angelic
nature to receive its natural perfection not by passing from one
stage to another; but to have it at once naturally, as was shown
above (Article 1; Question 58, Articles 3,4). But as the angel is of his