SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.23, C.11.

may be said to conduce indirectly to its diminution, and such are
venial sins, or even the cessation from the practice of works of
charity.
Reply to Objection 1: Contraries affect the same subject when that
subject stands in equal relation to both. But charity does not stand
in equal relation to increase and decrease. For it can have a cause of
increase, but not of decrease, as stated above. Hence the argument
does not prove.
Reply to Objection 2: Cupidity is twofold, one whereby man places
his end in creatures, and this kills charity altogether, since it is its
poison, as Augustine states (Confess. x). This makes us love God
less (i.e. less than we ought to love Him by charity), not indeed by
diminishing charity but by destroying it altogether. It is thus that we
must understand the saying: "He loves Thee less, who loves aught
beside Thee," for he adds these words, "which he loveth not for
Thee." This does not apply to venial sin, but only to mortal sin: since
that which we love in venial sin, is loved for God's sake habitually
though not actually. There is another cupidity, that of venial sin,
which is always diminished by charity: and yet this cupidity cannot
diminish charity, for the reason given above.
Reply to Objection 3: A movement of the free-will is requisite in the
infusion of charity, as stated above (FS, Question 113, Article 3).
Wherefore that which diminishes the intensity of the free-will
conduces dispositively to a diminution in the charity to be infused.
On the other hand, no movement of the free-will is required for the
safe-keeping of charity, else it would not remain inn us while we
sleep. Hence charity does not decrease on account of an obstacle on
the part of the intensity of the free-will's movement.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.23, C.12.

### ARTICLE 11. Whether we can lose charity when once we have

it?
Objection 1: It would seem that we cannot lose charity when once we
have it. For if we lose it, this can only be through sin. Now he who
has charity cannot sin, for it is written (1 Jn. 3:9): "Whosoever is
born of God, committeth not sin; for His seed abideth in him, and he
cannot sin, because he is born of God." But none save the children
of God have charity, for it is this which distinguishes "the children of
God from the children of perdition," as Augustine says (De Trin. xv,
17). Therefore he that has charity cannot lose it.
Objection 2: Further, Augustine says (De Trin. viii, 7) that "if love be
not true, it should not be called love." Now, as he says again in a
letter to Count Julian, "charity which can fail was never true." [De
Salutaribus Documentis ad quemdam comitem, vii.] Therefore it was
no charity at all. Therefore, when once we have charity, we cannot
lose it.
Objection 3: Further, Gregory says in a homily for Pentecost (In
Evang. xxx) that "God's love works great things where it is; if it
ceases to work it is not charity." Now no man loses charity by doing
great things. Therefore if charity be there, it cannot be lost.
Objection 4: Further, the free-will is not inclined to sin unless by
some motive for sinning. Now charity excludes all motives for
sinning, both self-love and cupidity, and all such things. Therefore
charity cannot be lost.
On the contrary, It is written (Apoc. 2:4): "I have somewhat against
thee, because thou hast left thy first charity."
I answer that, The Holy Ghost dwells in us by charity, as shown
above (Article 2; Questions 23,24). We can, accordingly, consider
charity in three ways: first on the part of the Holy Ghost, Who moves
the soul to love God, and in this respect charity is incompatible with
sin through the power of the Holy Ghost, Who does unfailingly
whatever He wills to do. Hence it is impossible for these two things
to be true at the same time---that the Holy Ghost should will to move
a certain man to an act of charity, and that this man, by sinning,
should lose charity. For the gift of perseverance is reckoned among