John 2:25
"And needed not that any should testify of man, for He knew what was in man."
The meaning is of this kind. "He who dwells in men's hearts, and enters
into their thoughts, took no heed of outward words; and knowing well that their
warmth was but for a season, He placed not confidence in them as in perfect
disciples, nor committed all His doctrines to them as though they had already
become firm believers." Now, to know what is in the heart of men belongs to
God alone, "who has fashioned hearts one by one" [Psalm 33:15, Septuagint],
for, says Solomon, "You, even Thou only, know the hearts" [1 Kings 8:39]; He
therefore needed not witnesses to learn the thoughts of His own creatures, and so
He felt no confidence in them because of their mere, temporary belief. Men, who
know neither the present nor the future, often tell and entrust all without any
reserve to persons who approach them deceitfully and who shortly will fall off
from them; but Christ did not so, for well He knew all their secret thoughts.
And many such now there are, who have indeed the name of faith, but are
unstable, and easily led away; wherefore neither now does Christ commit
Himself to them, but conceals from them many things; and just as we do not
place confidence in mere acquaintances but in real friends, so also does Christ.
Hear what He says to His disciples, "Henceforth I call you not servants, you are
My friends." [c. xv. 14, 15] Whence is this and why? "Because all things that I
have heard of My Father I have made known unto you." And therefore He gave
no signs to the Jews who asked for them, because they asked tempting Him.
Indeed the asking for signs is a practice of tempters both then and now; for even
now there are some that seek them and say, "Why do not miracles take place also
at this present time?" If you are faithful, as you ought to be, and lovest Christ as
you ought to love Him, you have no need of signs, they are given to the
unbelievers. "How then," asks one, "were they not given to the Jews?" Given
they certainly were; and if there were times when though they asked they did not

receive them, it was because they asked them not that they might be delivered
from their unbelief, but in order the more to confirm their wickedness.

John 3:1-2
"And there was a man of the Pharisees, named Nicodemus. The same came to
Jesus by night and said to Him, 'Rabbi, we know that You are a Teacher come
from God: for no man can do the miracles that You do, unless God is with him.'"
This man appears also in the middle of the Gospel, making defense for
Christ; for he says, "Our law judges no man before it hear him" [John 7:51]; and
the Jews in anger replied to him, "Search and look, for out of Galilee arises no
prophet." Again after the crucifixion he bestowed great care upon the burial of
the Lord's body: "There came also," says the Evangelist, "Nicodemus, which
came to the Lord by night, and brought a mixture of myrrh and aloes, about an
hundred pound weight." [John 19:39] And even now he was disposed towards
Christ, but not as he ought, nor with proper sentiments respecting Him, for he
was as yet entangled in Jewish infirmity. Wherefore he came by night, because
he feared to do so by day. Yet not for this did the merciful God reject or rebuke
him, or deprive him of His instruction, but even with much kindness conversed
with him and disclosed to him very exalted doctrines, enigmatically indeed, but
nevertheless He disclosed them. For far more deserving of pardon was he than
those who acted thus through wickedness. They are entirely without excuse; but
he, though he was liable to condemnation, yet was not so to an equal degree.
"How then does the Evangelist say nothing of the kind concerning him?" He has
said in another place, that "of the rulers also many believed on Him, but because
of the Jews they did not confess (Him), lest they should be put out of the
synagogue" [John 12:42]; but here he has implied the whole by mentioning his
coming "by night." What then says Nicodemus?
"Rabbi, we know that You are a Teacher come from God: for no man can do
the miracles that You do, except God be with him."
2. Nicodemus yet lingers below, has yet human thoughts concerning Him,
and speaks of Him as of a Prophet, imagining nothing great from His miracles.