the "creeping thing that has life," but reasonable and Spirit-bearing souls; and
what has been said of the sun, that he is "as a bridegroom coming out of his
chamber" [Psalm 18:6], we may now rather say of the faithful, for they send
forth rays far brighter than he. That which is fashioned in the womb requires
time, not so that in water, but all is done in a single moment. Here our life is
perishable, and takes its origin from the decay of other bodies; that which is to
be born comes slowly, (for such is the nature of bodies, they acquire perfection
by time,) but it is not so with spiritual things. And why? Because the things
made are formed perfect from the beginning.
When Nicodemus still hearing these things was troubled, see how Christ
partly opens to him the secret of this mystery, and makes that clear which was
for a while obscure to him. "That which is born," says He, "of the flesh is flesh;
and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit." He leads him away from all the
things of sense, and suffers him not vainly to pry into the mysteries revealed
with his fleshly eyes; "We speak not," says He, "of flesh, but of Spirit, O
Nicodemus," (by this word He directs him heavenward for a while,) "seek then
nothing relating to things of sense; never can the Spirit appear to those eyes,
think not that the Spirit brings forth the flesh." "How then," perhaps one may
ask, "was the Flesh of the Lord brought forth?" Not of the Spirit only, but of
flesh; as Paul de clares, when he says, "Made of a woman, made under the Law"
[Galatians 4:4]; for the Spirit fashioned Him not indeed out of nothing, (for what
need was there then of a womb?) but from the flesh of a Virgin. How, I cannot
explain unto you; yet it was done, that no one might suppose that what was born
is alien to our nature. For if even when this has taken place there are some who
disbelieve in such a birth, into what impiety would they not have fallen had He
not partaken of the Virgin's flesh.
"That which is born of the Spirit is spirit." Do you see the dignity of the
Spirit? It appears performing the work of God; for above he said of some, that,
"they were begotten of God," [John 1:13,] here He says, that the Spirit begets
them.

"That which is born of the Spirit is spirit." His meaning is of this kind; "He
that is born of the Spirit is spiritual." For the Birth which He speaks of here is
not that according to essence, but according to honor and grace. Now if the Son
is so born also, in what shall He be superior to men so born? And how is He,
Only-begotten? For I too am born of God, though not of His Essence, and if He
also is not of His Essence, how in this respect does He differ from us? Nay, He
will then be found to be inferior to the Spirit; for birth of this kind is by the grace
of the Spirit. Needs He then the help of the Spirit that He may continue a Son?
And in what do these differ from Jewish doctrines?
Christ then having said, "He that is born of the Spirit is spirit," when He
saw him again confused, leads His discourse to an example from sense, saying,