apply the medicines. For he who does not know his disease, will give no care to
his weakness. We have sinned much: I know this well. For we are all liable for
penalties. But we are not deprived of pardon; nor shall we fall away from
repentance for we still stand in the arena, and are in the struggles of repentance.
Are You old, and have you come to the last outlet of life? Do not consider even
thus that you have fallen from repentance, nor despair of your own salvation, but
consider the robber who was freed on the cross. For what was briefer than that
hour in which he was crowned? Yet notwithstanding even this was enough for
him, for salvation. Art thou young? Do not be confident in your youth, nor think
that you have a very fixed term of life, "For the day of the Lord so comes as a
thief in the night." On this account he has made our end invisible, in order that
we might make our diligence and our forethought plain. Do you not see men
taken away prematurely day after day? On this account a certain one admonishes
"make no tarrying to turn to the Lord and put not off from day to day," lest at any
time, as you delay, you are destroyed. Let the old man keep this admonition, let
the young man take this advice. Yea, are you in security, and are you rich, and do
you abound in wealth, and does no affliction happen to you? Still hear what Paul
says "when they say peace and safety, then sudden destruction comes upon
them." Affairs are full of much change. We are not masters of our end. Let us be
masters of virtue. Our Master Christ is loving.
6. Do you wish that I shall speak of the ways of repentance? They are many,
and various, and different, and all lead to heaven. The first way of repentance is
condemnation of sins. "Declare first your sins that you may be justified."
Wherefore also the prophet said "I said, I will speak out, my transgression to the
Lord, and you remitted the iniquity of my heart." Condemn yourself therefore for
your sins. This is enough for the Master by way of self-defence. For he who
condemns his sins, is slower to fall into them again. Awake your conscience, that
inward accuser, in order that you may have no accuser at the judgment seat of
the Lord. This is one way of repentance, the best; and there is another not less
than this, not to bear a grudge against your enemies to overcome anger, to

forgive the sins of our fellow-servants. For so will those which have been done
against the master be forgiven us. See the second expiation of sins: "For if ye
forgive" says he, "your debtors, your Heavenly Father will also forgive you." Do
you wish to learn a third way of repentance? Fervent and diligent prayer, and to
do this from the bottom of the heart. Have you not seen that widow, how she
persuaded the shameless judge? But you have a gentle Master, both tender, and
kind. She asked, against her adversaries, but you do not ask against your
adversaries, but on behalf of your own salvation. And if you wouldest learn a
fourth way, I will say almsgiving. For this has a great power and unspeakable.
For Daniel saith to Nebuchadnezzar when he had come to all kinds of evil, and
had entered upon all impiety, "O King let my counsel be acceptable unto you,
redeem your sins by almsgiving and your iniquities by compassion on the poor."
What could be compared with this lovingkindness? After countless sins, after so
many transgressions, he is promised that he will be reconciled with him he has
come into conflict with if he will show kindness to his own fellow-servants. And
modesty, and humility, not less than all words spoken, exhaust the nature of sins.
And the publican is proof, being unable to declare his good deeds, in sight of all,
bringing forward his humility, and laying aside the heavy burden of his sins. See
we have shown five ways of repentance: first the condemnation of sins, next the
forgiveness of our neighbours' sins, thirdly that which comes of prayer, fourth
that which comes of almsgiving, fifth that which comes of humility. Do not thou
then be lazy; but walk in all these day by day. For the ways are easy, nor can you
plead poverty. And even if you live poorer than all, you are able to leave your
anger, and be humble, and to pray fervently, and to condemn sins, and your
poverty is in no way a hindrance. And why do I speak thus, when not even in
that way of repentance in which it is possible to spend money (I speak of
almsgiving), not even there is poverty any hindrance to us from obeying the
command? The widow who spent the two mites is a proof. Having learned then
the healing of our wounds, let us constantly apply these medicines, in order that
we may return to health and enjoy the sacred table with assurance; and with