## Homily 37 on Matthew

Matthew 10:7-9.
" And as they departed, Jesus began to say unto the multitudes concerning
John, What went ye out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken with the wind?
But what went ye out for to see? A man clothed in soft raiment; behold, they that
wear soft clothing are in kings' houses. But what went ye out for to see? A
prophet? yea, I say unto you, and more than a prophet."
For the matter indeed of John's disciples had been ordered well, and they
had gone away assured by the miracles which had just been performed; but there
was need after that of remedy as regarded the people. For although they could
not suspect anything of the kind of their own master, the common people might
from the inquiry of John's disciples form many strange suspicions, not knowing
the mind with which he sent his disciples. And it was natural for them to reason
with themselves, and say, "He that bore such abundant witness, has he now
changed his persuasion, and does he doubt whether this or another be He that
should come? Can it be, that in dissension with Jesus he says this? That the
prison has made him more timid? That his former words were spoken vainly, and
at random?" It being then natural for them to suspect many such things, see how
He corrects their weakness, and removes these their suspicions. For "as they
departed, He began to say to the multitudes." Why, "as they departed?" That He
might not seem to be flattering the man.
And in correcting the people, He does not publish their suspicion, but adds
only the solution of the thoughts that were mentally disturbing them: signifying
that He knew the secrets of all men. For He says not, as unto the Jews,
"Wherefore think ye evil?" [Matthew 9:4] Because if they had it in their minds,
not of wickedness did they so reason, but of ignorance on the points that had
been spoken of. Wherefore neither does He discourse unto them in the way of

rebuke, but merely sets right their understanding, and defends John, and signifies
that he is not fallen away from his former opinion, neither is he changed, not
being at all a man easily swayed and fickle, but steadfast and sure, and far from
being such as to betray the things committed unto him.
And in establishing this, He employs not at first his own sentence, but their
former testimony, pointing out how they bare record of his firmness, not by their
words only, but also by their deeds.
Wherefore He says, "What went ye out into the wilderness to see?" as
though He had said, Wherefore did ye leave your cities, and your houses, and
come together all of you into the wilderness? To see a pitiful and flexible kind of
person? Nay, this were out of all reason, this is not what is indicated by that
earnestness, and the concourse of all men unto the wilderness. So much people
and so many cities would not have poured themselves out with so great zeal
towards the wilderness and the river Jordan at that time, had ye not expected to
see some great and marvellous one, one firmer than any rock. Yea, it was not "a
reed" surely, that "ye went out to see shaken by the wind:" for the flexible and
such as are lightly brought round, and now say one thing, now another, and stand
firm in nothing, are most like that.
And see how He omits all wickedness, and mentions this, which then
especially haunted them; and removes the suspicion of lightness.
"But what went ye out for to see? A man clothed in soft raiment? Behold,
they that wear soft clothing are in kings' houses." [Matthew 11:8]
Now His meaning is like this: He was not of himself a waverer; and this ye
yourselves showed by your earnestness. Much less could any one say this, that
he was indeed firm, but having made himself a slave to luxury, he afterwards
became languid. For among men, some are such as they are of themselves,
others become so; for instance, one man is passionate by nature, and another
from having fallen into a long illness gets this infirmity. Again, some men are
flexible and fickle by nature, while others become so by being slaves to luxury,
and by living effeminately. "But John," says He, "neither was such a character