merely to be quiet, but even to be more exceedingly earnest in his turn, by
offering the other cheek.
And this He says, not as legislating about such a blow as this only, but as
teaching also what forbearance we should practise in all our other trials. For just
as when He says, "whoso calls his brother fool, is in danger of hell," He speaks
not of this word only, but also of all reviling; even so here also He is making a
law, not so much for our bearing it manfully, when smitten, as that we should be
undisturbed, whatever we suffer. Because of this He both there singled out the
extremest insult, and here has set down that which seems to be of all blows most
opprobrious, the blow on the cheek, so full of all insolence. And He commands
this as having regard both of him that strikes and of him that is stricken. Since
both he that is insulted will not think that he suffers any harm, being thus framed
to self-restraint (nay, he will not even have any sense of the insult, as striving
rather for a prize than as receiving a blow); and he that is offering the affront will
be made ashamed, and not add a second blow, though he be fiercer than any wild
beast, yea, rather will condemn himself heartily for the former. For nothing so
restrains the wrong doers, as when the injured bear what is done with gentleness.
And it not only restrains them from rushing onward, but works upon them also
to repent for what has gone before, and in wonder at such forbearance to draw
back. And it makes them more our own, and causes them to be slaves, not
merely friends, instead of haters and enemies; even as avenging one's self does
just the contrary: for it both disgraces each of the two, and makes them worse,
and their anger it heightens into a greater flame; yea, often no less than death
itself is the end of it, going on from bad to worse. Wherefore He not only
forbade you to be angry when smitten, but even enjoined you to satiate the
other's desire, that so neither may the former blow appear to have befallen you
against your will. For thus, lost as he may be to shame, you will be able to smite
him with a mortal blow, rather than if you had smitten him with your hand; or if
his shamelessness be still greater, you will make him gentle in proportion.
2. "And if any man will sue you at the law, and take away your coat, let him

have your cloak also." [Matthew 5:40]
For not in the matter of blows only, but of our goods also, He would have
such forbearance exhibited. Wherefore He again employs the same strong figure.
That is, as in the other case He commands to overcome in suffering, so here
again, by allowing ourselves to be deprived of more than the wrong doer
expected. However, He did not put it so merely, but with something to enhance
it: not saying, "give your cloak to him that asks," but "to him that would sue you
at the law," that is, "if he drag you into court, and give you trouble."
And just as, after He had bidden not to call another fool, nor to be angry
without cause, He went on and required more, in that He commanded to offer the
right cheek also; even so here, having said, "Agree with your adversary," He
again amplifies the precept. For now He orders us not only to give what the other
would have, but even to show forth a greater liberality.
"What then!" one may say, "am I to go about naked?" We should not be
naked, if we obeyed these sayings with exactness; rather more abundantly than
any should we be clothed. For first, no one would attack men of this disposition;
and next, if there chanced to be any one so savage and ungentle, as to proceed
even so far, yet many more would be found to clothe him, who acted with such
self-denial, not with garments only, but even with their own flesh, if it were
possible.
Further: even though one were of necessity to go about naked on account of
this sort of self-denial, neither so were it any disgrace. Since Adam too was
"naked" [Genesis 2:25] in paradise, "and was not ashamed;" and Isaiah was
"naked, and barefoot," and more glorious than all the Jews; [Isaiah 20:2-3] and
Joseph [Genesis 39:12] also, when he stripped himself, did then more than ever
shine forth. For to be thus naked is no evil, but to be so clad, as we now are, with
costly garments, this is both disgraceful and ridiculous. For this cause, you see,
those had praise of God, but these He blames, both by prophets and by apostles.
Let us not therefore suppose His injunctions impossible. Nay, for besides
their expediency, they are very easy, if we are sober-minded; and the profit of