in the heavenly places above all Principality and Power, and Virtue,
and Dominion." Here he places "Virtues" between "Powers" and
"Dominations," according to the placing of Dionysius. Writing
however to the Colossians (1:16), numbering the same orders from
the highest, he says: "Whether Thrones, or Dominations, or
Principalities, or Powers, all things were created by Him and in Him."
Here he places the "Principalities" between "Dominations" and
"Powers," as does also Gregory.
Let us then first examine the reason for the ordering of Dionysius, in
which we see, that, as said above (Article 1), the highest hierarchy
contemplates the ideas of things in God Himself; the second in the
universal causes; and third in their application to particular effects.
And because God is the end not only of the angelic ministrations,
but also of the whole creation, it belongs to the first hierarchy to
consider the end; to the middle one belongs the universal
disposition of what is to be done; and to the last belongs the
application of this disposition to the effect, which is the carrying out
of the work; for it is clear that these three things exist in every kind
of operation. So Dionysius, considering the properties of the orders
as derived from their names, places in the first hierarchy those
orders the names of which are taken from their relation to God, the
"Seraphim," "Cherubim," and "Thrones"; and he places in the middle
hierarchy those orders whose names denote a certain kind of
common government or disposition---the "Dominations," "Virtues,"
and "Powers"; and he places in the third hierarchy the orders whose
names denote the execution of the work, the "Principalities,"
"Angels," and "Archangels."
As regards the end, three things may be considered. For firstly we
consider the end; then we acquire perfect knowledge of the end;
thirdly, we fix our intention on the end; of which the second is an
addition to the first, and the third an addition to both. And because
God is the end of creatures, as the leader is the end of an army, as
the Philosopher says (Metaph. xii, Did. xi, 10); so a somewhat similar
order may be seen in human affairs. For there are some who enjoy
the dignity of being able with familiarity to approach the king or
leader; others in addition are privileged to know his secrets; and
others above these ever abide with him, in a close union. According
to this similitude, we can understand the disposition in the orders of
the first hierarchy; for the "Thrones" are raised up so as to be the
familiar recipients of God in themselves, in the sense of knowing
immediately the types of things in Himself; and this is proper to the

whole of the first hierarchy. The "Cherubim" know the Divine secrets
supereminently; and the "Seraphim" excel in what is the supreme
excellence of all, in being united to God Himself; and all this in such
a manner that the whole of this hierarchy can be called the
"Thrones"; as, from what is common to all the heavenly spirits
together, they are all called "Angels."
As regards government, three things are comprised therein, the first
of which is to appoint those things which are to be done, and this
belongs to the "Dominations"; the second is to give the power of
carrying out what is to be done, which belongs to the "Virtues"; the
third is to order how what has been commanded or decided to be
done can be carried out by others, which belongs to the "Powers."
The execution of the angelic ministrations consists in announcing
Divine things. Now in the execution of any action there are beginners
and leaders; as in singing, the precentors; and in war, generals and
officers; this belongs to the "Principalities." There are others who
simply execute what is to be done; and these are the "Angels."
Others hold a middle place; and these are the "Archangels," as
above explained.
This explanation of the orders is quite a reasonable one. For the
highest in an inferior order always has affinity to the lowest in the
higher order; as the lowest animals are near to the plants. Now the
first order is that of the Divine Persons, which terminates in the Holy
Ghost, Who is Love proceeding, with Whom the highest order of the
first hierarchy has affinity, denominated as it is from the fire of love.
The lowest order of the first hierarchy is that of the "Thrones," who
in their own order are akin to the "Dominations"; for the "Thrones,"
according to Gregory (Hom. xxiv in Ev.), are so called "because
through them God accomplishes His judgments," since they are
enlightened by Him in a manner adapted to the immediate
enlightening of the second hierarchy, to which belongs the
disposition of the Divine ministrations. The order of the "Powers" is
akin to the order of the "Principalities"; for as it belongs to the
"Powers" to impose order on those subject to them, this ordering is
plainly shown at once in the name of "Principalities," who, as
presiding over the government of peoples and kingdoms (which
occupies the first and principal place in the Divine ministrations), are
the first in the execution thereof; "for the good of a nation is more
divine than the good of one man" (Ethic. i, 2); and hence it is written,
"The prince of the kingdom of the Persians resisted me" (Dan.