SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.188, C.8.

the cure of souls. Wherefore bishops "cannot lay aside their
bishopric for any pretext whatever, without the authority of the
Roman Pontiff" (Extra, De Regular. et Transeunt. ad Relig., cap.
Licet.): whereas archdeacons and parish priests are free to renounce
in the hands of the bishop the cure entrusted to them, without the
Pope's special permission, who alone can dispense from perpetual
vows. Therefore it is evident that archdeacons and parish priests
may lawfully enter religion.
Reply to Objection 1: Parish priests and archdeacons have bound
themselves to the care of their subjects, as long as they retain their
archdeaconry or parish, but they did not bind themselves to retain
their archdeaconry or parish for ever.
Reply to Objection 2: As Jerome says (Contra Vigil.): "Although
they," namely religious, "are sorely smitten by thy poisonous
tongue, about whom you argue, saying; 'If all shut themselves up
and live in solitude, who will go to church? who will convert
worldlings? who will be able to urge sinners to virtue?' If this holds
true, if all are fools with thee, who can be wise? Nor will virginity be
commendable, for if all be virgins, and none marry, the human race
will perish. Virtue is rare, and is not desired by many." It is therefore
evident that this is a foolish alarm; thus might a man fear to draw
water lest the river run dry.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.188, C.9.

### ARTICLE 8. Whether it is lawful to pass from one religious

order to another?
Objection 1: It seems unlawful to pass from one religious order to
another, even a stricter one. For the Apostle says (Heb. 10:25): "Not
forsaking our assembly, as some are accustomed"; and a gloss
observes: "Those namely who yield through fear of persecution, or
who presuming on themselves withdraw from the company of
sinners or of the imperfect, that they may appear to be righteous."
Now those who pass from one religious order to another more
perfect one would seem to do this. Therefore this is seemingly
unlawful.
Objection 2: Further, the profession of monks is stricter than that of
canons regular (Extra, De Statu Monach. et Canonic. Reg., cap. Quod
Dei timorem). But it is unlawful for anyone to pass from the state of
canon regular to the monastic state. For it is said in the Decretals
(XIX, qu. iii, can. Mandamus): "We ordain and without any exception
forbid any professed canon regular to become a monk, unless
(which God forbid) he have fallen into public sin." Therefore it would
seem unlawful for anyone to pass from one religious order to
another of higher rank.
Objection 3: Further, a person is bound to fulfil what he has vowed,
as long as he is able lawfully to do so; thus if a man has vowed to
observe continence, he is bound, even after contracting marriage by
words in the present tense, to fulfil his vow so long as the marriage
is not consummated, because he can fulfil the vow by entering
religion. Therefore if a person may lawfully pass from one religious
order to another, he will be bound to do so if he vowed it previously
while in the world. But this would seem objectionable, since in many
cases it might give rise to scandal. Therefore a religious may not
pass from one religious order to another stricter one.
On the contrary, It is said in the Decretals (XX, qu. iv, can. Virgines):
"If sacred virgins design for the good of their soul to pass to another
monastery on account of a stricter life, and decide to remain there,
the holy synod allows them to do so": and the same would seem to
apply to any religious. Therefore one may lawfully pass from one
religious order to another.