quality of the persons, but by the wickedness of his will who commits it; so is it
likewise in this case. Nay, I should call him who committed the sin with an
inferior perhaps more guilty, than him who intrigued with the queen herself. For
in this case, wealth, and beauty, and other attractions might be pleaded, none of
which exist in the other. Therefore the other is the worse adulterer. Again, he
seems to me a more determined drunkard, who commits that excess with bad
wine; so he is a worse defrauder, who does not despise small thefts; for he who
commits great robberies, would perhaps not stoop to petty thefts, whereas he
who steals little things would never forbear greater, therefore he is the greater
thief of the two. For how should he despise gold, who does not despise silver?
So that when we accuse our rulers, let us recount our own faults, and we shall
find ourselves more given to wrong and robbery than they; unless we judge of
right and wrong rather by the act, than by the intention of the mind, as we ought
to judge. If one should be convicted of having stolen the goods of a poor man,
another those of a rich man, will they not both be punished alike? Is not a man
equally a murderer, whether he murder a poor and deformed, or a rich and
handsome, man? When therefore we say that such an one has seized upon
another person's land, let us reflect upon our own faults, and then we shall not
condemn other men, but we shall admire the longsuffering of God. We shall not
be indignant that judgment does not fall upon them, but we shall be more slow to
commit wickedness ourselves. For when we perceive ourselves liable to the
same punishment, we shall no longer feel such discontent, and shall desist from
offenses, and shall obtain the good things to come, through the grace and
lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom with the Father, etc.

## Homily 4 on Second Timothy

[2 Timothy 2:1-7]
"Thou therefore, my son, be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus. And
the things that you have heard of me among many witnesses, the same commit
thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also. Thou therefore
endure hardness, as a good soldier of Jesus Christ. No man that wars entangles
himself with the affairs of this life; that he may please him who has chosen him
to be a soldier. And if a man also strive for masteries, yet is he not crowned,
except he strive lawfully. The husbandman that labors must be first partaker of
the fruits. Consider what I say; and the Lord give you understanding in all
things."
The young sailor at sea is inspired with great confidence, if the Master of
the ship has been preserved in a shipwreck. For he will not consider that it is
from his inexperience that he is exposed to the storm, but from the nature of
things; and this has no little effect upon his mind. In war also the Captain, who
sees his General wounded and recovered again, is much encouraged. And thus it
produces some consolation to the faithful, that the Apostle should have been
exposed to great sufferings, and not rendered weak by the utmost of them. And
had it not been so, he would not have related his sufferings. For when Timothy
heard, that he who possessed so great powers, who had conquered the whole
world, is a prisoner, and afflicted, yet is not impatient, nor discontented upon the
desertion of his friends; he, if ever exposed to the same sufferings himself,
would not consider that it proceeded from human weakness, nor from the
circumstance of his being a disciple, and inferior to Paul, since his teacher too
suffered the like, but that all this happened from the natural course of things. For
Paul himself did this, and related what had befallen him, that he might
strengthen Timothy, and renew his courage. And he shows that it was for this