John 18:4
"Jesus therefore, knowing all things that should come upon Him, went forth, and
said, Whom do you seek?"
That is, He did not wait to learn this from their coming, but spoke and acted
without confusion, as knowing all these things. "But why come they with
weapons, when about to seize Him?" They feared His followers, and for this
reason they came upon Him late at night. "And He went forth, and said unto
them, Whom do you seek?"

John 18:5
"They answered Him, Jesus of Nazareth."
Do you see His invincible power, how being in the midst of them He
disabled their eyes? For that the darkness was not the cause of their not knowing
Him, the Evangelist has shown, by saying, that they had torches also. And even
had there been no torches, they ought at least to have known Him by His voice;
or if they did not know it, how could Judas be ignorant, who had been so
continually with Him? For he too stood with them, and knew Him no more than
they, but with them fell backward. And Jesus did this to show, that not only they
could not seize Him, but could not even see Him when in the midst, unless He
gave permission.

John 18:7
"He says again, Whom do you seek?" What madness! His word threw them
backward, yet not even so did they turn, when they had learned that His power
was so great, but again set themselves to the same attempt. When therefore He
had fulfilled all that was His, then He gave Himself up.

John 18:8
"He answered, I told you that I Am." ([ John 18:5] "And Judas also which
betrayed Him stood with them.")
See the forbearance of the Evangelist, how he does not insult over the
traitor, but relates what took place, only desiring to prove one thing, that the
whole took place with His own consent. Then, lest any one should say that He
Himself brought them to this, by having placed Himself into their hands, and
revealed Himself to them; after having shown to them all things which should
have been sufficient to repulse them, when they persevered in their wickedness,
and had no excuse, He put Himself in their hands, saying,
"If therefore ye seek Me, let these go their way."
Manifesting until the last hour His lovingkindness towards them. "If," He
says, "ye want Me, have nothing to do with these, for, behold, I give Myself up."

John 18:9
"That the saying might be fulfilled which He spoke, Of those which You gave Me
have I lost none."
By "loss" He does not here mean that which is of death, but that which is
eternal; though the Evangelist in the present case includes the former also. And
one might wonder why they did not seize them with Him, and cut them to
pieces, especially when Peter had exasperated them by what he did to the
servant. Who then restrained them? No other than that Power which cast them
backward. And so the Evangelist, to show that it did not come to pass through
their intention, but by the power and decree of Him whom they had seized, has
added, "That the saying might be fulfilled which He spoke," that "not one, etc."
[John 17:12]
2. Peter, therefore, taking courage from His voice, and from what had
already happened, arms himself against the assailants, "And how," says some
one, "does he who was bidden not to have a scrip, not to have two coats, possess
a sword?" Methinks he had prepared it long before, as fearing this very thing
which came to pass. But if you say, "How does he, who was forbidden even to
strike a blow with the hand, become a manslayer?" He certainly had been
commanded not to defend himself, but here he did not defend himself, but his
Master. And besides, they were not as yet perfect or complete. But if you desire
to see Peter endued with heavenly wisdom, you shall after this behold him
wounded, and bearing it meekly, suffering ten thousand dreadful things, and not
moved to anger. But Jesus here also works a miracle, both showing that we
ought to do good to those who do evil to us, and revealing His own power. He
therefore restored the servant's ear, and said to Peter, that "All they that take the
sword shall perish by the sword" [Matthew 26:52]; and as He did in the case of
the basin, when He relaxed his vehemence by a threat, so also here. The
Evangelist adds the name of the servant, because the thing done was very great,