vengeance by an oath; that becoming less afraid, they might more readily bring
the offender to light. But under the influence of anger, and great madness, and
his former unreasonableness, he again does that which is directly contrary to
what he desires. What need is there to enlarge? He commits the matter to a
decision by lot; and the lot falls upon Saul, and Jonathan; "And Saul said, Cast
ye the lot between me and Jonathan; and they cast the lot, and Jonathan was
taken. And Saul said to Jonathan, Tell me, what have you done? And Jonathan
told him, saying, I only tasted a little honey on the top of the rod which is in my
hand, and, lo! I must die." Who is there that these words would not have moved
and turned to pity? Consider what a tempest Saul then sustained, his bowels
being torn with anguish, and the most profound precipice appearing on either
hand! But nevertheless he did not learn self-control, for what does he say? "God
do so to me, and more also; for you shall surely die this day." [1 Samuel 14:44]
Behold again the third oath, and not simply the third, but one with a very narrow
limit as to time; for he does not merely say, "You shall die;" but, "this day." For
the devil was hurrying, hurrying him on, constraining him and driving him to
this impious murder. Wherefore he did not suffer him to assign any future day
for the sentence, lest there should be any correction of the evil by delay. And the
people said to Saul, "God do so to us, and more also, if he shall be put to death,
who has wrought this great salvation in Israel. As the Lord lives, there shall not
an hair of his head fall to the ground; because he has wrought a merciful thing
from God today." [1 Samuel 14:45] Behold how, in the second place, the people
also swore, and swore contrary to the king.
13. Now recollect, I pray, the cord pulled by the children, and breaking, and
throwing on their backs those who pull it. Saul swore not once or twice, but
several times. The people swore what was contrary, and strained in the opposite
direction. Of necessity then it followed, that the oath must in any wise be broken
through. For it were impossible that all these should keep their oaths. And now
tell me not of the event of this transaction; but consider how many evils were
springing from it; and how the devil from thence was preparing the tragedy and

usurpation of Absalom. For if the king had chosen to resist, and to proceed to the
execution of his oath, the people would have been in array against him; and a
grievous rebellion would have been set on foot. And again, if the son consulting
his own safety had chosen to throw himself into the hands of the army, he would
straightway have become a parricide. Do you see not, that rebellion, as well as
child-murder, and parricide, and battle, and civil war, and slaughter, and blood,
and dead bodies without number, are the consequences of one oath. For if war
had perchance broken out, Saul might have been slain, and Jonathan perchance
too, and many of the soldiers would have been cut to pieces; and after all the
keeping of the oath would not have been forwarded. So that it is not for you to
consider that these events did not occur, but to mark this point, that it was the
nature of the case to necessitate the occurrence of such things. However, the
people prevailed. Come then, let us reckon up the perjuries that were the
consequence. The oath of Saul was first broken by his son; and again a second
and a third, concerning the slaying of his son, by Saul himself. And the people
seemed to have kept their oath. Yet if any one closely examines the matter, they
too all became liable to the charge of perjury. For they compelled the father of
Jonathan to perjure himself, by not surrendering the son to the father. Do you see
how many persons one oath made obnoxious to perjury, willingly and
unwillingly; how many evils it wrought, how many deaths it caused?
14. Now in the commencement of this discourse I promised to show that
perjury would in any case result from opposite oaths; but truly the course of the
history has proved more than I was establishing. It has exhibited not one, two, or
three individuals, but a whole people, and not one, two, or three oaths, but many
more transgressed. I might also make mention of another instance, and show
from that, how one oath caused a still greater and more grievous calamity. For
one oath entailed upon all the Jews the capture of their cities, as well as of their
wives and children; the ravages of fire, the invasion of barbarians, the pollution
of sacred things, and ten thousand other evils yet more distressing. But I
perceive that the discourse is running to a great length. Therefore, dismissing