Apostle too expressing the same thing himself with much boldness, and saying,
"I espoused you to one husband that I might present you as a pure virgin to
Christ?" Do you see wisdom again? For having said, 'You ought to bear with
me,' he did not say, 'for I am your teacher and I speak not for my own sake:' but
he uses this expression which invested them with special dignity, placing himself
in the room of her who promotes a match, and them in the rank of the bride; and
he adds these words;

2 Corinthians 11:3
"But I fear lest by any means, as the serpent beguiled Eve through his
subtlety, so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is toward
Christ. "
'For although the destruction be yours [alone], yet is the sorrow mine as
well.' And consider his wisdom. For he does not assert, although they were
corrupted; and so he showed when he said, "When your obedience is fulfilled,"
[2 Corinthians 10:6] and "I shall bewail many which have sinned already;" [2
Corinthians 12:21] but still he does not leave them to get shameless. And
therefore he says, "lest at any time." For this neither condemns nor is silent; for
neither course were safe, whether to speak out plainly or to conceal perpetually.
Therefore he employs this middle form, saying, "lest at any time." For this is the
language neither of one that entirely distrusts, nor entirely relies on them, but of
one who stands between these two. In this way then he palliated, but by his
mention of that history threw them into an indescribable terror, and cuts them off
from all forgiveness. For even although the serpent was malignant, and she
senseless, yet did none of these things snatch the woman from punishment.
'Beware then,' he says, 'lest such be your fate, and there be naught to screen you.
For he too promising greater things, so deceived.' Whence it is plain that these
too, by boasting and puffing themselves up, deceived. And this may be
conjectured not from this place only, but also from what he says afterwards,

2 Corinthians 11:4
"If he that comes preaches another Jesus, whom we did not preach, or if
you receive a different Spirit which you did not receive, or a different Gospel
which you did not accept, you do well to bear with him."
And he does not say, 'Lest by any means as Adam was deceived.' but shows
that those men are but women who are thus abused, for it is the part of woman to
be deceived. And he did not say, 'so ye also should be deceived.' but keeping up
the metaphor, he says, "so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity
that is toward Christ." 'From the simplicity, I say, not from wickedness; neither
out of wickedness [is it], nor out of your not believing, but out of simplicity.'
But, nevertheless, not even under such circumstances are the deceived entitled to
forgiveness, as Eve showed. But if this does not entitle to forgiveness, much
more will it not do so, when through vain-glory any is so.
2. "For if he that comes preaches another Jesus whom we did not preach:"
showing hereby that their deceivers were not Corinthians, but persons from some
other quarter previously corrupted: wherefore he says, "he that comes."
"If you receive a different Spirit, if a different Gospel which you did not
accept, you do well to bear" with him. What do you say? You that said to the
Galatians, "If any preach another Gospel to you than that you have received, let
him be anathema;" do you now say, "ye do well to bear" with him? And yet on
this account it were meet not to bear with, but to recoil, from them; but if they
say the same things, it is meet to bear with them. How then do you say, 'because
they say the same things, it is not meet to bear with them?' for he says, 'if they
said other things, it were meet to bear with them.' Let us then give good heed, for
the danger is great, and the precipice deep, if men run past this carelessly; and
what is here said gives an entrance to all the heresies. What then is the sense of
these words? Those persons so boasted as if the Apostles taught incompletely,