so he who is injured; he has all men to take his part, to condole with him, to
stretch out the hand of help: he stands on safe ground. If to injure another be a
good and a safe thing, let any one confess that he is unjust: but if he dares not do
this, why then does he pursue it as a good thing? But let us see in our own
persons, if his same be done there, what evils come of it: (I mean,) if any of the
parts or functions within us having overstepped its proper bounds, grasp at the
office of some other. For let the spleen, if it will, have left its proper place, and
seize on the part belonging to some other organ along with its own, is not this
disease? The moisture within us, let it fill every place, is it not dropsy and gout?
is not this to ruin itself, along with the other? Again, let the bile seek for a wide
room, and let the blood be diffused throughout every part. But how is it in the
soul with anger, lust, and all the rest, if the food exceed its proper measure?
Again in the body, if the eye wish to take in more, or to see more than is allotted
to it, or admit a greater light than is proper. But if, when the light is good, yet the
eye is ruined, if it choose to see more than is right: consider what it must be in
the case of an evil thing. If the ear take in a (too) loud voice, the sense is
stunned: the mind, if it reason about things above itself, it is overpowered: and
whatever is in excess, mars all. For this is [πλεονεξία], the wanting to have more
than what is marked off and allotted. So too in respect of money; when we will
needs put upon (us) more burdens (than is meet), although we do not perceive it,
to our sore hurt we are nourishing within ourselves a wild beast; much having,
yet much wanting, numberless the cares we entangle ourselves withal, many the
handles we furnish the devil against ourselves. In the case of the rich, however,
the devil has not even need of labor, so surely do their very concerns of business
of themselves ruin them. Wherefore I beseech you to abstain from the lust of
these things, that we may be enabled to escape the snares of the evil one, and
having taken hold of virtue, to attain unto the good things eternal, through the
grace and mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father and the Holy
Ghost together be glory forever. Amen.

Homily 52 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts XXV. 23
"And on the morrow, when Agrippa had come, and Bernice with great
pomp, and was entered into the place of hearing, with the chief captains, and
principal men of the city, at Festus' commandment Paul was brought forth.
See what an audience is gathered together for Paul. Having collected all his
guards, the governor has come, and the king, and the tribunes, "with the
principal men," it says, "of the city." Then Paul being brought forth, see how he
is proclaimed as conqueror. Festus himself acquits him from the charges, for
what says Festus? "And Festus said, King Agrippa, and all men which are here
present with us, you see this man, about whom all the multitude of the Jews have
dealt with me, both at Jerusalem, and also here, crying that he ought not to live
any longer. But when I found that he had committed nothing worthy of death,
and that he himself has appealed to Augustus, I have determined to send him. Of
whom I have no certain thing to write unto my lord. Wherefore I have brought
him forth before you, and especially before you, O king Agrippa, that, after
examination had, I might have somewhat to write. For it seems to me
unreasonable to send a prisoner, and not withal to signify the crimes laid against
him." [Acts 25:24-27] Mark how he accuses them, while he acquits him. O what
an abundance of justifications! After all these repeated examinations, the
governor finds not how he may condemn him. They said he was worthy of death.
On this account he said also: "When I found," says he "that he had committed
nothing worthy of death.— Of whom I have no certain thing to write to my lord."
This too is a proof of Paul's spotlessness, that the judge found nothing to say
concerning him. "Therefore I have brought him forth," he says, "before you. For
it seems to me unreasonable to send a prisoner, and not withal to signify the
crime laid against him." Such were the great straits into which the Jews brought