and Framer, and Maker of all things; and then, again, cutting Him up piecemeal into four syllables
and thirty elements; and bringing down the Lord of all who founded the heavens to the number
eight hundred and eighty-eight, so that He should be similar to the alphabet; and subdividing the
Father, who cannot be contained, but contains all things, into a Tetrad, and an Ogdoad, and a Decad,
and a Duodecad; and by such multiplications, setting forth the unspeakable and inconceivable
nature of the Father, as thou thyself declarest it to be? And showing thyself a very Dædalus for evil
invention, and the wicked architect of the supreme power, thou dost construct a nature and substance
for Him whom thou callest incorporeal and immaterial, out of a multitude of letters, generated the
one by the other. And that power whom thou affirmest to be indivisible, thou dost nevertheless
divide into consonants, and vowels, and semi-vowels; and, falsely ascribing those letters which are
mute to the Father of all things, and to His EnnÏa (thought), thou hast driven on all that place
confidence in thee to the highest point of blasphemy, and to the grossest impiety.
6. With good reason, therefore, and very fittingly, in reference to thy rash attempt, has that
divine elder and preacher of the truth burst forth in verse against thee as follows:—

"Marcus, thou former of idols, inspector of portents,
Skill'd in consulting the stars, and deep in the black arts of magic,
Ever by tricks such as these confirming the doctrines of error,
Furnishing signs unto those involved by thee in deception,
Wonders of power that is utterly severed from God and apostate,
Which Satan, thy true father, enables thee still to accomplish,
By means of Azazel, that fallen and yet mighty angel,—
Thus making thee the precursor of his own impious actions."
Such are the words of the saintly elder. And I shall endeavour to state the remainder of their
mystical system, which runs out to great length, in brief compass, and to bring to the light what
has for a long time been concealed. For in this way such things will become easily susceptible of
exposure by all.

### Chapter XVI.—Absurd interpretations of the Marcosians.
1. Blending in one the production of their own Æons, and the straying and recovery of the sheep
[spoken of in the Gospel], these persons endeavour to set forth things in a more mystical style,
while they refer everything to numbers, maintaining that the universe has been formed out of a
Monad and a Dyad. And then, reckoning from unity on to four, they thus generate the Decad. For
when one, two, three, and four are added together, they give rise to the number of the ten Æons.

[Some think Pothinus.]

And, again, the Dyad advancing from itself [by twos] up to six—two, and four, and six—brings
out the Duodecad. Once more, if we reckon in the same way up to ten, the number thirty appears,
in which are found eight, and ten, and twelve. They therefore term the Duodecad—because it
contains the Episemon, and because the Episemon [so to speak] waits upon it—the passion. And
for this reason, because an error occurred in connection with the twelfth number, the sheep
frisked off, and went astray; for they assert that a defection took place from the Duodecad. In the
same way they oracularly declare, that one power having departed also from the Duodecad, has
perished; and this was represented by the woman who lost the drachma, and, lighting a lamp,
again found it. Thus, therefore, the numbers that were left, viz., nine, as respects the pieces of
money, and eleven in regard to the sheep, when multiplied together, give birth to the number
ninety-nine, for nine times eleven are ninety-nine. Wherefore also they maintain the word "Amen"
contains this number.
2. I will not, however, weary thee by recounting their other interpretations, that you may perceive
the results everywhere. They maintain for instance, that the letter Eta (!) along with the Episemon
(") constitutes an Ogdoad, inasmuch as it occupies the eighth place from the first letter. Then, again,
without the Episemon, reckoning the number of the letters, and adding them up till we come to Eta,
they bring out the Triacontad. For if one begins at Alpha and ends with Eta, omitting the Episemon,
and adds together the value of the letters in succession, he will find their number altogether to
amount to thirty. For up to Epsilon (#) fifteen are formed; then adding seven to that number, the
sum of twenty-two is reached. Next, Eta being added to these, since its value is eight, the most
wonderful Triacontad is completed. And hence they give forth that the Ogdoad is the mother of
the thirty Æons. Since, therefore, the number thirty is composed of three powers [the Ogdoad,
Decad, and Duodecad], when multiplied by three, it produces ninety, for three times thirty are
ninety. Likewise this Triad, when multiplied by itself, gives rise to nine. Thus the Ogdoad generates,
by these means, ninety-nine. And since the twelfth Æon, by her defection, left eleven in the heights
above, they maintain that therefore the position of the letters is a true coordinate of the method of
their calculation (for Lambda is the eleventh in order among the letters, and represents the number
thirty), and also forms a representation of the arrangement of affairs above, since, on from Alpha,
omitting Episemon, the number of the letters up to Lambda, when added together according to the
successive value of the letters, and including Lambda itself, forms the sum of ninety-nine; but that
this Lambda, being the eleventh in order, descended to seek after one equal to itself, so as to complete
given what seems the simplest rendering of the text as it stands.