"We know," he says, "that You are a Teacher come from God." "Why then do you
come by night and secretly, to Him that speaks the things of God, to Him who
comes from God? Why do you not converse with Him openly?" But Jesus said
nothing like this to him, nor did He rebuke him; for, says the Prophet, "A bruised
reed shall He not break, and smoking flax shall he not quench; He shall not
strive nor cry" [Isaiah 42:2-3; as quoted Matthew 12:19-20]: and again He says
Himself, "I came not to condemn the world, but to save the world." [John 12:47]
"No man can do these miracles, except God be with him."
Still here Nicodemus speaks like the heretics, in saying, that He has a
power working within Him, and has need of the aid of others to do as He did.
What then says Christ? Observe His exceeding condescension. He refrained for a
while from saying, "I need not the help of others, but do all things with power,
for I am the Very Son of God, and have the same power as My Father," because
this would have been too hard for His hearer; for I say now what I am always
saying, that what Christ desired was, not so much for a while to reveal His own
Dignity, as to persuade men that He did nothing contrary to His Father. And
therefore in many places he appears in words confined by limits, but in His
actions He does not so. For when He works a miracle, He does all with power,
saying, "I will, be thou clean." [Matthew 8:3] "Talitha, arise." [Mark 5:41; not
verbally quoted] "Stretch forth your hand." [Mark 3:5] "Your sins be forgiven
you." [Matthew 9:2] "Peace, be still." [Mark 4:39] "Take up your bed, and go
unto your house." [Matthew 9:6] "Thou foul spirit, I say unto you, come out of
him." [Mark 9:25; not verbally quoted] "Be it unto you even as you will."
[Matthew 15:28] "If any one say (anything) unto you, you shall say, The Lord
has need of him." [Mark 11:3] "This day shall you be with Me in Paradise."
[Luke 23:43] "You have heard that it was said by them of old time, You shall not
kill; but I say unto you, that whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause,
shall be in danger of the judgment." [Matthew 5:21-22] "Come after Me, and I
will make you fishers of men." [Mark 1:17] And everywhere we observe that His
authority is great; for in His actions no one could find fault with what was done.

How was it possible? Had His words not come to pass, nor been accomplished
as He commanded, any one might have said that they were the commands of a
madman; but since they did come to pass, the reality of their accomplishment
stopped men's mouths even against their will. But with regard to His discourses,
they might often in their insolence charge Him with madness. Wherefore now in
the case of Nicodemus, He utters nothing openly, but by dark sayings leads him
up from his low thoughts, teaching him, that He has sufficient power in Himself
to show forth miracles; for that His Father begot Him Perfect and All-sufficient,
and without any imperfection.
But let us see how He effects this. Nicodemus says, "Rabbi, we know that
You are a Teacher come from God, for no man can do the miracles that You do,
except God be with him." He thought he had said something great when he had
spoken thus of Christ. What then says Christ? To show that he had not yet set
foot even on the threshold of right knowledge, nor stood in the porch, but was
yet wandering somewhere without the palace, both he and whoever else should
say the like, and that he had not so much as glanced towards true knowledge
when he held such an opinion of the Only-Begotten, what says He?