We should observe what care he bestows upon children. For he who cannot
be the instructor of his own children, how should he be the Teacher of others? If
he cannot keep in order those whom he has had with him from the beginning,
whom he has brought up, and over whom he had power both by the laws, and by
nature, how will he be able to benefit those without? For if the incompetency of
the father had not been great, he would not have allowed those to become bad
whom from the first he had under his power. For it is not possible, indeed it is
not, that one should turn out ill who is brought up with much care, and has
received great attention. Sins are not so prevalent by nature, as to overcome so
much previous care. But if, occupied in the pursuit of wealth, he has made his
children a secondary concern, and not bestowed much care upon them, even so
he is unworthy. For if when nature prompted, he was so void of affection or so
senseless, that he thought more of his wealth than of his children, how should he
be raised to the Episcopal throne, and so great rule? For if he was unable to
restrain them it is a great proof of his weakness; and if he was unconcerned, his
want of affection is much to be blamed. He then that neglects his own children,
how shall he take care of other men's? And he has not only said, "not riotous,"
but not even "accused of riot." There must not be an ill report, or such an
opinion of them.
Ver. 7. "For a Bishop must be blameless, as the steward of God; not selfwilled, not soon angry, not given to wine, no striker."
For a ruler without, as he rules by law and compulsion, perhaps does not
consult the wishes of those under his rule. But he who ought to rule men with
their own consent, and who will be thankful for his rule, if he so conduct himself
as to do everything of his own will, and share counsels with no one, makes his
presidency tyrannical rather than popular. For he must be "blameless, as the
steward of God, not self-willed, not soon angry." For how shall he instruct others
to rule that passion, who has not taught himself? For power leads on to many
temptations, it makes a man more harsh and difficult to please, even him that
was very mild, surrounding him with so many occasions of anger. If he have not

previously practiced himself in this virtue, he will grow harsh, and will injure
and destroy much that is under his rule.
"Not given to wine, no striker." Here he is speaking of the insolent man. For
he should do all things by admonition or rebuke, and not by insolence. What
necessity, tell me, for insult? He ought to terrify, to alarm, to penetrate the soul
with the threat of hell. But he that is insulted becomes more impudent, and rather
despises him that insults him. Nothing produces contempt more than insult; it
disgraces the insolent person, and prevents his being respected, as he ought to
be. Their discourse ought to be delivered with much caution. In reproving sins
they should bear in mind the future judgment, but keep clear of all insolence. Yet
if any prevent them from doing their duty, they must prosecute the matter with
all authority. "Not a striker," he says. The teacher is the physician of souls. But
the physician does not strike, but heals and restores him that has stricken him.
"Not given to filthy lucre."
Ver. 8. "But a lover of hospitality, a lover of good men, sober, just, holy,
temperate."
Ver. 9. "Holding fast the faithful word as he has been taught."
You see what intensity of virtue he required. "Not given to filthy lucre," that
is, showing great contempt for money. "A lover of hospitality, a lover of good
men, sober, just, holy"; he means, giving away all his substance to them that
need. "Temperate"; he speaks not here of one who fasts, but of one who
commands his passions, his tongue, his hands, his eyes. For this is temperance,
to be drawn aside by no passion.
"Holding fast the faithful word as he has been taught." By "faithful" is here
meant "true," or that which was delivered through faith, not requiring
reasonings, or questionings.
"Holding fast," that is, having care of it, making it his business. What then,
if he be ignorant of the learning that is without? For this cause, he says, "the
faithful word, according to teaching."
"That he may be able both to exhort, and to convince the gainsayers."