the Pleroma, did bring forth this very offspring; but what is beyond the Pleroma they represent as
being beyond the pale of knowledge, that is, ignorance. How, then, could that seed, which was
conceived in ignorance, possess the power of declaring knowledge? Or how did the mother herself,
a shapeless and undefined being, one cast out of doors as an abortion, obtain knowledge of the
mysteries within the Pleroma, she who was organized outside it and given a form there, and
prohibited by Horos from entering within, and who remains outside the Pleroma till the
consummation [of all things], that is, beyond the pale of knowledge? Then, again, when they say
that the Lord's passion is a type of the extension of the Christ above, which he effected through
Horos, and so imparted a form to their mother, they are refuted in the other particulars [of the Lord's
passion], for they have no semblance of a type to show with regard to them. For when did the
Christ above have vinegar and gall given him to drink? Or when was his raiment parted? Or when
was he pierced, and blood and water came forth? Or when did he sweat great drops of blood? And
[the same may be demanded] as to the other particulars which happened to the Lord, of which the
prophets have spoken. From whence, then, did the mother or her offspring divine the things which
had not yet taken place, but which should occur afterwards?
4. They affirm that certain things still, besides these, were spoken from the Pleroma, but are
confuted by those which are referred to in the Scriptures as bearing on the advent of Christ. But
what these are [that are spoken from the Pleroma] they are not agreed, but give different answers
regarding them. For if any one, wishing to test them, do question one by one with regard to any
passage those who are their leading men, he shall find one of them referring the passage in question
to the Propator—that is, to Bythus; another attributing it to Arche—that is, to the Only-begotten;
another to the Father of all—that is, to the Word; while another, again, will say that it was spoken
of that one Æon who was [formed from the joint contributions] of the Æons in the Pleroma;
others [will regard the passage] as referring to Christ, while another [will refer it] to the Saviour.
One, again, more skilled than these, after a long protracted silence, declares that it was spoken
of Horos; another that it signifies the Sophia which is within the Pleroma; another that it announces
the mother outside the Pleroma; while another will mention the God who made the world (the
Demiurge). Such are the variations existing among them with regard to one [passage], holding
discordant opinions as to the same Scriptures; and when the same identical passage is read out,
they all begin to purse up their eyebrows, and to shake their heads, and they say that they might
indeed utter a discourse transcendently lofty, but that all cannot comprehend the greatness of that
thought which is implied in it; and that, therefore, among the wise the chief thing is silence. For
that Sige (silence) which is above must be typified by that silence which they preserve. Thus do
they, as many as they are, all depart [from each other], holding so many opinions as to one thing,
and bearing about their clever notions in secret within themselves. When, therefore, they shall have
agreed among themselves as to the things predicted in the Scriptures, then also shall they be confuted