I, a wild beast? Nay, such a one is more unmanageable than any wild beast. For
they, although by nature savage, yet when they have had the advantage of man's
art, oftentimes grow tame; but thou who hast changed their natural wildness into
this unnatural gentleness, what sort of plea will you have, when you have trained
your own natural meekness into the savageness that is contrary to nature? When
that which is wild by nature you exhibit in gentle mood, but presentest yourself,
by nature so gentle, unnaturally savage? And the lion(2) you tame and make
tractable, but your own wrath you render wilder than any lion. And yet in that
case there are two hindrances, first that the beast is deprived of reason, and then
that it is the most wrathful of all things; nevertheless by the excellency of the
wisdom given to you of God, you overcome even nature. Thou therefore, who in
who beasts art victorious over nature herself, how is it that in your own case
together with nature you give up your admirable quality of free will also?
Further, if I were bidding you make another man gentle, not even so ought I
to seem as one enjoining impossible things; however, you might then object that
you have not the control of another's disposition, and that it does not altogether
rest with you. But now it is your own wild beast, and a thing which absolutely
depends on you. What plea then have you? Or what fair excuse will you be able
to put forth, turning as you are a lion into a man, and regardless that you yourself
art of a man becoming a lion; upon the beast bestowing what is above nature, but
for yourself not even preserving what is natural? Yea, while the wild beasts are
by your earnest endeavors advanced into our noble estate, you are by yourself
cast down from the throne of the kingdom, and thrust out into their madness.
Thus, imagine, if you will, your wrath to be a kind of wild beast, and as much
zeal as others have displayed about lions, so much do thou in regard of yourself,
and cause that way of taking things to become gentle and meek. Because this too
has grievous teeth and talons, and if you tame it not, it will lay waste all things.
For not even lion nor serpent has such power to rend the vitals as wrath, with its
iron talons continually doing so. Since it mars, we see, not the body only, but the
very health likewise of the soul is corrupted by it, devouring, rending, tearing to

pieces all its strength, and making it useless for everything. For if a man
nourishing worms in his entrails, shall not be able so much as to breathe, his
inward parts all wasting away; how shall we, having so large a serpent eating up
all within us (it is wrath I mean), how, I say, shall we be able to produce
anything noble?
17. How then are we to be freed from this pest? If we can drink a potion
that is able to kill the worms within us and the serpents. "And of what nature," it
will be asked, "may this potion be, that has such power?" The precious Blood of
Christ, if it be received with full assurance, (for this will have power to
extinguish every disease); and together with this the divine Scriptures carefully
heard, and almsgiving added to our hearing; for by means of all these things we
shall be enabled to mortify the affections that mar our soul. And then only shall
we live; for now surely we are in no better state than the dead: forasmuch as it
cannot be, that while those passions live, we should live too, but we must
necessarily perish. And unless we first kill them here, they will be sure to kill us
in the other life; or rather before that death they will exact of us, even here, the
utmost penalty. Yes, for every such passion is both cruel and tyrannical and
insatiable, and never ceases to devour us every day. For "their teeth are the teeth
of a lion," [Joel 1:6] or rather even far more fierce. For the lion, as soon as ever
he is satisfied, is wont to leave the carcass that has fallen in his way; but these
passions neither are satisfied, nor do they leave the man whom they have seized,
until they have set him near the devil. For so great is their power, that the very
service which Paul showed forth to Christ, [Romans 8:38] despising both hell
and the kingdom for His sake, even this same do they require of them whom
they have seized. For whether it be with the love of women, or of riches, or of
glory, that any one is entangled, he laughs at hell thenceforth, and despises the
kingdom, that he may work the will of these. Let us not then doubt Paul when he
says that he so loved Christ. For when some are found so doing service to their
passions, how should that other afterwards seem incredible? Yea, and this is the
reason why our longing for Christ is feebler, because all our strength is