humanity was based on the supposition that humanity is some
distinct form supervening form and matter; which is false.
The second reason does not disprove the identity of humanity,
because union implies action or passion, and though there be a
different union, this cannot prevent the identity of humanity, because
the action and passion from which humanity resulted are not of the
essence of humanity, wherefore a distinction on their part does not
involve a distinction of humanity: for it is clear that generation and
resurrection are not the self-same movement. Yet the identity of the
rising man with the begotten man is not hindered for this reason:
and in like manner neither is the identity of humanity prevented if we
take union for the relation itself: because this relation is not
essential to but concomitant with humanity, since humanity is not
one of those forms that are composition or order (Phys. ii, 1), as are
the forms of things produced by art, so that if there be another
distinct composition there is another distinct form of a house.
Reply to Objection 3: This argument affords a very good proof
against those who held a distinction between the sensitive and
rational souls in man: because in that case the sensitive soul in man
would not be incorruptible, as neither is it in other animals; and
consequently in the resurrection there would not be the same
sensitive soul, and consequently neither the same animal nor the
same man.
But if we assert that in man the same soul is by its substance both
rational and sensitive, we shall encounter no difficulty in this
question, because animal is defined from sense, i.e. the sensitive
soul as from its essential form: whereas from sense, i.e. the
sensitive power, we know its definition as from an accidental form
"that contributes more than another to our knowledge of the
quiddity" (De Anima i, 1). Accordingly after death there remains the
sensitive soul, even as the rational soul, according to its substance:
whereas the sensitive powers, according to some, do not remain.
And since these powers are accidental properties, diversity on their
part cannot prevent the identity of the whole animal, not even of the
animal's parts: nor are powers to be called perfections or acts of
organs unless as principles of action, as heat in fire.
Reply to Objection 4: A statue may be considered in two ways, either
as a particular substance, or as something artificial. And since it is
placed in the genus of substance by reason of its matter, it follows

that if we consider it as a particular substance, it is the selfsame
statue that is remade from the same matter. On the other hand, it is
placed in the genus of artificial things inasmuch as it has an
accidental form which, if the statue be destroyed, passes away also.
Consequently it does not return identically the same, nor can the
statue be identically the same. But man's form, namely the soul,
remains after the body has perished: wherefore the comparison fails.