say there is not, let us not answer them. For just as it is worthless to answer
madmen, so too those who say there is no God. For if a ship having few sailors,
and passengers, would not be conducted safely for one mile even, without the
hand which guides it, much more, such a world as this, having so many persons
in it, composed of different elements, would not have continued so long a time,
were there not a certain providence presiding over it, both governing, and
continually maintaining this whole fabric, and if in shame, through the common
opinion of all men, and the experience of affairs, they confess that there is a
God, let us say this to them. If there is a God, as indeed there is, it follows that
He is just, for if He is not just neither is He God, and if He is just He
recompenses to each according to their desert. But we do not see all here
receiving according to their desert. Therefore it is necessary to hope for some
other requital awaiting us, in order that by each one receiving according to his
desert, the justice of God may be made manifest. For this consideration does not
only contribute to our wisdom about providence alone, but about the
Resurrection; and let us teach others, and let us do all diligence to shut the
mouths of them who rave against the master, and let us ourselves glorify him in
all things. For thus shall we win more of his care, and enjoy much of his
influence, and thus shall we be able to escape from real evil, and obtain future
good, through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, By whom
and with whom be glory to the Father, with the Holy Spirit, now and always, for
ever and ever. Amen.

Homily 2. On the Power of Man to Resist the
Devil.
Against those who object because the devil has not been put out of the
world: and to prove that his wickedness does no harm to us—if we take
heed: and concerning repentance.
1. When Isaac, in old time, was desirous to eat a meal at the hands of his
son, he sent his son forth from the house to the chace. But when this Isaac was
desirous to accept a meal at my hands he did not send me forth from the house,
but himself ran to our table. What could be more tenderly affectionate than he?
What more humble? Who thought fit to show his warm love thus, and deigned to
descend so far. On this account surely, we also having spent the tones of our
voice, and the strength of our feet over the morning discourse, when we saw his
fatherly face, forgot our weakness, lay aside our fatigue, were uplifted with
pleasure; we saw his illustrious hoary head, and our soul was filled with light.
On this account too, we set out our table with readiness, in order that he should
eat and bless us. There is no fraud and guile, here, as there was then, there. One
indeed was commanded to bring the meal—but another brought it. But I was
commanded to bring it, and brought it too. Bless me then, O my father, with
spiritual blessing, which we all also pray ever to receive, and which is profitable
not only to you, but also to me, and to all these. Entreat the common master of us
all, to prolong your life to the old age of Isaac. For this is both for me, and for
these, more valuable, and more needful than the dew of heaven, and the fatness
of the earth.
But it is time to proceed to set out our table; what then is this? The remains
of what was lately said with a view to our love of you. For still—still—we renew
our discourse concerning the Devil, which we started two days ago, which we
also addressed to the initiated, this morning when we discoursed to them about