THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.2, C.12.

be called the Son of God." And hence every operation of this man
followed the union. Therefore no operation of His could have been
meritorious of the union.
Neither could the needs of any other man whatsoever have merited
this union condignly: first, because the meritorious works of man are
properly ordained to beatitude, which is the reward of virtue, and
consists in the full enjoyment of God. Whereas the union of the
Incarnation, inasmuch as it is in the personal being, transcends the
union of the beatified mind with God, which is by the act of the soul
in fruition; and therefore it cannot fall under merit. Secondly,
because grace cannot fall under merit, for the principle of merit does
not fall under merit; and therefore neither does grace, for it is the
principle of merit. Hence, still less does the Incarnation fall under
merit, since it is the principle of grace, according to Jn. 1:17: "Grace
and truth came by Jesus Christ." Thirdly, because the Incarnation is
for the reformation of the entire human nature, and therefore it does
not fall under the merit of any individual man, since the goodness of
a mere man cannot be the cause of the good of the entire nature. Yet
the holy Fathers merited the Incarnation congruously by desiring
and beseeching; for it was becoming that God should harken to
those who obeyed Him.
And thereby the reply to the First Objection is manifest.
Reply to Objection 2: It is false that under merit falls everything
without which there can be no reward. For there is something prerequired not merely for reward, but also for merit, as the Divine
goodness and grace and the very nature of man. And again, the
mystery of the Incarnation is the principle of merit, because "of His
fulness we all have received" (Jn. 1:16).
Reply to Objection 3: The Blessed Virgin is said to have merited to
bear the Lord of all; not that she merited His Incarnation, but
because by the grace bestowed upon her she merited that grade of
purity and holiness, which fitted her to be the Mother of God.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.2, C.13.

### ARTICLE 12. Whether the grace of union was natural to the

man Christ?
Objection 1: It would seem that the grace of union was not natural to
the man Christ. For the union of the Incarnation did not take place in
the nature, but in the Person, as was said above (Article 2). Now a
thing is denominated from its terminus. Therefore this grace ought
rather to be called personal than natural.
Objection 2: Further, grace is divided against nature, even as
gratuitous things, which are from God, are distinguished from
natural things, which are from an intrinsic principle. But if things are
divided in opposition to one another, one is not denominated by the
other. Therefore the grace of Christ was not natural to Him.
Objection 3: Further, natural is that which is according to nature. But
the grace of union is not natural to Christ in regard to the Divine
Nature, otherwise it would belong to the other Persons; nor is it
natural to Him according to the human nature, otherwise it would
belong to all men, since they are of the same nature as He. Therefore
it would seem that the grace of union is nowise natural to Christ.
On the contrary, Augustine says (Enchiridion xl): "In the assumption
of human nature, grace itself became somewhat natural to that man,
so as to leave no room for sin in Him."
I answer that, According to the Philosopher (Metaph. v, 5), nature
designates, in one way, nativity; in another, the essence of a thing.
Hence natural may be taken in two ways: first, for what is only from
the essential principles of a thing, as it is natural to fire to mount;
secondly, we call natural to man what he has had from his birth,
according to Eph. 2:3: "We were by nature children of wrath"; and
Wis. 12:10: "They were a wicked generation, and their malice
natural." Therefore the grace of Christ, whether of union or habitual,
cannot be called natural as if caused by the principles of the human
nature of Christ, although it may be called natural, as if coming to
the human nature of Christ by the causality of His Divine Nature. But
these two kinds of grace are said to be natural to Christ, inasmuch
as He had them from His nativity, since from the beginning of His
conception the human nature was united to the Divine Person, and
His soul was filled with the gift of grace.