cost) by experience, but before the experience let us "avoid both harm and loss."
Hear what he says: "They that will be rich fall into temptation." [1 Timothy 6:9]
Let us therefore obey him; else, see what they suffered, because they did not take
his counsel. And again he tells in another place what causes shipwrecks: "Who,"
he says, "have made shipwreck concerning the faith. But do thou continue in the
things which you have learned and wast assured of." [1 Timothy 1:19] Let us
obey Paul: though we be in the midst of a tempest, we shall surely be freed from
the dangers: though we remain without food fourteen days, though hope of
safety may have left us, though we be in darkness and mist, by doing his
bidding, we shall be freed from the dangers. Let us think that the whole world is
a ship, and in this the evildoers and those who have numberless vices, some
rulers, others guards, others just men, as Paul was, others prisoners, those bound
by their sins: if then we do as Paul bids us, we perish not in our bonds, but are
released from them: God will give us also to him. Or think you not that sins and
passions are grievous bonds? For it is not the hands only that are bound, but the
whole man. For tell me, when any one possessed of much money uses it not, nor
spends it, but keeps it close, is he not bound more grievously than any prisoner
by his miserliness, a bond that cannot be broken? What again, when a man gives
himself up to (the belief in) Fate, is not he too bound with other fetters? What,
when he gives himself up to observations (of times)? What, when to omens? Are
not these more grievous than all bonds? What again, when he gives himself up to
an unreasonable lust and to love? Who shall break in pieces these bonds for you?
There is need of God's help that they may be loosed. But when there are both
bonds and tempest, think how great is the amount of dangers. For which of them
is not enough to destroy? The hunger, the tempest, the wickedness of those on
board, the unfitness of the season? But against all these, Paul's glory stood its
ground. So is it now: let us keep the saints near us, and there will be no tempest:
or rather, though there be a tempest, there will be great calm and tranquillity, and
freedom from dangers: since that widow had the saint for her friend, and the
death of her child was loosed, and she received back her son alive again. [1

Kings 17:17] Where the feet of saints step, there will be nothing painful; and if
such should happen, it is for proving us and for the greater glory of God.
Accustom the floor of your house to be trodden by such feet, and an evil spirit
will not tread there. For as where a sweet odor is, there a bad odor will not find
place: so where the holy ointment is, there the evil spirit is choked, and it
gladdens those who are near it, it delights, it refreshes the soul. Where thorns
are, there are wild beasts: where hospitality is, there are no thorns: for
almsgiving having entered in, more keenly than any sickle it destroys the thorns,
more violently than any fire. Be not thou afraid: (the wicked one) fears the tracks
of saints, as foxes do lions. For "the righteous," it says, "is as bold as alion."
[Proverbs 28:1] Let us bring these lions into our house, and all the wild beasts
are put to flight, the lions not needing to roar, but simply to utter their voice. For
not so much does the roaring of a lion put the wild beasts to flight, as the prayer
of a righteous man puts to flight evil spirits: let him but speak, they cower. And
where are such men now to be found, you will say? Everywhere, if we believe, if
we seek, if we take pains. Where have you sought, tell me? When did you take
this work in hand? When did you make this your business? But if you seek not,
marvel not that thou dost not find. For "he that seeks finds" [Matthew 7:7], not
he that seeks not. Listen to those who live in deserts: away with your gold and
silver: (such holy men) are to be found in every part of the world. Though thou
receive not such an one in your house, yet go thou to him, live with the man, be
at his dwelling-place, that you may be able to obtain and enjoy his blessing. For
a great thing it is to receive a blessing from the saints: which let us be careful to
obtain, that being helped by their prayers we may enjoy mercy from God,
through the grace and loving-kindness of His only-begotten Son, with Whom to
the Father and the Holy Ghost together be glory, might, honor, now and ever,
world without end. Amen.