Him that sent Me," "is not judged," lest any one should imagine that this alone is
sufficient for salvation, He adds also the result of man's life, declaring that "they
which have done good shall come forth unto the resurrection of life, and they
that have done evil unto the resurrection of judgment." Since then He had said
that all the world should render account to Him, and that all at His Voice should
rise again, a thing new and strange and even now disbelieved by many who seem
to have believed, not to say by the Jews at that time, hear how He goes to prove
it, again condescending to the infirmity of His hearers.

John 5:30
"I can of My own self do nothing; as I hear I judge, and My judgment is just,
because I seek not My own will, but the will of Him which sent Me."
Although He had but lately given no trifling proof of the Resurrection by
bracing the paralytic; on which account also He had not spoken of the
Resurrection before He had done what fell little short of resurrection. And the
Judgment He hinted at after He had braced the body, by saying, "Behold, you are
made whole, sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto you"; yet still He
proclaimed beforehand the resurrection of Lazarus and of the world. And when
He had spoken of these two, that of Lazarus which should come to pass almost
immediately, and that of the inhabited world which should be long after, He
confirms the first by the paralytic and by the nearness of the time, saying, "The
hour comes and now is"; the other by the raising of Lazarus, by what had already
come to pass bringing before their sight what had not yet done so. And this we
may observe Him do everywhere, putting (forth) two or three predictions, and
always confirming the future by the past.
4. Yet after saying and doing so much, since they still were very weak He is
not content, but by other expressions calms their disputatious temper, saying, "I
can of Myself do nothing; as I hear I judge, and My judgment is just, because I
seek not My own will, but the will of Him which sent Me." For since He appeared
to make some assertions strange and varying from those of the Prophets, (for
they said that it is God who judges all the earth, that is, the human race; and this
truth David everywhere loudly proclaimed, "He shall judge the people in
righteousness," and, "God is a righteous Judge, strong and patient" [Psalm
96:10, and Psalm 7:11, Septuagint]; as did all the Prophets and Moses; but Christ
said, "The Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment to the Son": an
expression which was sufficient to perplex a Jew who heard it, and to make him
in turn suspect Christ of being an enemy of God,) He here greatly condescends

in His speech, and as far as their infirmity requires, in order to pluck up by the
roots this pernicious opinion, and says, "I can of Myself do nothing"; that is,
"nothing strange, or unlike, or what the Father desires not will you see done or
hear said by Me." And having before declared that He was "the Son of Man,"
and because they supposed Him to be a man at that time, so also He puts [His
expressions] here. As then when He said above, "We speak that we have heard,
and testify that we have seen"; and when John said, "What He has seen He
testifies, and no man receives His testimony" [John 3:32]; both expressions are
used respecting exact knowledge, not concerning hearing and seeing merely; so
in this place when He speaks of "hearing," He declares nothing else than that it
is impossible for Him to desire anything, save what the Father desires. Still He
said not so plainly, (for they would not as yet have at once received it on hearing
it thus asserted;) and how? In a manner very condescending and befitting a mere
man, "As I hear I judge." Again He uses these words in this place, not with
reference to "instruction," (for He said not, "as I am taught," but "as I hear";)
nor as though He needed to listen, (for not only did He not require to be taught,
but He needed not even to listen;) but it was to declare the Unanimity and
Identity of [His and the Father's] decision, as though He had said, "So I judge, as
if it were the Father Himself that judged." Then He adds, "and I know that My
judgment is just, because I seek not My own will, but the will of Him that sent
Me." What sayest Thou? Have You a will different from that of the Father? Yet
in another place He says, "As I and Thou are One," (speaking of will and
unanimity,) "grant to these also that they may be one in Us" [John 17:21; not
verbally quoted]; that is, "in faith concerning Us." Do you see that the words
which seem most humble are those which conceal a high meaning? For what He
implies is of this kind: not that the will of the Father is one, and His own
another; but that, "as one will in one mind, so is My own will and My Father's."
And marvel not that He has asserted so close a conjunction; for with
reference to the Spirit also Paul has used this illustration: "What man knows the
things of a man, save the spirit of man which is in him? Even so the things of