"He that forsakes not all that he has, and follows after Me, is not worthy of Me."
[Luke 14:27-33] And again, "You shall be brought before rulers and kings for
My sake." [Matthew 10:18] And again, "A man's foes shall be they of his own
household." [Matthew 10:36] But the things which pertain to rest are yonder.
But with regard to Abraham, it was different. He was enjoined to do what
was opposed to the promises; and yet not even so was he troubled, nor did he
stagger, nor think he had been deceived. But you endure nothing except what
was promised, yet you are troubled.
2. He heard the opposite of the promises from Him who had made them;
and yet he was not disturbed, but did them as if they had been in harmony
[therewith]. For they were in harmony; being opposed indeed according to
human calculations, but in harmony [when viewed] by Faith. And how this was,
the Apostle himself has taught us, by saying, "accounting that God was able to
raise Him up, even from the dead." By the same faith (he means) by which he
believed that God gave what was not, and raised up the dead, by the same was he
persuaded that He would also raise him up after he had been slain in sacrifice.
For it was alike impossible (to human calculation, I mean) from a womb which
was dead and grown old and already become useless for child-bearing to give a
child, and to raise again one who had been slain. But his previous faith prepared
the way for things to come.
And see; the good things came first, and the hard things afterwards, in his
old age. But for you, on the contrary, (he says) the sad things are first, and the
good things last. This for those who dare to say, 'He has promised us the good
things after death; perhaps He has deceived us.' He shows that "God is able to
raise up even from the dead," and if God be able to raise from the dead, without
all doubt He will pay all [that He has promised].
But if Abraham so many years before, believed "that God is able to raise
from the dead," much more ought we to believe it. You see (what I at first said)
that death had not yet entered in and yet He drew them at once to the hope of the
resurrection, and led them to such full assurance, that when bidden, they even

slay their own sons, and readily offer up those from whom they expected to
people the world.
And he shows another thing too, by saying, that "God tempted Abraham."
[Genesis 22:1] What then? Did not God know that the man was noble and
approved? Why then did He tempt him? Not that He might Himself learn, but
that He might show to others, and make his fortitude manifest to all. And here
also he shows the cause of trials, that they may not suppose they suffer these
things as being forsaken [of God]. For in their case indeed, it was necessary that
they should he tried, because there were many who persecuted or plotted against
them: but in Abraham's case, what need was there to devise trials for him which
did not exist? Now this trial, it is evident, was by His command. The others
indeed happened by His allowance, but this even by His command. If then
temptations make men approved in such wise that, even where there is no
occasion, God exercises His own athletes; much more ought we to bear all things
nobly.
And here he said emphatically, "By faith, when he was tried, he offered up
Isaac," for there was no other cause for his bringing the offering but that.
3. After this he pursues the same thought. No one (he says) could allege,
that he had another son, and expected the promise to be fulfilled from him, and
therefore confidently offered up this one. "And" (his words are) "he offered up
his only-begotten, who had received the promises." Why do you say "onlybegotten"? What then? Of whom was Ishmael sprung? I mean "only-begotten"
(he would say) so far as relates to the word of the promise. Therefore after
saying, "Only-begotten," showing that he says it for this reason, he added, "of
whom it was said, In Isaac shall your seed be called," that is, "from" him. Do
you see how he admires what was done by the Patriarch? "In Isaac shall your
seed be called," and that son he brought to be sacrificed.
Afterwards, that no one may suppose he does this in despair, and in
consequence of this command had cast away that Faith, but may understand that
this also was truly of faith, he says that he retained that faith also, although it