THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.86, C.7.

the keys, which is vested in the ministers, who furnish the formal
part of the sacrament, as stated above (Question 84, Article 3), and
secondarily by the instrumentality of those acts of the penitent
which pertain to the virtue of penance, but only in so far as such acts
are, in some way, subordinate to the keys of the Church. Accordingly
it is evident that the forgiveness of sin is the effect of penance as a
virtue, but still more of Penance as a sacrament.
Reply to Objection 1: The effect of operating grace is the justification
of the ungodly (as stated in the FS, Question 113), wherein there is,
as was there stated (Articles 1,2,3), not only infusion of grace and
forgiveness of sin, but also a movement of the free-will towards God,
which is an act of faith quickened by charity, and a movement of the
free-will against sin, which is the act of penance. Yet these human
acts are there as the effects of operating grace, and are produced at
the same time as the forgiveness of sin. Consequently the
forgiveness of sin does not take place without an act of the virtue of
penance, although it is the effect of operating grace.
Reply to Objection 2: In the justification of the ungodly there is not
only an act of penance, but also an act of faith, as stated above (ad
1: FS, Question 113, Article 4). Wherefore the forgiveness of sin is
accounted the effect not only of the virtue of penance, but also, and
that chiefly, of faith and charity.
Reply to Objection 3: The act of the virtue of penance is subordinate
to Christ's Passion both by faith, and by its relation to the keys of the
Church; and so, in both ways, it causes the forgiveness of sin, by the
power of Christ's Passion.
To the argument advanced in the contrary sense we reply that the
act of the virtue of penance is necessary for the forgiveness of sin,
through being an inseparable effect of grace, whereby chiefly is sin
pardoned, and which produces its effect in all the sacraments.
Consequently it only follows that grace is a higher cause of the
forgiveness of sin than the sacrament of Penance. Moreover, it must
be observed that, under the Old Law and the law of nature, there was
a sacrament of Penance after a fashion, as stated above (Question
84, Article 7, ad 2).

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.86, C.7.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.87, C.1.

## QUESTION 87 — OF THE REMISSION OF VENIAL SIN

Prologue
We must now consider the forgiveness of venial sins, under which
head there are four points of inquiry:
(1) Whether venial sin can be forgiven without Penance?
(2) Whether it can be forgiven without the infusion of grace?
(3) Whether venial sins are forgiven by the sprinkling of holy water, a
bishop's blessing, the beating of the breast, the Lord's Prayer, and
the like?
(4) Whether a venial sin can be taken away without a mortal sin?