Reply 1. The first objection contains a false supposition: for body and soul are not two
actually existing substances, but out of the two of them is made one substance actually
existing: for a man's body is not the same in actuality when the soul is present as when
it is absent: it is the soul that gives actual being.
Reply 2. As for the second objection, that form and matter are contained under the
same genus, it is not true in the sense that both are species of one genus, but inasmuch
as both are elements of the same species. Thus then a subsistent intelligence and a
body, which as separate existences would be species of different genera, in their union
belong to one genus as elements of the same.
Reply 3. Nor need a subsistent intelligence be a material form, notwithstanding that its
existence is in matter: for though in matter, it is not immersed in matter, or wholly
comprised in matter.
Reply 4. Nor yet does the union of a subsistent intelligence with a body by its being that
body's form stand in the way of intelligence being separable from body. In a soul
we have to observe as well its essence as also its power. In point of essence it gives
being to such and such a body, while in point of power it executes its own proper acts.
In any activity of the soul therefore which is completed by a bodily organ, the power of
the soul which is the principle of that activity must bring to act that part of the body
whereby its activity is completed, as sight brings the eye to act. But in any activity of the
soul that we may suppose not to be completed by any bodily organ, the corresponding
power will not bring anything in the body to act; and this is the sense in which the
intellect is said to be `separate,' -- not but that the substance of the soul, whereof
intellect is a power, or the intellectual soul, brings the body to act, inasmuch as it is the
form which gives being to such body.
Reply 5. Nor is it necessary, as was argued in the fifth place, that if the soul in its
substance is the form of the body, its every operation should be through the body, and
thus its every faculty should be the actuation of some part of the body: for the human
soul is not one of those forms which are entirely immersed in matter, but of all forms it is
the most exalted above matter: hence it is capable of a certain activity without the body,
being not dependent on the body in its action, as neither in its being is it dependent on
the body.

## CHAPTER LVII--Plato's Theory of the Union of the Intellectual Soul with the Body

the impression. But such a principle cannot be different in being from the subject
impressed. Therefore the sentient soul is not different in being from the animated body.
2. Though motion is the common act of moving force and object moved, still it is one
activity to impart motion and another to receive motion: hence the two several
categories of action and passion. If then in sensation the sentient soul stands for the
agent, and the body for the patient, there will be one activity of the soul and another of
the body. The sentient soul therefore will have an activity and proper motion of its own:
it will have therefore its own subsistence: therefore, when the body perishes, it will not
cease to be. Thus sentient souls, even of irrational animals, will be immortal;
which seems improbable, although it is not out of keeping with Plato's opinion. But
this will be matter of enquiry further on (Chap.LXXXII).
3. A body moved does not take its species according to the power that moves it. If
therefore the soul is only united to the body as mover to moved, the body and its parts
do not take their species from the soul: therefore, when the soul departs, the body and
the parts thereof will remain of the same species. But this is manifestly false: for flesh
and bone and hands and such parts, after the departure of the soul, do not retain their
own names except by a faon de parler; since none of these parts retains its proper
activity, and activity follows species. Therefore the union of soul and body is not that of
mover with moved, or of a man with his dress.
6. If the soul is united with the body only as mover with moved, it will be in the power of
the soul to go out of the body when it wishes, and, when it wishes, to reunite itself with
the body.
That the soul is united with the body as the proper form of the same, is thus proved.
That whereby a thing emerges from potential to actual being, is its form and actuality.
But by the soul the body emerges from potentiality to actuality: for the being of a living
thing is its life: moreover the seed before animation is only potentially alive, and by the
soul it is made actually alive: the soul therefore is the form of the animated body.
Again: as part is to part, so is the whole sentient soul to the whole body. But sight is the
form and actuality of the eye: therefore the soul is the form and actuality of the
body.