THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.57, C.3.

since Christ ascended into heaven in virtue of His Godhead, and not
in virtue of His human nature, then it must be said that Christ
ascended into heaven not as man, but as God. Hence Augustine
says in a sermon on the Ascension: "It was our doing that the Son of
man hung upon the cross; but it was His own doing that He
ascended."
Reply to Objection 1: These utterances were spoken prophetically of
God who was one day to become incarnate. Still it can be said that
although to ascend does not belong to the Divine Nature properly,
yet it can metaphorically; as, for instance, it is said "to ascend in the
heart of man" (cf. Ps. 83:6), when his heart submits and humbles
itself before God: and in the same way God is said to ascend
metaphorically with regard to every creature, since He subjects it to
Himself.
Reply to Objection 2: He who ascended is the same as He who
descended. For Augustine says (De Symb. iv): "Who is it that
descends? The God-Man. Who is it that ascends? The self-same GodMan." Nevertheless a twofold descent is attributed to Christ; one,
whereby He is said to have descended from heaven, which is
attributed to the God-Man according as He is God: for He is not to be
understood as having descended by any local movement, but as
having "emptied Himself," since "when He was in the form of God He
took the form of a servant." For just as He is said to be emptied, not
by losing His fulness, but because He took our littleness upon
Himself, so likewise He is said to have descended from heaven, not
that He deserted heaven, but because He assumed human nature in
unity of person.
And there is another descent whereby He descended "into the lower
regions of the earth," as is written Eph. 4:9; and this is local descent:
hence this belongs to Christ according to the condition of human
nature.
Reply to Objection 3: Christ is said to ascend to the Father,
inasmuch as He ascends to sit on the right hand of the Father; and
this is befitting Christ in a measure according to His Divine Nature,
and in a measure according to His human nature, as will be said later
(Question 58, Article 3)

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.57, C.3.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.57, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether Christ ascended by His own power?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ did not ascend by His own
power, because it is written (Mk. 16:19) that "the Lord Jesus, after He
had spoken to them, was taken up to heaven"; and (Acts 1:9) that,
"while they looked on, He was raised up, and a cloud received Him
out of their sight." But what is taken up, and lifted up, appears to be
moved by another. Consequently, it was not by His own power, but
by another's that Christ was taken up into heaven.
Objection 2: Further, Christ's was an earthly body, like to ours. But it
is contrary to the nature of an earthly body to be borne upwards.
Moreover, what is moved contrary to its nature is nowise moved by
its own power. Therefore Christ did not ascend to heaven by His own
power.
Objection 3: Further, Christ's own power is Divine. But this motion
does not seem to have been Divine, because, whereas the Divine
power is infinite, such motion would be instantaneous;
consequently, He would not have been uplifted to heaven "while" the
disciples "looked on," as is stated in Acts 1:9. Therefore, it seems
that Christ did not ascend to heaven by His own power.
On the contrary, It is written (Is. 63:1): "This beautiful one in his robe,
walking in the greatness of his strength." Also Gregory says in a
Homily on the Ascension (xxix): "It is to be noted that we read of
Elias having ascended in a chariot, that it might be shown that one
who was mere man needed another's help. But we do not read of our
Saviour being lifted up either in a chariot or by angels, because He
who had made all things was taken up above all things by His own
power."
I answer that, There is a twofold nature in Christ, to wit, the Divine
and the human. Hence His own power can be accepted according to
both. Likewise a twofold power can be accepted regarding His
human nature: one is natural, flowing from the principles of nature;
and it is quite evident that Christ did not ascend into heaven by such
power as this. The other is the power of glory, which is in Christ's
human nature; and it was according to this that He ascended to
heaven.