the man who gives heed, neither riches are a hindrance, nor the cares of
government, nor anything else of the kind.
Ver. 24. "The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen."
See what we ought to begin and to end with everywhere! For in this he laid
the foundation of the Epistle, and in this he puts on the roof, at once praying for
the mother of all good things for them, and calling the whole of his lovingkindness to their mind. For this is the best proof of a generous teacher, to benefit
his learners not by word only, but likewise by prayer, for which cause also one
said, "But let us give ourselves continually to prayers, and to the ministry of the
word." [Acts 6:4]
Who is there then to pray over us, since Paul has departed? These who are
the imitators of Paul. Only let us yield ourselves worthy of such intercession
([συνηγορίας]), that it may not be that we hear Paul's voice here only, but that
hereafter, when we are departed, we may be counted worthy to see the wrestler
of Christ. Or rather, if we hear him here, we shall certainly see him hereafter, if
not as standing near him, yet see him we certainly shall, glistening near the
Throne of the king. Where the Cherubim sing the glory, where the Seraphim are
flying, there shall we see Paul, with Peter, and as a chief and leader of the choir
of the Saints, and shall enjoy his generous love. For if when here he loved men
so, that when he had the choice of departing and being with Christ, he chose to
be here, much more will he there display a warmer affection. I love Rome even
for this, although indeed one has other grounds for praising it, both for its
greatness, and its antiquity, and its beauty, and its populousness, and for its
power, and its wealth, and for its successes in war. But I let all this pass, and
esteem it blessed on this account, that both in his lifetime he wrote to them, and
loved them so, and talked with them whiles he was with us, and brought his life
to a close there. Wherefore the city is more notable upon this ground, than upon
all others together. And as a body great and strong, it has as two glistening eyes
the bodies of these Saints. Not so bright is the heaven, when the sun sends forth
his rays, as is the city of Rome, sending out these two lights into all parts of the

world. From thence will Paul be caught up, from thence Peter. Just bethink you,
and shudder ([φρίξατε]) at the thought of what a sight Rome will see, when Paul
arises suddenly from that deposit, together with Peter, and is lifted up to meet the
Lord. [1 Thessalonians 4:17] What a rose will Rome send up to Christ! [Isaiah
35:1] what two crowns will the city have about it! What golden chains will she
be girded with! What fountains possess! Therefore I admire the city, not for the
much gold, not for the columns, not for the other display there, but for these
pillars of the Church. [1 Corinthians 15:38] Would that it were now given me to
throw myself round ([περιχυθἥναι]) the body of Paul, and be riveted to the tomb,
and to see the dust of that body that "filled up that which was lacking" after
"Christ" [Colossians 1:24], that bore "the marks" ([στίγματα],) [Galatians 6:17]
that sowed the Gospel everywhere yea, the dust of that body through which he
ran to and fro everywhere! The dust of that body through which Christ spoke,
and the Light shone forth more brilliant than any lightning, and the voice started
out, more awful than any thunder to the devils! Through which he uttered that
blessed voice, saying, "I could wish that myself were accursed, for my brethren"
[Romans 9:3], through which he spoke "before kings, and was not ashamed!"
[Psalm 119:46] through which we come to know Paul through which also Paul's
Master! Not so awful to us is the thunder, as was that voice to the demons! For if
they shuddered at his clothes [Acts 19:12], much more did they at his voice. This
led them away captive, this cleansed out the world, this put a stop to diseases,
cast out vice, lifted the truth on high, had Christ riding upon it, and everywhere
went about with Him; and what the Cherubim were, this was Paul's voice, for as
He was seated upon those Powers, so was He upon Paul's tongue. For it had
become worthy of receiving Christ, by speaking those things only which were
acceptable to Christ, and flying as the Seraphim to height unspeakable! For what
more lofty than that voice which says, "For I am persuaded that neither Angels,
nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the
love of God, which is in Christ Jesus?" [Romans 8:38-39] What pinions does not