wounds, as those that compel one to uncover and show them. Thus that man has
not only disgraced the other, but himself as well and his hearers, and the
common nature of men: he has wounded the hearer, done no good. For this
reason Paul says: "If there be any word that is good for edifying, that it may
minister grace unto the hearers." [Ephesians 4:29] Let us get a tongue speaking
only good things, that we may be lovely and amiable. But indeed, everything has
come to that pitch of wickedness, that many boast of the very things, for which
they should hide their faces. For the threats of the many are of this kind: "you
can not bear my tongue," say they. Words, these, worthy only of a woman, of an
abandoned drunken old hag, one of those that are dragged (to punishment) in the
forum, a procuress. Nothing more shameful than these words, nothing more
unmanly, more womanlike, than to have your strength in the tongue, and to think
great things of yourself because you can rail, just like the fellows in processions,
like the buffoons, parasites, and flatterers. Swine they are rather than men, who
pride themselves upon this. Whereas you should (sooner) have buried yourself,
and if another gave you this character, should recoil from the charge as odious
and unmanly, instead of that you have made yourself the herald of (your own)
disgrace ([ὓ] [βρεων]). But you will not be able to hurt him you speak ill of.
Wherefore I beseech you, considering how the wickedness has come to such a
height, that many boast of it, let us return to our senses, let us recover those who
are thus mad, let us take away these councils out of the city, let us make our
tongue gracious, let us rid it of all evil speaking, that being clean from sins, we
may be able to draw down upon us the good-will from above, and to have mercy
vouchsafed unto us from God, through the grace and compassion of His onlybegotten Son, with Whom to the Father, together with the Holy Spirit, be glory,
might, honor, now and ever, world without end. Amen.

Homily 32 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts XV. 1
"And certain men which came down from Judea taught the brethren, and
said, Unless you are circumcised after the manner of Moses, you cannot be
saved."
Mark how at every step of the right progress in respect of the Gentiles, the
beginning is brought in as matter of necessity. Before this (Peter) being found
fault with, justified himself, and said all that he said in the tone of apology,
which was what made his words acceptable: then, the Jews having turned away,
upon this (Paul) came to the Gentiles. Here again, seeing another extravagance
coming in, upon this (the apostle) enacts the law. For as it is likely that they, as
being taught of God, discoursed to all indifferently, this moved to jealousy them
of the Jews (who had believed). And they did not merely speak of circumcision,
but they said, You cannot even be saved. Whereas the very opposite to this was
the case, that receiving circumcision they could not be saved. Do you mark how
closely the trials succeed each other, from within, from without? It is well
ordered too, that this happens when Paul is present, that he may answer them.
"When therefore Paul and Barnabas had no small dissension and disputation
with them, they determined that Paul and Barnabas, and certain other of them,
should go up to Jerusalem unto the apostles and elders about this question."
[Acts 15:2] And Paul does not say, What? Have I not a right to be believed after
so many signs? But he complied for their sakes. "And being brought on their
way by the Church, they passed through Phenice and Samaria, declaring the
conversion of the Gentiles: and they caused great joy unto all the brethren."
[Acts 15:3] And observe, the consequence is that all the Samaritans also, learn
what has come to the Gentiles: and they rejoiced. "And when they had come to
Jerusalem, they were received of the Church, and of the apostles and elders, and