wisdom, in the tables; power, in the rod; goodness, in the manna--both by reason of its sweetness, and because it was through the
goodness of God that it was granted to man, wherefore it was
preserved as a memorial of the Divine mercy. Again, these three
things were represented in Isaias' vision. For he "saw the Lord
sitting upon a throne high and elevated"; and the seraphim standing
by; and that the house was filled with the glory of the Lord;
wherefrom the seraphim cried out: "All the earth is full of His
glory" (Is. 6:1,3). And so the images of the seraphim were set up, not
to be worshipped, for this was forbidden by the first commandment;
but as a sign of their function, as stated above.
The outer tabernacle, which denotes this present world, also
contained three things, viz. the "altar of incense," which was directly
opposite the ark; the "table of proposition," with the twelve loaves of
proposition on it, which stood on the northern side; and the
"candlestick," which was placed towards the south. These three
things seem to correspond to the three which were enclosed in the
ark; and they represented the same things as the latter, but more
clearly: because, in order that wise men, denoted by the priests
entering the temple, might grasp the meaning of these types, it was
necessary to express them more manifestly than they are in the
Divine or angelic mind. Accordingly the candlestick betokened, as a
sensible sign thereof, the wisdom which was expressed on the
tables (of the Law) in intelligible words. The altar of incense signified
the office of the priest, whose duty it was to bring the people to God:
and this was signified also by the rod: because on that altar the
sweet-smelling incense was burnt, signifying the holiness of the
people acceptable to God: for it is written (Apoc. 8:3) that the smoke
of the sweet-smelling spices signifies the "justifications of the
saints" (cf. Apoc. 19:8). Moreover it was fitting that the dignity of the
priesthood should be denoted, in the ark, by the rod, and, in the
outer tabernacle, by the altar of incense: because the priest is the
mediator between God and the people, governing the people by
Divine power, denoted by the rod; and offering to God the fruit of His
government, i.e. the holiness of the people, on the altar of incense,
so to speak. The table signified the sustenance of life, just as the
manna did: but the former, a more general and a coarser kind of
nourishment; the latter, a sweeter and more delicate. Again, the
candlestick was fittingly placed on the southern side, while the table
was placed to the north: because the south is the right-hand side of
the world, while the north is the left-hand side, as stated in De Coelo
et Mundo ii; and wisdom, like other spiritual goods, belongs to the

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.5.