various parts of the man, surely, which rot in the earth. But these are inherited by the Spirit when
they are translated into the kingdom of heaven. For this cause, too, did Christ die, that the Gospel
covenant being manifested and known to the whole world, might in the first place set free His
slaves; and then afterwards, as I have already shown, might constitute them heirs of His property,
when the Spirit possesses them by inheritance. For he who lives inherits, but the flesh is inherited.
In order that we may not lose life by losing that Spirit which possesses us, the apostle, exhorting
us to the communion of the Spirit, has said, according to reason, in those words already quoted,
"That flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God." Just as if he were to say, "Do not err;
for unless the Word of God dwell with, and the Spirit of the Father be in you, and if ye shall live
frivolously and carelessly as if ye were this only, viz., mere flesh and blood, ye cannot inherit the
kingdom of God."

### Chapter X.—By a comparison drawn from the wild olive-tree, whose quality but not whose
nature is changed by grafting, he proves more important things; he points out also that man
without the Spirit is not capable of bringing forth fruit, or of inheriting the kingdom of God.
1. This truth, therefore, [he declares], in order that we may not reject the engrafting of the Spirit
while pampering the flesh. "But thou, being a wild olive-tree," he says, "hast been grafted into the
good olive-tree, and been made a partaker of the fatness of the olive-tree." As, therefore, when
the wild olive has been engrafted, if it remain in its former condition, viz., a wild olive, it is "cut
off, and cast into the fire;" but if it takes kindly to the graft, and is changed into the good olive-tree,
it becomes a fruit-bearing olive, planted, as it were, in a king's park (paradiso): so likewise men,
if they do truly progress by faith towards better things, and receive the Spirit of God, and bring
forth the fruit thereof, shall be spiritual, as being planted in the paradise of God. But if they cast
out the Spirit, and remain in their former condition, desirous of being of the flesh rather than of the
Spirit, then it is very justly said with regard to men of this stamp, "That flesh and blood shall not
inherit the kingdom of God;" just as if any one were to say that the wild olive is not received
into the paradise of God. Admirably therefore does the apostle exhibit our nature, and God's
universal appointment, in his discourse about flesh and blood and the wild olive. For as the good
olive, if neglected for a certain time, if left to grow wild and to run to wood, does itself become a
wild olive; or again, if the wild olive be carefully tended and grafted, it naturally reverts to its
former fruit-bearing condition: so men also, when they become careless, and bring forth for fruit
the lusts of the flesh like woody produce, are rendered, by their own fault, unfruitful in righteousness.