I conjecture that there were others also. They came to Capernaum without any
certain information, but expecting to find Him there, or even in mid passage; this
the Evangelist implies by saying that "it was now dark, and Jesus was not yet
come to them."
"And the sea arose by reason of a great wind that blew." What did they?
They were troubled, for there were many and various causes which forced them
to be so. They were afraid by reason of the time for it was dark, of the storm for
the sea had risen, of the place for they were not near land; but,

John 6:19
"Had rowed about five and twenty furlongs."
And, lastly, by reason of the strangeness of the thing, for,
"They see Him walking upon the sea." And when they were greatly
troubled,

John 6:20
"He says unto them, It is I, be not afraid."
Wherefore then appears He? To show that it was He who would make the
storm cease. For this the Evangelist has shown, saying,

John 6:21
"They were willing to receive Him, and immediately the ship was near the land."
He not only gave them a safe passage, but also one with a fair wind.
To the multitude He shows not Himself walking upon the sea, for the
miracle was too great to suit their infirmity. Indeed, even by the disciples He was
not seen long doing this, but He appeared, and at once retired. Now this seems to
me to be a different miracle from that found in Matthew xiv .; and that it is
different is clear from many reasons. For He works often the same miracles, in
order to cause the beholders not merely to count them very strange, but also to
receive them with great faith.
"It is I, be not afraid." As He spoke the word, He cast out fear from their
souls. But at another time not so; wherefore Peter said, "Lord, if it be Thou, bid
me to come unto You." [Matthew 14:28] Whence then was it that at that time
they did not straightway admit this, but now were persuaded? It was because
then the storm continued to toss the bark, but now at His voice the calm had
come. Or if the reason be not this, it is that other which I have before mentioned,
that oftentimes working the same miracles, He made the second to be readily
received by means of the first. But wherefore went He not up into the ship?
Because He would make the marvel greater, would more openly reveal to them
His Godhead, and would show them, that when He before gave thanks, He did
not so as needing aid, but in condescension to them. He allowed the storm to
arise, that they might ever seek Him; He stilled the storm, that He might make
known to them His power; He went not up into the ship, that He might make the
marvel greater.

John 6:22
"And the people that were there saw that there was none other boat there save
the one into which the disciples had entered, and that Jesus went not into the
boat, but His disciples."
And why is John so exact? Why said he not that the multitudes having
passed over on the next day departed? He desires to teach us something else,
namely, that Jesus allowed the multitudes if not openly, at least in a secret
manner, to suspect what had taken place. For, "They saw," says he, "that there
was none other boat there but one, and that Jesus went not into it with His
disciples."