Hebrews 13:22-23
5. "And I beseech you, brethren, suffer the word of exhortation, for indeed I
have written a letter unto you in few words." Do you see that what he wrote to no
one [else], he writes to them? For (he means) I do not even trouble you with long
discourse.
I suppose that they were not at all unfavorably disposed towards Timothy:
wherefore he also put him forward. For [Hebrews 13:23] "know ye," he says,
"that our brother Timothy is set at liberty, with whom, if he come shortly, I will
see you." "Set at liberty," he says; from whence? I suppose he had been cast into
prison: or if not this, that he was sent away from Athens. For this also is
mentioned in the Acts.

Hebrews 13:24-25
"Salute all them that have the rule over you, and all the saints. They of Italy
salute you. Grace be with you all. Amen."
6. Seest thou how he shows that virtue is born neither wholly from God, nor
yet from ourselves alone? First by saying, "make you perfect in every good
work"; You have virtue indeed, he means, but need to be made complete. What is
"good work and word"? So as to have both life and doctrines right. "According
to His will, working in you that which is well-pleasing in His sight."
"In His sight," he says. For this is the highest virtue, to do that which is
well-pleasing in the sight of God, as the Prophet also says, "And according to the
cleanness of my hands in His eye-sight." [Psalm 18:24]
And having written thus much, he said this was little, in comparison with
what he was going to say. As he says also in another place, "As I wrote to you in
few words: whereby when you read, you may understand my knowledge in the
mystery of Christ." [Ephesians 3:3-4]
And observe his wisdom. He says not, "I beseech you, suffer the word of"
admonition, but "the word of exhortation," that is, of consolation, of
encouragement. No one, he means, can be wearied at the length of what has been
said (Did this then make them turn away from him? By no means: he does not
indeed wish to express this): that is, even if you be of little spirit, for it is the
peculiarity of such persons not to endure a long discourse.
"Know ye that our brother Timothy is set at liberty, with whom if he come
shortly I will see you." This is enough to persuade them to submit themselves, if
he is ready to come with his disciple.
"Salute them that have the rule over you, and all the saints." See how he
honored them, since he wrote to them instead of to those [their rulers].
"They of Italy salute you. Grace be with you all. Amen." Which was for

them all in common.
But how does "Grace" come to be "with" us? If we do not do despite to the
benefit, if we do not become indolent in regard to the Gift. And what is "the
grace"? Remission of sins, Cleansing: this is "with" us. For who (he means) can
keep the Grace despitefully, and not destroy it? For instance; He freely forgave
you your sins. How then shall the "Grace be with" you, whether it be the good
favor or the effectual working of the Spirit? If you draw it to you by good deeds.
For the cause of all good things is this, the continual abiding with us of the
"grace" of the Spirit. For this guides us to all [good things], just as when it flies
away from us, it ruins us, and leaves us desolate.
7. Let us not then drive it from us. For on ourselves depends, both its
remaining, and its departing. For the one results, when we mind heavenly things;
the other, when [we mind] the things of this life. "Which the world" (He says)
"cannot receive because it sees Him not, neither knows Him." [John 14:17] Do
you see that a worldly soul cannot have Him? We need great earnestness that so
there He may be held fast by us, so as to direct all our affairs, and do them in
security, and in much peace.
For as a ship sailing with favorable winds is neither to be hindered nor
sunk, so long as it enjoys a prosperous and steady breeze, but also causes great
admiration according to the march of its progress both to the mariners, and to the
passengers, giving rest to the one, and not forcing them to toil on at their oars,
and setting the others free from all fear, and giving them the most delightful
view of her course; so too a soul strengthened by the Divine Spirit, is far above
all the billows of this life, and more strongly than the ship, cuts the way bearing
on to Heaven, since it is not sent along by wind, but has all the pure sails filled
by the Paraclete Himself: and He casts out of our minds all that is slackened and
relaxed.
For as the wind if it fall upon a slackened sail, would have no effect; so
neither does the Spirit endure to continue in a slack soul; but there is need of
much tension, of much vehemence, so that our mind may be on fire, and our