be deemed worthy, through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus
Christ, through whom, and with whom, to the Father together with the Holy
Ghost, be glory, now and always, for ever and ever. Amen.

## Homily 6 on the Statues
This Homily is intended to show that the fear of Magistrates is
beneficial. It also contains an account of what occurred, during their
journey, to those who were conveying the tidings of the sedition to the
Emperor. The case of Jonah is further cited in illustration. The exhortation
on the fear of death is here continued; and it is shown, that he who suffers
unjustly, and yet gives thanks to God, by whose permission it happens, is as
one suffering for God's sake. Examples are again adduced from the history
of the Three Children, and the Babylonian furnace. The Homily concludes
with an address on the necessity of abstaining from oaths.
1. We have spent many days addressing words of comfort to your Charity.
We would not, however, on that account lay the subject aside; but as long as the
sore of despondency remains, we will apply to it the medicine of consolation.
For if in the case of bodily wounds, physicians do not give over their
fomentations, until they perceive that the pain has subsided; much less ought this
to be done in regard to the soul. Despondency is a sore of the soul; and we must
therefore foment it continually with soothing words. For not so naturally is warm
water efficacious to soften a hard tumour of the flesh, as words of comfort are
powerful to allay the swelling passions of the soul. Here, there is no need of the
sponge as with physician, but instead of this we employ the tongue. No need of
fire here, that we may warm the water; but instead of fire, we make use of the
grace of the Spirit. Suffer us then to do so today. For if we were not to comfort
you, where else could ye obtain consolation? The judges affright; the priests
therefore must console! The rulers threaten; therefore must the Church give
comfort! Thus it happens with respect to little children. The teachers frighten
them, and send them away weeping to their mothers; but the mothers receiving
them back to their own bosoms, keep them there, embrace them, and kiss them,

while they wipe away their tears, and relieve their sorrowing spirits; persuading
them by what they say, that it is profitable for them to fear their teachers. Since
therefore the rulers also make you afraid, and render you anxious, the Church,
which is the common mother of us all, opening her bosom, and cradling us in her
arms, administers daily consolation; telling us that the fear of rulers is profitable,
and profitable too the consolation that comes from hence. For the fear of the
former does not permit us to be relaxed by listlessness, but the consolation of the
latter does not allow us to sink under the weight of sadness; and by both these
means God provides for our safety. He Himself has armed magistrates with
power; that they may strike terror into the licentious; and has ordained His
priests that they may administer consolation to those that are in sorrow.
2. And both these things are taught us by the Scripture, and by actual
experience of recent events. For if, while there are magistrates and soldiers
living under arms, the madness of a few individuals, a motley crew of
adventurers, has kindled such a fire among us, in so short a moment of time, and
raised such a tempest, and made us all to stand in fear of shipwreck, suppose the
fear of magistrates to be wholly taken away? To what lengths would they not
have gone in their madness? Would they not have overthrown the city from its
foundations, turning all things upside down, and have taken our very lives? If
you were to abolish the public tribunals, you would abolish all order from our
life. And even as if you deprive the ship of its pilot, you sink the vessel; or as, if
you remove the general from the army, you place the soldiers bound in the hands
of the enemy; so if you deprive the city of its rulers, we must lead a life less
rational than that of the brutes, biting and devouring one another; the rich man,
the poorer; the stronger man, the weaker; and the bolder man, him who is more
gentle. But now by the grace of God none of these things happen. For they who
live in a state of piety, require no correction on the part of the magistrates; for
"the law is not made for a righteous man," [1 Timothy 1:9] says one. But the
more numerous being viciously inclined, if they had no fear of these hanging
over them, would fill the cities with innumerable evils; which Paul knowing,