the essence of the predicate and subject be known to all, the
proposition will be self-evident to all; as is clear with regard to the
first principles of demonstration, the terms of which are common
things that no one is ignorant of, such as being and non-being,
whole and part, and such like. If, however, there are some to whom
the essence of the predicate and subject is unknown, the proposition
will be self-evident in itself, but not to those who do not know the
meaning of the predicate and subject of the proposition. Therefore, it
happens, as Boethius says (Hebdom., the title of which is: "Whether
all that is, is good"), "that there are some mental concepts selfevident only to the learned, as that incorporeal substances are not in
space." Therefore I say that this proposition, "God exists," of itself is
self-evident, for the predicate is the same as the subject, because
God is His own existence as will be hereafter shown (Question 3,
Article 4). Now because we do not know the essence of God, the
proposition is not self-evident to us; but needs to be demonstrated
by things that are more known to us, though less known in their
nature---namely, by effects.
Reply to Objection 1: To know that God exists in a general and
confused way is implanted in us by nature, inasmuch as God is
man's beatitude. For man naturally desires happiness, and what is
naturally desired by man must be naturally known to him. This,
however, is not to know absolutely that God exists; just as to know
that someone is approaching is not the same as to know that Peter is
approaching, even though it is Peter who is approaching; for many
there are who imagine that man's perfect good which is happiness,
consists in riches, and others in pleasures, and others in something
else.
Reply to Objection 2: Perhaps not everyone who hears this word
"God" understands it to signify something than which nothing
greater can be thought, seeing that some have believed God to be a
body. Yet, granted that everyone understands that by this word
"God" is signified something than which nothing greater can be
thought, nevertheless, it does not therefore follow that he
understands that what the word signifies exists actually, but only
that it exists mentally. Nor can it be argued that it actually exists,
unless it be admitted that there actually exists something than which
nothing greater can be thought; and this precisely is not admitted by
those who hold that God does not exist.
Reply to Objection 3: The existence of truth in general is self-evident

but the existence of a Primal Truth is not self-evident to us.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether it can be demonstrated that God exists?

Objection 1: It seems that the existence of God cannot be
demonstrated. For it is an article of faith that God exists. But what is
of faith cannot be demonstrated, because a demonstration produces
scientific knowledge; whereas faith is of the unseen (Heb. 11:1).
Therefore it cannot be demonstrated that God exists.
Objection 2: Further, the essence is the middle term of
demonstration. But we cannot know in what God's essence consists,
but solely in what it does not consist; as Damascene says (De Fide
Orth. i, 4). Therefore we cannot demonstrate that God exists.
Objection 3: Further, if the existence of God were demonstrated, this
could only be from His effects. But His effects are not proportionate
to Him, since He is infinite and His effects are finite; and between the
finite and infinite there is no proportion. Therefore, since a cause
cannot be demonstrated by an effect not proportionate to it, it seems
that the existence of God cannot be demonstrated.
On the contrary, The Apostle says: "The invisible things of Him are
clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made" (Rm.
1:20). But this would not be unless the existence of God could be
demonstrated through the things that are made; for the first thing we
must know of anything is whether it exists.
I answer that, Demonstration can be made in two ways: One is
through the cause, and is called "a priori," and this is to argue from
what is prior absolutely. The other is through the effect, and is called
a demonstration "a posteriori"; this is to argue from what is prior
relatively only to us. When an effect is better known to us than its
cause, from the effect we proceed to the knowledge of the cause.
And from every effect the existence of its proper cause can be
demonstrated, so long as its effects are better known to us; because
since every effect depends upon its cause, if the effect exists, the
cause must pre-exist. Hence the existence of God, in so far as it is
not self-evident to us, can be demonstrated from those of His effects
which are known to us.
Reply to Objection 1: The existence of God and other like truths
about God, which can be known by natural reason, are not articles of