their justice, but on the justice of God ordering all things.
Reply to Objection 2: The concord of the demons, whereby some
obey others, does not arise from mutual friendships, but from their
common wickedness whereby they hate men, and fight against
God's justice. For it belongs to wicked men to be joined to and
subject to those whom they see to be stronger, in order to carry out
their own wickedness.
Reply to Objection 3: The demons are not equal in nature; and so
among them there exists a natural precedence; which is not the case
with men, who are naturally equal. That the inferior are subject to the
superior, is not for the benefit of the superior, but rather to their
detriment; because since to do evil belongs in a pre-eminent degree
to unhappiness, it follows that to preside in evil is to be more
unhappy.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether there is enlightenment in the demons?

Objection 1: It would seem that enlightenment is in the demons. For
enlightenment means the manifestation of the truth. But one demon
can manifest truth to another, because the superior excel in natural
knowledge. Therefore the superior demons can enlighten the
inferior.
Objection 2: Further, a body abounding in light can enlighten a body
deficient in light, as the sun enlightens the moon. But the superior
demons abound in the participation of natural light. Therefore it
seems that the superior demons can enlighten the inferior.
On the contrary, Enlightenment is not without cleansing and
perfecting, as stated above (Question 106, Article 1). But to cleanse
does not befit the demons, according to the words: "What can be
made clean by the unclean?" (Ecclus. 34:4). Therefore neither can
they enlighten.
I answer that, There can be no enlightenment properly speaking
among the demons. For, as above explained (Question 107, Article
2), enlightenment properly speaking is the manifestation of the truth
in reference to God, Who enlightens every intellect. Another kind of
manifestation of the truth is speech, as when one angel manifests
his concept to another. Now the demon's perversity does not lead
one to order another to God, but rather to lead away from the Divine
order; and so one demon does not enlighten another; but one can
make known his mental concept to another by way of speech.
Reply to Objection 1: Not every kind of manifestation of the truth is
enlightenment, but only that which is above described.
Reply to Objection 2: According to what belongs to natural
knowledge, there is no necessary manifestation of the truth either in
the angels, or in the demons, because, as above explained (Question
55, Article 2; Question 58, Article 2; Question 79, Article 2), they
know from the first all that belongs to their natural knowledge. So
the greater fulness of natural light in the superior demons does not
prove that they can enlighten others.