SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.93, C.2.

they stated to be certain animal denizens of the air, and beneath
these again they placed human souls, which they believed to be
taken up into the fellowship of the gods or of the demons by reason
of the merit of their virtue. To all these they gave divine worship, as
Augustine relates (De Civ . . Dei xviii, 14).
The last two opinions were held to belong to "natural theology"
which the philosophers gathered from their study of the world and
taught in the schools: while the other, relating to the worship of men,
was said to belong to "mythical theology" which was wont to be
represented on the stage according to the fancies of poets. The
remaining opinion relating to images was held to belong to "civil
theology," which was celebrated by the pontiffs in the temples [De
Civ. Dei vi, 5].
Now all these come under the head of the superstition of idolatry.
Wherefore Augustine says (De Doctr. Christ. ii, 20): "Anything
invented by man for making and worshipping idols, or for giving
Divine worship to a creature or any part of a creature, is
superstitious."
Reply to Objection 1: Just as religion is not faith, but a confession of
faith by outward signs, so superstition is a confession of unbelief by
external worship. Such a confession is signified by the term idolatry,
but not by the term heresy, which only means a false opinion.
Therefore heresy is a species of unbelief, but idolatry is a species of
superstition.
Reply to Objection 2: The term latria may be taken in two senses. In
one sense it may denote a human act pertaining to the worship of
God: and then its signification remains the same, to whomsoever it
be shown, because, in this sense, the thing to which it is shown is
not included in its definition. Taken thus latria is applied univocally,
whether to true religion or to idolatry, just as the payment of a tax is
univocally the same, whether it is paid to the true or to a false king.
In another sense latria denotes the same as religion, and then, since
it is a virtue, it is essential thereto that divine worship be given to
whom it ought to be given; and in this way latria is applied
equivocally to the latria of true religion, and to idolatry: just as
prudence is applied equivocally to the prudence that is a virtue, and
to that which is carnal.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.93, C.2.

Reply to Objection 3: The saying of the Apostle that "an idol is
nothing in the world" means that those images which were called
idols, were not animated, or possessed of a divine power, as Hermes
maintained, as though they were composed of spirit and body. In the
same sense we must understand the saying that "what is offered in
sacrifice to idols is not anything," because by being thus sacrificed
the sacrificial flesh acquired neither sanctification, as the Gentiles
thought, nor uncleanness, as the Jews held.
Reply to Objection 4: It was owing to the general custom among the
Gentiles of worshipping any kind of creature under the form of
images that the term "idolatry" was used to signify any worship of a
creature, even without the use of images.