FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.89, C.6.

believers. Therefore it is not possible for the mere movements of the
sensuality in unbelievers, to be mortal sins. Secondly, from the state
of the sinner. Because excellence of the person of the person never
diminishes sin, but, on the contrary, increases it, as stated above
(Question 73, Article 10). Therefore a sin is not less grievous in a
believer than in an unbeliever, but much more so. For the sins of an
unbeliever are more deserving of forgiveness, on account of their
ignorance, according to 1 Tim. 1:13: "I obtained the mercy of God,
because I did it ignorantly in my unbelief": whereas the sins of
believers are more grievous on account of the sacraments of grace,
according to Heb. 10:29: "How much more, do you think, he
deserveth worse punishments . . . who hath esteemed the blood of
the testament unclean, by which he was sanctified?"
Reply to Objection 1: The Apostle is speaking of the condemnation
due to original sin, which condemnation is remitted by the grace of
Jesus Christ, although the "fomes" of concupiscence remain.
Wherefore the fact that believers are subject to concupiscence is not
in them a sign of the condemnation due to original sin, as it is in
unbelievers.
In this way also is to be understood the saying of Anselm, wherefore
the Reply to the Second Objection is evident.
Reply to Objection 3: This freedom from liability to concupiscence
was a result of original justice. Wherefore that which is opposed to
such liability pertains, not to actual but to original sin.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.89, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether venial sin can be in anyone with original

sin alone?
Objection 1: It would seem that venial sin can be in a man with
original sin alone. For disposition precedes habit. Now venial sin is a
disposition to mortal sin, as stated above (Question 88, Article 3).
Therefore in an unbeliever, in whom original sin is not remitted,
venial sin exists before mortal sin: and so sometimes unbelievers
have venial together with original sin, and without mortal sins.
Objection 2: Further, venial sin has less in common, and less
connection with mortal sin, than one mortal sin has with another. But
an unbeliever in the state of original sin, can commit one mortal sin
without committing another. Therefore he can also commit a venial
sin without committing a mortal sin.
Objection 3: Further, it is possible to fix the time at which a child is
first able to commit an actual sin: and when the child comes to that
time, it can stay a short time at least, without committing a mortal
sin, because this happens in the worst criminals. Now it is possible
for the child to sin venially during that space of time, however short
it may be. Therefore venial sin can be in anyone with original sin
alone and without mortal sin.
On the contrary, Man is punished for original sin in the children's
limbo, where there is no pain of sense as we shall state further on
(SS, Question 69, Article 6): whereas men are punished in hell for no
other than mortal sin. Therefore there will be no place where a man
can be punished for venial sin with no other than original sin.
I answer that, It is impossible for venial sin to be in anyone with
original sin alone, and without mortal sin. The reason for this is
because before a man comes to the age of discretion, the lack of
years hinders the use of reason and excuses him from mortal sin,
wherefore, much more does it excuse him from venial sin, if he does
anything which is such generically. But when he begins to have the
use of reason, he is not entirely excused from the guilt of venial or
mortal sin. Now the first thing that occurs to a man to think about
then, is to deliberate about himself. And if he then direct himself to
the due end, he will, by means of grace, receive the remission of
original sin: whereas if he does not then direct himself to the due