Thus ought a man to love his enemies; by lamentation, by unwearied
endurance, by doing everything, by showing all favor, to aim at their salvation.
And what again, tell me, did Paul? Did he not ask even to be accursed in
their stead? [Romans 9:3] But the great pattern we must of necessity derive from
the Lord, for thus does He also Himself, where he says, "For He makes His sun
to rise on the evil and the good," [Matthew 5:45] adducing the example from His
Father; but we from Christ Himself. He came unto them, in His Incarnation, I
mean, He became a servant for their sakes, "He humbled Himself, He emptied
Himself, He took the form of a servant." [Philippians 2:7-8] And when He came
unto them, He went not Himself aside "into any way of the Gentiles," [Matthew
10:5] and gave the same charge to His disciples, and not only so, but "He went
about healing all manner of disease, and all manner of sickness." [Matthew
4:23] And what then? All the rest indeed were astonished, and marvelled, and
said, "Whence, then, has this man all these things?" [Matthew 13:56] But these,
the objects of His beneficence, these said, "He has a devil," [John 10:20] and
"blasphemes," [John 10:36] and "is mad," and is a "deceiver," [John 7:12 and
Matthew 27:63] Did he therefore cast them away? No, in no wise, but when He
heard these sayings, He even yet more signally bestowed His benefits upon
them, and went straightway to them that were about to crucify Him, to the intent
that He might but only save them. And after He was crucified, what were His
words? "Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do." [Luke 23:34]
Both cruelly treated before this, and cruelly treated after this, even to the very
latest breath, for them He did every thing, in their behalf He prayed. Yea, and
after the Cross itself, what did He not do for their sakes? Did He not send
Apostles? Did He not work miracles? Did He not shake the whole world?
Thus is it we ought to love our enemies, thus to imitate Christ. Thus did
Paul. Stoned, suffering unnumbered cruelties, yet did he all things for their good.
Hear his own words. "My heart's desire and my supplication to God is for them
that they may be saved." [Romans 10:1-2] And again; "For I bear them witness
that they have a zeal for God." And again; "If you, being a wild olive tree wast

grafted in, how much more shall these be grafted into their own olive tree?"
[Romans 11:24] How tender, do you think, must be the affection from which
these expressions proceed, how vast the benevolence? It is impossible to express
it, impossible.
Thus is it we ought to love our enemies. This is to love God, Who has
enjoined it, Who has given it as His law. To imitate Him is to love our enemy.
Consider it is not your enemy you are benefiting, but yourself; you are not
loving him, but art obeying God. Knowing therefore these things, let us confirm
our love one to another, that we may perform this duty perfectly, and attain those
good things that are promised in Christ Jesus our Lord, with Whom to the Father,
together with the Holy Ghost, be glory, might, and honor, now, and for ever and
ever. Amen.