God, which is an intolerable error; and therefore it is refuted by
proofs that are cogent. Some, however, said that the world was
eternal, although made by God. For they hold that the world has a
beginning, not of time, but of creation, so that in a certain hardly
intelligible way it was always made. "And they try to explain their
meaning thus (De Civ. Dei x, 31): for as, if the foot were always in the
dust from eternity, there would always be a footprint which without
doubt was caused by him who trod on it, so also the world always
was, because its Maker always existed." To understand this we must
consider that the efficient cause, which acts by motion, of necessity
precedes its effect in time; because the effect is only in the end of
the action, and every agent must be the principle of action. But if the
action is instantaneous and not successive, it is not necessary for
the maker to be prior to the thing made in duration as appears in the
case of illumination. Hence they say that it does not follow
necessarily if God is the active cause of the world, that He should be
prior to the world in duration; because creation, by which He
produced the world, is not a successive change, as was said above
(Question 45, Article 2).
Reply to Objection 2: Those who would say that the world was
eternal, would say that the world was made by God from nothing, not
that it was made after nothing, according to what we understand by
the word creation, but that it was not made from anything; and so
also some of them do not reject the word creation, as appears from
Avicenna (Metaph. ix, text 4).
Reply to Objection 3: This is the argument of Anaxagoras (as quoted
in Phys. viii, text 15). But it does not lead to a necessary conclusion,
except as to that intellect which deliberates in order to find out what
should be done, which is like movement. Such is the human intellect,
but not the divine intellect (Question 14, Articles 7,12).
Reply to Objection 4: Those who hold the eternity of the world hold
that some region was changed an infinite number of times, from
being uninhabitable to being inhabitable and "vice versa," and
likewise they hold that the arts, by reason of various corruptions and
accidents, were subject to an infinite variety of advance and decay.
Hence Aristotle says (Meteor. i), that it is absurd from such particular
changes to hold the opinion of the newness of the whole world.
Reply to Objection 5: Even supposing that the world always was, it
would not be equal to God in eternity, as Boethius says (De Consol.

v, 6); because the divine Being is all being simultaneously without
succession; but with the world it is otherwise.
Reply to Objection 6: Passage is always understood as being from
term to term. Whatever bygone day we choose, from it to the present
day there is a finite number of days which can be passed through.
The objection is founded on the idea that, given two extremes, there
is an infinite number of mean terms.
Reply to Objection 7: In efficient causes it is impossible to proceed
to infinity "per se"---thus, there cannot be an infinite number of
causes that are "per se" required for a certain effect; for instance,
that a stone be moved by a stick, the stick by the hand, and so on to
infinity. But it is not impossible to proceed to infinity "accidentally"
as regards efficient causes; for instance, if all the causes thus
infinitely multiplied should have the order of only one cause, their
multiplication being accidental, as an artificer acts by means of
many hammers accidentally, because one after the other may be
broken. It is accidental, therefore, that one particular hammer acts
after the action of another; and likewise it is accidental to this
particular man as generator to be generated by another man; for he
generates as a man, and not as the son of another man. For all men
generating hold one grade in efficient causes---viz. the grade of a
particular generator. Hence it is not impossible for a man to be
generated by man to infinity; but such a thing would be impossible if
the generation of this man depended upon this man, and on an
elementary body, and on the sun, and so on to infinity.
Reply to Objection 8: Those who hold the eternity of the world evade
this reason in many ways. For some do not think it impossible for
there to be an actual infinity of souls, as appears from the
Metaphysics of Algazel, who says that such a thing is an accidental
infinity. But this was disproved above (Question 7, Article 4). Some
say that the soul is corrupted with the body. And some say that of all
souls only one will remain. But others, as Augustine says [Serm. xiv,
De Temp. 4,5; De Haeres., haeres. 46; De Civ. Dei xii. 13], asserted on
this account a circuit of souls, viz. that souls separated from their
bodies return again thither after a course of time; a fuller
consideration of which matters will be given later (Question 75,
Article 2; Question 118, Article 6). But be it noted that this argument
considers only a particular case. Hence one might say that the world
was eternal, or least some creature, as an angel, but not man. But we
are considering the question in general, as to whether any creature