"Do you not hear what these say?" And yet it was Christ's part to have said this
to them, "Hear ye not what these say?" for the children were singing to Him as
to God.
What then says He? Since they were speaking against things manifest, He
applies His correction more in the way of reproof, saying, "Have ye never read,
Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings You have perfected praise?" And well
did He say, "Out of the mouth." For what was said was not of their
understanding, but of His power giving articulation to their tongue yet immature.
And this was also a type of the Gentiles lisping, and sounding forth at once
great things with understanding and faith.
And for the apostles also there was from hence no small consolation. For
that they might not be perplexed, how being unlearned they should be able to
publish the gospel, the children anticipate them, and remove all their anxiety,
teaching them, that He would grant them utterance, who made even these to sing
praises.
And not so only, but the miracle showed that He is Creator even of nature.
The children then, although of age immature, uttered things that had a clear
meaning, and were in accordance with those above, but the men things teeming
with frenzy and madness. For such is the nature of wickedness.
Forasmuch then as there were many things to provoke them, from the
multitude, from the casting out of the sellers, from the miracles, from the
children, He again leaves them, giving room to the swelling passion, and not
willing to begin His teaching, lest boiling with envy they should be the more
displeased at His sayings.
"Now in the morning as He returned into the city, He was an hungered."
[Matthew 21:18] How is He an hungered in the morning? When He permits the
flesh, then it shows its feeling. "And when He saw a fig tree in the way, He came
to it, and found nothing thereon, but leaves only." [Matthew 21:19] Another
evangelist says, "The time of figs was not yet;" but if it was not time, how does
the other evangelist say, "He came, if haply He might find fruit thereon." Whence

it is manifest that this belongs to the suspicion of His disciples, who were yet in
a somewhat imperfect state. For indeed the evangelists in many places record the
suspicions of the disciples.
Like as this then was their suspicion, so also was it too to suppose it was
cursed for this cause, because of having no fruit. Wherefore then was it cursed?
For the disciples' sakes, that they might have confidence. For because
everywhere He conferred benefits, but punished no man; and it was needful that
He should afford them a demonstrative proof of His power to take vengeance
also, that both the disciples might learn, and the Jews, that being able to blast
them that crucify Him, of His own will He submits, and does not blast them; and
it was not His will to show forth this upon men; upon the plant did He furnish
the proof of His might in taking vengeance. But when unto places, or unto
plants, or unto brutes, any such thing as this is done, be not curious, neither say,
how was the fig-tree justly dried up, if it was not the time of figs; for this it is the
utmost trifling to say; but behold the miracle, and admire and glorify the worker
thereof.
Since in the case also of the swine that were drowned, many have said this,
working out the argument of justice; but neither there should one give heed, for
these again are brutes, even as that was a plant without life.
Wherefore then was the act invested with such an appearance, and with this
plea for a curse? As I said, this was the disciple's suspicion.
But if it was not yet time, vainly do some say the law is here meant. For the
fruit of this was faith, and then was the time of this fruit, and it had indeed borne
it; "For already [John 4:35] are the fields white to harvest," says He; and, "I
sent you to reap that whereon ye bestowed no labor." [John 4:38]
2. Not any therefore of these things does He here intimate, but it is what I
said, He displays His power to punish, and this is shown by saying, "The time
was not yet," making it clear that of this special purpose He went, and not for
hunger, but for His disciples' sake, who indeed marvelled exceedingly, although
many miracles had been done greater; but, as I said, this was strange, for now