things, or judge them on this account to be better than itself; especially
since it is in the company of the holy, who, whether they are men or good
angels, accomplish, through the power of God, to whom all things are
subject, wonders which are far greater and the very reverse of deceptive.

### CHAP. 12.—THE DEVIL THE MEDIATOR OF DEATH, CHRIST OF LIFE.

15. In no wise therefore are souls cleansed and reconciled to God by
sacrilegious imitations, or curious arts that are impious, or magical
incantations; since the false mediator does not translate them to higher
things, but rather blocks and cuts off the way thither through the
affections, malignant in proportion as they are proud, which he inspires
into those of his own company; which are not able to nourish the wings of
virtues so as to fly upwards, but rather to heap up the weight of vices so
as to press downwards; since the soul will fall down the more heavily, the
more it seems to itself to have been carried upwards. Accordingly, as the
Magi did when warned of God, whom the star led to adore the low estate
of the Lord; so we also ought to return to our country, not by the way by
which we came, but by another way which the lowly King has taught, and
which the proud king, the adversary of that lowly King, cannot block up.
For to us, too, that we may adore the lowly Christ, the "heavens have
declared the glory of God, when their sound went into all the earth, and
their words to the ends of the world." A way was made for us to death
through sin in Adam. For, "By one man sin entered into the world, and
death by sin; and so death passed upon all men, in whom all have
sinned." Of this way the devil was the mediator, the persuader to sin, and
the caster down into death. For he, too, applied his one death to work out
our double death. Since he indeed died in the spirit through ungodliness,
but certainly did not die in the flesh: yet both persuaded us to
ungodliness, and thereby brought it to pass that we deserved to come into
the death of the flesh. We desired therefore the one through wicked
persuasion, the other followed us by a just condemnation; and therefore
it is written, "God made not death," since He was not Himself the cause
of death; but yet death was inflicted on the sinner, through His most just
retribution. Just as the judge inflicts punishment on the guilty; yet it is
not the justice of the judge, but the desert of the crime, which is the cause

of the punishment. Whither, then, the mediator of death caused us to
pass, yet did not come himself, that is, to the death of the flesh, there our
Lord God introduced for us the medicine of correction, which He
deserved not, by a hidden and exceeding mysterious decree of divine and
profound justice. In order, therefore, that as by one man came death, so
by one man might come also the resurrection of the dead; because men
strove more to shun that which they could not shun, viz. the death of the
flesh, than the death of the spirit, i.e. punishment more than the desert of
punishment (for not to sin is a thing about which either men are not
solicitous or are too little solicitous; but not to die, although it be not
within reach of attainment, is yet eagerly sought after); the Mediator of
life, making it plain that death is not to be feared, which by the condition
of humanity cannot now be escaped, but rather ungodliness, which can be
guarded against through faith, meets us at the end to which we have
come, but not by the way by which we came. (For we, indeed, came to
death through sin; He through righteousness: and, therefore, as our
death is the punishment of sin, so His death was made a sacrifice for sin.)