also this other hard point, how Elizabeth, who was of the Levitical tribe, was
kinswoman to Mary.
15. But that we may not overload your memory, by stringing many things
together, here let us stay our discourse for a time. For it is enough for you in
order that you be thoroughly roused, that you learn the questions only. But if you
long for their solution also, this again depends on yourselves, before we speak.
For if I see you thoroughly awakened, and longing to learn, I will endeavor to
add the solution also; but if gaping and not attending, I will conceal both the
difficulties, and their solution, in obedience to a divine law. For, says He, "Give
not the holy things to the dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before swine, lest they
trample them under their feet."
But who is he that tramples them under foot? He that does not account these
things precious, and venerable. And who, it may be asked, is so wretched as not
to esteem these things venerable, and more precious than all? He who does not
bestow on them so much leisure as on the harlot women in the theatres of Satan.
For there the multitude pass the whole day, and give up not a few of their
domestic concerns for the sake of this unseasonable employment, and they retain
with exactness whatever they have heard, and this though it be to the injury of
their souls, that they keep it. But here, where God is speaking, they will not bear
to tarry even a little time.
Therefore, let me warn you, we have nothing in common with Heaven, but
our citizenship goes no further than words. And yet because of this, God has
threatened even hell, not in order to cast us therein, but that He might persuade
us to flee this grievous tyranny. But we do the opposite, and run each day the
way that leads there, and while God is commanding us not only to hear, but also
to do what He says, we do not submit so much as to hearken.
When then, I pray you, are we to do what is commanded, and to put our
hand to the works, if we do not endure so much as to hear the words that relate
to them, but are impatient and restless about the time we stay here, although it be
exceedingly short?

16. And besides, when we are talking of indifferent matters, if we see those
that are in company do not attend, we call what they do an insult; but do we
consider that we are provoking God, if, while He is discoursing of such things as
these, we despise what is said, and look another way?
Why, he that is grown old, and has travelled over much country, reports to
us with all exactness the number of stadia, and the situations of cities, their
plans, and their harbors and markets; but we ourselves know not even how far
we are from the city that is in Heaven. For surely we should have endeavored to
shorten the space, had we known the distance. That city being not only as far
from us as Heaven is from the earth, but even much farther, if we be negligent;
like as, on the other hand, if we do our best, even in one instant we shall come to
the gates thereof. For not by local space, but by moral disposition, are these
distances defined.
But you know exactly the affairs of the world, as well new as old, and such
too as are quite ancient; you can number the princes under whom you have
served in time past, and the ruler of the games, and them that gained the prize,
and the leaders of armies, matters that are of no concern to you; but who has
become ruler in this city, the first or the second or the third, and for how long,
each of them; and what each has accomplished, and brought to pass, you have
not imagined even as in a dream. And the laws that are set in this city you will
not endure to hear, nor attend to them, even when others tell you of them. How
then, I pray you, do you expect to obtain the blessings that are promised, when
thou dost not even attend to what is said?
17. But though never before, now, at any rate, let us do this. Yea, for we are
on the point of entering into a city (if God permit) of gold, and more precious
than any gold.
Let us then mark her foundations, her gates consisting of sapphires and
pearls; for indeed we have in Matthew an excellent guide. For through his gate
we shall now enter in, and much diligence is required on our part. For should He
see any one not attentive, He casts him out of the city.