when insulted, since the possessed strike us, and we, so far from being provoked,
do rather pity them. This do thou also; pity him that is insolent to you, for he is
held in subjection by a dreadful monster, rage, by a grievous demon, anger. Set
him free as he is wrought upon by a grievous demon, and going quickly to ruin.
For so great is this disease as not to need even time for the destruction of him
that is seized with it. Wherefore also one said, "The sway of his fury shall be his
fall;" [Sirach 1:22] by this most of all showing its tyranny, that in a short time it
works great ills, and needs not to continue long with us, so that if in addition to
its strength it were apt to last, it would indeed be hard to strive against.
I should like to show what the man is who insults, what he that practises
self-control, and to bring nakedly before you the soul of the one and the other.
For you should see the one like a sea tost with a tempest, but the other like a
harbor free from disturbance. For it is not disturbed by these evil blasts, but puts
them to rest easily. For indeed they who are insulting, do everything in order to
make it sting. When then they fail of that hope, even they are thenceforth at
peace, and go away amended. For it is impossible that a man, who is angry,
should not utterly condemn himself, even as on the other hand it is impossible
for one who is not angry to be self-condemned. For though it be necessary to
retaliate, it is possible to do this without anger (and it were more easy and more
wise than with anger) and to have no painful feeling. For if we be willing, the
good things will be from ourselves, and we shall be with the grace of God
sufficient for our own safety and honor.
For why do you seek the glory that comes from another? Do thou honor
yourself, and no one will be able to insult you; but if you dishonor yourself,
though all should honor you, you will not be honored. For like as, unless we put
ourselves in an evil state, no one else puts us in such a state; even so unless we
insult ourselves, no one else can put us to shame.
For let any man be great and worthy of admiration, and let all men call him
an adulterer, a thief, a violater of tombs, a murderer, a robber, and let him be
neither provoked or indignant, nor be conscious to himself of any of these

crimes, what disgrace will he thence undergo? None. What then, you may say, if
many have such an opinion of him? Not even so is he disgraced, but they bring
shame upon themselves, by accounting one, who is not such, to be such. For tell
me, if any one think the sun to be dark, does he bring an ill name on that
heavenly body, or on himself? Surely on himself, getting himself the character of
being blind or mad. So also they that account wicked men good, and they that
make the opposite error, disgrace themselves.
Wherefore we ought to give the greater diligence, to keep our conscience
clear, and to give no handle against ourselves, nor matter for evil suspicion; but
if others will be mad, even when this is our disposition, not to care very much,
nor to grieve. For he that has got the character of a wicked man, being a good
man, is in no degree thereby hurt as regards his being such as he is; but he that
has been suspecting another vainly and causelessly, receives the utmost harm; as,
on the other hand, the wicked man, if he be supposed to be the contrary, will gain
nothing thence, but will both have a heavier judgment, and be led into greater
carelessness. For he that is such and is suspected thereof, may perhaps be
humbled, and acknowledge his sins; but when he escapes detection, he falls into
a state past feeling. For if, while all are accusing them, offenders are hardly
stirred up to compunction, when so far from accusing them, some even praise
them, at what time will they who are living in vice be able to open their eyes?
Do you hear that Paul also blames for this, that the Corinthians (so far from
permitting him that had been guilty of fornication, to acknowledge his own sin),
applauding and honoring him, did on the contrary urge him on in vice thereby?
Wherefore, I pray, let us leave the suspicions of the multitude, their insults and
their honors, and let us be diligent about one thing only, that we be conscious to
ourselves of no evil thing, nor insult our own selves. For so both here, and in the
world to come, we shall enjoy much glory, unto which God grant we all may
attain, by the grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be
glory world without end. Amen.