THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.31, C.4.

called the son of Heli and of all those who were descended from
David; as the Apostle says (Rm. 9:5): "Of whom" (viz. the Jews) "is
Christ according to the flesh."
Augustine again gives three solutions (De Qq. Evang. ii), saying:
"There are three motives by one or other of which the evangelist was
guided. For either one evangelist mentions Joseph's father of whom
he was begotten; whilst the other gives either his maternal
grandfather or some other of his later forefathers; or one was
Joseph's natural father: the other is father by adoption. Or,
according to the Jewish custom, one of those having died without
children, a near relation of his married his wife, the son born of the
latter union being reckoned as the son of the former": which is a
kind of legal adoption, as Augustine himself says (De Consensu
Evang. ii, Cf. Retract. ii).
This last motive is the truest: Jerome also gives it commenting on
Mt. 1:16; and Eusebius of Caesarea in his Church history (I, vii), says
that it is given by Africanus the historian. For these writers says that
Mathan and Melchi, at different times, each begot a son of one and
the same wife, named Estha. For Mathan, who traced his descent
through Solomon, had married her first, and died, leaving one son,
whose name was Jacob: and after his death, as the law did not forbid
his widow to remarry, Melchi, who traced his descent through
Mathan, being of the same tribe though not of the same family as
Mathan, married his widow, who bore him a son, called Heli; so that
Jacob and Heli were uterine brothers born to different fathers. Now
one of these, Jacob, on his brother Heli dying without issue, married
the latter's widow, according to the prescription of the law, of whom
he had a son, Joseph, who by nature was his own son, but by law
was accounted the son of Heli. Wherefore Matthew says "Jacob
begot Joseph": whereas Luke, who was giving the legal genealogy,
speaks of no one as begetting.
And although Damascene (De Fide Orth. iv) says that the Blessed
Virgin Mary was connected with Joseph in as far as Heli was
accounted as his father, for he says that she was descended from
Melchi: yet must we also believe that she was in some way
descended from Solomon through those patriarchs enumerated by
Matthew, who is said to have set down Christ's genealogy according
to the flesh; and all the more since Ambrose states that Christ was of
the seed of Jechonias.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.31, C.4.

Reply to Objection 3: According to Augustine (De Consensu Evang.
ii) "Matthew purposed to delineate the royal personality of Christ;
Luke the priestly personality: so that in Matthew's genealogy is
signified the assumption of our sins by our Lord Jesus Christ":
inasmuch as by his carnal origin "He assumed 'the likeness of sinful
flesh.' But in Luke's genealogy the washing away of our sins is
signified," which is effected by Christ's sacrifice. "For which reason
Matthew traces the generations downwards, Luke upwards." For the
same reason too "Matthew descends from David through Solomon,
in whose mother David sinned; whereas Luke ascends to David
through Nathan, through whose namesake, the prophet, God
expiated his sin." And hence it is also that, because "Matthew
wished to signify that Christ had condescended to our mortal nature,
he set down the genealogy of Christ at the very outset of his Gospel,
beginning with Abraham and descending to Joseph and the birth of
Christ Himself. Luke, on the contrary, sets forth Christ's genealogy
not at the outset, but after Christ's Baptism, and not in the
descending but in the ascending order: as though giving
prominence to the office of the priest in expiating our sins, to which
John bore witness, saying: 'Behold Him who taketh away the sin of
the world.' And in the ascending order, he passes Abraham and
continues up to God, to whom we are reconciled by cleansing and
expiating. With reason too he follows the origin of adoption; because
by adoption we become children of God: whereas by carnal
generation the Son of God became the Son of Man. Moreover he
shows sufficiently that he does not say that Joseph was the son of
Heli as though begotten by him, but because he was adopted by him,
since he says that Adam was the son of God, inasmuch as he was
created by God."
Again, the number forty pertains to the time of our present life:
because of the four parts of the world in which we pass this mortal
life under the rule of Christ. And forty is the product of four
multiplied by ten: while ten is the sum of the numbers from one to
four. The number ten may also refer to the decalogue; and the
number four to the present life; or again to the four Gospels,
according to which Christ reigns in us. And thus "Matthew, putting
forward the royal personality of Christ, enumerates forty persons not
counting Him" (cf. Augustine, De Consensu Evang. ii). But this is to
be taken on the supposition that it be the same Jechonias at the end
of the second, and at the commencement of the third series of
fourteen, as Augustine understands it. According to him this was
done in order to signify "that under Jechonias there was a certain