six times six.
8. A single year also, if the whole twelve months are taken into account,
which are made up of thirty days each (for the month that has been kept
from of old is that which the revolution of the moon determines),
abounds in the number six. For that which six is, in the first order of
numbers, which consists of units up to ten, that sixty is in the second
order, which consists of tens up to a hundred. Sixty days, then, are a sixth
part of the year. Further, if that which stands as the sixth of the second
order is multiplied by the sixth of the first order, then we make six times
sixty, i.e. three hundred and sixty days, which are the whole twelve
months. But since, as the revolution of the moon determines the month
for men, so the year is marked by the revolution of the sun; and five days
and a quarter of a day remain, that the sun may fulfill its course and end
the year; for four quarters make one day, which must be intercalated in
every fourth year, which they call bissextile, that the order of time may
not be disturbed: if we consider, also, these five days and a quarter
themselves, the number six prevails in them. First, because, as it is usual
to compute the whole from a part, we must not call it five days, but rather
six, taking the quarter days for one day. Next, because five days
themselves are the sixth part of a month; while the quarter of a day
contains six hours. For the entire day, i.e. including its night, is twentyfour hours, of which the fourth part, which is a quarter of a day, is found
to be six hours. So much in the course of the year does the sixth number
prevail.

### CHAP. 5.—THE NUMBER SIX IS ALSO COMMENDED IN THE BUILDING UP OF THE BODY OF CHRIST AND OF THE TEMPLE AT JERUSALEM.

9. And not without reason is the number six understood to be put for a
year in the building up of the body of the Lord, as a figure of which He
said that He would raise up in three days the temple destroyed by the
Jews. For they said, "Forty and six years was this temple in building."
And six times forty-six makes two hundred and seventy-six. And this
number of days completes nine months and six days, which are reckoned,
as it were, ten months for the travail of women; not because all come to
the sixth day after the ninth month, but because the perfection itself of

the body of the Lord is found to have been brought in so many days to the
birth, as the authority of the church maintains upon the tradition of the
elders. For He is believed to have been conceived on the 25th of March,
upon which day also He suffered; so the womb of the Virgin, in which He
was conceived, where no one of mortals was begotten, corresponds to the
new grave in which He was buried, wherein was never man laid,2 neither
before nor since. But He was born, according to tradition, upon
December the 25th. If, then you reckon from that day to this you find two
hundred and seventy-six days which is forty-six times six. And in this
number of years the temple was built, because in that number of sixes the
body of the Lord was perfected; which being destroyed by the suffering of
death, He raised again on the third day. For "He spake this of the temple
of His body," as is declared by the most clear and solid testimony of the
Gospel; where He said, "For as Jonas was three days and three nights in
the whale's belly, so shall the Son of man be three days and three nights
in the heart of the earth."