SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.87, C.3.

the saints, as also by reason of the victory which he obtained, and
because it is probable that he repented of his sinful deed, which
nevertheless foreshadowed something good.
Reply to Objection 3: The mortification of one's own body, for
instance by vigils and fasting, is not acceptable to God except in so
far as it is an act of virtue; and this depends on its being done with
due discretion, namely, that concupiscence be curbed without
overburdening nature. on this condition such things may be the
matter of a vow. Hence the Apostle after saying (Rm. 12:1), "Present
your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, pleasing to God," adds, "your
reasonable service." Since, however, man is easily mistaken in
judging of matters concerning himself, such vows as these are more
fittingly kept or disregarded according to the judgment of a superior,
yet so that, should a man find that without doubt he is seriously
burdened by keeping such a vow, and should he be unable to appeal
to his superior, he ought not to keep it. As to vows about vain and
useless things they should be ridiculed rather than kept.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.87, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether all vows are binding?

Objection 1: It would seem that vows are not all binding. For man
needs things that are done by another, more than God does, since
He has no need for our goods (Ps. 15:2). Now according to the
prescription of human laws [Dig. L. xii, de pollicitat., i] a simple
promise made to a man is not binding; and this seems to be
prescribed on account of the changeableness of the human will.
Much less binding therefore is a simple promise made to God, which
we call a vow.
Objection 2: Further, no one is bound to do what is impossible. Now
sometimes that which a man has vowed becomes impossible to him,
either because it depends on another's decision, as when, for
instance, a man vows to enter a monastery, the monks of which
refuse to receive him: or on account of some defect arising, for
instance when a woman vows virginity, and afterwards is
deflowered; or when a man vows to give a sum of money, and
afterwards loses it. Therefore a vow is not always binding.
Objection 3: Further, if a man is bound to pay something, he must do
so at once. But a man is not bound to pay his vow at once, especially
if it be taken under a condition to be fulfilled in the future. Therefore
a vow is not always binding.
On the contrary, It is written (Eccles. 5:3,4): "Whatsoever thou hast
vowed, pay it; and it is much better not to vow, than after a vow not
to perform the things promised."
I answer that, For one to be accounted faithful one must keep one's
promises. Wherefore, according to Augustine [Ep. xxxii, 2: De
Mendac. xx] faith takes its name "from a man's deed agreeing with
his word". Now man ought to be faithful to God above all, both on
account of God's sovereignty, and on account of the favors he has
received from God. Hence man is obliged before all to fulfill the vows
he has made to God, since this is part of the fidelity he owes to God.
On the other hand, the breaking of a vow is a kind of infidelity.
Wherefore Solomon gives the reason why vows should be paid to
God, because "an unfaithful . . . promise displeaseth Him" [Eccles.
5:3].