SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.46, C.14.

effective command.
The third prudence is both true and perfect, for it takes counsel,
judges and commands aright in respect of the good end of man's
whole life: and this alone is prudence simply so-called, and cannot
be in sinners, whereas the first prudence is in sinners alone, while
imperfect prudence is common to good and wicked men, especially
that which is imperfect through being directed to a particular end,
since that which is imperfect on account of a failing in the chief act,
is only in the wicked.
Reply to Objection 1: This saying of our Lord is to be understood of
the first prudence, wherefore it is not said that they are prudent
absolutely, but that they are prudent in "their generation."
Reply to Objection 2: The nature of faith consists not in conformity
with the appetite for certain right actions, but in knowledge alone. On
the other hand prudence implies a relation to a right appetite. First
because its principles are the ends in matters of action; and of such
ends one forms a right estimate through the habits of moral virtue,
which rectify the appetite: wherefore without the moral virtues there
is no prudence, as shown above (FS, Question 58, Article 5);
secondly because prudence commands right actions, which does
not happen unless the appetite be right. Wherefore though faith on
account of its object is more excellent than prudence, yet prudence,
by its very nature, is more opposed to sin, which arises from a
disorder of the appetite.
Reply to Objection 3: Sinners can take good counsel for an evil end,
or for some particular good, but they do not perfectly take good
counsel for the end of their whole life, since they do not carry that
counsel into effect. Hence they lack prudence which is directed to
the good only; and yet in them, according to the Philosopher (Ethic.
vi, 12) there is "cleverness," [deinotike] i.e. natural diligence which
may be directed to both good and evil; or "cunning," [panourgia]
which is directed only to evil, and which we have stated above, to be
"false prudence" or "prudence of the flesh."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.46, C.14.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.46, C.15.

### ARTICLE 14. Whether prudence is in all who have grace?

Objection 1: It would seem that prudence is not in all who have
grace. Prudence requires diligence, that one may foresee aright what
has to be done. But many who have grace have not this diligence.
Therefore not all who have grace have prudence.
Objection 2: Further, a prudent man is one who takes good counsel,
as stated above (Article 8, Objection 2; Article 13, Objection 3). Yet
many have grace who do not take good counsel, and need to be
guided by the counsel of others. Therefore not all who have grace,
have prudence
Objection 3: Further, the Philosopher says (Topic. iii, 2) that "young
people are not obviously prudent." Yet many young people have
grace. Therefore prudence is not to be found in all who have grace.
On the contrary, No man has grace unless he be virtuous. Now no
man can be virtuous without prudence, for Gregory says (Moral. ii,
46) that "the other virtues cannot be virtues at all unless they effect
prudently what they desire to accomplish." Therefore all who have
grace have prudence.
I answer that, The virtues must needs be connected together, so that
whoever has one has all, as stated above (FS, Question 65, Article 1).
Now whoever has grace has charity, so that he must needs have all
the other virtues, and hence, since prudence is a virtue, as shown
above (Article 4), he must, of necessity, have prudence also.
Reply to Objection 1: Diligence is twofold: one is merely sufficient
with regard to things necessary for salvation; and such diligence is
given to all who have grace, whom "His unction teacheth of all
things" (1 Jn. 2:27). There is also another diligence which is more
than sufficient, whereby a man is able to make provision both for
himself and for others, not only in matters necessary for salvation,
but also in all things relating to human life; and such diligence as
this is not in all who have grace.
Reply to Objection 2: Those who require to be guided by the counsel
of others, are able, if they have grace, to take counsel for themselves
in this point at least, that they require the counsel of others and can