commit adultery, is it from lust they commit it, or simply from desire of dangers?
Plainly from lust. Do they then therefore obtain forgiveness? Certainly not. Why
not? Because the sin is their own. 'But,' says one, 'why, pray, string syllogisms?
For my conscience bears me witness that I wish to repel the passion; and cannot,
but it keeps close, presses me sore, and afflicts me grievously.' O man, thou dost
wish to repel it, but thou dost not the things repellers should do; but it is with
you just as with a man in a fever, who drinking of cold streams to the fill, should
say, 'How many things I devise with the wish to quench this fever, and I cannot;
but they stir up my flame the more.' Let us see then whether at all thou too dost
the things that inflame, yet thinkest you are devising such as quench. 'I do not,'
he says. Tell me then, what have you ever essayed to do in order to quench the
passion? And what is it, in fine, that will increase the passion? For even
supposing we be not all of us obnoxious to these particular charges; (for more
may be found who are captivated by the love of money than of beauty;) still the
remedy to be proposed will be common to all, both to these and to those. For
both that is an unreasonable passion, and this, is keener and fiercer than that.
When then we have proved victorious over the greater, it is very plain that we
shall easily subdue the less also. 'And how is it,' says one, 'that if this be keener,
all persons are not made captive by the vice, but a greater number are mad after
money?' Because in the first place this last desire appears to be unattended with
danger: next, although that of beauty be even fiercer, yet it is more speedily
extinguished; for were it to continue like that of money, it would wholly destroy
its captive.
7. Come then, let us discourse to you on this, the love of beauty, and let us
see whereby the mischief is increased; for so we shall know whether the fault be
ours, or not ours. And if ours, let us do everything to get the better of it; whereas
if not ours, why do we afflict ourselves for nought? And why do we not pardon,
but find fault, with those who are made captive by it? Whence then is this love
engendered? 'From comeliness of feature,' says one, 'when she that wounds one
is beautiful and of fair countenance.' It is said idly and in vain. For if it were

beauty that attracted lovers, then would the maiden who is such have all men for
her lovers; but if she has not all, this thing comes not of nature nor from beauty,
but from unchaste eyes. For it was when by eyeing too curiously , you admired
and become enamored, that you received the shaft. 'And who,' says one, 'when
he sees a beautiful woman, can refrain from commending her he sees? If then
admiring such things comes not of deliberate choice, it follows that love depends
not on ourselves.' Stop, O man! Why do you crowd all things together, running
round and round on every side, and not choosing to see the root of the evil? For I
see numbers admiring and commending, who yet are not enamored. 'And how is
it possible to admire and not be enamored?' Clamor not, (for this I am coming to
speak of,) but wait, and you shall hear Moses admiring the son of Jacob, and
saying, "And Joseph was a goodly person, and well favored exceedingly."
[Genesis 39:6, Septuagint] Was he then enamored who speaks this? By no
means. 'For,' says he, 'he did not even see him whom he commended.' We are
affected, however, somewhat similarly towards beauties also which are
described to us, not only which are beheld. But that thou cavil not with us on this
point:— David, was he not comely exceedingly, and ruddy with beauty of eyes?
[So 1 Samuel 16:12 and 17:42, Septuagint] and indeed this beauty of the eyes, is
even especially, a component of beauteousness of more despotic power than any.
Was then any one enamored of him? By no means. Then to be also enamored
comes not [necessarily] with admiring. For many too have had mothers
blooming exceedingly in beauty of person. What then? Were their children
enamored of them? Away with the thought! But they admire what they see, yet
fall not into a shameful love. 'No, for again this good provision is Nature's.' How
Nature's? Tell me. 'Because they are mothers,' he says. Then do you not hear that
Persians, and that without any compulsion, have intercourse with their own
mothers, and that not one or two individuals, but a whole nation? But
independent of these, it is hence also evident that this distemper comes not from
bloom of person nor from beauty merely, but from a listless and wandering soul.
Many at least it is certain, oftentimes, having passed over thousands of well-