Polity of the Holy Spirit? "Which the Holy Ghost spoke before by the mouth of
David." Observe how he appropriates ([οἰκειοὕται]) him; and that it is an
advantage to them, that this was spoken by David, and not by some other
Prophet. "Concerning Judas," he says, "which was guide." Here again mark the
philosophical temper of the man: how he does not mention him with scorn, nor
say, "that wretch," "that miscreant:" but simply states the fact; and does not even
say, "who betrayed Him," but does what he can to transfer the guilt to others: nor
does he animadvert severely even on these: "Which was guide," he says, "to
them that took Jesus." Furthermore, before he declares where David had spoken,
he relates what had been the case with Judas, that from the things present he may
fetch assurance of the things future, and show that this man had already received
his due. "For he was numbered," says he, "with us, and had obtained part of this
ministry. Now this man acquired a field out of the reward of iniquity." (v. 17-18.)
He gives his discourse a moral turn, and covertly mentions the cause of the
wickedness, because it carried reproof with it. And he does not say, The Jews,
but, "this man, acquired" it. For since the minds of weak persons do not attend to
things future, as they do to things present, he discourses of the immediate
punishment inflicted. "And falling headlong, he burst asunder in the midst." He
does well to dilate not upon the sin, but upon the punishment. "And," he says,
"all his bowels gushed out." This brought them consolation. "And it was known
unto all the dwellers at Jerusalem; insomuch as that field is called in their
proper tongue [Aceldama], that is to say, the field of blood." [Acts 1:19]. Now
the Jews gave it this name, not on this account, but because of Judas; here,
however, Peter makes it to have this reference, and when he brings forward the
adversaries as witnesses, both by the fact that they named it, and by saying, "in
their proper tongue," this is what he means.
Then after the event, he appositely brings in the Prophet, saying, "For it is
written in the Book of Psalms, Let his habitation be desolate, and let no man
dwell therein" [Acts 1:20] [Psalm 69:25]: this is said of the field and the
dwelling: And his bishopric let another take; that is, his office, his priesthood. So

that this, he says, is not my counsel, but His who has foretold these things. For,
that he may not seem to be undertaking a great thing, and just such as Christ had
done, he adduces the Prophet as a witness. "Wherefore it behooves of these men
which have companied with us all the time." [Acts 1:21] Why does he make it
their business too? That the matter might not become an object of strife, and they
might not fall into contention about it. For if the Apostles themselves once did
this, much more might those. This he ever avoids. Wherefore at the beginning he
said, "Men and brethren. It behooves" to choose from among you. He defers the
decision to the whole body, thereby both making the elected objects of reverence
and himself keeping clear of all invidiousness with regard to the rest. For such
occasions always give rise to great evils. Now that some one must needs be
appointed, he adduces the prophet as witness: but from among what persons: "Of
these," he says, "which have companied with us all the time." To have said, the
worthy must present themselves, would have been to insult the others; but now
he refers the matter to length of time; for he says not simply, "These who have
companied with us," but, "all the time that the Lord Jesus went in and out among
us, beginning from the baptism of John unto that same day that He was taken up
from us, must one be ordained to be a witness with us of His resurrection" [Acts
1:22]: that their college ([ὁ] [χορὸς]) might not be left mutilated. Then why did it
not rest with Peter to make the election himself: what was the motive? This; that
he might not seem to bestow it of favor. And besides, he was not yet endowed
with the spirit. "And they appointed two, Joseph called Barsabus, who was
surnamed Justus, and Matthias." [Acts 1:23] Not he appointed them: but it was
he that introduced the proposition to that effect, at the same time pointing out
that even this was not his own, but from old time by prophecy; so that he acted
as expositor, not as preceptor. "Joseph called Barsabus, who was surnamed
Justus." Perhaps both names are given, because there were others of the same
name, for among the Apostles also there were several names alike; as James, and
James (the son) of Alphæus; Simon Peter, and Simon Zelotes; Judas (the
brother) of James, and Judas Iscariot. The appellation, however, may have arisen