2 Corinthians 5:2
2. "For verily in this we groan, longing to be clothed upon with our
habitation which is from heaven."
What habitation? Tell me. The incorruptible body. And why do we groan
now? Because that is far better. And "from heaven" he calls it because of its
incorruptibleness. For it is not surely that a body will come down to us from
above: but by this expression he signifies the grace which is sent from thence. So
far then ought we to be from grieving at these trials which are in part that we
ought to seek even for their fullness , as if he had said: Groanest thou, that you
are persecuted, that this your man is decaying? Groan that this is not done unto
excess and that it perishes not entirely. Do you see how he has turned round what
was said unto the contrary; having proved that they ought to groan that those
things were not done fully; for which because they were done partially; they
groaned. Therefore he henceforth calls it not a tabernacle, but a house, and with
great reason. For a tabernacle indeed is easily taken to pieces; but a house abides
continually.

2 Corinthians 5:3
"If so be that being unclothed we shall not be found naked."
That is, even if we have put off the body, we shall not be presented there
without a body, but even with the same one made incorruptible. But some read,
and it deserves very much to be adopted, "If so be that being clothed we shall not
be found naked." For lest all should be confident because of the Resurrection, he
says, "If so be that being clothed," that is, having obtained incorruption and an
incorruptible body, "we shall not be found naked" of glory and safety. As he also
said in the former Epistle; "We shall all be raised; but each in his own order."
And, "There are celestial bodies, and bodies terrestial." [1 Corinthians 15:2223] (ib. 40.) For the Resurrection indeed is common to all, but the glory is not
common; but some shall rise in honor and others in dishonor, and some to a
kingdom but others to punishment. This surely he signified here also, when he
said; "If so be that being clothed we shall not be found naked."

2 Corinthians 5:4
3. "For indeed we that are in this tabernacle do groan , not for that we
would be unclothed, but that we would be clothed upon." Here again he has
utterly and manifestly stopped the mouths of the heretics, showing that he is not
speaking absolutely of a body differing in identity , but of corruption and
incorruption: 'For we do not therefore groan,' says he, 'that we may be delivered
from the body: for of this we do not wish to be unclothed; but we hasten to be
delivered from the corruption that is in it.' Wherefore he says, 'we wish not to be
unclothed of the body, but that it should be clothed upon with incorruption.'
Then he also interprets it [thus,] "That what is mortal may be swallowed up of
life." For since putting off the body appeared to many a grievous thing; and he
was contradicting the judgments of all, when he said, "we groan," not wishing to
be set free from it; ('for if,' says one, 'the soul in being separated from it so
suffers and laments, how do you say that we groan because we are not separated
from it?') lest then this should be urged against him, he says, 'Neither do I assert
that we therefore groan, that we may put it off; (for no one puts it off without
pain, seeing that Christ says even of Peter, 'They shall "carry you," and lead you
"whither you would not;" [John 21:18]) but that we may have it clothed upon
with incorruption.' For it is in this respect that we are burdened by the body; not
because it is a body, but because we are encompassed with a corruptible body
and liable to suffering , for it is this that also causes us pain. But the life when it
arrives destroys and uses up the corruption; the corruption, I say, not the body.
'And how comes this to pass?' says one. Inquire not; God does it; be not too
curious. Wherefore also he added,