makes the movement of the free will towards sin to be one of
contrition, just as may occur in the Eucharist and Confirmation.
Again it diminishes the debt of temporal punishment; and this
indirectly, in as much as it takes away weakness, for a strong man
bears the same punishment more easily than a weak man. Hence it
does not follow that the measure of satisfaction is diminished. As to
the remnants of sin, they do not mean here those dispositions which
result from acts, and are inchoate habits so to speak, but a certain
spiritual debility in the mind, which debility being removed, though
such like habits or dispositions remain, the mind is not so easily
prone to sin.
Reply to Objection 3: When many actions are ordained to one effect,
the last is formal with respect to all the others that precede, and acts
by virtue of them: wherefore by the last anointing is infused grace
which gives the sacrament its effect.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether bodily health is an effect of this

sacrament?
Objection 1: It would seem that bodily health is not an effect of this
sacrament. For every sacrament is a spiritual remedy. Now a
spiritual remedy is ordained to spiritual health, just as a bodily
remedy is ordained to health of the body. Therefore bodily health is
not an effect of this sacrament.
Objection 2: Further, the sacraments always produce their effect in
those who approach them in the proper dispositions. Now
sometimes the recipient of this sacrament does not receive bodily
health, no matter how devoutly he receives it. Therefore bodily
health is not its effect.
Objection 3: Further, the efficacy of this sacrament is notified to us
in the fifth chapter of James. Now healing is ascribed there as the
effect, not of the anointing, but of the prayer, for he says: "The
prayer of faith shall save the sick man." Therefore bodily healing is
not an effect of this sacrament.
On the contrary, The operation of the Church is more efficacious
since Christ's Passion than before. Now, before the Passion, those
whom the apostles anointed with oil were healed (Mk. 6:13).
Therefore unction has its effect now in healing bodies.
Further, the sacraments produce their effect by signifying it. Now
Baptism signifies and effects a spiritual washing, through the bodily
washing in which it consists outwardly. Therefore Extreme Unction
signifies and causes a spiritual healing through the bodily healing
which it effects externally.
I answer that, Just as Baptism causes a spiritual cleansing from
spiritual stains by means of a bodily washing, so this sacrament
causes an inward healing by means of an outward sacramental
healing: and even as the baptismal washing has the effect of a bodily
washing, since it effects even a bodily cleansing, so too, Extreme
Unction has the effect of a bodily remedy, namely a healing of the
body. But there is a difference, for as much as the bodily washing
causes a bodily cleansing by a natural property of the bodily
element, and consequently always causes it, whereas Extreme