fruit of sin, of rebellion against parents. Let children hearken to this, that
whenever they are undutiful to their parents, they deserve to be servants. Such a
child strips himself of his nobility of birth; for he who rebels against his father is
no longer a son; and if he who rebels against his father is not a son, how shall he
be a son who rebels against our true Father? He has departed from his nobility of
birth, he has done outrage to nature. Then come also wars, and battles, and take
their prisoners. Well, but Abraham, you will say, had servants. Yes, but he used
them not as servants.
Observe how everything depends upon the head; the wife, by telling him
"to love her"; the children, by telling him "to bring them up in the chastening
and admonition of the Lord"; the servants, by the words, "knowing that both
their Master and yours is in Heaven." So, says he, you also in like manner, as
being yourselves servants, shall be kind and indulgent. "Finally, be strong in the
Lord and in the strength of His might."
But if, before considering this next, you have a mind to hearken, I shall
make the same remarks concerning servants, as I have also made before
concerning children. Teach them to be religious, and everything else will follow
of necessity. But now, when any one is going to the theater, or going off to the
bath, he drags all his servants after him; but when he goes to church, not for a
moment; nor does he compel them to attend and hear. Now how shall your
servant listen, when thou his master art attending to other things? Have you
purchased, have you bought your slave? Before all things enjoin him what God
would have him do, to be gentle towards his fellow-servants, and to make much
account of virtue.
Every one's house is a city; and every man is a prince in his own house.
That the house of the rich is of this character, is plain enough, where there are
both lands, and stewards, and rulers over rulers. But I say that the house of the
poor also is a city. Because here too there are offices of authority; for instance,
the husband has authority over the wife, the wife over the servants, the servants
again over their own wives; again the wives and the husbands over the children.

Does he not seem to you to be, as it were, a sort of king, having so many
authorities under his own authority? And that it were meet that he should be
more skilled both in domestic and general government than all the rest? For he
who knows how to manage these in their several relations, will know how to
select the fittest men for offices, yes, and will choose excellent ones. And thus
the wife will be a second king in the house, lacking only the diadem; and he who
knows how to choose this king, will excellently regulate all the rest.
Ver. 10. "Finally," says he, "be strong in the Lord."
Whenever the discourse is about to conclude, he always employs this turn.
Said I not well from the first, that every man's house is a camp in itself? For
look, having disposed of the several offices, he proceeds to arm them, and to
lead them out to war. If no one usurps the other's office, but every one remains at
his post, all will be well ordered.
"Be strong," says he, "in the Lord, and in the strength of His might."
That is, in the hope which we have in Him, by means of His aid. For as he
had enjoined many duties, which were necessary to be done, fear not, he seems
to say, cast your hope upon the Lord, and He will make all easy.
Ver. 11. "Put on the whole armor of God, that you may be able to stand
against the wiles of the devil."
He says not, against the fightings, nor against the hostilities, but against the
"wiles." For this enemy is at war with us, not simply, nor openly, but by "wiles."
What is meant by wiles? To use "wiles," is to deceive and to take by artifice or
contrivance; a thing which takes place both in the case of the arts, and by words,
and actions, and stratagems, in the case of those who seduce us. I mean
something like this. The Devil never proposes to us sins in their proper colors;
he does not speak of idolatry, but he sets it off in another dress, using "wiles,"
that is, making his discourse plausible, employing disguises. Now therefore the
Apostle is by this means both rousing the soldiers, and making them vigilant, by
persuading and instructing them, that our conflict is with one skilled in the arts
of war, and with one who wars not simply, nor directly, but with much wiliness.