The text fluctuates between "legis dationem" and "legis dationis." We have followed the latter.

points out, when he says of Christ, "He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire, having
His fan in His hand to cleanse His floor; and He will gather His fruit into the garner, but the chaff
He will burn up with unquenchable fire." For He who makes the chaff and He who makes the
wheat are not different persons, but one and the same, who judges them, that is, separates them.
But the wheat and the chaff, being inanimate and irrational, have been made such by nature. But
man, being endowed with reason, and in this respect like to God, having been made free in his will,
and with power over himself, is himself the cause to himself, that sometimes he becomes wheat,
and sometimes chaff. Wherefore also he shall be justly condemned, because, having been created
a rational being, he lost the true rationality, and living irrationally, opposed the righteousness of
God, giving himself over to every earthly spirit, and serving all lusts; as says the prophet, "Man,
being in honour, did not understand: he was assimilated to senseless beasts, and made like to
them."

### Chapter V.—The author returns to his former argument, and shows that there was but one
God announced by the law and prophets, whom Christ confesses as His Father, and who,
through His word, one living God with Him, made Himself known to men in both covenants.
1. God, therefore, is one and the same, who rolls up the heaven as a book, and renews the face
of the earth; who made the things of time for man, so that coming to maturity in them, he may
produce the fruit of immortality; and who, through His kindness, also bestows [upon him] eternal
things, "that in the ages to come He may show the exceeding riches of His grace;" who was
announced by the law and the prophets, whom Christ confessed as His Father. Now He is the
Creator, and He it is who is God over all, as Esaias says, "I am witness, saith the Lord God, and
my servant whom I have chosen, that ye may know, and believe, and understand that I am. Before
me there was no other God, neither shall be after me. I am God, and besides me there is no Saviour.
I have proclaimed, and I have saved." And again: "I myself am the first God, and I am above
things to come." For neither in an ambiguous, nor arrogant, nor boastful manner, does He say
these things; but since it was impossible, without God, to come to a knowledge of God, He teaches
men, through His Word, to know God. To those, therefore, who are ignorant of these matters, and
on this account imagine that they have discovered another Father, justly does one say, "Ye do err,
not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God."

Eph. ii. 7.

2. For our Lord and Master, in the answer which He gave to the Sadducees, who say that there
is no resurrection, and who do therefore dishonour God, and lower the credit of the law, did both
indicate a resurrection, and reveal God, saying to them, "Ye do err, not knowing the Scriptures,
nor the power of God." "For, touching the resurrection of the dead," He says, "have ye not read
that which was spoken by God, saying, I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God
of Jacob?" And He added, "He is not the God of the dead, but of the living; for all live to Him."
By these arguments He unquestionably made it clear, that He who spake to Moses out of the bush,
and declared Himself to be the God of the fathers, He is the God of the living. For who is the God
of the living unless He who is God, and above whom there is no other God? Whom also Daniel the
prophet, when Cyrus king of the Persians said to him, "Why dost thou not worship Bel?" did
proclaim, saying, "Because I do not worship idols made with hands, but the living God, who
established the heaven and the earth and has dominion over all flesh." Again did he say, "I will
adore the Lord my God, because He is the living God." He, then, who was adored by the prophets
as the living God, He is the God of the living; and His Word is He who also spake to Moses, who
also put the Sadducees to silence, who also bestowed the gift of resurrection, thus revealing [both]
truths to those who are blind, that is, the resurrection and God [in His true character]. For if He be
not the God of the dead, but of the living, yet was called the God of the fathers who were sleeping,
they do indubitably live to God, and have not passed out of existence, since they are children of
the resurrection. But our Lord is Himself the resurrection, as He does Himself declare, "I am the
resurrection and the life." But the fathers are His children; for it is said by the prophet: "Instead
of thy fathers, thy children have been made to thee." Christ Himself, therefore, together with
the Father, is the God of the living, who spake to Moses, and who was also manifested to the fathers.
3. And teaching this very thing, He said to the Jews: "Your father Abraham rejoiced that he
should see my day; and he saw it, and was glad." What is intended? "Abraham believed God,
and it was imputed unto him for righteousness." In the first place, [he believed] that He was the
maker of heaven and earth, the only God; and in the next place, that He would make his seed as
the stars of heaven. This is what is meant by Paul, [when he says,] "as lights in the world."
under the title of "Bel and the Dragon."