which succeeds it, having pulled up evil-speaking by the roots; and after that,
having amended what yet remains; thus going forward in our course, we shall
come little by little to the very summit of virtue; and we shall escape the present
danger; and shall make God propitious; and the multitude will come back again
to our city; and we shall teach the fugitives that we are to place our hopes of
safety neither in security of place, nor in flight and retirement; but in piety of
soul, and in virtue of manners. And thus shall we obtain the good things of this
and of the future life; which, God grant! We may all be found worthy of, by the
grace and loving-kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom and with
whom be glory to the Father, together with the Holy Ghost, now and for ever and
ever. Amen.

## Homily 5 on the Statues
The exhortation of the last Homily is continued in this. The people are
exhorted to bear with fortitude the impending wrath of the Emperor. The
cases of Job and the Ninevites are referred to as examples. It is shown that
men ought not to fear death, but sin. What it is to die miserably is
explained; and the Homily concludes with an earnest dissuasive against the
use of oaths.
1. The discourse concerning the three young men, and the Babylonian
furnace, did, as it would seem, yesterday give no small comfort to your Charity;
and still more the example in the case of Job, and that dunghill more to be
venerated than any kingly throne. For from seeing a royal throne no advantage
results to the spectators, but only a temporary pleasure, which has no profit; but
from the sight of Job's dunghill, one may derive every kind of benefit, yea, much
divine wisdom and consolation, in order to patience. Therefore to this day many
undertake a long pilgrimage, even across the sea, hastening from the extremities
of the earth, as far as Arabia, that they may see that dunghill; and having beheld
it, may kiss the land, which contained the wrestling-ground of such a victor, and
received the blood that was more precious than all gold! For the purple shines
not so brilliantly, as did that body when dyed not in another's blood, but in its
own! Even those very wounds were more precious than all manner of jewels!
For the nature of pearls is of no help to our life; nor do they satisfy any
necessary want on the part of those who have them. But those wounds are a
consolation for all sadness; and that you may learn this to be the truth, suppose
any one were to lose a beloved and only son. Show him ten thousand pearls, and
you will not console his grief, or lighten his anguish; but recall to his mind the
wounds of Job, and you would easily be able to minister comfort by speaking
thus: "Why do you sorrow, O man? You have lost one son; but that blessed man,

after he had been bereaved of the whole family of his children, both received a
plague in his own flesh, and sat down naked upon the dunghill, streaming with
gore from every part, and his flesh gradually wasting away; even he who was
just, and true, so devout a man, who stained from every evil deed, and had even
God for a witness to his virtue." By speaking thus you would extinguish all the
sufferer's sadness, and remove all his distress. Thus the wounds of the just man
become more useful than pearls!
2. Figure to yourselves then this wrestler; and imagine that you see that
dunghill, and himself sitting in the midst of it! That golden statue! set with
gems! I know not how to express it: for I am unable to find any material so
precious as to compare it with that body stained with blood! So far above every
substance, however costly, was the nature of that flesh, beyond all comparison
more precious, and those wounds more splendid than the sun's beams; for these
illumine the eyes of the body; but those enlighten the eyes of the mind! Those
struck the devil with utter blindness! Therefore it was, that after that blow, he
started back and appeared no more. And do thou, O beloved, learn thence too
what advantage there is in tribulation! For when the just man was rich, and
enjoyed ease, he had the means of accusing him. However falsely, yet still he
had it in his power to say, "Does Job serve you for nought?" But after he had
stripped him and made him poor, he dared not even open his mouth any more.
When he was wealthy, he prepared to wrestle with him, and threatened to
overthrow him; but when he had made him poor, and taken away all he had, and
thrown him into the deepest distress, then he started back. When indeed his body
was sound, he lifted up his hands against him, but when he had battered his
flesh, then he fled—defeated! Do you see how to the vigilant, poverty is much
better and more beneficial than riches; and infirmity and sickness, than health;
and trial, than tranquillity; inasmuch as it makes the combatants more illustrious
and vigorous?
3. Who has seen or heard of such an astonishing contest? The fighters in
worldly contests, when they have battered the heads of their adversaries, are then