been clear that a period of consolidation, and above all of intensive organization and planning, was becoming increasingly necessary. The new order was expanding rapidly in numbers and in the diverse directions of its personnel and their occupations. Attached though Ignatius was to the 'inner law of divine love' as the guiding principle for himself and his subjects, mounting pressure from his companions and from the papacy, together with the evident dangers of dissipated energy, impelled him to begin the unwelcome task of composing the Constitutions. The problem became crucial with the need for a decision concerning poverty: Ignatius realized that the principles involved were of radical importance. First, there was the complex question of poverty itself: he was sufficiently aware of life's reality to appreciate that absolute poverty might spell the end of the new order by the normal calculus of human probability. Secondly, his own authority would be particularly tested: for the first time he would have to exercise on a grand scale the power so gladly entrusted to him and so reluctantly accepted; for this was only the exordium of the whole book of the Constitutions. And by a cruel twist of fate, the first point appeared to be one in which he would have to revoke a decision already approved by the early companions. Only if the Diary is seen against this background can one understand the apparently excessive hesitation over such a relatively minor matter. The Diary's interest lies in the fact that it shows the first movements of a great soul struggling to enter with determination on a hazardous journey.

## The literary genre

At this point, an explanation of the role of the Diary becomes imperative. The title given to these sheets of paper is not one chosen by the saint himself: and it is in many ways singularly misleading. The famous diarists of world literature, the Pepys, the Boswells, the Evelyns, fall into a certain category

March 12, 1544, is written on 14 folios; the second part, covering almost a year, March 13, 1544 to February 27, 1545, occupies 12 folios. of mind and character: they are remarkable for their acute observation, their constancy, fidelity, industry. Often they are witty, sometimes pedestrian. One is not surprised to find that a methodical, rational trait predominates: one thinks, perhaps unjustly, of a bank-clerk's ledger. It is surprising to find a man of violent passions keeping a diary. And yet the distinctive features of the Spiritual Diary, the elements that give it life and interest, are precisely the diffuse out-pourings, the breaking of the bonds of ordinary experience, and indeed of ordinary diction - the words flow regardless of sentence form, often twisted into phrases of almost unintelligible ambiguity. When eventually the second part of the Diary is reached, the exact contrary seems to happen: the entries are clipped into telegrammatic reiterations. If Ignatius is a diarist, then he must be one of the strangest. There is nothing in his character or circumstances which would explain at least the temporary adoption of such a literary form. Pepys is eminently autobiographical; his diary may begin with a blush and an attempt at secrecy, but very soon he is confiding himself and his doings with relative abandon to his readers. Ignatius was continually pressed by his companions to write an autobiography. He resisted strongly, but eventually submitted when the attack took advantage of his weak flank, his genuine humility. It was then that he dictated a short and incomplete account to his secretary. It is very matter-of-fact, dour and blunt, pitiless and, one cannot help feeling, rather unjust to himself. Few people have succeeded in avoiding making fools of themselves at the start of their conversions; most are only too willing to consign such vagaries to oblivion. The story of his encounter with the moor is a classic example; and it is rewarding to consider that St Ignatius might have been executed for murder before he reached Manresa, had it not been for a mule's whim. The Diary, on the other hand, describes with a fulness and a detail rarely equalled the reception of spiritual gifts which would be the envy of many a canonized saint. What possessed Ignatius to indulge suddenly in a spate of autobiography which is belied by his other express statements? The answer is not to be found in a love for literary composition. Ignatius can reject as wildly improbable in himself the sort of motivation that Augustine perhaps would have acknowledged as part or the secret of his Confessions. The author of the Diary is not a lover of words: he treats them roughly, now sparingly, now in wanton excess; they are seized and hammered into place - rather like the saint's own hand-writing.