SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.85, C.2.

2:1): "When anyone shall offer an oblation of sacrifice to the Lord,
his offering shall be of fine flour." If, on the other hand, it be offered
with a view to its remaining entire and being deputed to the worship
of God or to the use of His ministers, it will be an oblation and not a
sacrifice. Accordingly it is essential to oblations of this kind that
they be offered voluntarily, according to Ex. 25:2, of "every man that
offereth of his own accord you shall take them." Nevertheless it may
happen in four ways that one is bound to make oblations. First, on
account of a previous agreement: as when a person is granted a
portion of Church land, that he may make certain oblations at fixed
times, although this has the character of rent. Secondly, by reason of
a previous assignment or promise; as when a man offers a gift
among the living, or by will bequeaths to the Church something
whether movable or immovable to be delivered at some future time.
Thirdly, on account of the need of the Church, for instance if her
ministers were without means of support. Fourthly, on account of
custom; for the faithful are bound at certain solemn feasts to make
certain customary oblations. In the last two cases, however, the
oblation remains voluntary, as regards, to wit, the quantity or kind of
the thing offered.
Reply to Objection 1: Under the New Law men are not bound to make
oblations on account of legal solemnities, as stated in Exodus, but
on account of certain other reasons, as stated above.
Reply to Objection 2: Some are bound to make oblations, both
before making them, as in the first, third, and. fourth cases, and after
they have made them by assignment or promise: for they are bound
to offer in reality that which has been already offered to the Church
by way of assignment.
Reply to Objection 3: Those who do not make the oblations they are
bound to make may be punished by being deprived of the
sacraments, not by the priest himself to whom the oblations should
be made, lest he seem to exact, something for bestowing the
sacraments, but by someone superior to him.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.85, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether oblations are due to priests alone?

Objection 1: It would seem that oblations are not due to priests
alone. For chief among oblations would seem to be those that are
deputed to the sacrifices of victims. Now whatever is given to the
poor is called a "victim in Scripture according to Heb. 13:16, "Do not
forget to do good and to impart, for by such victims God's favor is
obtained. Much more therefore are oblations due to the poor.
Objection 2: Further, in many parishes monks have a share in the
oblations. Now "the case of clerics is distinct from the case of
monks," as Jerome states [Ep. xiv, ad Heliod.]. Therefore oblations
art not due to priests alone.
Objection 3: Further, lay people with the consent of the Church buy
oblations such as loaves and so forth, and they do so for no other
reason than that they may make use thereof themselves. Therefore
oblations may have reference to the laity.
On the contrary, A canon of Pope Damasus [Damasus I] quoted X,
qu. i [Can. Hanc consuetudinem], says: "None but the priests whom
day by day we see serving the Lord may eat and drink of the
oblations which are offered within the precincts of the Holy Church:
because in the Old Testament the Lord forbade the children of Israel
to eat the sacred loaves, with the exception of Aaron and his
sons" (Lev. 24:8,9).
I answer that, The priest is appointed mediator and stands, so to
speak, "between" the people and God, as we read of Moses (Dt. 5:5),
wherefore it belongs to him to set forth the Divine teachings and
sacraments before the people; and besides to offer to the Lord
things appertaining to the people, their prayers, for instance, their
sacrifices and oblations. Thus the Apostle says (Heb. 5:1): "Every
high priest taken from among men is ordained for men in the things
that appertain to God, that he may offer up gifts and sacrifices for
sins." Hence the oblations which the people offer to God concern the
priests, not only as regards their turning them to their own use, but
also as regards the faithful dispensation thereof, by spending them
partly on things appertaining to the Divine worship, partly on things
touching their own livelihood (since they that serve the altar partake
with the altar, according to 1 Cor. 9:13), and partly for the good of the