fount of tears watered souls, not earth. If one were to show us Paul bathed in
tears, and groaning, would not this be better far to see, than countless choirs
gayly crowned? I am not now speaking of you; but, if one, having pulled away
from the theater and the stage some wanton fellow, burning and drunken with
carnal love, were to show him a young virgin in the very flower of her age,
surpassing her fellows, both in other respects, and in her face more than the rest
of her person, having an eye, tender and soft, that gently rests, and gently rolls,
moist, mild, calmly smiling, and arrayed in much modesty and much grace,
fringed with dark lashes both under and over, having an eyeball, so to speak,
alive, a forehead radiant; underneath, again, a cheek shaded to exact redness,
lying smooth as marble, and even; and then any one should show me Paul
weeping; leaving that maiden, I would have eagerly sprung away to the sight of
him; for from his eyes there beamed spiritual beauty. For that other transports the
souls of youths, it scorches and inflames them; but this, on the contrary, subdues
them. This makes the eyes of the soul more beauteous, it curbs the belly: it fills
with the love of wisdom, with much sympathy: and it is able to soften even a
soul of adamant. With these tears the Church is watered, with these souls are
planted; yea, though there be fire sensible and substantial, yet can these tears
quench it; these tears quench the fiery darts of the wicked one.
Remember we then these tears of his, and we shall laugh to scorn all
present things. These tears did Christ pronounce blessed, saying, "Blessed are
they that mourn, and blessed are they that weep, for they shall laugh." [Matthew
5:4; Luke 6:21] Such tears did Isaiah too, and Jeremiah weep; and the former
said, "Leave me alone, I will weep bitterly" [Isaiah 22:4, Septuagint]: and the
latter, "Who will give my head water, and my eyes fountains of tears?" [Jeremiah
9:1]; as though the natural fount were not enough.
Nothing is sweeter than these tears; sweeter are they than any laughter.
They that mourn, know how great consolation it possesses. Let us not think this
a thing to be deprecated, but one to be even exceedingly prayed for; not that
others may sin, but that, when they sin, we may be heart-broken for them.

Remember we these tears, these bonds. Surely too upon those bonds tears
descended; but the death of the perishing, of those that had bound him in them,
suffered him not to taste the pleasure of the bonds. For in their behalf he grieved,
being a disciple of Him that bewept the priests of the Jews; not because they
were going to crucify Him, but because they were themselves perishing. And He
does not this Himself alone, but He thus exhorts others also, saying, "Daughters
of Jerusalem, weep not for Me." [Luke 23:28] These eyes saw Paradise, saw the
third heaven: but I count not them so blessed because of this sight, as because of
those tears, through which they saw Christ. Blessed, indeed, was that sight; for
he himself even glories in it, saying, "Have I not seen Jesus Christ our Lord?" [1
Corinthians 9:1]; but more blessed so to weep.
In that sight many have been partakers, and those who have not so been,
Christ the rather calls blessed, saying, "Blessed are they that have not seen, and
yet have believed" [John 20:29]; but unto this not many have attained. For if to
stay here for Christ's sake were more needful than to depart to Him [Philippians
1:23-24], for the sake of the salvation of others; surely then to groan for others'
sakes, is more needful even than to see Him. For if for His sake to be in hell, is
rather to be desired, than to be with Him; and to be separated from Him for His
sake more to be desired than to be with Him, (for this is what he said, "For I
could wish that I myself were anathema from Christ" [Romans 9:3], much more
is weeping for His sake. "I ceased not," he says, "to admonish everyone with
tears." [Acts 20:31] Wherefore? Not fearing the dangers; no; but as if one sitting
by a sick man's side, and not knowing what would be the end, should weep for
affection, fearing lest he should lose his life; so too did he; when he saw any one
diseased, and could not prevail by rebuke, he thenceforward wept. So did Christ
also, that happily they might reverence His tears: thus, one sinned, He rebuked
him; the rebuked spat upon Him, and sprang aloof; He wept, that haply He might
win him even so.
Remember we these tears: thus let us bring up our daughters, thus our sons;
weeping when we see them in evil. As many women as wish to be loved, let