intense desire, but he leaves him to an eager and longing expectation of what he
shall hear. "And when the Angel which spoke unto Cornelius was departed, he
called two of his household servants, and a devout soldier of them that waited on
him continually; and when he had declared all these things unto them, he sent
them to Joppa." (v. 7, 8.) Do you see, that it is not without purpose that the
writer says this? (it shows) that those also "who waited on him continually" were
such as he. "And when he had declared the whole matter unto them:" observe the
unassuming character of the man: for he does not say, Call Peter to me: but, in
order also to induce him to come, he declared the whole matter:— this was so
ordered by Providence;— for he did not choose to use the authority of his rank
to fetch Peter to him; therefore "he declared the matter;" such was the
moderation of the man: and yet no great notion was to be formed of one lodging
with a tanner. "And on the morrow, as they journeyed, and drew near to the city"
[Acts 10:9]— observe how the Spirit connects the times: no sooner than this, and
no later, He Causes this to take place— "Peter about the sixth hour went up upon
the housetop to pray:" that is, privately and quietly, as in an upper chamber.
"And he became very hungry, and would have eaten; but while they made ready,
there fell upon him a trance." [Acts 10:10] What means this expression, [ἔ]
[κστασις], "trance?" Rather, there was presented to him a kind of spiritual view
([θεωρία]): the soul, so to say, was caused to be out of the body ([ἐ] [ξέστη]).
"And saw heaven opened, and, knit at the four corners, a certain vessel
descending unto him, as it had been a great sheet, and let down to the earth:
wherein were all manner of fourfooted beasts of the earth, and wild beasts, and
creeping things, and fowls of the air. And there came a voice to him, Rise, Peter;
kill, and eat. But Peter said, Not so, Lord; for I have never eaten anything that is
common or unclean. And the voice spoke unto him again the second time, What
God has cleansed, that call not thou common. This was done thrice: and the
vessel was received up again into heaven." [Acts 10:11-16] What is this? It is a
symbol of the whole world. The man was uncircumcised: and — for he had
nothing in common with the Jews— they would all accuse him as a transgressor:

"you went in to men uncircumcised, and ate with them: [Acts 11:3]" this was a
thing altogether offensive to them: observe then what is providentially managed.
He himself also says, "I have never eaten:" not being himself afraid— far be the
thought from us— but it is so contrived by the Spirit, in order that he may have it
to say in answer to those accusing him, that he did object: for it was altogether
necessary for them to observe the Law. He was in the act of being sent to the
Gentiles: therefore that these also may not accuse him, see how many things are
contrived (by the Providence of God). For, that it may not seem to be a mere
fancy, "this was done thrice. I said," says he, "Not so, Lord, for I have never
eaten anything common or unclean.— And the voice came unto him, What God
has cleansed, that call not thou common." [ch. 11:8, with 10:14] It seems indeed
to be spoken to him, but the whole is meant for the Jews. For if the teacher is
rebuked, much more these. The earth then, this is what the linen sheet denotes,
and the wild beasts in it, are they of the Gentiles, and the command, "Kill and
eat," denotes that he must go to them also; and that this thing is thrice done,
denotes baptism. "What God has cleansed," says it, "call not thou common."
Great daring! Wherefore did he object? That none may say that God was proving
him, as in the case of Abraham, this is why he says, "Not so, Lord," etc. not
gainsaying— just as to Philip also He said, "How many loaves do you have?"
Not to learn, but tempting, or "proving him." And yet it was the same (Lord) that
had discoursed above (in the Law) concerning things clean and unclean. But in
that sheet were also "all the four-footed beasts of the earth:" the clean with the
unclean. And for all this, he knew not what it meant. "Now while Peter doubted
in himself what this vision which he had seen should mean, behold, the men
which were sent from Cornelius had made enquiry for Simon's house, and stood
before the gate, and called, and asked whether Simon, which was surnamed
Peter, were lodged there. But while Peter," it says, "doubted in himself" (v. 17,
18), the men come at the right moment to solve his doubt: just as (the Lord)
suffered Joseph first to be perturbed in mind, and then sends the Angel: for the
soul with ease accepts the solution, when it has first been in perplexity. His