lessons long enough, and you must henceforth press on to such as are higher
than these."
And it is well that He does not disturb the order of the commandments, but
begins first with that which comes earlier, with which the law also began. Yea,
for this too suits with one showing the harmony between them.
"But I say unto you, that whosoever is angry with his brother without a
cause, shall be in danger of the judgment."
Do you see authority in perfection? Do you see a bearing suited to a
legislator? Why, which among prophets ever spoke on this wise? Which among
righteous men? Which among patriarchs? None; but, "Thus says the Lord." But
the Son not so. Because they were publishing their Master's commands, He His
Father's. And when I say, "His Father's," I mean His own. "For mine," says He,
"are yours, and yours are mine." [John 17:10] And they had their fellowservants to legislate for, He His own servants.
Let us now ask those who reject the law, "is, 'Be not angry' contrary to 'Do
no murder'? Or is not the one commandment the completion and the
development of the other?" Clearly the one is the fulfilling of the other, and that
is greater on this very account. Since he who is not stirred up to anger, will much
more refrain from murder; and he who bridles wrath will much more keep his
hands to himself. For wrath is the root of murder. And you see that He who cuts
up the root will much more remove the branches; or rather, will not permit them
so much as to shoot out at all. Not therefore to abolish the law did He make these
enactments, but for the more complete observation of it. For with what design
did the law enjoin these things? Was it not, that no one might slay his neighbor?
It follows, that he who was opposing the law would have to enjoin murder. For
to murder, were the contrary to doing no murder. But if He does not suffer one
even to be angry, the mind of the law is established by Him more completely.
For he that studies to avoid murder will not refrain from it equally with him that
has put away even anger; this latter being further removed from the crime.
8. But that we may convict them in another way also, let us bring forward

all their allegations. What then do they affirm? They assert that the God who
made the world, who "makes His sun to rise on the evil and on the good, who
sends the rain on the just and on the unjust," is in some sense an evil being. But
the more moderate (forsooth) among them, though declining this, yet while they
affirm Him to be just, they deprive Him of being good. And some other one,
who is not, nor made any of the things that are, they assign for a Father to Christ.
And they say that he, who is not good, abides in his own, and preserves what are
his own; but that He, that is good, seeks what are another's, and desires of a
sudden to become a Saviour to them whose Creator He was not. Do you see the
children of the devil, how they speak out of the fountain of their father,
alienating the work of creation from God: while John cries out, "He came unto
His own," and, "The world was made by Him?"
In the next place, they criticise the law in the old covenant, which bids put
out "an eye for an eye," and "a tooth for a tooth;" and straightway they insult
and say, "Why, how can He be good who speaks so?"
What then do we say in answer to this? That it is the highest kind of
philanthropy. For He made this law, not that we might strike out one another's
eyes, but that fear of suffering by others might restrain us from doing any such
thing to them. As therefore He threatened the Ninevites with overthrow, not that
He might destroy them, (for had that been His will, He ought to have been
silent), but that He might by fear make them better, and so quiet His wrath: so
also has He appointed a punishment for those who wantonly assail the eyes of
others, that if good principle dispose them not to refrain from such cruelty, fear
may restrain them from injuring their neighbors' sight.
And if this be cruelty, it is cruelty also for the murderer to be restrained, and
the adulterer checked. But these are the sayings of senseless men, and of those
that are mad to the extreme of madness. For I, so far from saying that this comes
of cruelty, should say, that the contrary to this would be unlawful, according to
men's reckoning. And whereas, you say, Because He commanded to pluck out
"an eye for an eye," therefore He is cruel; I say, that if He had not given this