clerics, celebrate synods, consecrate chrism, bless vestments and
vessels.
We may also say that the "stockings" signify his upright walk; the
"sandals" which cover the feet, his contempt of earthly things; the
"succinctory" which girds the stole with the alb, his love of probity;
the "tunic," perseverance, for Joseph is said (Gn. 37:23) to have had
a long tunic---"talaric," because it reached down to the ankles [talos],
which denote the end of life; the "dalmatic," generosity in works of
mercy; the "gloves," prudence in action; the "mitre," knowledge of
both Testaments, for which reason it has two crests; the "crozier,"
his pastoral care, whereby he has to gather together the wayward
(this is denoted by the curve at the head of the crozier), to uphold the
weak (this is denoted by the stem of the crozier), and to spur on the
laggards (this is denoted by the point at the foot of the crozier).
Hence the line:
"Gather, uphold, spur on
The wayward, the weak, and the laggard." The "ring" signifies the
sacraments of that faith whereby the Church is espoused to Christ.
For bishops are espoused to the Church in the place of Christ.
Furthermore archbishops have the "pallium" in sign of their
privileged power, for it signifies the golden chain which those who
fought rightfully were wont to receive.
Reply to Objection 1: The priests of the Old Law were enjoined
continency only for the time of their attendance for the purpose of
their ministry. Wherefore as a sign of the chastity which they had
then to observe, they wore the breeches while offering sacrifices.
But the ministers of the New Testament are enjoined perpetual
continency; and so the comparison fails.
Reply to Objection 2: The mitre was not a sign of dignity, for it was a
kind of hat, as Jerome says (Ep. ad Fabiol.). But the diadem which
was a sign of dignity was given to the pontiffs alone, as the mitre is
now.
Reply to Objection 3: The power of the ministers resides in the
bishop as their source, but not in the priest, for he does not confer
those Orders. Wherefore the bishop, rather than the priest, wears
those vestments.

Reply to Objection 4: Instead of the ephod, they wear the stole,
which is intended for the same signification as the ephod.
Reply to Objection 5: The pallium takes the place of the "rational."
Reply to Objection 6: Instead of that plate our pontiff wears the
cross, as Innocent III says (De Myst. Miss. i), just as the breeches are
replaced by the sandals, the linen garment by the alb, the belt by the
girdle, the long or talaric garment by the tunic, the ephod by the
amice, the "rational" by the pallium, the diadem by the mitre.
Reply to Objection 7: Although he has not another kind of power he
has the same power more fully. and so in order to designate this
perfection, he receives the pallium which surrounds him on all sides.
Reply to Objection 8: The Roman Pontiff does not use a pastoral
staff because Peter sent his to restore to life a certain disciple who
afterwards became bishop of Treves. Hence in the diocese of Treves
the Pope carries a crozier but not elsewhere; or else it is a sign of his
not having a restricted power denoted by the curve of the staff.