FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.74, C.3.

evils, by reason of which they can be the subject of virtue, vice, and
sin, in so far as they partake of will and reason.
Reply to Objection 3: The members of the body are not principles but
merely organs of action: wherefore they are compared to the soul
which moves them, as a slave who is moved but moves no other. On
the other hand, the internal appetitive powers are compared to
reason as free agents, because they both act and are acted upon, as
is made clear in Polit. i, 3. Moreover, the acts of the external
members are actions that pass into external matter, as may be seen
in the blow that is inflicted in the sin of murder. Consequently there
is no comparison.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.74, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether there can be sin in the sensuality?

Objection 1: It would seem that there cannot be sin in the sensuality.
For sin is proper to man who is praised or blamed for his actions.
Now sensuality is common to us and irrational animals. Therefore
sin cannot be in the sensuality.
Objection 2: Further, "no man sins in what he cannot avoid," as
Augustine states (De Lib. Arb. iii, 18). But man cannot prevent the
movement of the sensuality from being inordinate, since "the
sensuality ever remains corrupt, so long as we abide in this mortal
life; wherefore it is signified by the serpent," as Augustine declares
(De Trin. xii, 12,13). Therefore the inordinate movement of the
sensuality is not a sin.
Objection 3: Further, that which man himself does not do is not
imputed to him as a sin. Now "that alone do we seem to do
ourselves, which we do with the deliberation of reason," as the
Philosopher says (Ethic. ix, 8). Therefore the movement of the
sensuality, which is without the deliberation of reason, is not
imputed to a man as a sin.
On the contrary, It is written (Rm. 7:19): "The good which I will I do
not; but the evil which I will not, that I do": which words Augustine
explains (Contra Julian. iii, 26; De Verb. Apost. xii, 2,3), as referring
to the evil of concupiscence, which is clearly a movement of the
sensuality. Therefore there can be sin in the sensuality.
I answer that, As stated above (Articles 2,3), sin may be found in any
power whose act can be voluntary and inordinate, wherein consists
the nature of sin. Now it is evident that the act of the sensuality, or
sensitive appetite, is naturally inclined to be moved by the will.
Wherefore it follows that sin can be in the sensuality.
Reply to Objection 1: Although some of the powers of the sensitive
part are common to us and irrational animals, nevertheless, in us,
they have a certain excellence through being united to the reason;
thus we surpass other animals in the sensitive part for as much as
we have the powers of cogitation and reminiscence, as stated in the
FP, Question 78, Article 4. In the same way our sensitive appetite
surpasses that of other animals by reason of a certain excellence