SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.26, C.3.

suddenly, as happens to us if we look on at a boxing-match, and we
wish one of the boxers to win. But the love, which is in the
intellective appetite, also differs from goodwill, because it denotes a
certain union of affections between the lover and the beloved, in as
much as the lover deems the beloved as somewhat united to him, or
belonging to him, and so tends towards him. On the other hand,
goodwill is a simple act of the will, whereby we wish a person well,
even without presupposing the aforesaid union of the affections with
him. Accordingly, to love, considered as an act of charity, includes
goodwill, but such dilection or love adds union of affections,
wherefore the Philosopher says (Ethic. ix, 5) that "goodwill is a
beginning of friendship."
Reply to Objection 1: The Philosopher, by thus defining "to love,"
does not describe it fully, but mentions only that part of its definition
in which the act of love is chiefly manifested.
Reply to Objection 2: To love is indeed an act of the will tending to
the good, but it adds a certain union with the beloved, which union is
not denoted by goodwill.
Reply to Objection 3: These things mentioned by the Philosopher
belong to friendship because they arise from a man's love for
himself, as he says in the same passage, in so far as a man does all
these things in respect of his friend, even as he does them to
himself: and this belongs to the aforesaid union of the affections.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.26, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether out of charity God ought to be loved for

Himself?
Objection 1: It would seem that God is loved out of charity, not for
Himself but for the sake of something else. For Gregory says in a
homily (In Evang. xi): "The soul learns from the things it knows, to
love those it knows not," where by things unknown he means the
intelligible and the Divine, and by things known he indicates the
objects of the senses. Therefore God is to be loved for the sake of
something else.
Objection 2: Further, love follows knowledge. But God is known
through something else, according to Rm. 1:20: "The invisible things
of God are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are
made." Therefore He is also loved on account of something else and
not for Himself.
Objection 3: Further, "hope begets charity" as a gloss says on Mt.
1:1, and "fear leads to charity," according to Augustine in his
commentary on the First Canonical Epistle of John (In prim. canon.
Joan. Tract. ix). Now hope looks forward to obtain something from
God, while fear shuns something which can be inflicted by God.
Therefore it seems that God is to be loved on account of some good
we hope for, or some evil to be feared. Therefore He is not to be
loved for Himself.
On the contrary, According to Augustine (De Doctr. Christ. i), to
enjoy is to cleave to something for its own sake. Now "God is to be
enjoyed" as he says in the same book. Therefore God is to be loved
for Himself.
I answer that, The preposition "for" denotes a relation of causality.
Now there are four kinds of cause, viz., final, formal, efficient, and
material, to which a material disposition also is to be reduced,
though it is not a cause simply but relatively. According to these four
different causes one thing is said to be loved for another. In respect
of the final cause, we love medicine, for instance, for health; in
respect of the formal cause, we love a man for his virtue, because, to
wit, by his virtue he is formally good and therefore lovable; in
respect of the efficient cause, we love certain men because, for
instance, they are the sons of such and such a father; and in respect