Hath listlessness excited the wrath? Let us shake this off by zeal, and let us
manifest in our conduct a great change. We have the fast, a very great auxiliary
and ally in our warfare; and besides the fast, we have the impending distress, and
the fear of danger. Now then, in season, let us be at work on the soul; for we
shall easily be able to persuade it to whatever we choose; since he who is
alarmed and trembling, and set free from all luxury, and who lives in terror, is
able to practise moral wisdom without difficulty, and to receive the seeds of
virtue with much alacrity.
20. Let us therefore persuade it to make this first change for the better, by
the avoidance of oaths; for although I spoke to you yesterday, and the day
before, on this same subject; yet neither today, nor tomorrow, nor the day after,
will I desist giving my counsel on this subject. And why do I say tomorrow and
the day following? Until I see that you are amended, I will not abstain from
doing so. If those, indeed, who transgress this law, are not ashamed, far less
should we who bid them not transgress it, feel this frequency of the admonition
to be a matter worthy of shame. For to be continually reminding men of the same
topics is not the fault of the speaker, but of the hearers, needing as they do
perpetual instruction, upon simple and easily-observed precepts. What indeed is
easier than not to swear? It is only a good work of habit. It is neither labour of
the body, nor expenditure of wealth. Are you desirous to learn how it is possible
to get the better of this infirmity, how it is possible to be set free from this evil
habit? I will tell you of a particular method by which if pursued you will
certainly master it. If you see either yourself or any other person, whether it be
one of your servants, or of your children, or your wife, ensnared in this vice;
when you have continually reminded them of it, and they are not amended, order
them to retire to rest supperless; and impose this sentence upon yourself, as well
as upon them, a sentence which will bring with it no injury, but a gain. For such
is the nature of spiritual acts; they bring profit and a speedy reformation. The
tongue when constantly punished, when straitened by thirst. and pained by
hunger, receives a sufficient admonition, even while no one is its monitor; and

though we were the most stupid of mortals, yet when we are thus reminded by
the greatness of the punishment during a whole day, we shall need no other
counsel and exhortation.
21. You have applauded what I have spoken. But still show me your
applause too by deeds. Else what is the advantage of our meeting here? Suppose
a child were to go to school every day, yet if he learned nothing the more for it,
would the excuse satisfy us that he every day went there? Should we not esteem
it the greatest fault, that going there daily, he did it to no purpose. Let us consider
this with ourselves, and let us say to ourselves, For so long a time have we met
together at church, having the benefit of a most solemn Communion, which has
in it much profit; and should we return back again just as we came, with none of
our defects corrected, of what advantage is our coming here? For most actions
are done, not for themselves, but for the effects which follow through their
means; as, for example, the sower does not sow for the mere sake of sowing, but
in order that he may reap too; since if this were not to follow, the sowing would
be a loss, the seeds rotting without any kind of advantage. The merchant does
not take a voyage merely for sailing's sake, but that he may increase his
substance by going abroad; since, if this be not attained beside, extreme mischief
will result, and the voyage of merchants were but for loss. Let us indeed consider
this in relation to ourselves. We also meet together in the church, not for the
mere purpose of spending time here, but in order that we may return having
gained a great and spiritual benefit. Should we then depart empty, and without
having received any advantage, this our diligence becomes our condemnation! In
order that this may not occur, and extreme mischief result, on departing from this
place, let friends practise with one another; fathers with children; and masters
with servants; and train yourselves to perform the task assigned you; so that
when you come back again, and hear us giving you counsel on the same
subjects, you may not be put to shame by an accusing conscience, but may
rejoice and be glad, while ye perceive that you have accomplished the greatest
part of the admonition.