information from the story of times and places?"
But that Augustine did not understand all things to be known in their
"eternal types" or in the "unchangeable truth," as though the eternal
types themselves were seen, is clear from what he says (Questions.
83, qu. 46)---viz. that "not each and every rational soul can be said to
be worthy of that vision," namely, of the eternal types, "but only
those that are holy and pure," such as the souls of the blessed.
From what has been said the objections are easily solved.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether intellectual knowledge is derived from

sensible things?
Objection 1: It would seem that intellectual knowledge is not derived
from sensible things. For Augustine says (Questions. 83, qu. 9) that
"we cannot expect to learn the fulness of truth from the senses of
the body." This he proves in two ways. First, because "whatever the
bodily senses reach, is continually being changed; and what is never
the same cannot be perceived." Secondly, because, "whatever we
perceive by the body, even when not present to the senses, may be
present to the imagination, as when we are asleep or angry: yet we
cannot discern by the senses, whether what we perceive be the
sensible object or the deceptive image thereof. Now nothing can be
perceived which cannot be distinguished from its counterfeit." And
so he concludes that we cannot expect to learn the truth from the
senses. But intellectual knowledge apprehends the truth. Therefore
intellectual knowledge cannot be conveyed by the senses.
Objection 2: Further, Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. xii, 16): "We must
not thing that the body can make any impression on the spirit, as
though the spirit were to supply the place of matter in regard to the
body's action; for that which acts is in every way more excellent than
that which it acts on." Whence he concludes that "the body does not
cause its image in the spirit, but the spirit causes it in itself."
Therefore intellectual knowledge is not derived from sensible things.
Objection 3: Further, an effect does not surpass the power of its
cause. But intellectual knowledge extends beyond sensible things:
for we understand some things which cannot be perceived by the
senses. Therefore intellectual knowledge is not derived from
sensible things.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Metaph. i, 1; Poster. ii, 15)
that the principle of knowledge is in the senses.
I answer that, On this point the philosophers held three opinions. For
Democritus held that "all knowledge is caused by images issuing
from the bodies we think of and entering into our souls," as
Augustine says in his letter to Dioscorus (cxviii, 4). And Aristotle
says (De Somn. et Vigil.) that Democritus held that knowledge is
cause by a "discharge of images." And the reason for this opinion

was that both Democritus and the other early philosophers did not
distinguish between intellect and sense, as Aristotle relates (De
Anima iii, 3). Consequently, since the sense is affected by the
sensible, they thought that all our knowledge is affected by this mere
impression brought about by sensible things. Which impression
Democritus held to be caused by a discharge of images.
Plato, on the other hand, held that the intellect is distinct from the
senses: and that it is an immaterial power not making use of a
corporeal organ for its action. And since the incorporeal cannot be
affected by the corporeal, he held that intellectual knowledge is not
brought about by sensible things affecting the intellect, but by
separate intelligible forms being participated by the intellect, as we
have said above (Articles 4,5). Moreover he held that sense is a
power operating of itself. Consequently neither is sense, since it is a
spiritual power, affected by the sensible: but the sensible organs are
affected by the sensible, the result being that the soul is in a way
roused to form within itself the species of the sensible. Augustine
seems to touch on this opinion (Gen. ad lit. xii, 24) where he says
that the "body feels not, but the soul through the body, which it
makes use of as a kind of messenger, for reproducing within itself
what is announced from without." Thus according to Plato, neither
does intellectual knowledge proceed from sensible knowledge, nor
sensible knowledge exclusively from sensible things; but these
rouse the sensible soul to the sentient act, while the senses rouse
the intellect to the act of understanding.
Aristotle chose a middle course. For with Plato he agreed that
intellect and sense are different. But he held that the sense has not
its proper operation without the cooperation of the body; so that to
feel is not an act of the soul alone, but of the "composite." And he
held the same in regard to all the operations of the sensitive part.
Since, therefore, it is not unreasonable that the sensible objects
which are outside the soul should produce some effect in the
"composite," Aristotle agreed with Democritus in this, that the
operations of the sensitive part are caused by the impression of the
sensible on the sense: not by a discharge, as Democritus said, but
by some kind of operation. For Democritus maintained that every
operation is by way of a discharge of atoms, as we gather from De
Gener. i, 8. But Aristotle held that the intellect has an operation
which is independent of the body's cooperation. Now nothing
corporeal can make an impression on the incorporeal. And therefore
in order to cause the intellectual operation according to Aristotle, the