through even to heaven.'
4. Then after this he led on to Faith also, that there might not only be hope,
but a very true [hope]. For after the oath he lays down another thing too, even
proof by facts, because "the forerunner is for us entered in, even Jesus ." But a
forerunner is a forerunner of some one, as John was of Christ.
Now he did not simply say, "He is entered in," but "where He is entered in
a forerunner for us," as though we also ought to attain. For there is no great
interval between the forerunner and those who follow: otherwise he would not
be a forerunner; for the forerunner and those who follow ought to be in the same
road, and to arrive after [each other].
"Being made an High Priest forever after the order," he says, "of
Melchisedec." Here is also another consolation, if our High Priest is on high, and
far better than those among the Jews, not in the kind [of Priesthood] only, but
also in the place, and the tabernacle, and the covenant, and the person. And this
also is spoken according to the flesh.
5. Those then, whose High Priest He is, ought to be greatly superior. And as
great as the difference is between Aaron and Christ, so great should it be
between us and the Jews. For see, we have our victim on high, our priest on
high, our sacrifice on high: let us bring such sacrifices as can be offered on that
altar, no longer sheep and oxen, no longer blood and fat. All these things have
been done away; and there has been brought in their stead "the reasonable
service." [Romans 12:1] But what is "the reasonable service"? The [offerings
made] through the soul; those made through the spirit. ("God," it is said, "is a
Spirit, and they that worship Him must worship Him in spirit and in truth" [John
4:24]); things which have no need of a body, no need of instruments, nor of
special places, whereof each one is himself the Priest, such as, moderation,
temperance, mercifulness, enduring ill-treatment, long-suffering, humbleness of
mind.
These sacrifices one may see in the Old [Testament] also, shadowed out
beforehand. "Offer to God," it is said, "a sacrifice of righteousness" [Psalm 4:5];

"Offer a sacrifice of praise" [Psalm 50:14]; and, "a sacrifice of praise shall
glorify Me" [Psalm 50:23], and, "the sacrifice of God is a broken spirit" [Psalm
51:17]; and "what does the Lord require of you but" to hearken to Him? [Micah
6:8] "Burnt-offerings and sacrifices for sin You have had no pleasure in: then I
said, Lo I come to do Your will, O God!" [Psalm 40:6-7], and again, "To what
purpose do ye bring the incense from Sheba?" [Jeremiah 6:20] "Take away from
Me the noise of your songs, for I will not hear the melody of your viols." [Amos
5:23] But instead of these "I will have mercy and not sacrifice." [Hosea 6:6] You
see with what kind of "sacrifices God is well pleased." [Hebrews 13:16] You see
also that already from the first the one class have given place, and these have
come in their stead.
These therefore let us bring, for the other indeed are [the offerings] of
wealth and of persons who have [possessions], but these of virtue: those from
without, these from within: those any chance person even might perform; these
only a few. And as much as a man is superior to a sheep, so much is this sacrifice
superior to that; for here you offer your soul as a victim.
6. And other sacrifices also there are, which are indeed whole burntofferings, the bodies of the martyrs: there both soul and body [are offered].
These have a great savor of a sweet smell. Thou also art able, if you will, to
bring such a sacrifice.
For what, if you dost not burn your body in the fire? Yet in a different fire
you can, for instance, in that of voluntary poverty, in that of affliction. For to
have it in one's power to spend one's days in luxury and expense, and yet to take
up a life of toil and bitterness, and to mortify the body, is not this a whole burntoffering? Mortify your body, and crucify it, and you shall yourself also receive
the crown of this martyrdom. For what in the other case the sword accomplishes,
that in this case let a willing mind effect. Let not the love of wealth burn, or
possess you, but let this unreasonable appetite itself be consumed and quenched
by the fire of the Spirit; let it be cut in pieces by the sword of the Spirit.
This is an excellent sacrifice, needing no priest but him who brings it. This