impressions of the agent. Hence, for instance, it happens that on
account of an unhealthy tongue sweet seems bitter to a sick person.
But as to common objects of sense, and accidental objects, even a
rightly disposed sense may have a false judgment, because it is
referred to them not directly, but accidentally, or as a consequence
of being directed to other things.
Reply to Objection 1: The affection of sense is its sensation itself.
Hence, from the fact that sense reports as it is affected, it follows
that we are not deceived in the judgment by which we judge that we
experience sensation. Since, however, sense is sometimes affected
erroneously of that object, it follows that it sometimes reports
erroneously of that object; and thus we are deceived by sense about
the object, but not about the fact of sensation.
Reply to Objection 2: Falsity is said not to be proper to sense, since
sense is not deceived as to its proper object. Hence in another
translation it is said more plainly, "Sense, about its proper object, is
never false." Falsity is attributed to the imagination, as it represents
the likeness of something even in its absence. Hence, when anyone
perceives the likeness of a thing as if it were the thing itself, falsity
results from such an apprehension; and for this reason the
Philosopher says (Metaph. v, 34) that shadows, pictures, and dreams
are said to be false inasmuch as they convey the likeness of things
that are not present in substance.
Reply to Objection 3: This argument proves that the false is not in
the sense, as in that which knows the true and the false.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether falsity is in the intellect?

Objection 1: It seems that falsity is not in the intellect. For Augustine
says (Qq. lxxxiii, 32), "Everyone who is deceived, understands not
that in which he is deceived." But falsity is said to exist in any
knowledge in so far as we are deceived therein. Therefore falsity
does not exist in the intellect.
Objection 2: Further, the Philosopher says (De Anima iii, 51) that the
intellect is always right. Therefore there is no falsity in the intellect.
On the contrary, It is said in De Anima iii, 21,22 that "where there is
composition of objects understood, there is truth and falsehood."
But such composition is in the intellect. Therefore truth and
falsehood exist in the intellect.
I answer that, Just as a thing has being by its proper form, so the
knowing faculty has knowledge by the likeness of the thing known.
Hence, as natural things cannot fall short of the being that belongs
to them by their form, but may fall short of accidental or consequent
qualities, even as a man may fail to possess two feet, but not fail to
be a man; so the faculty of knowing cannot fail in knowledge of the
thing with the likeness of which it is informed; but may fail with
regard to something consequent upon that form, or accidental
thereto. For it has been said (Article 2) that sight is not deceived in
its proper sensible, but about common sensibles that are
consequent to that object; or about accidental objects of sense. Now
as the sense is directly informed by the likeness of its proper object,
so is the intellect by the likeness of the essence of a thing. Hence the
intellect is not deceived about the essence of a thing, as neither the
sense about its proper object. But in affirming and denying, the
intellect may be deceived, by attributing to the thing of which it
understands the essence, something which is not consequent upon
it, or is opposed to it. For the intellect is in the same position as
regards judging of such things, as sense is as to judging of
common, or accidental, sensible objects. There is, however, this
difference, as before mentioned regarding truth (Question 16, Article
2), that falsity can exist in the intellect not only because the intellect
is conscious of that knowledge, as it is conscious of truth; whereas
in sense falsity does not exist as known, as stated above (Article 2).