beneficial to those who are in bonds or in affliction. Something of this kind Paul
enjoined to the Corinthians, alluding to which he says, "That there be no
gatherings when I come." [1 Corinthians 16:2] But now everything is done with
a view to luxury, reveling, and pleasure. We have a common seat, a common
table, we have wine in common, and common expenses, but we have no
community of alms. Such were the friendly doings in the time of the Apostles;
they brought all their goods into the common stock. Now I do not require you to
bestow all, but some part. "Let each lay by him in store on the first day of the
week, as God has prospered him," and lay it down as a tribute for the seven days.
In this way give alms, whether more or less. "For you shall not appear before
the Lord empty." [Exodus 23:15] This was said to the Jews, how much more then
to us. For this cause the poor stand before the doors, that no one may enter
empty, but each may do alms at his entrance. You enter to implore mercy. First
show mercy. He that comes later owes the more. For when we have been first, he
that is second pays down more. Make God your debtor, and then offer your
prayers. Lend to Him, and then ask a return, and you shall receive it with usury.
God wills this, and does not retract. If you ask with alms, He holds himself
obliged. If you ask with alms, you lend and receive interest. Yes, I beseech you!
It is not for stretching out your hands you shall be heard! stretch forth your
hands, not to heaven, but to the poor. If you stretch forth your hand to the hands
of the poor, you have reached the very summit of heaven. For He who sits there
receives your alms. But if you lift them up without a gift, you gain nothing. If
the king, arrayed in purple, should come to you and ask an alms, would you not
readily give all that you have? But now when you are entreated through the poor,
not by an earthly but a heavenly King, do you stand regardless, and defer your
gift? What punishment then do you not deserve? For the being heard depends
not upon the lifting up of your hands, nor on the multitude of your words, but
upon your works. For hear the prophet, "When you" spread "forth your hands, I
will hide my eyes from you: yea, when you make many prayers, I will not hear."
[Isaiah 1:15] For he ought to be silent, who needs mercy, and not even to look up

to heaven; he that has confidence may say much. But what says the Scripture,
"Judge for the fatherless, plead for the widow, learn to do good." [Isaiah 1:17] In
this way we shall be heard, though we lift not up our hands, nor utter a word, nor
make request. In these things then let us be zealous, that we may obtain the
promised blessings, through the grace and lovingkindness, etc.

## Homily 2 on Second Timothy

[2 Timothy 1:8-10]
"Be not thou therefore ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, nor of me His
prisoner: but be thou partaker of the afflictions of the Gospel according to the
power of God; Who has saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not
according to our works, but according to His own purpose and grace, which was
given us in Christ Jesus before the world began; but is now made manifest by the
appearing of our Saviour Jesus Christ."
There is nothing worse than that man should measure and judge of divine
things by human reasonings. For thus he will fall from that rock a vast distance,
and be deprived of the light. For if he who wishes with human eyes to apprehend
the rays of the sun will not only not apprehend them, but, besides this failure,
will sustain great injury; so, but in a higher degree, is he in a way to suffer this,
and abusing the gift of God, who would by human reasonings gaze intently on
that Light. Observe accordingly how Marcion, and Manes, and Valentinus, and
others who introduced their heresies and pernicious doctrines into the Church of
God, measuring divine things by human reasonings, became ashamed of the
Divine economy. Yet it was not a subject for shame, but rather for glorying; I
speak of the Cross of Christ. For there is not so great a sign of the love of God
for mankind, not heaven, nor sea, nor earth, nor the creation of all things out of
nothing, nor all else beside, as the Cross. Hence it is the boast of Paul, "God
forbid that I should glory, save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ." [Galatians
6:14] But natural men, and those who attribute to God no more than to human
beings, stumble, and become ashamed. Wherefore Paul from the first exhorts his
disciple, and through him all others, in these words: "Be not thou ashamed of the
testimony of our Lord," that is, "Be not ashamed, that you preach One that was
crucified, but rather glory in it." For in themselves death and imprisonment and