him and approval of what he had done may rather be called a participation in the
things that he had dared. And he said not, "for my sake," but obtains the more
credit for his words, by saying, "because for the work of God," since he acted not
for my sake, but for God's sake "he was near unto death." What then? Though
by the providence of God he died not, yet he himself regarded not his life, and
gave himself up to any suffering that might befall him, so as not to remit his
attendance on me. And if he gave himself up to death to attend on Paul, much
more would he have endured this for the Gospel's sake. Or rather, this also had
been for the Gospel's sake, even to have died for Paul. For we may bind about
our brows the crown of martyrdom, not only by refusing to sacrifice, but such
causes as these also make death martyrdom, and if I may say something
startling, these latter do so far more than the former. For he who dares to face
death for the lesser cause, will much rather for the greater. Let us therefore,
when we see the Saints in danger, regard not our life, for it is impossible without
daring ever to perform any noble act, but need is that he who takes thought
beforehand for his safety here, should fall from that which is to come.
"To supply," he says, "your lack of service toward me." What is this? The
city was not present, but by sending him, it fulfilled through him all service
toward me. He therefore supplied your lack of service, so that for this reason too
he deserves to enjoy much honor, since, what ye all should have done, this has
he performed on your behalf. Here he shows that there is also a foregoing
service rendered by those in safety to those in danger, for so he speaks of the
lack, and the lack of service. Do you see the spirit of the Apostle? These words
spring not from arrogance, but from his great care towards them; for he calls the
matter a "service" and a "lack," that they may not be puffed up, but be moderate,
nor think that they have rendered some great thing, but rather be humbleminded.
For we owe the saints a debt, and are not doing them a favor. For as
supplies are due by those who are in peace and not engaged in war to such as
stand in the army and fight (for these stand on their behoof), thus too is it here.

For if Paul had not taught, who would have cast him into prison? Wherefore we
ought to minister to the Saints. For is it not absurd to contribute to an earthly
king, when engaged in war, all that he wants, as clothing and food, not according
to his need alone, but abundantly, while to the King of Heaven, when engaged in
war, and contending against far more bitter foes (for it is written, "our wrestling
is not against flesh and blood") [Ephesians 6:12], we will not supply urgent
necessity? What folly is this! What ingratitude! What base love of gain! But, as
it seems, the fear of man has greater force with us than hell, and the future
torments. For this cause, in truth, all things are turned upside down; for political
affairs are daily accomplished with much earnestness, and one must not be left
behind, while of spiritual things there is no account taken at all; but the things
which are demanded of us of necessity, and with compulsion, as though we were
slaves, and against our wills, are laid down by us with much readiness, while
such as are asked from willing minds, and as if from free men, are again
deficient. I speak not against all, but against those who are behindhand with
these supplies. For might not God have made these contributions compulsory?
Yet He would not, for He has more care of you than of those whom you support.
Wherefore He would not that you should contribute of necessity, since there is
no recompense. And yet many of those who stand here are lower minded than
the Jews. Consider how great things the Jews gave, tithes, first-fruits, tithes
again, and again other tithes, and besides this thirteenths, and the shekel, and no
one said, how much they devour; for the more they receive, the greater is the
reward. They say not, They receive much, they are gluttons; which words I hear
now from some. They for their part, while they are building houses, and buying
estates, still think they have nothing; but if any priest is clothed in dress more
bright than usual, and enjoys more than what is necessary for his sustenance, or
has an attendant, that he may not be forced himself to act unbecomingly, they set
the matter down for riches. And in truth we are rich even at this rate, and they
admit it against their will; for we, though we have but little, are rich, while they,
though they get everything about them, are poor.