"as though they had none."
Then, having interposed something about the future, he brings back his
speech to the present. For some of his topics are spiritual; as that, "the one cares
about the things which be her husband's, the other about those which be God's."
Others relate to this present life; as, "I would have you to be free from cares."
But still with all this he leaves it to their own choice: inasmuch as he who after
proving what is best goes back to compulsion, seems as if he did not trust his
own statements. Wherefore he rather attracts them by concession, and checks
them as follows:

1 Corinthians 7:35
And this I say for your own profit, not that I may cast a snare upon you, but
for that which is seemly, and that you may attend upon the Lord without
distraction. Let the virgins hear that not by that one point is virginity defined; for
she that is careful about the things of the world cannot be a virgin, nor seemly.
Thus, when he said, "There is difference between a wife and a virgin," he added
this as the difference, and that wherein they are distinguished from each other.
And laying down the definition of a virgin and her that is not a virgin, he names,
not marriage nor continence but leisure from engagements and multiplicity of
engagements. For the evil is not in the cohabitation, but in the impediment to the
strictness of life.

1 Corinthians 7:36-40
"But if any man think that he behaves himself unseemly toward his virgin."
Here he seems to be talking about marriage; but all that he says relates to
virginity; for he allows even a second marriage, saying, "only in the Lord." Now
what means, "in the Lord?" With chastity, with honor: for this is needed every
where, and must be pursued for else we cannot see God.
Now if we have passed lightly by what he says of virginity, let no one
accuse us of negligence; for indeed an entire book has been composed by us
upon this topic and as we have there with all the accuracy which we could, gone
through every branch of the subject, we considered it a waste of words to
introduce it again here. Wherefore, referring the hearer to that work as concerns
these things, we will say this one thing here: We must follow after continence.
For, says he, "follow after peace, and the sanctification without which no one
shall see the Lord." Therefore that we may be accounted worthy to see Him,
whether we be in virginity or in the first marriage or the second, let us follow
after this that we may obtain the kingdom of heaven, through the grace and
loving-kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ; to Whom with the Father and the Holy
Spirit, be glory, power, honor, now, henceforth, and for everlasting ages. Amen.

## Homily 20 on First Corinthians

1 Corinthians 8:1
Now concerning things sacrificed to idols: we know that we all have
knowledge. Knowledge puffs up, but love edifies.
It is necessary first to say what the meaning of this passage is: for so shall
we readily comprehend the Apostle's discourse. For he that sees a charge
brought against any one, except he first perceive the nature of the offense will
not understand what is said. What then is it of which he was then accusing the
Corinthians? A heavy charge and the cause of many evils. Well, what is it? Many
among them, having learned that [Matthew 15:11] "not the things which enter in
defile the man, but the things which proceed out," and that idols of wood and
stone, and demons, have no power to hurt or help, had made an immoderate use
of their perfect knowledge of this to the harm both of others and of themselves.
They had both gone in where idols were and had partaken of the tables there, and
were producing thereby great and ruinous evil. For, on the one hand, those who
still retained the fear of idols and knew not how to contemn them, took part in
those meals, because they saw the more perfect sort doing this; and hence they
got the greatest injury: since they did not touch what was set before them with
the same mind as the others, but as things offered in sacrifice to idols; and the
thing was becoming a way to idolatry. On the other hand, these very persons
who pretended to be more perfect were injured in no common way, partaking in
the tables of demons.
This then was the subject of complaint. Now this blessed man being about
to correct it, did not immediately begin to speak vehemently; for that which was
done came more of folly than of wickedness: wherefore in the first instance there
was need rather of exhortation than of severe rebuke and wrath. Now herein