merciful and loving men, were not ashamed at all of this treatment, but
continually looked to one thing only, how they might rescue the lamb from the
wolves; which in fact they actually accomplished by means of their
perseverance. For afterwards, as if he had been converted by some sudden
stroke, and were put to shame by their great assiduity, if ever he saw them in the
distance approaching, he would instantly dismount, and bending low would
listen silently in that attitude to all which fell from their lips, and in time he
displayed even greater reverence and respect towards them. And then, by the
grace of God having gradually rescued him out of all those entanglements, they
handed him over again to his former state of seclusion and devout
contemplation. And now he became so illustrious, that his former life seemed to
be nothing in comparison with that which he lived after his fall. For being well
aware by experience of the snare, and having expended all his wealth upon the
needy, and released himself from all care of that kind, he cut off every pretext for
an attack from those who wished to make designs upon him; and now treading
the path which leads to heaven, he has already arrived at the very goal of virtue.
This man indeed fell and rose again while he was still young; but another
man, after enduring great toils during his sojourn in the deserts, with only a
single companion, and leading an angelic life, and being now on the way to old
age, afforded I know not how a little loophole to the evil one, through some
Satanic condition of mind, and carelessness; and although he had never seen a
woman since he transferred himself to the monastic life, he fell into a passionate
desire for intercourse with women. And first of all he besought his companion to
supply him with meat and wine, and threatened, if he did not receive it, that he
would go down into the marketplace. And this he said, not so much out of a
longing for meat, as because he wished to get some handle and pretext for
returning into the city. The other being perplexed at these things, and fearing,
that if he hindered this he might drive him into some great evil, suffered him to
have his fill of this craving. But when his companion perceived that this was a
stale device, he openly threw off shame, and unmasked his pretence, and said

that he must positively himself go down to the city, and as the other had not
power to prevent him, he desisted at last from his efforts, and following him at a
distance, watched to see what the meaning of this return could possibly be. And
having seen him enter a brothel, and knowing that he had intercourse with a
harlot there, he waited until he had satiated that foul desire, and then, when he
came out, he received him with uplifted hands, and having embraced and
fervently kissed him, without uttering any rebuke on account of what had
happened he only besought him, seeing that he had satiated his desire, to return
again to his dwelling in the wilderness. And the other, put to shame by his great
clemency, was immediately smitten at the heart of compunction for the deed
which he had perpetrated, followed him to the mountain; and there he begged the
man to shut him up in another hut, and, having closed the doors of the dwelling,
to supply him with bread and water on certain days, and to inform those who
enquired for him that he was laid to rest. And when he had said this, and
persuaded him, he shut himself up, and was there continually, with fastings and
prayers and tears, wiping off from his soul the defilement of his sin. And not
long after when a drought had settled on the neighbouring region, and all in that
country were lamenting over it, a certain man was commanded by a vision to
depart, and exhort this recluse to pray, and put an end to the drought. And when
he had departed, taking companions with him, they found the man, who formerly
dwelt with him, there alone; and on enquiring concerning the other they were
informed that he was dead. But they, believing that they were deceived, betook
themselves again to prayer, and again by means of the same vision heard the
same things which they had heard before. And then, standing round the man who
really had deceived them, they besought him to show the other to them; for they
declared that he was not dead but living. When he heard this, and perceived that
their compact was exposed, he brought them to that holy man; and they having
broken through the wall (for he had even blocked up the entrance) and having all
of them entered, prostrating themselves at his feet, and informing him of what
had happened, besought him to succour them against the famine. But he at first