FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.72, C.5.

sacrilege, or blasphemy, is said to sin against God. In like manner,
the first order includes the third and surpasses it, because in all
things wherein we are directed in reference to our neighbor, we need
to be directed according to the order of reason. Yet in some things
we are directed according to reason, in relation to ourselves only,
and not in reference to our neighbor; and when man sins in these
matters, he is said to sin against himself, as is seen in the glutton,
the lustful, and the prodigal. But when man sins in matters
concerning his neighbor, he is said to sin against his neighbor, as
appears in the thief and murderer. Now the things whereby man is
directed to God, his neighbor, and himself are diverse. Wherefore
this distinction of sins is in respect of their objects, according to
which the species of sins are diversified: and consequently this
distinction of sins is properly one of different species of sins:
because the virtues also, to which sins are opposed, differ
specifically in respect of these three. For it is evident from what has
been said (Question 62, Articles 1,2,3) that by the theological virtues
man is directed to God; by temperance and fortitude, to himself; and
by justice to his neighbor.
Reply to Objection 1: To sin against God is common to all sins, in so
far as the order to God includes every human order; but in so far as
order to God surpasses the other two orders, sin against God is a
special kind of sin.
Reply to Objection 2: When several things, of which one includes
another, are distinct from one another, this distinction is understood
to refer, not to the part contained in another, but to that in which one
goes beyond another. This may be seen in the division of numbers
and figures: for a triangle is distinguished from a four-sided figure
not in respect of its being contained thereby, but in respect of that in
which it is surpassed thereby: and the same applies to the numbers
three and four.
Reply to Objection 3: Although God and our neighbor are external to
the sinner himself, they are not external to the act of sin, but are
related to it as to its object.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.72, C.5.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.72, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether the division of sins according to their

debt of punishment diversifies their species?
Objection 1: It would seem that the division of sins according to their
debt of punishment diversifies their species; for instance, when sin
is divided into "mortal" and "venial." For things which are infinitely
apart, cannot belong to the same species, nor even to the same
genus. But venial and mortal sin are infinitely apart, since temporal
punishment is due to venial sin, and eternal punishment to mortal
sin; and the measure of the punishment corresponds to the gravity
of the fault, according to Dt. 25:2: "According to the measure of the
sin shall the measure be also of the stripes be." Therefore venial and
mortal sins are not of the same genus, nor can they be said to
belong to the same species.
Objection 2: Further, some sins are mortal in virtue of their species
["ex genere"], as murder and adultery; and some are venial in virtue
of their species, as in an idle word, and excessive laughter.
Therefore venial and mortal sins differ specifically.
Objection 3: Further, just as a virtuous act stands in relation to its
reward, so does sin stand in relation to punishment. But the reward
is the end of the virtuous act. Therefore punishment is the end of sin.
Now sins differ specifically in relation to their ends, as stated above
(Article 1, ad 1). Therefore they are also specifically distinct
according to the debt of punishment.
On the contrary, Those things that constitute a species are prior to
the species, e.g. specific differences. But punishment follows sin as
the effect thereof. Therefore sins do not differ specifically according
to the debt of punishment.
I answer that, In things that differ specifically we find a twofold
difference: the first causes the diversity of species, and is not to be
found save in different species, e.g. "rational" and "irrational,"
"animate," and "inanimate": the other difference is consequent to
specific diversity; and though, in some cases, it may be consequent
to specific diversity, yet, in others, it may be found within the same
species; thus "white" and "black" are consequent to the specific
diversity of crow and swan, and yet this difference is found within
the one species of man.