other? For my part, I perceive by their acts that they are not only not contrary but
closely accordant and attached one to another. It is not therefore of these that he
speaks as opposed to each other, but he refers to the contest of bad and good
principles. [cf. Romans 7:23] To will and not to will belongs to the soul;
wherefore he says, "these are contrary the one to the other," that you may not
suffer the soul to proceed in its evil desires. For he speaks this like a Master and
Teacher in a threatening way.
Ver. 18. "But if you are led by the Spirit, you are not under the Law."
If it be asked in what way are these two connected, I answer, closely and
plainly; for he that has the Spirit as he ought, quenches thereby every evil desire,
and he that is released from these needs no help from the Law, but is exalted far
above its precepts. He who is never angry, what need has he to hear the
command, You shall not kill? He who never casts unchaste looks, what need has
he of the admonition, You shall not commit adultery? Who would discourse
about the fruits of wickedness with him who had plucked up the root itself? For
anger is the root of murder, and of adultery the inquisitive gazing into faces.
Hence he says, "If you are led by the Spirit, you are not under the Law;" wherein
he appears to me to have pronounced a high and striking eulogy of the Law, if, at
least, the Law stood, according to its power, in the place of the Spirit before the
Spirit's coming upon us. But we are not on that account obliged to continue apart
with our schoolmaster. Then we were justly subject to the Law, that by fear we
might chasten our lusts, the Spirit not being manifested; but now that grace is
given, which not only commands us to abstain from them, but both quenches
them, and leads us to a higher rule of life, what more need is there of the Law?
He who has attained an exalted excellence from an inner impulse, has no
occasion for a schoolmaster, nor does any one, if he is a philosopher, require a
grammarian. Why then do you so degrade yourselves, as now to listen to the
Law, having previously given yourselves to the Spirit?
Ver. 19, 20, 21. "Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are these;
fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry, sorcery, enmities, strife,

jealousies, wrath, factions, divisions, heresies, envyings, drunkenness, revellings,
and such like: of the which I forewarn you even as I did forewarn you, that they
which practice such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God."
Answer me now, you that accusest your own flesh, and supposest that this
is said of it as of an enemy and adversary. Let it be allowed that adultery and
fornication proceed, as you assert, from the flesh; yet hatred, variance,
emulations, strife, heresies, and witchcraft, these arise merely from a depraved
moral choice. And so it is with the others also, for how can they belong to the
flesh? You observe that he is not here speaking of the flesh, but of earthly
thoughts, which trail upon the ground. Wherefore also he alarms them by saying,
that "they which practice such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God." If
these things belonged to nature and not to a bad moral choice, his expression,
"they practice," is inappropriate, it should be, "they suffer." And why should they
be cast out of the kingdom, for rewards and punishments relate not to what
proceeds from nature but from choice?
Ver. 22. "But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace."
He says not, "the work of the Spirit," but, "the fruit of the Spirit." Is the
soul, however, superfluous? The flesh and the Spirit are mentioned, but where is
the soul? Is he discoursing of beings without a soul? For if the things of the flesh
be evil, and those of the Spirit good, the soul must be superfluous. By no means,
for the mastery of the passions belongs to her, and concerns her; and being
placed amid vice and virtue, if she has used the body fitly, she has wrought it to
be spiritual, but if she separate from the Spirit and give herself up to evil desires,
she makes herself more earthly. You observe throughout that his discourse does
not relate to the substance of the flesh, but to the moral choice, which is or is not
vicious. And why does he say, "the fruit of the Spirit?" it is because evil works
originate in ourselves alone, and therefore he calls them "works," but good
works require not only our diligence but God's loving kindness. He places first
the root of these good things, and then proceeds to recount them, in these words,
"Love, joy, peace, long-suffering, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, meekness,