SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.98, C.2.

sovereign, such as disputing his judgment, and questioning whether
one ought to follow it, is called sacrilege by a kind of likeness.
Reply to Objection 2: Christians are sanctified by faith and the
sacraments of Christ, according to 1 Cor. 6:11, "But you are washed,
but you are sanctified." Wherefore it is written (1 Pt. 2:9): "You are a
chosen generation, a kingly priesthood, a holy nation, a purchased
people." Therefore any injury inflicted on the Christian people, for
instance that unbelievers should be put in authority over it, is an
irreverence for a sacred thing, and is reasonably called a sacrilege.
Reply to Objection 3: Violation here means any kind of irreverence or
dishonor. Now as "honor is in the person who honors and not in the
one who is honored" (Ethic. i, 5), so again irreverence is in the
person who behaves irreverently even though he do no harm to the
object of his irreverence. Hence, so far he is concerned, he violates
the sacred thing, though the latter be not violated in itself.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.98, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether sacrilege is a special sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that sacrilege not a special sin. It is
stated (XVII, qu. iv) "They are guilty of sacrilege who through
ignorance sin against the sanctity of the law, violate and defile it by
their negligence." But this is done in every sin, because sin is "a
word, deed or desire contrary to the law of God," according to
Augustine (Contra Faust. xxi, 27). Therefore sacrilege is a general
sin.
Objection 2: Further, no special sin is comprised under different
kinds of sin. Now sacrilege comprised under different kinds of sin,
for instance under murder, if one kill a priest under lust, as the
violation of a consecrate virgin, or of any woman in a sacred place
under theft, if one steal a sacred thing. Therefore sacrilege is not a
special sin.
Objection 3: Further, every special sin is to found apart from other
sins as the Philosopher states, in speaking of special justice (Ethic.
v, 11). But, seemingly, sacrilege is not to be found apart from other
sins; for it is sometimes united to theft, sometimes to murder, as
stated in the preceding objection. Therefore it is not a special sin.
On the contrary, That which is opposed to a special virtue is a
special sin. But sacrilege is opposed to a special virtue, namely
religion, to which it belongs to reverence God and divine things.
Therefore sacrilege is a special sin.
I answer that, Wherever we find a special aspect of deformity, there
must needs be a special sin; because the species of a thing is
derived chiefly from its formal aspect, and not from its matter or
subject. Now in sacrilege we find a special aspect of deformity,
namely, the violation of a sacred thing by treating it irreverently.
Hence it is a special sin.
Moreover, it is opposed to religion. For according to Damascene (De
Fide Orth. iv, 3), "When the purple has been made into a royal robe,
we pay it honor and homage, and if anyone dishonor it he is
condemned to death," as acting against the king: and in the same
way if a man violate a sacred thing, by so doing his behavior is
contrary to the reverence due to God and consequently he is guilty