repentance, saying, "Be first to tell your sins, that you may be justified." For it is
not, it is not indeed, a small step towards amendment, to lay together all our sins,
and to be continually revolving and reckoning them up with their particulars. For
he that is doing this will be so heart-broken, as not to think himself worthy so
much as to live; and he that thinks thus, will be tenderer than any wax. For tell
me not of acts of fornication only, nor of adulteries, nor of these things that are
manifest, and acknowledged among all men: but lay together also your secret
crafts, and your false accusations, and your evil speakings, and your vain
gloryings, and your envy, and all such things. For neither will these bring a
trifling punishment. For the reviler too shall fall into hell; and the drunkard has
no part in the kingdom; and he that lovest not his neighbor so offends God, as to
find no help even in his own martyrdom; and he that neglects his own has denied
the faith, and he who overlooks the poor is sent into the fire.
Account not then these things to be little, but put all together, and write
them as in a book. For if you write them down, God blots them out; even as on
the other hand, if you omit writing them, God both inscribes them, and exacts
their penalty. It were then far better for them to be written by us, and blotted out
above, than on the contrary, when we have forgotten them, for God to bring them
before our eyes in that day.
Therefore that this may not be so, let us reckon up all with strictness, and
we shall find ourselves answerable for much. For who is clear from
covetousness? Nay, tell me not of the quantity, but since even in a small amount
we shall pay the same penalty, consider this and repent. Who is rid of all
insolence? Yet this casts into hell. Who has not secretly spoken evil of his
neighbor? Yet this deprives one of the Kingdom. Who has not been self-willed?
Yet this man is more unclean than all. Who has not looked with unchaste eyes?
Yet this is a complete adulterer. Who has not been "angry with his brother
without a cause"? Yet such an one is "in danger of the council." Who has not
sworn? Yet this thing is of the evil one. Who has not forsworn himself? But this
man is something more than of the evil one. Who has not served mammon? But

this man is fallen away from the genuine service of Christ.
I have also other things greater than these to mention: but even these are
enough, and able, if a man be not made of stone, nor utterly past feeling, to bring
him to compunction. For if each one of them casts into hell, what will they not
bring to pass when all are met together?
How then can one be saved? It may be asked. By application of the
countervailing remedies: alms, prayers, compunction, repentance, humility, a
contrite heart, contempt of possessions. For God has marked out for us
innumerable ways of salvation, if we be willing to attend. Let us then attend, and
let us every way cleanse out our wounds, showing mercy, remitting our anger
against them that have displeased us, giving thanks for all things to God, fasting
according to our power, praying sincerely, "making unto ourselves friends of the
mammon of unrighteousness." For so shall we be able to obtain pardon for our
offenses, and to win the promised good things; whereof may we all be counted
worthy, by the grace and love toward man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be
glory and might forever and ever. Amen.