order effectually to eradicate their prejudice. And Peter too, hearing this joins in
the feint, as if he had erred, that they might be corrected by means of the rebuke
administered to him. Had Paul reproved these Jews, they would have spurned at
it with indignation, for they held him in slight esteem; but now, when they saw
their Teacher silent under rebuke, they were unable to despise or resist Paul's
sentence.
Ver. 14. "But when I saw that they walked not uprightly according to the
truth of the Gospel."
Neither let this phrase disturb you, for in using it he does not condemn
Peter, but so expresses himself for the benefit of those who were to be reformed
by the reproof of Peter.
Ver. 14. "I said unto Cephas before them all."
Observe his mode of correcting the others; he speaks "before them all," that
the hearers might be alarmed thereby. And this is what he says—
Ver. 14. "If you, being a Jew, livest as do the Gentiles, and not as do the
Jews, how do you compel the Gentiles to live as do the Jews?"
But it was the Jews and not the Gentiles who were carried away together
with Peter; why then does Paul impute what was not done, instead of directing
his remarks, not against the Gentiles, but against the dissembling Jews? And
why does he accuse Peter alone, when the rest also dissembled together with
him? Let us consider the terms of his charge; "If you, being a Jew, livest as do
the Gentiles, and not as do the Jews, how do you compel the Gentiles to live as
do the Jews?" for in fact Peter alone had withdrawn himself. His object then is to
remove suspicion from his rebuke; had he blamed Peter for observing the Law,
the Jews would have censured him for his boldness towards their Teacher. But
now arraigning him in behalf of his own peculiar disciples, I mean the Gentiles,
he facilitates thereby the reception of what he has to say which he also does by
abstaining from reproof of the others, and addressing it all to the Apostle. "If
you," he says, "being a Jew, livest as do the Gentiles, and not as do the Jews;"
which almost amounts to an explicit exhortation to imitate their Teacher, who,

himself a Jew, lived after the manner of the Gentiles. This however he says not,
for they could not have received such advice, but under color of reproving him
in behalf of the Gentiles, he discloses Peter's real sentiments. On the other hand,
if he had said, Wherefore do you compel these Jews to Judaize? His language
would have been too severe. But now he effects their correction by appearing to
espouse the part, not of the Jewish, but of the Gentile, disciples; for rebukes,
which are moderately severe, secure the readiest reception. And none of the
Gentiles could object to Paul that he took up the defense of the Jews. The whole
difficulty was removed by Peter's submitting in silence to the imputation of
dissimulation, in order that he might deliver the Jews from its reality. At first
Paul directs his argument to the character which Peter wore, "If you, being a
Jew:" but he generalizes as he goes on, and includes himself in the phrase,
Ver. 15. "We being Jews by nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles."
These words are hortatory, but are couched in the form of a reproof, on
account of those Jews. So elsewhere, under cover of one meaning he conveys
another; as where he says in his Epistle to the Romans, "But now I go unto
Jerusalem, ministering unto the saints." [Romans 15:25] Here his object was not
simply to inform them of the motive of his journey to Jerusalem, but to excite
them to emulation in the giving of alms. Had he merely wished to explain his
motive, it would have sufficed to say, "I go to ministering unto the saints;" but
now observe what he says in addition; "For it has been the good pleasure of
Macedonia and Achaia to make a certain contribution for the poor among the
saints that are at Jerusalem. Yea, it has been their good pleasure and their
debtors they are." And again, "For if the Gentiles have been made partakers of
their spiritual things, they owe it to them, also to minister unto them in carnal
things." [Romans 15:26-27]
Observe how he represses the high thoughts of the Jews; preparing for one
thing by means of another, and his language is authoritative. "We being Jews by
nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles." The phrase, "Jews by nature," implies
that we, who are not proselytes, but educated from early youth in the Law, have