fullness of God;" meaning by the "fullness of God," either the knowledge how
God is worshipped in the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, or else urging
them thus to use every effort, in order to be filled with all virtue, of which God is
full.
Ver. 20. "Now unto Him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all
that we ask or think, according to the power that works in us."
That God has done "abundantly above all that we ask or think," is evident
from what the Apostle himself has written. For I indeed, says he, pray, but He of
Himself, even without any prayer of mine, will do works greater than all we ask,
not simply "greater," nor "abundantly greater," but "exceeding abundantly." And
this is evident from "the power, that works in us:" for neither did we ever ask
these things, nor did we expect them.
Ver. 21. "Unto Him be the glory," he concludes, "in the Church and in
Christ Jesus, unto all generations forever and ever. Amen."
Well does he close the discourse with prayer and doxology; for right were it
that He, who has bestowed upon us such vast gifts, should be glorified and
blessed, so that this is even a proper part of our amazement at His mercies, to
give glory for the things advanced to us at God's hands through Jesus Christ.
"The glory in the Church." Well might he say this, forasmuch as the Church
alone can last on to eternity.
It seems necessary to state what are meant by "families." ([πατριαί]) Here
on earth, indeed there are "families" that is races sprung from one parent stock;
but in heaven how can this be, where none is born of another? Surely then, by
"families," he means either the assemblies and orders of heavenly beings; as also
we find it written in Scripture, "the family of Amattari:" [1 Samuel 10:21. See
Septuagint] or else that it is from Him from whom earthly fathers have their
name of father.
However, he does not ask the whole of God, but demands of them also faith
and love, and not simply love, but love "rooted and grounded," so that neither
any blasts can shake it, nor any thing else overturn it. He had said, that

"tribulations" are "glory," and if mine are so to you, he would say, much more
will your own be: so that to be afflicted is no token of men being forsaken, for
He who has wrought so great things for us, never would do this.
Again, if in order to understand the love of God, it was necessary for Paul
to pray, and there was need of the indwelling of the Holy Spirit, who by
following mere reasonings shall understand the nature of Christ? And why is it a
difficult thing to learn that God loves us? Beloved, it is extremely difficult. For
some know not even this; wherefore, they even say, numberless evils come to be
in the world; and others know not the extent of this love. Nor, indeed, is Paul
seeking to know its extent, nor with any view to measure it; for how could he?
But only to understand this, that it is transcendent, and great. And this very
thing, he says, he is able to show, even from the knowledge which has been
vouchsafed to us.
However, what is higher than the being "strengthened with might," in order
to have Christ within? Vast are the things we ask, says he, yet is He able to do
above even them, so that not only does He love us, but does so intensely. Be it
our care therefore, beloved, to understand the love of God. A great thing indeed
is this; nothing is so beneficial to us, nothing so deeply touches us: more availing
this to convince our souls than the fear of hell itself. Whence then shall we
understand it? Both from the sources now mentioned, and from the things which
happen every day. For from what motive have these things been done for us?
From what necessity on His part? None whatever. Over and over again he lays
down love as the cause. But the highest degree of love is that where men receive
a benefit, without any prior service on their part to call for it.
Moral. And let us then be followers of Him; let us do good to our enemies,
to them that hate us, let us draw near to those who turn their backs upon us. This
renders us like God. "For if you love them that love you," says Christ, "what
reward will you have?" "Do not even the Gentiles the same." [Matthew 5:46]
But what is a sure proof of love? To love him that hates you. I wish to give you
some example, (pardon me,) and since I find it not among them that are spiritual,