Jew, and a determined Jew, and very zealous, and among them that lived after
Christ's coming.
What then says this man? That those terrors surpassed all tragedy, and that
no such had ever overtaken the nation. For so great was the famine, that the very
mothers fought about the devouring of their children, and that there were wars
about this; and he says that many when they were dead had their bellies ripped
up.
I should therefore be glad to inquire of the Jews. Whence came there thus
upon them wrath from God intolerable, and more sore than all that had befallen
aforetime, not in Judæa only, but in any part of the world? Is it not quite clear,
that it was for the deed of the cross, and for this rejection? All would say it, and
with all and before all the truth of the facts itself.
But mark, I pray you, the exceeding greatness of the ills, when not only
compared with the time before, they appear more grievous, but also with all the
time to come. For not in all the world, neither in all time that is past, and that is
to come, shall any one be able to say such ills have been. And very naturally; for
neither had any man perpetrated, not of those that ever have been, nor of those to
come hereafter, a deed so wicked and horrible. Therefore He says, "there shall
be tribulation such as never was, nor shall be."
"And except those days should be shortened, there should no flesh be saved;
but for the elect's sake those days shall be shortened." By these things He shows
them to be deserving of a more grievous punishment than had been mentioned,
speaking now of the days of the war and of that siege. But what He says is like
this. If, says He, the war of the Romans against the city had prevailed further, all
the Jews had perished (for by "no flesh" here, He means no Jewish flesh), both
those abroad, and those at home. For not only against those in Judæa did they
war, but also those that were dispersed everywhere they outlawed and banished,
because of their hatred against the former.
2. But whom does He here mean by the elect? The believers that were shut
up in the midst of them. For that Jews may not say that because of the gospel,

and the worship of Christ, these ills took place, He shows, that so far from the
believers being the cause, if it had not been for them, all had perished utterly. For
if God had permitted the war to be protracted, not so much as a remnant of the
Jews had remained, but lest those of them who had become believers should
perish together with the unbelieving Jews, He quickly put down the fighting, and
gave an end to the war. Therefore He says, "But for the elect's sake they shall be
shortened." But these things He said to leave an encouragement to those of them
who were shut up in the midst of them, and to allow them to take breath, that
they might not be in fear, as though they were to perish with them. And if here
so great is His care for them, that for their sakes others also are saved, and that
for the sake of Christians remnants were left of the Jews, how great will be their
honor in the time for their crowns?
By this He also encouraged them not to be distressed at their own dangers,
since these others are suffering such things, and for no profit, but for evil upon
their own head.
But He not only encouraged them, but also led them off secretly and
unsuspectedly from the customs of the Jews. For if there is not to be a change
afterwards, and the temple is not to stand, it is quite evident that the law also
shall be made to cease.
However, He spoke not this openly, but by their entire destruction He
darkly intimated it. But He spoke it not openly, lest He should startle them
before the time. Wherefore neither at the beginning did He of Himself fall into
discourse touching these things; but having first lamented over the city, He
constrained them to show Him the stones, and question Him, in order that as it
were in answering them their question, He might declare to them beforehand all
the things to come.
But mark thou, I pray you, the dispensation of the Spirit, that John wrote
none of these things, lest he should seem to write from the very history of the
things done (for indeed he lived a long time after the taking of the city), but they,
who died before the taking, and had seen none of these things, they write it, in