FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.100, C.8.

punishment is only affixed to those precepts of the law which
forbade evils to which men were prone. Now men were prone to
idolatry by reason of the general custom of the nations. Likewise
men are prone to perjury on account of the frequent use of oaths.
Hence it is that a threat is affixed to the first two precepts.
Reply to Objection 5: The commandment about the Sabbath was
made in memory of a past blessing. Wherefore special mention of
the memory is made therein. Or again, the commandment about the
Sabbath has a determination affixed to it that does not belong to the
natural law, wherefore this precept needed a special admonition.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.100, C.9.

### ARTICLE 8. Whether the precepts of the decalogue are

dispensable?
Objection 1: It would seem that the precepts of the decalogue are
dispensable. For the precepts of the decalogue belong to the natural
law. But the natural law fails in some cases and is changeable, like
human nature, as the Philosopher says (Ethic. v, 7). Now the failure
of law to apply in certain particular cases is a reason for
dispensation, as stated above (Question 96, Article 6; Question 97,
Article 4). Therefore a dispensation can be granted in the precepts of
the decalogue.
Objection 2: Further, man stands in the same relation to human law
as God does to Divine law. But man can dispense with the precepts
of a law made by man. Therefore, since the precepts of the
decalogue are ordained by God, it seems that God can dispense with
them. Now our superiors are God's viceregents on earth; for the
Apostle says (2 Cor. 2:10): "For what I have pardoned, if I have
pardoned anything, for your sakes have I done it in the person of
Christ." Therefore superiors can dispense with the precepts of the
decalogue.
Objection 3: Further, among the precepts of the decalogue is one
forbidding murder. But it seems that a dispensation is given by men
in this precept: for instance, when according to the prescription of
human law, such as evil-doers or enemies are lawfully slain.
Therefore the precepts of the decalogue are dispensable.
Objection 4: Further, the observance of the Sabbath is ordained by a
precept of the decalogue. But a dispensation was granted in this
precept; for it is written (1 Macc. 2:4): "And they determined in that
day, saying: Whosoever shall come up to fight against us on the
Sabbath-day, we will fight against him." Therefore the precepts of the
decalogue are dispensable.
On the contrary, are the words of Is. 24:5, where some are reproved
for that "they have changed the ordinance, they have broken the
everlasting covenant"; which, seemingly, apply principally to the
precepts of the decalogue. Therefore the precepts of the decalogue
cannot be changed by dispensation.