1 Corinthians 12:8
"For to one is given through the Spirit the word of wisdom; to another the
word of knowledge according to the same Spirit;"

1 Corinthians 12:9
"To another, faith in the same Spirit; to another gifts of healing in the one
Spirit."
Do you see how he every where makes this addition, saying, "through the
same Spirit, and according to the same Spirit?" For he knew that the comfort
from thence was great.

1 Corinthians 12:10
"To another working of miracles; to another prophecies; to another
discernings of spirits; to another various kind of tongues; to another the
interpretation of tongues."
Thus, since they boasted themselves in this, therefore he placed it last, and
added,

1 Corinthians 12:11
"But all these works one and the same Spirit."
The universal medicine in which his consolation consists is that out of the
same root, out of the same treasures, out of the same streams, they all receive.
And accordingly, from time to time dwelling on this expression, he levels the
apparent inequality, and consoles them. And above indeed he points out both the
Spirit, and the Son, and the Father, as supplying the gifts, but here he was
content to make the Spirit, that even hence again you may understand their
dignity to be the same.
But what is "the word of wisdom?" That which Paul had, which John had,
the son of thunder.
And what is "the word of knowledge?" That which most of the faithful had,
possessing indeed knowledge, but not thereupon able to teach nor easily to
convey to another what they knew.
"And to another, faith:" not meaning by this faith the faith of doctrines, but
the faith of miracles; concerning which Christ says, "If you have faith as a grain
of mustard-seed, you shall say to this mountain, Remove, and it shall remove."
[Matthew 17:20] And the Apostles too concerning this besought Him, saying,
"Increase our faith:" [Luke 17:5] for this is the mother of the miracles. But to
possess the power of working miracles and gifts of healing, is not the same
thing: for he that had a gift of healing used only to do cures: but he that
possessed powers for working miracles used to punish also. For a miracle is not
the healing only, but the punishing also: even as Paul inflicted blindness: as Peter
slew.
"To another prophecies; and to another discernings of spirits." What is,
"discernings of spirits?" the knowing who is spiritual, and who is not: who is a
prophet, and who a deceiver: as he said to the Thessalonians, "despise not

prophesyings:" [1 Thessalonians 5:20-21] but proving all things, hold fast that
which is good. For great was at that time the rush of the false prophets, the devil
striving underhand to substitute falsehood for the truth. "To another various
kinds of tongues; to another the interpretation of tongues." For one person knew
what he spoke himself, but was unable to interpret to another; while another had
acquired both these or the other of the two. Now this seemed to be a great gift
because both the Apostles received it first, and the most among the Corinthians
had obtained it. But the word of teaching not so. Wherefore that he places first,
but this last: for this was on account of that, and so indeed were all the rest; both
prophecies, and working of miracles, and various kinds of tongues, and
interpretation of tongues. For none is equal to this. Wherefore also he said, "Let
the elders that rule well be counted worthy of double honor, especially they who
labor in the word and in teaching." [1 Timothy 5:17] And to Timothy he wrote,
saying, "Give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to teaching; neglect not the
gift that is in you." [1 Timothy 4:13-14] Do you see how he calls it also a gift?
6. Next, the comfort which he before gave, when he said, "the same Spirit,"
this also he here sets before us, saying, "But all these works the one and the
same Spirit, dividing to each one severally even as he will." And he not only
gives consolation but also stops the mouth of the gainsayer, saying here,
"dividing to each one severally even as he will." For it was necessary to bind up
also, not to heal only, as he does also in the Epistle to the Romans, when he says,
But who are you that repliest against God? [Romans 9:20] So likewise here,
"dividing to each one severally as he will."
And that which was of the Father, this he signifies to be of the Spirit also.
For as concerning the Father, he says, "but it is the same God who works all
things in all;" so also concerning the Spirit, "but all these things works one and
the same Spirit." But, it will be said, "He does it, actuated by God." Nay, he no
where said this, but you feign it. For when he says, "who actuates all things in
all," he says this concerning men: you will hardly say that among those men he
numbers also the Spirit, though you should be ever so manifold in your doting