would they have believed that He was born of a virgin?
It is then for this reason that both Joseph has his genealogy traced, and the
Virgin betrothed to him. For if even he, who was both a just and wondrous man,
required many things, in order that he should receive that which had come to
pass; an angel, and the vision in dreams, and the testimony from the prophets;
how could the Jews, being both dull and depraved, and of so unfriendly spirit
towards Him, have admitted this idea into their minds? For the strangeness and
novelty thereof would be sure greatly to disturb them, and the fact that they had
never so much as heard of such a thing having happened in the times of their
forefathers. For as the man who was once persuaded that He is Son of God,
would after that have no cause to doubt concerning this too; so he who was
accounting Him to be a deceiver and an adversary of God, how could he but
have been yet more offended by this, and have been led on unto the opposite
notion? For this cause neither do the apostles at the first directly say this, but
while of His resurrection they discourse much and often (forasmuch as of this
there were examples in the times before, although not such as this); that He was
born of a virgin they do not say always: nay, not even His mother herself
ventured to utter this. See, for instance, what says the Virgin even to Himself:
"Behold, Your father and I have sought You." [Luke 2:48] For if this suspicion
had been entertained, neither would He any longer have been accounted to be a
Son of David, and this opinion not being held, many other evils besides would
have arisen. For this cause neither do the angels say these things to all, but to
Mary only, and Joseph; but when showing to the shepherds the glad tidings of
that which had come to pass, they no longer added this.
2. But why is it, that having mentioned Abraham, and having said that "he
begot Isaac, and Isaac, Jacob;" and not having made any mention of his brother;
when he has come to Jacob, he remembers both "Judah, and his brethren"? Now
there are some that say, it was because of the perverseness of Esau, and of the
rest that came before. But I should not say this; for if it were so, how is it that he
a little after mentions such women? It being out of contraries, in this place, that

His glory is manifested; not by having great forefathers, but low and of little
account. For to the lofty One it is a great glory to be able to abase Himself
exceedingly. Wherefore then did He not mention them? Because Saracens, and
Ishmaelites, and Arabians, and as many as are sprung from those ancestors, have
nothing in common with the race of the Israelites. For this cause then he passes
over those in silence, and hastens on to His forefathers, and those of the Jewish
people. Wherefore he says, "And Jacob begot Judas and his brethren." For at
this point the race of the Jews begins to have its peculiar mark.
3. "And Judas begot Phares and Zara of Thamar." [Matthew 1:3] "What
doest thou, O man, putting us in remembrance of a history that contains an
unlawful intercourse?" But why is this said? Since, if we were recounting the
race of a mere man, one might naturally have been silent touching these things;
but if of God Incarnate, so far from being silent, one ought to make a glory of
them, showing forth His tender care, and His power. Yea, it was for this cause
He came, not to escape our disgraces, but to bear them away. Therefore as He is
the more admired, in that He not only died, but was even crucified (though the
thing be opprobrious, yet the more opprobrious the more does it show Him full
of love to man), so likewise may we speak touching His birth; it is not only
because He took flesh upon Him, and became man, that we justly stand amazed
at Him, but because He vouchsafed to have also such kinsfolk, being in no
respect ashamed of our evils. And this He was proclaiming from the very
beginnings of His birth, that He is ashamed of none of those things that belong to
us; while He teaches us also hereby, never to hide our face at our forefathers'
wickedness, but to seek after one thing alone, even virtue. For such a man,
though he have an alien for his ancestor, though he have a mother who is a
prostitute, or what you will, can take no hurt thereby. For if the whoremonger
himself, being changed, is nothing disgraced by his former life, much more will
the wickedness of his ancestry have no power to bring to shame him that is
sprung of an harlot or an adulteress, if he be virtuous.
But he did these things not only to instruct us, but also to bring down the