commands were laid on him by his envy. She ordered him to slay his brother, to
lie unto God, to grieve his father, to cast off shame; and he did it all, and in
nothing refused to obey. And why marvel that over a single person so great
should be the power of this mistress? She has often destroyed entire nations. For
instance, the Midianitish women took the Jews, and all but bound them in
captivity; their own beauty kindling desire, was the means of their vanquishing
that whole nation. Paul then to cast out this sort of slavery, said, "Become not
servants of men;" that is, "Obey not men commanding unreasonable things: nay,
obey not yourselves." Then having raised up their mind and made it mount on
high, he says,

1 Corinthians 7:25-26
7. "Now concerning virgins. I have no commandment of the Lord; but I give
my judgment, as one that has obtained mercy of the Lord to be faithful."
Advancing on his way in regular order, he proceeds next to speak
concerning virginity. For after that he had exercised and trained them, in his
words concerning continence, he goes forth towards what is greater, saying, "I
have no commandment, but I esteem it to be good." For what reason? For the
self-same reason as he had mentioned respecting continence.

1 Corinthians 7:27-34
"Are you bound unto a wife? Seek not to be loosed. Are you loosed from a
wife? Seek not a wife."
These words carry no contradiction to what had been said before but rather
the most entire agreement with them. For he says in that place also, "Except it be
by consent:" as here he says, "Are you bound unto a wife? Seek not separation."
This is no contradiction. For its being against consent makes a dissolution: but if
with consent both live continently, it is no dissolution.
Then, lest this should seem to be laying down a law, he subjoins, [1
Corinthians 7:28] "but if you marry, you have not sinned." He next alleges the
existing state of things, "the present distress, the shortness of the time," and "the
affliction." For marriage draws along with it many things, which indeed he has
glanced at, as well here as also in the discourse about continence: there, by
saying, "the wife has not power over herself;" and here, by the expression, "You
are bound."
"But if and thou marry, you have not sinned." He is not speaking about her
who has made choice of virginity, for if it comes to that, she has sinned. Since if
the widows are condemned for having to do with second marriages after they
have once chosen widowhood, much more the virgins.
"But such shall have trouble in the flesh." "And pleasure too," you will say:
but observe how he curtails this by the shortness of the time, saying, [1
Corinthians 7:28] "the time is shortened;" that is, "we are exhorted to depart
now and go forth, but you are running further in." And yet even although
marriage had no troubles, even so we ought to press on towards things to come.
But when it has affliction too, what need to draw on one's self an additional
burden. What occasion to take up such a load, when even after taking it you
must use it as having it not? For "those even that have wives must be," he says,