known what was therein contained; but the Scythian, and the Barbarian, and the
Indian, and the Egyptian, and all those who were excluded from that language,
would have gone away without receiving any instruction. This however cannot
be said with respect to the heavens; but the Scythian, and Barbarian, and Indian,
and Egyptian, and every man that walks upon the earth, shall hear this voice; for
not by means of the ears, but through the sight, it reaches our understanding.
And of the things that are seen, there is one uniform perception; and there is no
difference, as is the case with respect to languages. Upon this volume the
unlearned, as well as the wise man, shall be alike able to look; the poor man as
well as the rich man; and wherever any one may chance to come, there looking
upwards towards the heavens, he will receive a sufficient lesson from the view
of them: and the prophet himself intimated and indicated this fact, that the
creation utters this voice so as to be intelligible to barbarians, and to Greeks, and
to all mankind without exception, when he spoke on this wise; "There is no
speech, nor language, where there voice is not heard." What he means is to this
effect, that there is no nation or tongue which is unable to understand this
language; but that such is their utterance, that it may be heard of all mankind.
And that not merely of the heavens, but of the day and night. But how of the day
and night? The heavens, indeed, by their beauty and magnitude, and by all the
rest, astonish the beholder, and transport him to an admiration of the Creator; but
as to the day and night, what can these show us of the same kind? Nothing
certainly of the same kind, but other things which are not inferior to them; as for
example; the harmony, and the order which they so accurately observe. For when
you consider how they distribute between them the whole year, and mutually
divide the length of the whole space, even as if it were by a beam and scales, you
will be astonished at Him who has ordered them! For just as certain sisters
dividing their father's inheritance among themselves with much affection, and
not insulting one another in the smallest degree, even so too the day and the
night distribute the year with such an equality of parts, with the utmost accuracy;
and keep to their own boundaries, and never push one another aside. Never has

the day been long in winter; and in like manner never has the night been long in
summer, while so many generations have passed away; but during so great an
interval and length of time one has not defrauded the other even in the smallest
degree; not of half an hour's space, no, nor of the twinkling of an eye!
6. Therefore also the Psalmist, struck with astonishment at the equality of
this distribution, exclaimed, "Night unto night shows knowledge." If you know
how to meditate wisely on these matters, you will admire the Being who fixed
these immoveable boundaries even from the beginning. Let the avaricious hear
these things; and those who are coveting the wealth of others; and let them
imitate the equality of the day and night. Let those who are puffed up and highminded also hear; and those who are unwilling to concede the first places to
others! The day gives place to the night, and does not invade the territory of
others! But you, while always enjoying honour, can you not bear to share it with
your brethren? Consider also with me the wisdom of the Lawgiver. In winter He
has ordered that the night should be long; when the germs are tender, and require
more coolness; and are unable to sustain the hotter rays of the sun; but when
they are somewhat grown, the day again increases with them, and becomes then
the longest, when the fruit has now attained ripeness. And this is a beneficial
arrangement not only for seeds, but for our bodies. For since during winter, the
sailor, and the pilot, and the traveller, and the soldier, and the farmer, sit down
for the most part at home, fettered by the frost; and the season is one of idleness;
God has appointed that the greater part of this time should be consumed in night,
in order that the length of the day might not be superfluous, when men were
unable to do anything. Who can describe the perfect order of the seasons; and
how these, like some virgins dancing in a circle, succeed one another with the
happiest harmony; and how those who are in the middle cease not to pass over to
the opposite ones with a gradual and noiseless transition? Therefore, neither are
we overtaken by the summer immediately after winter; nor by the winter
immediately after the summer; but mid-way the spring is interposed; that while
we gently and gradually take up one season after the other, we may have our