the object he would compass when he says it. But he makes them respectful by
no slight motive, when he says this: for what he means is, if God, Who
undergoes the loss, hitherto does nothing, how can you be else than ill-timed and
out of all measure exact, when you seize on ([ἄ] [γκων], throttle) him and annoy
him?
Ver. 5. "One man esteems one day above another, another esteems every
day alike."
Here he seems to me to be giving a gentle hint about fasting. For it is not
unlikely that some who fasted were always judging those who did not, or among
the observances it is likely that there were some that on fixed days abstained,
and on fixed days did not. Whence also he says, "Let every man be fully
persuaded in his own mind." And in this way he released those who kept the
observances from fear, by saying that the thing was indifferent, and he removed
also the quarrelsomeness of those who attacked them, by showing that it was no
very desirable (or urgent, [περισπούδαστον]) task to be always making a trouble
about these things. Yet it was not a very desirable task, not in its own nature, but
on account of the time chosen, and because they were novices in the faith. For
when he is writing to the Colossians, it is with great earnestness that he forbids
it, saying, "Beware lest any man spoil you through philosophy and vain deceit,
after the traditions of men, after the elements of the world, and not after Christ."
[Colossians 2:8, see p. 4] And again, "Let no man judge you in meat or in drink"
[Colossians 2:16], and, "let no man beguile you of your reward." [Colossians
2:18] And when writing to the Galatians with great precision, he exacts of them
Christian spirit and perfectness in this matter. But here he does not use this
vehemency, because the faith was lately planted in them. Let us therefore not
apply the phrase, "Let every man be persuaded in his own mind," to all subjects.
For when he is speaking of doctrines, hear what he says, "If any one preaches
unto you any gospel other than that you have received, let him be accursed"
["even" if it be "an angel." And again, "I fear lest by any means as the serpent
beguiled Eve through his subtlety, so your minds should be corrupted." 2

Corinthians 11:3] And in writing to the Philippians, he says, "Beware of dogs,
beware of evil workers, beware of the concision." [Philippians 3:2] But with the
Romans, since it was not yet the proper time for setting things of this sort right,
"Let every man," he says, "be fully persuaded in his own mind." For he had been
speaking of fasting. It was to clear away the vanity of the others and to release
these from fear then, that he said as follows:
Ver. 6. "He that regards the day, regards it unto the Lord; and he that
regards not the day, to the Lord he does not regard it." And, "He that eats, eats
to the Lord, for he gives God thanks; and he that eats not, to the Lord he eats
not, and gives God thanks."
He still keeps to the same subject. And what he means is about this. The
thing is not concerned with fundamentals. For the thing requisite is, if this
person and the other are acting for God's sake, the thing requisite is (these words
are repeated 3 manuscripts), if both terminate in thanksgiving. For indeed both
this man and that give thanks to God. If then both do give thanks to God, the
difference is no great one. But let me draw your notice to the way in which here
also he aims unawares a blow at the Judaizers. For if the thing required be this,
the "giving of thanks," it is plain enough that he which eats it is that "gives
thanks," and not "he which eats not." For how should he, while he still holds to
the Law? As then he told the Galatians, "As many of you as are justified by the
Law are fallen from grace" [Galatians 5:4]; so here he hints it only, but does not
unfold it so much. For as yet it was not time to do so. But for the present he
bears with it (see p. 337): but by what follows he gives it a further opening. For
where he says,
Ver. 7, 8. "For none of us lives unto himself, and no man dies unto himself.
For whether we live, we live unto the Lord; and whether we die, we die unto the
Lord," by this too he makes the same clearer. For how can he that lives unto the
Law, be living unto Christ? But this is not the only thing that he effects by this,
he also holds back the person who was in so much haste for their being set right,
and persuades him to be patient, by showing that it is impossible for God to