FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.100, C.6.

paying his debts: and in this sense is to be taken the commandment
about honoring one's parents. In general, as to all men, by doing
harm to none, either by deed, or by word, or by thought. By deed,
harm is done to one's neighbor---sometimes in his person, i.e. as to
his personal existence; and this is forbidden by the words, "Thou
shalt not kill": sometimes in a person united to him, as to the
propagation of offspring; and this is prohibited by the words, "Thou
shalt not commit adultery": sometimes in his possessions, which are
directed to both the aforesaid; and with this regard to this it is said,
"Thou shalt not steal." Harm done by word is forbidden when it is
said, "Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbor": harm
done by thought is forbidden in the words, "Thou shalt not covet."
The three precepts that direct man in his behavior towards God may
also be differentiated in this same way. For the first refers to deeds;
wherefore it is said, "Thou shalt not make . . . a graven thing": the
second, to words; wherefore it is said, "Thou shalt not take the name
of the Lord thy God in vain": the third, to thoughts; because the
sanctification of the Sabbath, as the subject of a moral precept,
requires repose of the heart in God. Or, according to Augustine (In
Ps. 32: Conc. 1), by the first commandment we reverence the unity of
the First Principle; by the second, the Divine truth; by the third, His
goodness whereby we are sanctified, and wherein we rest as in our
last end.
Reply to Objection 1: This objection may be answered in two ways.
First, because the precepts of the decalogue can be reduced to the
precepts of charity. Now there was need for man to receive a precept
about loving God and his neighbor, because in this respect the
natural law had become obscured on account of sin: but not about
the duty of loving oneself, because in this respect the natural law
retained its vigor: or again, because love of oneself is contained in
the love of God and of one's neighbor: since true self-love consists
in directing oneself to God. And for this reason the decalogue
includes those precepts only which refer to our neighbor and to God.
Secondly, it may be answered that the precepts of the decalogue are
those which the people received from God immediately; wherefore it
is written (Dt. 10:4): "He wrote in the tables, according as He had
written before, the ten words, which the Lord spoke to you." Hence
the precepts of the decalogue need to be such as the people can
understand at once. Now a precept implies the notion of duty. But it
is easy for a man, especially for a believer, to understand that, of

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.100, C.6.

necessity, he owes certain duties to God and to his neighbor. But
that, in matters which regard himself and not another, man has, of
necessity, certain duties to himself, is not so evident: for, at the first
glance, it seems that everyone is free in matters that concern
himself. And therefore the precepts which prohibit disorders of a
man with regard to himself, reach the people through the instruction
of men who are versed through the instruction of men who are
versed in such matters; and, consequently, they are not contained in
the decalogue.
Reply to Objection 2: All the solemnities of the Old Law were
instituted in celebration of some Divine favor, either in memory of
past favors, or in sign of some favor to come: in like manner all the
sacrifices were offered up with the same purpose. Now of all the
Divine favors to be commemorated the chief was that of the
Creation, which was called to mind by the sanctification of the
Sabbath; wherefore the reason for this precept is given in Ex. 20:11:
"In six days the Lord made heaven and earth," etc. And of all future
blessings, the chief and final was the repose of the mind in God,
either, in the present life, by grace, or, in the future life, by glory;
which repose was also foreshadowed in the Sabbath-day
observance: wherefore it is written (Is. 58:13): "If thou turn away thy
foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy own will in My holy day, and
call the Sabbath delightful, and the holy of the Lord glorious."
Because these favors first and chiefly are borne in mind by men,
especially by the faithful. But other solemnities were celebrated on
account of certain particular favors temporal and transitory, such as
the celebration of the Passover in memory of the past favor of the
delivery from Egypt, and as a sign of the future Passion of Christ,
which though temporal and transitory, brought us to the repose of
the spiritual Sabbath. Consequently, the Sabbath alone, and none of
the other solemnities and sacrifices, is mentioned in the precepts of
the decalogue.
Reply to Objection 3: As the Apostle says (Heb. 6:16), "men swear by
one greater than themselves; and an oath for confirmation is the end
of all their controversy." Hence, since oaths are common to all,
inordinate swearing is the matter of a special prohibition by a
precept of the decalogue. According to one interpretation, however,
the words, "Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in
vain," are a prohibition of false doctrine, for one gloss expounds
them thus: "Thou shalt not say that Christ is a creature."