"you shall see my face no more, you all, among whom I have gone about
preaching the Kingdom." So that he may well (say), "Wherefore I take you to
record (read [διὸ μαρτ] . for [διαμαρτ].)—seeing I shall be with you no more—
"that I am pure from the blood of all men." [Acts 20:26] Do you mark how he
terrifies them, and troubled and afflicted as their souls are, how hard he rubs
them ([ἐ] [πιτρίβει])? But it was necessary. "For I have not shunned," he says,
"to declare unto you all the counsel of God." [Acts 20:27] Why then, he who
does not speak, has blood to answer for: that is, murder! Nothing could be more
terrifying than this. He shows that they also, if they do it not, have blood to
answer for. So, whereas he seems to be justifying himself, in fact he is terrifying
them. "Take heed therefore unto yourselves, and to all the flock, over the which
the Holy Ghost has made you overseers (or, bishops) to feed the Church of God
(see note 3), which He has purchased with His own blood." [Acts 20:28] Do you
mark? He enjoins them two things. Neither success in bringing others right of
itself is any gain— for, I fear, he says, "lest by any means, when I have preached
to others, I myself should be a cast-away" [1 Corinthians 9:27]; nor the being
diligent for one's self alone. For such an one is selfish, and seeks his own good
only, and is like to him who buried his talent. "Take heed to yourselves:" this he
says, not because our own salvation is more precious than that of the flock, but
because, when we take heed to ourselves, then the flock also is a gainer. "In
which the Holy Ghost has made you overseers, to feed the Church of God." See,
it is from the Spirit you have your ordination. This is one constraint: then he
says, "To feed the Church of the Lord." Lo! Another obligation: the Church is the
Lord's. And a third: "which He has purchased with His own blood." It shows
how precious the concern is; that the peril is about no small matters, seeing that
even His own blood He spared not. He indeed, that he might reconcile those who
were enemies, poured out even His blood: but thou, even when they have
become your friends, are not able to retain them. "For I know this, that after my
departing shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock."
[Acts 20:29] Again he engages ([ἐ] [πιστρέφει]) them from another quarter, from

the things which should come after: as when he says, "We wrestle not against
flesh and blood. After my departing," he says, "grievous wolves shall enter in
among you" [Ephesians 6:12]; twofold the evil, both that he himself would not
be present, and that others would assail them. "Then why depart, if you know this
beforehand?" The Spirit draws me, he says. Both "wolves," and "grievous, not
sparing the flock;" and what is worse, even "from among your own selves:" the
grievous thing (this), when the war is moreover an intestine war. The matter is
exceeding serious, for it is "the Church of the Lord:" great the peril for with
blood He redeemed it: mighty the war, and twofold. "Also of your own selves
shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after them."
[Acts 20:30] "How then? What comfort shall there be?" "Therefore watch, and
remember, that by the space of three years I ceased not to warn every one night
and day with tears." [Acts 20:31] See how many strong expressions are here:
"with tears," and "night and day," and "every one." For it was not that if he saw
many, then he came in (to the work), but even were it for a single soul, he was
capable of doing everything (for that one soul). So it was, in fact, that he
compacted them together ([συνεκρότησεν]) (so firmly as he did). "Enough done
on my part: three years have I remained:" they had establishing enough, he says;
enough of roofing. "With tears," he says. Do you see that the tears were on this
account? The bad man grieves not: grieve thou: perhaps he will grieve also. As,
when the sick man sees his physician partaking of food, he also is incited to do
the same: so likewise here, when he sees you weeping, he is softened: he will be
a good and great man.
(Recapitulation.) "Not knowing," he says, "the things that shall befall me."
(v. 22, 23.) Then is this why you depart? By no means; on the contrary (I know
that), "bonds and afflictions await me." That (there are) trials, I know, but of
what kind I know not: which was more grievous. "But none of these things move
me" [Acts 20:24]: for do not suppose that I say these things as lamenting them:
for "I hold not my own life dear." It is to raise up their minds that he says all this,
and to persuade them not only not to flee, but also to bear nobly. Therefore it is