SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.185, C.9.

possess as much as you receive, clothe yourself with what is given
to you." Hence fasting is not acceptable to God if it is done of one's
own will, according to Is. 58:3, "Behold in the day of your fast your
own will is found."
Secondly, because the vow of obedience includes the other vows,
but not vice versa: for a religious, though bound by vow to observe
continence and poverty, yet these also come under obedience, as
well as many other things besides the keeping of continence and
poverty.
Thirdly, because the vow of obedience extends properly to those
acts that are closely connected with the end of religion; and the
more closely a thing is connected with the end, the better it is.
It follows from this that the vow of obedience is more essential to the
religious life. For if a man without taking a vow of obedience were to
observe, even by vow, voluntary poverty and continence, he would
not therefore belong to the religious state, which is to be preferred to
virginity observed even by vow; for Augustine says (De Virgin. xlvi):
"No one, methinks, would prefer virginity to the monastic life."
Reply to Objection 1: The counsel of obedience was included in the
very following of Christ, since to obey is to follow another's will.
Consequently it is more pertinent to perfection than the vow of
poverty, because as Jerome, commenting on Mt. 19:27, "Behold we
have left all things," observes, "Peter added that which is perfect
when he said: And have followed Thee."
Reply to Objection 2: The words quoted mean that continence is to
be preferred, not to all other acts of virtue, but to conjugal chastity,
or to external riches of gold and silver which are measured by
weight. Or again continence is taken in a general sense for
abstinence from ali evil, as stated above (Question 155, Article 4, ad
1).
Reply to Objection 3: The Pope cannot dispense a religious from his
vow of obedience so as to release him from obedience to every
superior in matters relating to the perfection of life, for he cannot
exempt him from obedience to himself. He can, however, exempt him
from subjection to a lower superior, but this is not to dispense him
from his vow of obedience.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.185, C.9.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.185, C.10.

### ARTICLE 9. Whether a religious sins mortally whenever he

transgresses the things contained in his rule?
Objection 1: It would seem that a religious sins mortally whenever he
transgresses the things contained in his rule. For to break a vow is a
sin worthy of condemnation, as appears from 1 Tim. 5:11,12, where
the Apostle says that widows who "will marry have damnation,
because they have made void their first faith." But religious are
bound to a rule by the vows of their profession. Therefore they sin
mortally by transgressing the things contained in their rule.
Objection 2: Further, the rule is enjoined upon a religious in the
same way as a law. Now he who transgresses a precept of law sins
mortally. Therefore it would seem that a monk sins mortally if he
transgresses the things contained in his rule.
Objection 3: Further, contempt involves a mortal sin. Now whoever
repeatedly does what he ought not to do seems to sin from
contempt. Therefore it would seem that a religious sins mortally by
frequently transgressing the things contained in his rule.
On the contrary, The religious state is safer than the secular state;
wherefore Gregory at the beginning of his Morals [Epist. Missoria, ad
Leand. Episc. i] compares the secular life to the stormy sea, and the
religious life to the calm port. But if every transgression of the things
contained in his rule were to involve a religious in mortal sin, the
religious life would be fraught with danger of account of its multitude
of observances. Therefore not every transgression of the things
contained in the rule is a mortal sin.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1, ad 1,2), a thing is contained
in the rule in two ways. First, as the end of the rule, for instance
things that pertain to the acts of the virtues; and the transgression of
these, as regards those which come under a common precept,
involves a mortal sin; but as regards those which are not included in
the common obligation of a precept, the transgression thereof does
not involve a mortal sin, except by reason of contempt, because, as
stated above (Article 2), a religious is not bound to be perfect, but to
tend to perfection, to which the contempt of perfection is opposed.
Secondly, a thing is contained in the rule through pertaining to the