knowing that one of the twelve was a traitor? What profit? What advantage?
Much. For, when we know whence it was that he arrived at this deadly counsel,
we are on our guard that we too suffer not the like. Whence came he to this?
From the love of money. He was a thief. For thirty pieces of silver he betrayed
his Lord. So drunken was he with the passion, he betrayed the Lord of the world
for thirty pieces of silver. What can be worse than this madness? Him to whom
nothing is equivalent, nothing is equal, "before whom the nations are as nothing"
[Isaiah 40:15], Him did he betray for thirty pieces of silver. A grievous tyrant
indeed is the love of gold, and terrible in putting the soul beside itself. A man is
not so beside himself through drunkenness as through love of money, not so
much from madness and insanity as from love of money.
For tell me, why did you betray Him? He called you, when a man unmarked
and unknown. He made you one of the twelve, He gave you a share in His
teaching, He promised you ten thousand good things, He caused you to work
wonders, thou were sharer of the same table, the same journeys, the same
company, the same intercourse, as the rest. And were not these things sufficient
to restrain you? For what reason did you betray Him? What had you to charge
Him with, O wicked one? Rather, what good did you not receive at His hands?
He knew your mind, and ceased not to do His part. He often said, "One of you
shall betray Me." [Matthew 26:21] He often marked you, and yet spared you,
and though He knew you to be such an one, yet cast you not out of the band. He
still bore with you, He still honored you, and loved you, as a true disciple, and as
one of the twelve, and last of all (oh, for your vileness!), He took a towel, and
with His own unsullied hands He washed your polluted feet, and even this did
not keep you back. You stole the things of the poor, and that you might not go on
to greater sin, He bore this too. Nothing persuaded you. Had you been a beast, or
a stone, would you not have been changed by these kindnesses towards you, by
these wonders, by these teachings? Though you were thus brutalized, yet still He
called you, and by wondrous works He drew you, you were more senseless than
a stone, to Himself. Yet for none of these things did you become better.

You wonder perhaps at such folly of the traitor; dread therefore that which
wounded him. He became such from avarice, from the love of money. Cut out
this passion, for to these diseases does it give birth; it makes us impious, and
causes us to be ignorant of God, though we have received ten thousand benefits
at His hands. Cut it out, I entreat you, it is no common disease, it knows how to
give birth to a thousand destructive deaths. We have seen his tragedy. Let us fear
lest we too fall into the same snares. For this is it written, that we too should not
suffer the same things. Hence did all the Evangelists relate it, that they might
restrain us. Flee then far from it. Covetousness consists not alone in the love of
much money, but in loving money at all. It is grievous avarice to desire more
than we need. Was it talents of gold that persuaded the traitor? For thirty pieces
of silver he betrayed his Lord. Do ye not remember what I said before, that
covetousness is not shown in receiving much, but rather in receiving little
things? See how great a crime he committed for a little gold, rather not for gold,
but for pieces of silver.
It cannot, it cannot be that an avaricious man should ever see the face of
Christ! This is one of the things which are impossible. It is a root of evils, and if
he that possesses one evil thing, falls from that glory, where shall he stand who
bears with him the root? He who is the servant of money cannot be a true servant
of Christ. Christ Himself has declared that the thing is impossible. "You cannot,"
He says, "serve God and Mammon," and, "No man can serve two masters"
[Matthew 6:24], for they lay upon us contrary orders. Christ says, "Spare the
poor"; Mammon says, "Even from the naked strip off the things they have."
Christ says, "Empty yourself of what you have"; Mammon says, "Take also what
you have not." Do you see the opposition, do you see the strife? How is it that a
man cannot easily obey both, but must despise one? Nay, does it need proof?
How so? Do we not see in very deed, that Christ is despised, and Mammon
honored? Perceive ye not how that the very words are painful? How much more
then the thing itself? But it does not appear so painful in reality, because we are
possessed with the disease. Now if the soul be but a little cleansed of the disease,