distinction of the Divine Persons is only according to origin, or,
rather, relations of origin. Now the mode of origin is not the same in
all things, but in each thing is adapted to the nature thereof;
animated things being produced in one way, and inanimate in
another; animals in one way, and plants in another. Wherefore it is
manifest that the distinction of the Divine Persons is suitable to the
Divine Nature; and therefore to be to the image of God by imitation of
the Divine Nature does not exclude being to the same image by the
representation of the Divine Persons: but rather one follows from the
other. We must, therefore, say that in man there exists the image of
God, both as regards the Divine Nature and as regards the Trinity of
Persons; for also in God Himself there is one Nature in Three
Persons.
Thus it is clear how to solve the first two objections.
Reply to Objection 3: This argument would avail if the image of God
in man represented God in a perfect manner. But, as Augustine says
(De Trin. xv, 6), there is a great difference between the trinity within
ourselves and the Divine Trinity. Therefore, as he there says: "We
see, rather than believe, the trinity which is in ourselves; whereas we
believe rather than see that God is Trinity."
Reply to Objection 4: Some have said that in man there is an image
of the Son only. Augustine rejects this opinion (De Trin. xii, 5,6).
First, because as the Son is like to the Father by a likeness of
essence, it would follow of necessity if man were made in likeness to
the Son, that he is made to the likeness of the Father. Secondly,
because if man were made only to the image of the Son, the Father
would not have said, "Let Us make man to Our own image and
likeness"; but "to Thy image." When, therefore, it is written, "He
made him to the image of God," the sense is not that the Father
made man to the image of the Son only, Who is God, as some
explained it, but that the Divine Trinity made man to Its image, that
is, of the whole Trinity. When it is said that God "made man to His
image," this can be understood in two ways: first, so that this
preposition "to" points to the term of the making, and then the sense
is, "Let Us make man in such a way that Our image may be in him."
Secondly, this preposition 'to' may point to the exemplar cause, as
when we say, "This book is made (like) to that one." Thus the image
of God is the very Essence of God, Which is incorrectly called an
image forasmuch as image is put for the exemplar. Or, as some say,
the Divine Essence is called an image because thereby one Person

imitates another.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether the image of God is in man as regards

the mind only?
Objection 1: It would seem that the image of God is not only in man's
mind. For the Apostle says (1 Cor. 11:7) that "the man is the
image . . . of God." But man is not only mind. Therefore the image of
God is to be observed not only in his mind.
Objection 2: Further, it is written (Gn. 1:27): "God created man to His
own image; to the image of God He created him; male and female He
created them." But the distinction of male and female is in the body.
Therefore the image of God is also in the body, and not only in the
mind.
Objection 3: Further, an image seems to apply principally to the
shape of a thing. But shape belongs to the body. Therefore the
image of God is to be seen in man's body also, and not in his mind.
Objection 4: Further, according to Augustine (Gen. ad lit. xii, 7,24)
there is a threefold vision in us, "corporeal," "spiritual," or
imaginary, and "intellectual." Therefore, if in the intellectual vision
that belongs to the mind there exists in us a trinity by reason of
which we are made to the image of God, for the like reason there
must be another trinity in the others.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (Eph. 4:23,24): "Be renewed in the
spirit of your mind, and put on the new man." Whence we are given
to understand that our renewal which consists in putting on the new
man, belongs to the mind. Now, he says (Col. 3:10): "Putting on the
new" man; "him who is renewed unto knowledge" of God,
"according to the image of Him that created him," where the renewal
which consists in putting on the new man is ascribed to the image of
God. Therefore to be to the image of God belongs to the mind only.
I answer that, While in all creatures there is some kind of likeness to
God, in the rational creature alone we find a likeness of "image" as
we have explained above (Articles 1,2); whereas in other creatures
we find a likeness by way of a "trace." Now the intellect or mind is
that whereby the rational creature excels other creatures; wherefore
this image of God is not found even in the rational creature except in
the mind; while in the other parts, which the rational creature may