aware that this was a great thing, for writing to Philemon he says, "Whom I have
begotten in my bonds." [Philemon 10] And this he said, that we should not be
dispirited when in adversity, but even rejoice. At this place was Philemon with
these (Colossians). For in the Epistle to him he says, "And to Archippus our
fellow-soldier" [Philemon 2]; and in this, "Say to Archippus." [Colossians 4:17]
This man seems to me to have been charged with some office in the Church.
But he had not seen either these people, or the Romans, or the Hebrews,
when he wrote to them. That this is true of the others, he shows in many places;
with regard to the Colossians, hear him saying, "And as many as have not seen
my face in the flesh" [Colossians 2:1-5]: and again, "Though I am absent in the
flesh, yet am I with you in the spirit." So great a thing did he know his presence
everywhere to be. And always, even though he be absent, he makes himself
present. So, when he punishes the fornicator, look how he places himself on the
tribunal; "for," he says, "I verily being absent in body, but present in spirit, have
judged already as though I were present" [1 Corinthians 5:3]: and again, "I will
come to you, and will know not the word of them which are puffed up, but the
power" [1 Corinthians 4:19]: and again, "Not only when I am present with you,
but much more when I am absent." [Philippians 2:12; Galatians 4:18]
"Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ through the will of God."
It were well also to say, what from considering this Epistle we have found
to be its occasion and subject. What then is it? They used to approach God
through angels; they held many Jewish and Grecian observances. These things
then he is correcting. Wherefore in the very outset he says, "Through the will of
God." So here again he has used the expression "through." "And Timothy the
brother," he says; of course then he too was an Apostle, and probably also
known to them. "To the saints which are at Colossæ." This was a city of Phrygia,
as is plain from Laodicea's being near to it. "And faithful brethren in Christ."
[Colossians 4:16] Whence, says he, are you made a saint? Tell me. Whence are
you called faithful? Is it not because thou were sanctified through death? Is it not
because you have faith in Christ? Whence are you made a brother? For neither in

deed, nor in word, nor in achievement did you show yourself faithful. Tell me,
whence is it that you have been entrusted with so great mysteries? Is it not
because of Christ?
"Grace to you and peace from God our Father." Whence comes grace to
you? Whence peace? "From God," says he, "our Father." Although he uses not
in this place the name of Christ.
I will ask those who speak disparagingly of the Spirit, Whence is God the
Father of servants? Who wrought these mighty achievements? Who made you a
saint? Who faithful? Who a son of God? He who made you worthy to be trusted,
the same is also the cause of your being entrusted with all.
For we are called faithful, not only because we have faith, but also because
we are entrusted of God with mysteries which not even angels knew before us.
However, to Paul it was indifferent whether or not to put it thus.
Ver. 3. "We give thanks to God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ."
He seems to me to refer everything to the Father, that what he has to say
may not at once offend them.
"Praying always for you."
He shows his love, not by giving thanks only, but also by continual prayer,
in that those whom he did not see, he had continually within himself.
Ver. 4. ["Having heard of your faith in Christ Jesus."
A little above he said, "our Lord." "He," says he, "is Lord, not the servants."
"Of Jesus Christ." These names also are symbols of His benefit to us, for "He," it
means, "shall save His people from their sins." [Matthew 1:21]]
Ver. 4. "Having heard of your faith in Christ Jesus, and of the love which
you have toward all the saints."
Already he conciliates them. It was Epaphroditus who brought him this
account. But he sends the Epistle by Tychicus, retaining Epaphroditus with
himself. "And of the love," he says, "which you have toward all the saints," not
toward this one and that: of course then toward us also.
Ver. 5. "Because of the hope which is laid up for you in the heavens."