this. For he would not, when consoling the slave and signifying that he was in no
respect injured, have told him to get free. Since perhaps some one might say,
"What then, if I am not able? I am an injured and degraded person." This then is
not what he says: but as I said, meaning to point out that a man gets nothing by
being made free, he says, "Though you have it in your power to be made free,
remain rather in slavery."
Next he adds also the cause; "For he that was called in the Lord being a
bondservant, is the Lord's free man: likewise he that was called, being free, is
Christ's bondservant." "For," says he, in the things that relate to Christ, both are
equal: and like as you are the slave of Christ, so also is your master. How then is
the slave a free man? Because He has freed you not only from sin, but also from
outward slavery while continuing a slave. For he suffers not the slave to be a
slave, not even though he be a man abiding in slavery: and this is the great
wonder.
But how is the slave a free man while continuing a slave? When he is freed
from passions and the diseases of the mind: when he looks down upon riches and
wrath and all other the like passions.

1 Corinthians 7:23-24
"You were bought with a price: become not bondservants of men." This
saying is addressed not to slaves only but also to free men. For it is possible for
one who is a slave not to be a slave; and for one who is a freeman to be a slave.
"And how can one be a slave and not a slave?" When he does all for God: when
he feigns nothing, and does nothing out of eye-service towards men: that is how
one that is a slave to men can be free. Or again, how does one that is free
become a slave? When he serves men in any evil service, either for gluttony or
desire of wealth or for office' sake. For such an one, though he be free, is more
of a slave than any man.
And consider both these points. Joseph was a slave but not a slave to men:
wherefore even in slavery he was freer than all that are free. For instance, he
yielded not to his mistress; yielded not to the purposes which she who possessed
him desired. Again she was free; yet none ever so like a slave, courting and
beseeching her own servant. But she prevailed not on him, who was free, to do
what he would not. This then was not slavery; but it was liberty of the most
exalted kind. For what impediment to virtue had he from his slavery? Let men
hear, both slaves and free. Which was the slave? He that was entreated or she
that did entreat? She that besought or he that despised her supplication?
In fact, there are limits set to slaves by God Himself; and up to what point
one ought to keep them, has also been determined, and to transgress them is
wrong. Namely, when your master commands nothing which is unpleasing to
God, it is right to follow and to obey; but no farther. For thus the slave becomes
free. But if you go further, even though you are free you have become a slave. At
least he intimates this, saying, "Be not ye the servants of men."
But if this be not the meaning, if he bade them forsake their masters and
strive contentiously to become free, in what sense did he exhort them, saying,