SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.186, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether religious are bound to manual labor?

Objection 1: It would seem that religious are bound to manual labor.
For religious are not exempt from the observance of precepts. Now
manual labor is a matter of precept according to 1 Thess. 4:11,
"Work with your own hands as we commanded you"; wherefore
Augustine says (De oper. Monach. xxx): "But who can allow these
insolent men," namely religious that do no work, of whom he is
speaking there, "who disregard the most salutary admonishment of
the Apostle, not merely to be borne with as being weaker than
others, but even to preach as though they were holier than others."
Therefore it would seem that religious are bound to manual labor.
Objection 2: Further, a gloss [St. Augustine, De oper. Monach. xxi]
on 2 Thess. 3:10, "If any man will not work, neither let him eat," says:
"Some say that this command of the Apostle refers to spiritual
works, and not to the bodily labor of the farmer or craftsman"; and
further on: "But it is useless for them to try to hide from themselves
and from others the fact that they are unwilling not only to fulfil, but
even to understand the useful admonishments of charity"; and
again: "He wishes God's servants to make a living by working with
their bodies." Now religious especially are called servants of God,
because they give themselves entirely to the service of God, as
Dionysius asserts (Eccl. Hier. vi). Therefore it would seem that they
are bound to manual labor.
Objection 3: Further, Augustine says (De oper. Monach. xvii): "I
would fain know how they would occupy themselves, who are
unwilling to work with their body. We occupy our time, say they, with
prayers, psalms, reading, and the word of God." Yet these things are
no excuse, and he proves this, as regards each in particular. For in
the first place, as to prayer, he says: "One prayer of the obedient
man is sooner granted than ten thousand prayers of the
contemptuous": meaning that those are contemptuous and unworthy
to be heard who work not with their hands. Secondly, as to the divine
praises he adds: "Even while working with their hands they can
easily sing hymns to God." Thirdly, with regard to reading, he goes
on to say: "Those who say they are occupied in reading, do they not
find there what the Apostle commanded? What sort of perverseness
is this, to wish to read but not to obey what one reads?" Fourthly, he
adds in reference to preaching [Cap. xviii]: "If one has to speak, and

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.186, C.4.

is so busy that he cannot spare time for manual work, can all in the
monastery do this? And since all cannot do this, why should all
make this a pretext for being exempt? And even if all were able, they
should do so by turns, not only so that the others may be occupied
in other works, but also because it suffices that one speak while
many listen." Therefore it would seem that religious should not
desist from manual labor on account of such like spiritual works to
which they devote themselves.
Objection 4: Further, a gloss on Lk. 12:33, "Sell what you possess,"
says: "Not only give your clothes to the poor, but sell what you
possess, that having once for all renounced all your possessions for
the Lord's sake, you may henceforth work with the labor of your
hands, so as to have wherewith to live or to give alms." Now it
belongs properly to religious to renounce all they have. Therefore it
would seem likewise to belong to them to live and give alms through
the labor of their hands.
Objection 5: Further, religious especially would seem to be bound to
imitate the life of the apostles, since they profess the state of
perfection. Now the apostles worked with their own hands,
according to 1 Cor. 4:12: "We labor, working with our own hands."
Therefore it would seem that religious are bound to manual labor.
On the contrary, Those precepts that are commonly enjoined upon
all are equally binding on religious and seculars. But the precept of
manual labor is enjoined upon all in common, as appears from 2
Thess. 3:6, "Withdraw yourselves from every brother walking
disorderly," etc. (for by brother he signifies every Christian,
according to 1 Cor. 7:12, "If any brother have a wife that believeth
not"). Now it is written in the same passage (2 Thess. 3:10): "If any
man will not work, neither let him eat." Therefore religious are not
bound to manual labor any more than seculars are.
I answer that, Manual labor is directed to four things. First and
principally to obtain food; wherefore it was said to the first man (Gn.
3:19): "In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread," and it is written
(Ps. 127:2): "For thou shalt eat the labors of thy hands." Secondly, it
is directed to the removal of idleness whence arise many evils;
hence it is written (Ecclus. 33:28,29): "Send" thy slave "to work, that
he be not idle, for idleness hath taught much evil." Thirdly, it is
directed to the curbing of concupiscence, inasmuch as it is a means
of afflicting the body; hence it is written (2 Cor. 6:5,6): "In labors, in