22. To return, however, to the new opinions mentioned above, a number of things are proposed or
suggested by some even against the divine authorship of Sacred Scripture. For some go so far as to
pervert the sense of the Vatican Council's definition that God is the author of Holy Scripture, and they
put forward again the opinion, already often condemned, which asserts that immunity from error
extends only to those parts of the Bible that treat of God or of moral and religious matters. They even
wrongly speak of a human sense of the Scriptures, beneath which a divine sense, which they say is
the only infallible meaning, lies hidden. In interpreting Scripture, they will take no account of the
analogy of faith and the Tradition of the Church. Thus they judge the doctrine of the Fathers and of
the Teaching Church by the norm of Holy Scripture, interpreted by the purely human reason of exegetes, instead of explaining Holy Scripture according to the mind of the Church which Christ Our
Lord has appointed guardian and interpreter of the whole deposit of divinely revealed truth.

23. Further, according to their fictitious opinions, the literal sense of Holy Scripture and its
explanation, carefully worked out under the Church's vigilance by so many great exegetes, should
yield now to a new exegesis, which they are pleased to call symbolic or spiritual. By means of this
new exegesis of the Old Testament, which today in the Church is a sealed book, would finally be
thrown open to all the faithful. By this method, they say, all difficulties vanish, difficulties which hinder
only those who adhere to the literal meaning of the Scriptures.

24. Everyone sees how foreign all this is to the principles and norms of interpretation rightly fixed by
our predecessors of happy memory, Leo XIII in his Encyclical "Providentissimus Deus," and Benedict
XV in the Encyclical "Spiritus Paraclitus," as also by Ourselves in the Encyclical "Divino Afflante
Spiritu."

25. It is not surprising that novelties of this kind have already borne their deadly fruit in almost all
branches of theology. It is now doubted that human reason, without divine revelation and the help of
divine grace, can, by arguments drawn from the created universe, prove the existence of a personal
God; it is denied that the world had a beginning; it is argued that the creation of the world is
necessary, since it proceeds from the necessary liberality of divine love; it is denied that God has
eternal and infallible foreknowledge of the free actions of men - all this in contradiction to the decrees
of the Vatican Council.

26. Some also question whether angels are personal beings, and whether matter and spirit differ
essentially. Others destroy the gratuity of the supernatural order, since God, they say, cannot create
intellectual beings without ordering and calling them to the beatific vision. Nor is this all. Disregarding
the Council of Trent, some pervert the very concept of original sin, along with the concept of sin in
general as an offense against God, as well as the idea of satisfaction performed for us by Christ. Some
even say that the doctrine of transubstantiation, based on an antiquated philosophic notion of
substance, should be so modified that the real presence of Christ in the Holy Eucharist be reduced to
a kind of symbolism, whereby the consecrated species would be merely efficacious signs of the
spiritual presence of Christ and of His intimate union with the faithful members of His Mystical Body.