I mean such as Paul, who being on earth, spent their lives in heaven. But
why do I say "in heaven"? They were higher than the Heaven, yea than the other
heaven, and mounted up to God Himself. For, "who" (he says) "shall separate us
from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine,
or nakedness, or peril, or sword?" [Romans 8:35] And again, "while we look not
at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen." [2
Corinthians 4:18] Do you see that he did not even see the things here? But to
show you that he was higher than the heavens, hear him saying himself, "For I
am persuaded that neither death, or life, nor things present, nor things to come,
nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from
the love of Christ." [Romans 8:38-39]
Do you see how thought, hurrying past all things, made him higher not than
this creation only, not than these heavens, but even [than any other also] if any
other there were? Have you seen the elevation of his mind? Have you seen what
the tent-maker became, because he had the will, he who had spent his whole life
in the market-place?
9. For there is no hindrance, no not any, but that we may rise above all men,
if we have the will. For if we are so successful in arts that are beyond the reach
of the generality, much more in that which does not require so great labor.
For, tell me, what is more difficult than to walk along a tight rope, as if on
level ground, and when walking on high to dress and undress, as if sitting on a
couch? Does not the performance seem to us to be so frightful, that we are not
even willing to look at it, but are terrified and tremble at the very sight? And tell
me, what is more difficult than to hold a pole upon your face, and when you
have put up a child upon it, to perform innumerable feats and delight the
spectators? And what is more difficult than to play at ball with swords? And tell
me what is harder than thoroughly to search out the bottom of the sea? And one
might mention innumerable other arts.
But easier than all these, if we have the will, is virtue, and the going up into
Heaven. For here it is only necessary to have the will, and all [the rest] follows.

For we may not say, I am unable, neither accuse the Creator. For if He made us
unable, and then commands, it is an accusation against Himself.
10. How is it then (some one says) that many are not able? How is it then
that many are not willing? For, if they be willing, all will be able. Therefore also
Paul says, "I would that all men were even as I myself" [1 Corinthians 7:7], since
he knew that all were able to be as himself. For he would not have said this, if it
had been impossible. Do you wish to become [such]? Only lay hold on the
beginning.
Tell me now, in the case of any arts, when we wish to attain them, are we
content with wishing, or do we also engage with the things themselves? As for
instance, one wishes to become a pilot; he does not say, I wish, and content
himself with that, but he also puts his hand to the work. He wishes to become a
merchant; he does not merely say, I wish, but he also puts his hand to the work.
Again he wishes to travel abroad, and he does not say, I wish, but he puts his
hand to the work. In everything then, wishing alone is not sufficient, but work
must also be added; and when you wish to mount up to heaven, do you merely
say, "I wish"?
How then (he says) did you say that willing is sufficient? [I meant] willing
joined with deeds, the laying hold on the thing itself, the laboring. For we have
God working with us, and acting with us. Only let us make our choice, only let
us apply ourselves to the matter as to work, only let us think earnestly about it,
only let us lay it to heart, and all follows. But if we sleep on, and as we snore
expect to enter into heaven, how shall we be able to obtain the heavenly
inheritance?
Let us therefore be willing, I exhort you, let us be willing. Why do we carry
on all our traffic with reference to the present life, which tomorrow we shall
leave? Let us choose then that Virtue which will suffice us through all eternity:
wherein we shall be continually, and shall enjoy the everlasting good things;
which may we all attain, in Christ Jesus our Lord, with whom to the Father
together with the Holy Ghost be glory, power, honor, now and for ever and world