pang would expel all kinds of dejection. Here then is another thing also which
we should gain by our thorough confession; namely, the not being overwhelmed
([βαπτίζεσθαι]) with the pains of the present life, nor puffed up with its
splendors. And in this way, again, we should more entirely propitiate God; just
as by our present conduct we provoke Him to anger. For tell me, if you have a
servant, and he, after suffering much evil at the hands of his fellow-servants,
takes no account of any one of the rest, but is only anxious not to provoke his
master; is he not able by this alone to do away your anger? But what, if his
offenses against you are no manner of care to him, while on those against his
fellow-servants he is full of thought; will you not lay on him the heavier
punishment? So also God does: when we neglect His wrath, He brings it upon us
more heavily; but when we regard it, more gently. Yea, rather, He lays it on us no
more at all. He wills that we should exact vengeance of ourselves for our
offenses, and thenceforth He does not exact it Himself. For this is why He at all
threatens punishment; that by fear He may destroy contempt; and when the
threat alone is sufficient to cause fear in us, He does not suffer us to undergo the
actual trial. See, for instance, what He says unto Jeremiah, [Jeremiah 7:17-18.
Septuagint, transposing the first and second clauses] "Do you see not what they
do? Their fathers light a fire, their children gather sticks together, their women
knead dough." It is to be feared lest the same kind of thing be said also
concerning us. "Do you see not what they do? No one seeks the things of Christ,
but all their own. Their children run into uncleanness, their fathers into
covetousness and rapine, their wives so far from keeping back their husbands
from the pomps and vanities of life, do rather sharpen their appetites for them."
Just take your stand in the market place; question the comers and goers, and not
one will you see hastening upon a spiritual errand, but all running after carnal
things. How long ere we awake from our surfeiting? How long are we to keep
sinking down into deep slumber? Have we not had our fill of evils?
9. And yet one might think that even without words experience itself is
sufficient to teach you the nothingness of things present, and their utter

meanness. At all events, there have been men, who, exercising mere heathen
wisdom and knowing nothing of the future, because they had proved the great
worthlessness of present things, have left them on this account alone. What
pardon then can you expect to obtain, grovelling on the ground and not despising
the little things and transient for the sake of the great and everlasting: who also
hear God Himself declaring and revealing these things unto you, and hast such
promises from Him? For that things here have no sufficient power to detain a
man, those have shown who even without any promise of things greater have
kept away from them. For what wealth did they expect that they came to
poverty? There was none. But it was from their knowing full well that such
poverty is better than wealth. What sort of life did they hope for that they
forsook luxury, and gave themselves up unto severe discipline? Not any. But
they had become aware of the very nature of things; and perceived that this of
the two is more suitable, both for the strict training of the soul, and for the health
of the body.
These things then duly estimating, and revolving with ourselves continually
the future blessings, let us withdraw from this present world that we may obtain
that other which is to come; through the favor and loving kindness of our Lord
Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father and the Holy Ghost etc., etc.