SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.98, C.4.

and to certain other sacred things. And the holiness of a place is
directed to the holiness of man, who worships God in a holy place.
For it is written (2 Macc. 5:19): "God did not choose the people for
the place's sake, but the place for the people's sake." Hence
sacrilege committed against a sacred person is a graver sin than that
which is committed against a sacred place. Yet in either species
there are various degrees of sacrilege, according to differences of
sacred persons and places.
In like manner the third species of sacrilege, which is committed
against other sacred things, has various degrees, according to the
differences of sacred things. Among these the highest place belongs
to the sacraments whereby man is sanctified: chief of which is the
sacrament of the Eucharist, for it contains Christ Himself. Wherefore
the sacrilege that is committed against this sacrament is the gravest
of all. The second place, after the sacraments, belongs to the vessels
consecrated for the administration of the sacraments; also sacred
images, and the relics of the saints, wherein the very persons of the
saints, so to speak, are reverenced and honored. After these come
things connected with the apparel of the Church and its ministers;
and those things, whether movable or immovable, that are deputed
to the upkeep of the ministers. And whoever sins against any one of
the aforesaid incurs the crime of sacrilege.
Reply to Objection 1: There is not the same aspect of holiness in all
the aforesaid: wherefore the diversity of sacred things is not only a
material, but also a formal difference.
Reply to Objection 2: Nothing hinders two things from belonging to
one species in one respect, and to different species in another
respect. Thus Socrates and Plato belong to the one species,
"animal," but differ in the species "colored thing," if one be white
and the other black. In like manner it is possible for two sins to differ
specifically as to their material acts, and to belong to the same
species as regards the one formal aspect of sacrilege: for instance,
the violation of a nun by blows or by copulation.
Reply to Objection 3: Every sin committed by a sacred person is a
sacrilege materially and accidentally as it were. Hence Jerome [St.
Bernard, De Consideration, ii, 13] says that "a trifle on a priest's lips
is a sacrilege or a blasphemy." But formally and properly speaking a
sin committed by a sacred person is a sacrilege only when it is
committed against his holiness, for instance if a virgin consecrated

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.98, C.4.

to God be guilty of fornication: and the same is to be said of other
instances.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.98, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the punishment of sacrilege should be