invested, so ours ought to be discernible by the soul. That is, the believer ought
to be manifest not by the gift only, but also by the new life. The believer ought to
be the light and salt of the world. But when thou dost not give light even to
yourself, neither bind up your own gangrene, what remains, whereby we are to
know you? Because you have entered the holy waters? Nay, this to you becomes
a store of punishment. For greatness of honor is, to them who do not choose to
live worthy of the honor, an increase of vengeance. Yea, the believer ought to
shine forth not only by what he has received from God, but also by what he
himself has contributed; and should be discernible by everything, by his gait, by
his look, by his garb, by his voice. And this I have said, not that display, but that
the profit of beholders, may be the rule by which we frame ourselves.
15. But now, what things soever I might seek to recognize you by, I find
you in all points distinguished by the contraries of the same. For whether by
your place I would fain discern you, I see you spending your day in horse races,
and theatres, and scenes of lawlessness, in the wicked assemblies in the market
places, and in companies of depraved men; or by the fashion of your
countenance, I see you continually laughing to excess, and dissolute as a
grinning and abandoned harlot; or by your clothes, I see you in no better trim
than the people on the stage; or by your followers, you are leading about
parasites and flatterers; or by your words, I hear you say nothing wholesome,
nothing necessary, nothing of moment to our life; or by your table, yet heavier
from thence will the charge against you appear.
By what then, tell me, am I to recognize the believer in you, while all the
things I have mentioned give the contrary sentence? And why do I say, the
believer? Since I can not clearly make out whether you are a man. For when you
are like an ass, kicking, and like a bull, wantoning, and like a horse neighing
after women; when thou dost play the glutton like the bear, and pamper your
flesh as the mule, and bear malice like the camel; when you prowl as a wolf, art
wrathful as a serpent, stingest like a scorpion, and art crafty as a fox, treasurest
the poison of wickedness like an asp or a viper, and warrest against your

brethren like that evil demon;--how shall I be able to number you with men, not
seeing in you the marks of man's nature. Why, whilst I am seeking the difference
of catechumen and believer, I come near not to find even the difference between
a man and a wild beast. For what shall I call you? A wild beast? Nay, the wild
beasts are possessed by some one of these defects, but you heap all together, and
far surpassest their brutishness. Shall I then call you a devil?(1) Nay, a devil is
not a slave to the dominion of the belly, neither does he set his love on riches.
When therefore you have more faults than either wild beasts or devils, how, I
pray you, shall we call you a man? And if you art not to be styled a man, how
shall we address you as a believer?
16. And what is yet more grievous is this, that being in such evil case, we
have no idea whatever of the deformity of our own soul, nor discern the
hideousness thereof. And yet when you are sitting at a hairdresser's, and having
your hair cut, you take the mirror, and examine with care the arrangement of
your locks, and ask them that stand by, and the haircutter himself, if he has well
disposed what is on the forehead; and being old, for so it often happens, art not
ashamed of going wild with the fancies of youth: while of our own soul, not only
deformed, but transformed into a wild beast, and made a sort of Scylla or
Chimaera, according to the heathen fable, we have not even a slight perception.
And yet in this case too there is a mirror, spiritual, and far more excellent, and
more serviceable than that other one; for it not only shows our own deformity,
but transforms it too, if we be willing, into surpassing beauty. This mirror is the
memory of good men, and the history of their blessed lives; the reading of the
Scriptures; the laws given by God. If thou be willing once only to look upon the
portraitures of those holy men, thou will both see the foulness of your own mind,
and having seen this, wilt need nothing else to be set free from that deformity.
Because the mirror is useful for this purpose also, and makes the change easy.
Let no man therefore continue in the form of the irrational creatures. For if
the slave does not enter into the father's house, how will you, having become
even a wild beast, be able to set your foot within those vestibules? And why say