both? For there is nothing evil in learning one's infirmities by endurance; yea, rather, it has even
the beneficial effect of preventing him from forming an undue opinion of his own nature (non
aberrare in natura sua). But the being lifted up against God, and taking His glory to one's self,
rendering man ungrateful, has brought much evil upon him. [And thus, I say, man must learn both
things by experience], that he may not be destitute of truth and love either towards himself or his
Creator. But the experience of both confers upon him the true knowledge as to God and man,
and increases his love towards God. Now, where there exists an increase of love, there a greater
glory is wrought out by the power of God for those who love Him.
2. Those men, therefore, set aside the power of God, and do not consider what the word declares,
when they dwell upon the infirmity of the flesh, but do not take into consideration the power of
Him who raises it up from the dead. For if He does not vivify what is mortal, and does not bring
back the corruptible to incorruption, He is not a God of power. But that He is powerful in all these
respects, we ought to perceive from our origin, inasmuch as God, taking dust from the earth, formed
man. And surely it is much more difficult and incredible, from non-existent bones, and nerves, and
veins, and the rest of man's organization, to bring it about that all this should be, and to make man
an animated and rational creature, than to reintegrate again that which had been created and then
afterwards decomposed into earth (for the reasons already mentioned), having thus passed into
those [elements] from which man, who had no previous existence, was formed. For He who in the
beginning caused him to have being who as yet was not, just when He pleased, shall much more
reinstate again those who had a former existence, when it is His will [that they should inherit] the
life granted by Him. And that flesh shall also be found fit for and capable of receiving the power
of God, which at the beginning received the skilful touches of God; so that one part became the
eye for seeing; another, the ear for hearing; another, the hand for feeling and working; another, the
sinews stretched out everywhere, and holding the limbs together; another, arteries and veins,
passages for the blood and the air; another, the various internal organs; another, the blood, which
is the bond of union between soul and body. But why go [on in this strain]? Numbers would fail
to express the multiplicity of parts in the human frame, which was made in no other way than by
the great wisdom of God. But those things which partake of the skill and wisdom of God, do also
partake of His power.
3. The flesh, therefore, is not destitute [of participation] in the constructive wisdom and power
of God. But if the power of Him who is the bestower of life is made perfect in weakness —that is,
in the flesh—let them inform us, when they maintain the incapacity of flesh to receive the life
granted by God, whether they do say these things as being living men at present, and partakers of
life, or acknowledge that, having no part in life whatever, they are at the present moment dead men.
Grabe and Harvey, however, would make conjectural emendations in the text, which seem to us to be inadmissible.
quite empty, from all the blood stagnating in the veins when death supervenes.