SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.47, C.2.

multitude of a home or family, and this is ruled by "domestic
prudence": and such again is the multitude of a city or kingdom, the
ruling principle of which is "regnative prudence" in the ruler, and
"political prudence," simply so called, in the subjects.
If, however, prudence be taken in a wide sense, as including also
speculative knowledge, as stated above (Question 47, Article 2, ad 2)
then its parts include "dialectics," "rhetoric" and "physics,"
according to three methods of prudence in the sciences. The first of
these is the attaining of science by demonstration, which belongs to
"physics" (if physics be understood to comprise all demonstrative
sciences). The second method is to arrive at an opinion through
probable premises, and this belongs to "dialectics." The third
method is to employ conjectures in order to induce a certain
suspicion, or to persuade somewhat, and this belongs to "rhetoric."
It may be said, however, that these three belong also to prudence
properly so called, since it argues sometimes from necessary
premises, sometimes from probabilities, and sometimes from
conjectures.
The potential parts of a virtue are the virtues connected with it,
which are directed to certain secondary acts or matters, not having,
as it were, the whole power of the principal virtue. In this way the
parts of prudence are "good counsel," which concerns counsel,
"synesis," which concerns judgment in matters of ordinary
occurrence, and "gnome," which concerns judgment in matters of
exception to the law: while "prudence" is about the chief act, viz. that
of commanding.
Reply to Objection 1: The various enumerations differ, either
because different kinds of parts are assigned, or because that which
is mentioned in one enumeration includes several mentioned in
another enumeration. Thus Tully includes "caution" and
"circumspection" under "foresight," and "reasoning," "docility" and
"shrewdness" under "understanding."
Reply to Objection 2: Here domestic and civic prudence are not to be
taken as sciences, but as kinds of prudence. As to the other three,
the reply may be gathered from what has been said.
Reply to Objection 3: All these things are reckoned parts of
prudence, not by taking them altogether, but in so far as they are

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.47, C.2.

connected with things pertaining to prudence.
Reply to Objection 4: Right command and right use always go
together, because the reason's command is followed by obedience
on the part of the lower powers, which pertain to use.
Reply to Objection 5: Solicitude is included under foresight.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.48, C.1.

## QUESTION 49 — OF EACH QUASI-INTEGRAL PART OF PRUDENCE

Prologue
We must now consider each quasi-integral part of prudence, and
under this head there are eight points of inquiry:
(1) Memory;
(2) Understanding or Intelligence;
(3) Docility;
(4) Shrewdness;
(5) Reason;
(6) Foresight;
(7) Circumspection;
(8) Caution.