acquisition of virtue. To the good indeed then this was the gain from the wicked.
Thus at all events, also trees tossed about by contrary winds, become stronger.
And there is a gain to the wicked from their mixing with the good. They feel
confusion, they are ashamed, they blush in their presence; and even if they do
not abstain from evil, yet nevertheless they dare what they dare with secrecy.
And this is no small thing not to have transgression publicly committed. For the
life of the others becomes the accuser of the wickedness of these. Hear at least
what they say about the righteous man. "He is grievous to us, even when
beheld," and it is no small beginning of amendment to be tormented at his
presence. For if the sight of the righteous man did not torment them, this word
would not have been uttered. But to be stung, and pinched in conscience at his
presence, would be no little hindrance to indulging in wickedness with pleasure,
Do you see how great is the gain both to the good from the wicked, and to the
wicked from the good? On this account God has not set them apart, but allowed
them to be mingled together.
2. Let our argument also about the Devil be the same. For on this account
He has left him also to be here, in order that he might render you the stronger, in
order that he may make the athlete more illustrious, in order that the contests
may be greater. When therefore any one says, why has God left the Devil here?
Say these words to him, because he not only does no harm to the wary and the
heedful, but even profits them, not owing to his own purpose (for that is
wicked), but owing to their courage who have used that wickedness aright. Since
he even fixed upon Job not on this account that he might make him more
illustrious, but in order that he might upset him. On this account he is wicked
both because of such an opinion and such a purpose. But notwithstanding he did
no harm to the righteous man, but he rather rejoiced in the conflict as we
accordingly showed. Both the Demon showed his wickedness and the righteous
man his courage. But he does upset many says one: owing to their weakness, not
owing to his own strength: for this too has been already proved by many
examples. Direct your own intention aright then, and you shall never receive

harm from any, but shall get the greatest gain, not only from the good but even
from the wicked. For on this account, as I have before said, God has suffered
men to be with one another, and especially the wicked with the good, in order
that they may bring them over to their own virtue. Hear at least what Christ saith
to his disciples, "The Kingdom of heaven is like unto a woman who took leaven
and hid it in three measures of meal." So that the righteous have the power of
leaven, in order that they may transfer the wicked to their own manner of
conduct. But the righteous are few, for the leaven is small. But the smallness in
no way injures the lump, but that little quantity converts the whole of the meal to
itself by means of the power inherent in it. So accordingly the power also of the
righteous has its force not in the magnitude of their number, but in the grace of
the Spirit. There were twelve Apostles. Do you see how little is the leaven? The
whole world was in unbelief. Do you see how great is the lump? But those
twelve turned the whole world to themselves. The leaven and the lump had the
same nature but not the same manner of conduct. On this account he left the
wicked in the midst of the good, that since they are of the same nature as the
righteous they may also become of the same purpose.
Remember these things. With these stop the mouths of the indolent, the
dissolute, the slothful, the indisposed towards the labours of virtue, those who
accuse their common Master. "You have sinned" he saith "be still." "Do not add
a second more grievous sin." It is not so grievous to sin, as after the sin to accuse
the Master. Take knowledge of the cause of the sin, and you will find that it is
none other than yourself who hast sinned. Everywhere there is a need of a good
intention. I have shown you this not from simple reasoning only, but from the
case of fellow-servants living in the world itself. Do thou also use this proof.
Thus too our common master will judge us. Learn this method of proof, and no
one will be able to reason with you. Is any a fornicator? Show him another who
is self-restrained. Is any covetous and rapacious? Show him one who gives alms.
Does he live in jealousy and envy? Show him one clean from passion. Is he
overcome by anger? Bring into the midst one who is living in wisdom, for we