the Church endures, and not any definite number of years. The
reason whereof is because the preaching of Christ on which the
Church is built lasted three years and a half, which time contains
almost an equal number of days as the aforesaid number. Again the
number of days appointed by Daniel does not refer to a number of
years to elapse before the end of the world or until the preaching of
Antichrist, but to the time of Antichrist's preaching and the duration
of his persecution.
Reply to Objection 3: Although the state of the New Testament in
general is foreshadowed by the state of the Old Testament it does
not follow that individuals correspond to individuals: especially
since all the figures of the Old Testament were fulfilled in Christ.
Hence Augustine (De Civ. Dei xviii, 52) answers certain persons who
wished to liken the number of persecutions suffered by the Church
to the number of the plagues of Egypt, in these words: "I do not think
that the occurrences in Egypt were in their signification prophetic of
these persecutions, although those who think so have shown nicety
and ingenuity in adapting them severally the one to the other, not
indeed by a prophetic spirit, but by the guess-work of the human
mind, which sometimes reaches the truth and sometimes not." The
same remarks would seem applicable to the statements of Abbot
Joachim, who by means of such conjectures about the future
foretold some things that were true, and in others was deceived.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the resurrection will take place at nighttime?

Objection 1: It would seem that the resurrection will not be at nighttime. For the resurrection will not be "till the heavens be
broken" (Job 14:12). Now when the heavenly movement ceases,
which is signified by its breaking, there will be no time, neither night
nor day. Therefore the resurrection will not be at night-time.
Objection 2: Further, the end of a thing ought to be most perfect.
Now the end of time will be then: wherefore it is said (Apoc. 10:6)
that "time shall be no longer." Therefore time ought to be then in its
most perfect disposition and consequently it should be the daytime.
Objection 3: Further, the time should be such as to be adapted to
what is done therein: wherefore (Jn. 13:30) the night is mentioned as
being the time when Judas went out from the fellowship of the light.
Now, all things that are hidden at the present time will then be made
most manifest, because when the Lord shall come He "will bring to
light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the
counsels of the hearts" (1 Cor. 4:5). Therefore it ought to be during
the day.
On the contrary, Christ's resurrection is the exemplar of ours. Now
Christ's resurrection was at night, as Gregory says in a homily for
Easter (xxi in Evang.). Therefore our resurrection will also be at nighttime.
Further, the coming of our Lord is compared to the coming of a thief
into the house (Lk. 12:39,40). But the thief comes to the house at
night-time. Therefore our Lord will also come in the night. Now, when
He comes the resurrection will take place, as stated above (Question
76, Article 2). Therefore the resurrection will be at night-time.
I answer that, The exact time and hour at which the resurrection will
be cannot be known for certain, as stated in the text (Sent. iv, D, 43).
Nevertheless some assert with sufficient probability that it will be
towards the twilight, the moon being in the east and the sun in the
west; because the sun and moon are believed to have been created
in these positions, and thus their revolutions will be altogether
completed by their return to the same point. Wherefore it is said that