be some one"; and he shows the way— through this way— as if we were to say,
through this chamber; so, "through philosophy," says he.
Then because the term "philosophy" has an appearance of dignity, he added,
"and vain deceit." For there is also a good deceit; such as many have been
deceived by, which one ought not even to call a deceit at all. Whereof Jeremiah
speaks; "O Lord, You have deceived me, and I was deceived" [Jeremiah 20:7];
for such as this one ought not to call a deceit at all; for Jacob also deceived his
father, but that was not a deceit, but an economy. "Through his philosophy," he
says, "and vain deceit, after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the
world, and not after Christ." Now he sets about to reprove their observance of
particular days, meaning by elements of the world the sun and moon; as he also
said in the Epistle to the Galatians, "How turn ye back again to the weak and
beggarly elements?" [Galatians 4:9] And he said not observances of days, but in
general of the present world, to show its worthlessness: for if the present world
be nothing, much more then its elements. Having first shown how great benefits
and kindnesses they had received, he afterwards brings on his accusation,
thereby to show its greater seriousness, and to convict his hearers. Thus too the
Prophets do. They always first point out the benefits, and then they magnify their
accusation; as Esaias says, "I have begotten children, and exalted them, but they
have rejected me" [Isaiah 1:2, Septuagint]; and again, "O my people, what have I
done unto you, or wherein have I grieved you, or wherein have I wearied you"?
[Micah 6:3] and David; as when he says, "I heard you in the secret place of the
tempest" [Psalm 81:7, Septuagint]; and again, "Open your mouth, and I will fill
it." [Psalm 81:10] And everywhere you will find it the same.
That indeed were most one's duty, not to be persuaded by them, even did
they say anything to the purpose; as it is, however, obligations apart even, it
would be our duty to shun those things. "And not after Christ," he says. For were
it in such sort a matter done by halves, that you were able to serve both the one
and the other, not even so ought ye to do it; as it is, however, he suffers you not
to be "after Christ." Those things withdraw you from Him. Having first shaken

to pieces the Grecian observances, he next overthrows the Jewish ones also. For
both Greeks and Jews practiced many observances, but the former from
philosophy, the latter from the Law. First then, he makes at those against whom
lay the heavier accusation. How, "not after Christ"?
Ver. 9, 10. "For in Him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily: and in
Him you are made full, who is the head of all principality and power."
Observe how in his accusing of the one he thrusts through the other, by first
giving the solution, and then the objection. For such a solution is not suspected,
and the hearer accepts it the rather, that the speaker is not making it his aim. For
in that case indeed he would make a point of not coming off worsted, but in this,
not so. "For in Him dwells," that is, for God dwells in Him. But that you may not
think Him enclosed, as in a body, he says, "All the fullness of the Godhead
bodily: and you are made full in Him." Others say that he intends the Church
filled by His Godhead, as he elsewhere says, "of Him that fills all in all"
[Ephesians 1:23], and that the term "bodily" is here, as the body in the head.
How is it then that he did not add, "which is the Church"? Some again say it is
with reference to The Father, that he says that the fullness of the Godhead dwells
in Him, but wrongly. First, because "to dwell," cannot strictly be said of God:
next, because the "fullness" is not that which receives, for "the earth is the
Lord's, and the fullness thereof" [Psalm 24:1]; and again the Apostle, "until the
fullness of the Gentiles be come in." [Romans 11:25] By "fullness" is meant "the
whole." Then the word "bodily," what did it intend? "As in a head." But why
does he say the same thing over again? "And you are made full in Him." What
then does it mean? That you have nothing less than He. As it dwelt in Him, so
also in you. For Paul is ever straining to bring us near to Christ; as when he says,
"Hath raised us up with Him, and made us to sit with Him" [Ephesians 2:6]: and,
"If we endure, we shall also reign with Him" [2 Timothy 2:12]: and, "How shall
He not also with Him freely give us all things" [Romans 8:32]: and calling us
"fellow-heirs." Then as for His dignity. And He "is the head of all principality
and power." [Ephesians 3:6] He that is above all, The Cause, is He not