God;" and, "It repenteth me that I have made man." But it has drawn no
words whatever, whereby to frame either figures of speech or enigmatic
sayings, from things which do not exist at all. And hence it is that they
who are shut out from the truth by that third kind of error are more
mischievously and emptily vain than their fellows; in that they surmise
respecting God, what can neither be found in Himself nor in any creature.
For divine Scripture is wont to frame, as it were, allurements for children
from the things which are found in the creature; whereby, according to
their measure, and as it were by steps, the affections of the weak may be
moved to seek those things that are above, and to leave those things that
are below. But the same Scripture rarely employs those things which are
spoken properly of God, and are not found in any creature; as, for
instance, that which was said to Moses, "I am that I am;" and, "I Am hath
sent me to you." For since both body and soul also are said in some
sense to be, Holy Scripture certainly would not so express itself unless it
meant to be understood in some special sense of the term. So, too, that
which the Apostle says, "Who only hath immortality." Since the soul also
both is said to be, and is, in a certain manner immortal, Scripture would
not say "only hath," unless because true immortality is
unchangeableness; which no creature can possess, since it belongs to the
creator alone.7 So also James says, "Every good gift and every perfect gift
is from above, and cometh down from the Father of Lights, with whom is
no variableness, neither shadow of turning." So also David, "Thou shalt
change them, and they shall be changed; but Thou art the same."
3. Further, it is difficult to contemplate and fully know the substance of
God; who fashions things changeable, yet without any change in Himself,
and creates things temporal, yet without any temporal movement in
Himself. And it is necessary, therefore, to purge our minds, in order to be
able to see ineffably that which is ineffable; whereto not having yet
attained, we are to be nourished by faith, and led by such ways as are
more suited to our capacity, that we may be rendered apt and able to
comprehend it. And hence the Apostle says, that "in Christ indeed are hid
all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge;" and yet has commended
Him to us, as to babes in Christ, who, although already born again by His
grace, yet are still carnal and psychical, not by that divine virtue wherein
He is equal to the Father, but by that human infirmity whereby He was

crucified. For he says, "I determined not to know anything among you,
save Jesus Christ and Him crucified;" and then he continues, "And I
was with you in weakness, and in fear, and in much trembling." And a
little after he says to them, "And I, brethren, could not speak unto you as
unto spiritual, but as unto carnal, even as unto babes in Christ. I have fed
you with milk, and not with meat: for hitherto ye were not able to bear it,
neither yet now are ye able." There are some who are angry at language
of this kind, and think it is used in slight to themselves, and for the most
part prefer rather to believe that they who so speak to them have nothing
to say, than that they themselves cannot understand what they have said.
And sometimes, indeed, we do allege to them, not certainly that account
of the case which they seek in their inquiries about God,—because neither
can they themselves receive it, nor can we perhaps either apprehend or
express it,—but such an account of it as to demonstrate to them how
incapable and utterly unfit they are to understand that which they require
of us. But they, on their parts, because they do not hear what they desire,
think that we are either playing them false in order to conceal our own
ignorance, or speaking in malice because we grudge them knowledge; and
so go away indignant and perturbed.