"do so," but he states it in the form of a sentiment to prevent again making the
other, the weaker man, too listless. And what are his words? "It is good not to
eat flesh." And why do I say flesh? If it be wine, or any other thing of the sort
besides, which gives offense, refrain. For nothing is so important as your
brother's salvation. And this Christ shows us, since He came from Heaven, and
suffered all that He went through, for our sakes. And let me beg you to observe,
how he also drives it home upon the other, by the words "stumbles, or is
offended, or is made weak." And do not tell me (he means) that he is so without
reason but, that you have power to set it right. For the other has a sufficient
claim to be helped in his weakness, and to you this were no loss, not being a case
of hypocrisy, but of edification and economy. For if you force him, he is at once
destroyed, and will condemn you, and fortify himself the more in not eating. But
if you condescend to him, then he will love you, and will not suspect you as a
teacher, and you will afterwards gain the power of sowing imperceptibly in him
the right views. But if he once hate you, then you have closed the entrance for
your reasoning. Do not then compel him, but even yourself refrain for his sake,
not refraining from it as unclean, but because he is offended, and he will love
you the more. So Paul also advises when he says, "It is good not to eat flesh,"
not because it was unclean, but because the brother is offended and is weak.
Ver. 22. "Have you faith? Have it to yourself."
Here he seems to me to be giving a gentle warning to the more advanced on
the score of vanity. And what he says is this, Do you wish to show me that you
are perfect, and fully furnished? Do not show it to me, but let your conscience
suffice. And by faith, he here means that concerned not with doctrines, but with
the subject in hand. For of the former it says, "With the mouth confession is made
unto salvation" [Romans 10:10]; and, "Whosoever shall deny Me before men,
him will I also deny." [Luke 9:26] For the former by not being confessed, ruins
us; and so does this by being confessed unseasonably. "Happy is he that
condemns not himself in the thing which he allows." Again he strikes at the
weaker one, and gives him (i.e. the stronger) a sufficient crown, in that of his

conscience. Even if no man see, that is, you are able to be happy in yourself. For
after saying, "Have it to yourself," to prevent his thinking this a contemptible
tribunal, he tells him this is better to you than the world. And if all accuse you,
and thou condemn not yourself, and your conscience lay no charge against you,
you are happy. But this is a statement he did not make to apply to any person
whatever. For there are many that condemn not themselves, and yet are great
transgressors: and these are the most miserable of men. But he still keeps to the
subject in hand.
Ver. 23. "And he that doubts is condemned if he eat."
Again, it is to exhort him to spare the weaker, that he says this. For what
good is it if he eat in doubt, and condemn himself? For I approve of him, who
both eats, and does it not with doubting. See how he induces him not to eating
only, but to eating with a good conscience too. Then he mentions likewise the
reason why he is condemned continuing in these words,
"Because he eats not of faith." Not because it is unclean, but because it is
not of faith. For he did not believe that it is clean, but though unclean he touched
it. But by this he shows them also what great harm they do by compelling men,
and not persuading them, to touch things which had hitherto appeared unclean to
them, that for this at all events they might leave rebuking. "For whatsoever is
not of faith is sin." For when a person does not feel sure, nor believe that a thing
is clean, how can he do else than sin? Now all these things have been spoken by
Paul of the subject in hand, not of everything. And observe what care he takes
not to offend any; and he had said before, "If your brother be grieved with your
meat, now you do not walk charitably." But if one should not grieve him, much
less ought one to give him offense. And again, "For meat destroy not the work of
God." For if it were a grievous act of iniquity to throw down a Church, much
more so is it to do so to the spiritual Temple. Since a man is more dignified than
a Church: for it was not for walls that Christ died, but for these temples.
Let us then watch our own conduct on all sides, and afford to no one ever so
little handle. For this life present is a race-course and we ought to have