## Homily 1 on Philemon

Philemon i. 1-3
"Paul, a prisoner of Jesus Christ, and Timothy our brother, unto Philemon
our dearly beloved, and fellow-laborer, And to our beloved Apphia, and
Archippus our fellow-soldier, and to the Church in your house: Grace to you,
and peace, from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ."
These things are said to a master in behalf of a servant. Immediately at the
outset, he has pulled down his spirit, and not suffered him to be ashamed, he has
quenched his anger; calling himself a prisoner, he strikes him with compunction,
and makes him collect himself, and makes it appear that present things are
nothing. For if a chain for Christ's sake is not a shame but a boast, much more is
slavery not to be considered a reproach. And this he says, not exalting himself,
but for a good purpose doing this, showing thence that he was worthy of credit;
and this he does not for his own sake, but that he may more readily obtain the
favor. As if he had said, "It is on your account that I am invested with this
chain." As he also has said elsewhere, there indeed showing his concern, but
here his trustworthiness.
Nothing is greater than this boast, to be called "the stigmatized of Christ."
"For I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus." [Galatians 6:17]
"The prisoner of the Lord." For he had been bound on His account. Who
would not be struck with awe, who would not be humbled when he hears of the
chains of Christ? Who would not be ready to give up even his own life, much
less one domestic?
"And Timothy our brother."
He joins another also with himself, that he, being entreated by many, may
the more readily yield and grant the favor.
"Unto Philemon our dearly beloved, and fellow-laborer."

If "beloved," then his confidence is not boldness nor forwardness, but a
proof of much affection. If a "fellow-laborer," then not only may he be instructed
in such a matter, but he ought to acknowledge it as a favor. For he is gratifying
himself, he is building up the same work. So that apart from any request, he
says, you have another necessity for granting the favor. For if he is profitable to
the Gospel, and you are anxious to promote the Gospel, then ought you not to be
entreated, but to entreat.
Ver. 2. "And to our beloved Apphia."
It seems to me that she was his partner in life. Observe the humility of Paul;
he both joins Timothy with him in his request, and asks not only the husband,
but the wife also, and some one else, perhaps a friend.
"And Archippus," he says, "our fellow-soldier."
Not wishing to effect such things by command, and not taking it ill, if he
did not immediately comply with his request; but he begs them to do what a
stranger might have done to aid his request. For not only the being requested by
many, but the petition being urged to many, contributes to its being granted. And
on this account he says, "And Archippus our fellow-soldier." If you are a fellowsoldier, you ought also to take a concern in these things. But this is the
Archippus, about whom he says in his Epistle to the Colossians, "Say to
Archippus, Take heed to the ministry which you have received in the Lord, that
you fulfill it." [Colossians 4:17] It seems to me too, that he, whom he joins with
him in this request, was also one of the Clergy. And he calls him his fellowsoldier, that he may by all means cooperate with him.
"And to the Church in your house."
Here he has not omitted even the slaves. For he knew that often even the
words of slaves have power to overthrow their master; and more especially when
his request was in behalf of a slave. And perhaps it was they particularly who
exasperated him. He does not suffer them therefore to fall into envy, having
honored them by including them in a salutation with their masters. And neither
does he allow the master to take offense. For if he had made mention of them by