FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.74, C.4.

consisting in its natural aptitude to obey the reason; and in this
respect it can be the principle of a voluntary action, and,
consequently, the subject of sin.
Reply to Objection 2: The continual corruption of the sensuality is to
be understood as referring to the "fomes," which is never completely
destroyed in this life, since, though the stain of original sin passes,
its effect remains. However, this corruption of the "fomes" does not
hinder man from using his rational will to check individual inordinate
movements, if he be presentient to them, for instance by turning his
thoughts to other things. Yet while he is turning his thoughts to
something else, an inordinate movement may arise about this also:
thus when a man, in order to avoid the movements of
concupiscence, turns his thoughts away from carnal pleasures, to
the considerations of science, sometimes an unpremeditated
movement of vainglory will arise. Consequently, a man cannot avoid
all such movements, on account of the aforesaid corruption: but it is
enough, for the conditions of a voluntary sin, that he be able to avoid
each single one.
Reply to Objection 3: Man does not do perfectly himself what he
does without the deliberation of reason, since the principal part of
man does nothing therein: wherefore such is not perfectly a human
act; and consequently it cannot be a perfect act of virtue or of sin,
but is something imperfect of that kind. Therefore such movement of
the sensuality as forestalls the reason, is a venial sin, which is
something imperfect in the genus of sin.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.74, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether mortal sin can be in the sensuality?

Objection 1: It would seem that mortal sin can be in the sensuality.
Because an act is discerned by its object. Now it is possible to
commit a mortal sin about the objects of the sensuality, e.g. about
carnal pleasures. Therefore the act of the sensuality can be a mortal
sin, so that mortal sin can be found in the sensuality.
Objection 2: Further, mortal sin is opposed to virtue. But virtue can
be in the sensuality; for temperance and fortitude are virtues of the
irrational parts, as the Philosopher states (Ethic. iii, 10). Therefore,
since it is natural to contraries to be about the same subject,
sensuality can be the subject of mortal sin.
Objection 3: Further, venial sin is a disposition to mortal sin. Now
disposition and habit are in the same subject. Since therefore venial
sin may be in the sensuality, as stated above (Article 3, ad 3), mortal
sin can be there also.
On the contrary, Augustine says (Retract. i, 23): "The inordinate
movement of concupiscence, which is the sin of the sensuality, can
even be in those who are in a state of grace," in whom, however,
mortal sin is not to be found. Therefore the inordinate movement of
the sensuality is not a mortal sin.
I answer that, Just as a disorder which destroys the principle of the
body's life causes the body's death, so too a disorder which
destroys the principle of spiritual life, viz. the last end, causes
spiritual death, which is mortal sin, as stated above (Question 72,
Article 5). Now it belongs to the reason alone, and not to the
sensuality, to order anything to the end: and disorder in respect of
the end can only belong to the power whose function it is to order
others to the end. Wherefore mortal sin cannot be in the sensuality,
but only in the reason.
Reply to Objection 1: The act of the sensuality can concur towards a
mortal sin: yet the fact of its being a mortal sin is due, not to its
being an act of the sensuality, but to its being an act of reason, to
whom the ordering to the end belongs. Consequently mortal sin is
imputed, not to the sensuality, but to reason.