Or they may be called universal rules since there is in them no falsity or any admixture of evil,
neither in any essential article or accidentally. Then he adds another reason, saying: "Because the

worship in which they are expressed has spread throughout the world," a thing which is
evidently in accord with that saying of Ps. 18:5: "Their sound has gone forth into all the earth:
and their words unto the ends of the world."

Hereupon he next sets forth the doctrine of the Catholic faith concerning the question
proposed: "The belief of this religion concerning the Trinity." Concerning this, he does three
things: First, he presents the teaching of the Catholic faith on the unity of the Trinity. Secondly,
the reason for this opinion: "The principle of this unity." Thirdly, he shows the fitness of the
reason, saying: "Now the essence of plurality."

Moreover, he proposes the opinion of Catholic faith in a certain argumentative form,
because faith is called "the evidence of things that appear not" (Heb. 11:1). In the same argument,
indeed, from the fact that divinity is attributed equally to each of the Persons, he concludes that of
all three the name "God" is 'Predicated not plurally, as taken together, but individually.

Next he assigns the reason for this belief. First, he states the reason, and secondly, he
explains it by its contrary where he says: "Difference cannot be avoided by those who add to or
take from the Unity."

Therefore he says: "The nature of Their Unity is such that there is no difference,"
namely, the Unity of Deity in the three Persons, as confessed by the Catholic faith. From this the
conclusion following upon the foregoing words is that Deity without difference is attributed to
each of the three Persons; (1.1.2.2.2) and this reasoning he explains by its contrary saying:
"Difference cannot be avoided by those who add to or take from the Unity (of the Deity)": that
is, who hold that one Person is greater or less than the others, as the Arians, who make the
Father greater than the Son. Wherefore he continues: "As for instance the Arians, who by
graduating the Trinity, break it up"; that is, by graduating the Trinity according to dignity, since
they make the Son subject to the Father, and the Holy Spirit to both Father and Son, and so
"convert it to Plurality"; that is, produce diversity by dividing the Deity among the Persons. For
from division there follows plurality. Conversely, Catholics who confess an equality of the
Persons, an equality without difference, make profession of consequent Unity.

Next, he shows that the foregoing reasoning is valid, saying: "For the essence of
plurality is otherness," and first he points out the necessity possessed by this reasoning.
Secondly, what in the demonstration itself had been supposed is made clear: "In fact, the
difference between three or more things lies in genus or species or number." Regarding the first
point he does two things. First he shows that otherness is the principle of plurality,
understanding by "otherness" any difference by which things can be constituted among
themselves as other. And he prefers to say "otherness" rather than "separateness" because not
only substantial differences constitute plurality, since they make another thing, but accidental
differences also constitute plurality, since they make for otherness: they make a thing other. Now
otherness follows upon separateness; but the converse is not true. And the reason for the
deduction of the Arians follows from this supposition. For if otherness is the principle of
plurality, and positing a cause posits its effect, then supposing in them that otherness is by
augmentation and diminution, plurality of divinity would follow.