THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.68, C.11.

children of the ancients "were saved through the faith of their
parents." Wherefore it would be contrary to natural justice if such
children were baptized against their parents' will; just as it would be
if one having the use of reason were baptized against his will.
Moreover under the circumstances it would be dangerous to baptize
the children of unbelievers; for they would be liable to lapse into
unbelief, by reason of their natural affection for their parents.
Therefore it is not the custom of the Church to baptize the children of
unbelievers against their parents' will.
Reply to Objection 1: It is not right to rescue a man from death of the
body against the order of civil law: for instance, if a man be
condemned to death by the judge who has tried him, none should
use force in order to rescue him from death. Consequently, neither
should anyone infringe the order of the natural law, in virtue of which
a child is under the care of its father, in order to rescue it from the
danger of eternal death.
Reply to Objection 2: Jews are slaves of rulers by civil slavery, which
does not exclude the order of the natural and Divine law.
Reply to Objection 3: Man is ordained unto God through his reason,
by which he can know God. Wherefore a child, before it has the use
of reason, is ordained to God, by a natural order, through the reason
of its parents, under whose care it naturally lies, and it is according
to their ordering that things pertaining to God are to be done in
respect of the child.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.68, C.12.

### ARTICLE 11. Whether a child can be baptized while yet in its

mother's womb?
Objection 1: It seems that a child can be baptized while yet in its
mother's womb. For the gift of Christ is more efficacious unto
salvation than Adam's sin unto condemnation, as the Apostle says
(Rm. 5:15). But a child while yet in its mother's womb is under
sentence of condemnation on account of Adam's sin. For much more
reason, therefore, can it be saved through the gift of Christ, which is
bestowed by means of Baptism. Therefore a child can be baptized
while yet in its mother's womb.
Objection 2: Further, a child, while yet in its mother's womb, seems
to be part of its mother. Now, when the mother is baptized, whatever
is in her and part of her, is baptized. Therefore it seems that when
the mother is baptized, the child in her womb is baptized.
Objection 3: Further, eternal death is a greater evil than death of the
body. But of two evils the less should be chosen. If, therefore, the
child in the mother's womb cannot be baptized, it would be better for
the mother to be opened, and the child to be taken out by force and
baptized, than that the child should be eternally damned through
dying without Baptism.
Objection 4: Further, it happens at times that some part of the child
comes forth first, as we read in Gn. 38:27: "In the very delivery of the
infants, one put forth a hand, whereon the midwife tied a scarlet
thread, saying: This shall come forth the first. But he drawing back
his hand, the other came forth." Now sometimes in such cases there
is danger of death. Therefore it seems that that part should be
baptized, while the child is yet in its mother's womb.
On the contrary, Augustine says (Ep. ad Dardan.): "No one can be
born a second time unless he be born first." But Baptism is a
spiritual regeneration. Therefore no one should be baptized before
he is born from the womb.
I answer that, It is essential to Baptism that some part of the body of
the person baptized be in some way washed with water, since
Baptism is a kind of washing, as stated above (Question 66, Article
1). But an infant's body, before being born from the womb, can