4. Having then uttered all this, and concluded His discourse in a tone to
cause fear, and signified that these are the majority of cases (for He dwelt more
on them). He says,
"Have ye understood all these things? They say unto Him, Yea, Lord."
Then because they understood, He again praises them, saying,
"Therefore every Scribe, which is instructed in the Kingdom of Heaven, is
like a man that is an householder, which brings forth out of his treasure things
new and old." [Matthew 13:52]
Wherefore elsewhere also He says, "I will send you wise men and scribes."
[Matthew 23:34] Do you see how so far from excluding the Old Testament, He
even commends it, and speaks publicly in favor of it, calling it "a treasure"?
So that as many as are ignorant of the divine Scriptures cannot be
"householders;" such as neither have of themselves, nor receive of others, but
neglect their own case, perishing with famine. And not these only, but the
heretics too, are excluded from this blessing. For they bring not forth things new
and old. For they have not the old things, wherefore neither have they the new;
even as they who have not the new, neither have they the old, but are deprived of
both. For these are bound up and interwoven one with another.
Let us then hear, as many of us as neglect the reading of the Scriptures, to
what harm we are subjecting ourselves, to what poverty. For when are we to
apply ourselves to the real practice of virtue, who do not so much as know the
very laws according to which our practice should be guided? But while the rich,
those who are mad about wealth, are constantly shaking out their garments, that
they may not become moth-eaten; do you, seeing forgetfulness worse than any
moth wasting your soul, neglect conversing with books? Do you not thrust away
from you the pest, adorn your soul, look continually upon the image of virtue,
and acquaint yourself with her members and her head? For she too has a head
and members more seemly than any graceful and beautiful body.
What then, says one, is the head of virtue? Humility. Wherefore Christ also
begins with it, saying, "Blessed are the poor." This head has not locks and

ringlets, but beauty, such as to gain God's favor. For, "Unto whom shall I look,"
says He, "but unto him that is meek and humble, and trembles at my words?"
[Isaiah 66:2] And, "My eyes are upon the meek of the earth." And, "The Lord is
near unto them that are of a contrite heart." This head, instead of locks, and
flowing hair, bears sacrifices acceptable to God. It is a golden altar, and a
spiritual place of sacrifice; "For a contrite spirit is a sacrifice to God." This is
the mother of wisdom. If a man have this, he will have the rest also.
Have you seen a head such as you had never seen? Will you see the face
too, or rather mark it? Mark then for the present its color, how ruddy, and
blooming, and very engaging; and observe what are its ingredients. "Well, and
what are they?" Shame-facedness and blushing. Wherefore also some one says,
"Before a shamefaced man shall go favor." [Sirach 32:10] This sheds much
beauty over the other members also. Though thou mix ten thousand colors, you
will not produce such a bloom.
And if you will see the eyes also, behold them exactly delineated with
decency and temperance. Wherefore they become also so beautiful and
sharpsighted, as to behold even the Lord Himself. For, "Blessed," says He, "are
the pure in heart, for they shall see God." [Matthew 5:8]
And her mouth is wisdom and understanding, and the knowledge of
spiritual hymns. And her heart, acquaintance with Scripture, and maintenance of
sound doctrines, and benevolence, and kindness. And as without this last there is
no living, so without that other is never any salvation. Yea, for from that all her
excellencies have birth. She has also for feet and hands the manifestations of her
good works. She has a soul too, godliness. She has likewise a bosom of gold,
and firmer than adamant, even fortitude; and all may be taken captive more
easily than that bosom may be riven asunder. And the spirit that is in the brain
and heart, is charity.
5. Will you that in her actual deeds also I show you her image? Consider, I
pray you, this very evangelist: although we have not his whole life in writing,
nevertheless even from a few facts one may see his image shine forth.