out of town, and baths, and terraces, and chambers without number, in
thoughtless vanity; and to Christ you give not even a share of a little hut, while
for daws and vultures you deck out upper chambers. What can be worse than
such insanity as this? What more grievous than such madness? For madness it is
in the last stage of it, or rather one has no name to suit it, use whatever one may.
Yet still if we be so minded, it is possible to beat off the disorder, tenacious as it
is; and not possible only, but even easy; and not easy merely, but even easier is it
to get rid of this pest than of the sufferings of the body, since the Physician is so
much greater. Let us then draw Him to ourselves, and invite Him to aid us in the
attempt, and let us contribute our share, good-will, I mean, and energy. For He
will not require anything further, but if He can meet with this only, He will
confer all that is His part. Let us then contribute our share, that in this world we
may enjoy a genuine health, and may attain to the good things to come, by the
grace and love towards man, etc.

## Homily 15 on Romans

Rom. VIII. 28
"And we know that all things work together for good to them that love
God."
Here he seems to me to have mooted this whole topic with a view to those
who were in danger; or, rather, not this only, but also what was said a little
before this. For the words, "the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to
be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us;" and those, that "the
whole creation groans;" and the saying, that "we are saved by hope;" and the
phrase, "we with patience wait for;" and that, "we know not what we should pray
for as we ought;" are all of them said to these. For he instructs them not to
choose just what they may think, themselves, to be useful, but what the Spirit
may suggest; for many things that seem to one's self profitable, do sometimes
even cause much harm. Quiet, for instance, and freedom from dangers, and
living out of fear, seemed to be advantageous for them. And what wonder if they
did to them, since to the blessed Paul himself this seemed to be so? Still he came
afterwards to know that the opposite to all these are the things advantageous, and
when he came to know it, he was content. So he that besought the Lord thrice to
be freed from hazards, when once he heard Him say, "My grace is sufficient for
you, for My Power is perfected in weakness" [2 Corinthians 12:8-9], was
afterwards delighted at being persecuted, and insulted, and having irreparable ills
done him. For, "I glory," he says, "in persecutions, in insults" (Eng. V.
reproaches), "in necessities." [2 Corinthians 12:10] And this was his reason for
saying, "For we know not what we should pray for as we ought." And he
exhorted all men to give up these matters to the Spirit. For the Holy Spirit is very
mindful of us, and this is the will of God. Having then cheered them by all
methods, he proceeds to what we have heard today, putting forward a reason