way ordained to the remission of guilt, but only to the remission of
punishment, as some hold, it would not be necessary to have a
desire of receiving the effect of the keys in order to have one's sins
forgiven, just as it is not necessary to have a desire of receiving the
other sacraments which are ordained, not to the remission of guilt,
but against punishment. But this enables us to see that it is not
ordained unto the remission of guilt, because the use of the keys, in
order to be effective, always requires a disposition on the part of the
recipient of the sacrament. And the same would apply to Baptism,
were it never given save to adults.
Reply to Objection 1: As the Master says in the text (Sent. iv, D, 18),
the power of forgiving sins was entrusted to priests, not that they
may forgive them, by their own power, for this belongs to God, but
that, as ministers, they may declare the operation of God Who
forgives. Now this happens in three ways. First, by a declaration, not
of present, but of future forgiveness, without co-operating therein in
any way: and thus the sacraments of the Old Law signified the Divine
operation, so that the priest of the Old Law did but declare and did
not operate the forgiveness of sins. Secondly, by a declaration of
present forgiveness without co-operating in it at all: and thus some
say that the sacraments of the New Law signify the bestowal of
grace, which God gives when the sacraments are conferred, without
the sacraments containing any power productive of grace, according
to which opinion, even the power of the keys would merely declare
the Divine operation that has its effect in the remission of guilt when
the sacrament is conferred. Thirdly, by signifying the Divine
operation causing then and there the remission of guilt, and by cooperating towards this effect dispositively and instrumentally: and
then, according to another and more common opinion, the
sacraments of the New Law declare the cleansing effected by God. In
this way also the priest of the New Testament declares the recipient
to be absolved from guilt, because in speaking of the sacraments,
what is ascribed to the power of the ministers must be consistent
with the sacrament. Nor is it unreasonable that the keys of the
Church should dispose the penitent to the remission of his guilt,
from the fact that the guilt is already remitted, even as neither is it
unreasonable that Baptism, considered in itself, causes a disposition
in one who is already sanctified.
Reply to Objection 2: Neither the sacrament of Penance, nor the
sacrament of Baptism, by its operation, causes grace, or the
remission of guilt, directly, but only dispositively. Hence the Reply to

the Third Objection is evident.
The other arguments show that the power of the keys does not effect
the remission of guilt directly, and this is to be granted.