FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.75, C.2.

in a certain privation, has a deficient cause, or an accidental efficient
cause. Now every accidental cause is reducible to the direct cause.
Since then sin, on the part of its inordinateness, has an accidental
efficient cause, and on the part of the act, a direct efficient cause, it
follows that the inordinateness of sin is a result of the cause of the
act. Accordingly then, the will lacking the direction of the rule of
reason and of the Divine law, and intent on some mutable good,
causes the act of sin directly, and the inordinateness of the act,
indirectly, and beside the intention: for the lack of order in the act
results from the lack of direction in the will.
Reply to Objection 1: Sin signifies not only the privation of good,
which privation is its inordinateness, but also the act which is the
subject of that privation, which has the nature of evil: and how this
evil has a cause, has been explained.
Reply to Objection 2: If this definition is to be verified in all cases, it
must be understood as applying to a cause which is sufficient and
not impeded. For it happens that a thing is the sufficient cause of
something else, and that the effect does not follow of necessity, on
account of some supervening impediment: else it would follow that
all things happen of necessity, as is proved in Metaph. vi, text. 5.
Accordingly, though sin has a cause, it does not follow that this is a
necessary cause, since its effect can be impeded.
Reply to Objection 3: As stated above, the will in failing to apply the
rule of reason or of the Divine law, is the cause of sin. Now the fact
of not applying the rule of reason or of the Divine law, has not in
itself the nature of evil, whether of punishment or of guilt, before it is
applied to the act. Wherefore accordingly, evil is not the cause of the
first sin, but some good lacking some other good.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.75, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether sin has an internal cause?

Objection 1: It would seem that sin has no internal cause. For that
which is within a thing is always in it. If therefore sin had an internal
cause, man would always be sinning, since given the cause, the
effect follows.
Objection 2: Further, a thing is not its own cause. But the internal
movements of a man are sins. Therefore they are not the cause of
sin.
Objection 3: Further, whatever is within man is either natural or
voluntary. Now that which is natural cannot be the cause of sin, for
sin is contrary to nature, as Damascene states (De Fide Orth. ii, 3; iv,
21); while that which is voluntary, if it be inordinate, is already a sin.
Therefore nothing intrinsic can be the cause of the first sin.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Duabus Anim. x, 10,11; Retract.
i, 9) that "the will is the cause of sin."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), the direct cause of sin
must be considered on the part of the act. Now we may distinguish a
twofold internal cause of human acts, one remote, the other
proximate. The proximate internal cause of the human act is the
reason and will, in respect of which man has a free-will; while the
remote cause is the apprehension of the sensitive part, and also the
sensitive appetite. For just as it is due to the judgment of reason,
that the will is moved to something in accord with reason, so it is
due to an apprehension of the senses that the sensitive appetite is
inclined to something; which inclination sometimes influences the
will and reason, as we shall explain further on (Question 77, Article
1). Accordingly a double interior cause of sin may be assigned; one
proximate, on the part of the reason and will; and the other remote,
on the part of the imagination or sensitive appetite.
But since we have said above (Article 1, ad 3) that the cause of sin is
some apparent good as motive, yet lacking the due motive, viz. the
rule of reason or the Divine law, this motive which is an apparent
good, appertains to the apprehension of the senses and to the
appetite; while the lack of the due rule appertains to the reason,
whose nature it is to consider this rule; and the completeness of the