the manner of women." [Genesis 18:11] Yea, a marriage it is, not of passion, nor
of the flesh, but wholly spiritual, the soul being united to God by a union
unspeakable, and which He alone knows. Therefore he says, "He that is joined
unto the Lord is one spirit." [1 Corinthians 6:17] Mark how earnestly he
endeavors to unite both flesh with flesh, and spirit with spirit. And where are the
heretics? Never surely, if marriage were a thing to be condemned, would he have
called Christ and the Church a bride and bridegroom; never would he have
brought forward by way of exhortation the words, "A man shall leave his father
and his mother"; and again have added, that it was "spoken in regard of Christ
and of the Church." For of her it is that the Psalmist also says, "Hearken, O
daughter, and consider, and incline your ear; forget also your own people, and
your father's house. So shall the king desire your beauty." [Psalm 45:10-11]
Therefore also Christ says, "I came out from the Father, and have come." [John
16:28] But when I say, that He left the Father, imagine not such a thing as
happens among men, a change of place; for just in the same way as the word "go
forth" is used, not because He literally came forth, but because of His
incarnation, so also is the expression, "He left the Father."
Now why did he not say of the wife also, She shall be joined unto her
husband? Why, I say, is this? Because he was discoursing concerning love, and
was discoursing to the husband. For to her indeed he discourses concerning
reverence, and says, "the husband is the head of the wife" [Ephesians 5:23], and
again, "Christ is the Head of the Church." Whereas to him he discourses
concerning love, and commits to him this province of love, and declares to him
that which pertains to love, thus binding him and cementing him to her. For the
man that leaves his father for the sake of his wife, and then again, leaves this
very wife herself and abandons her, what forbearance can he deserve?
Do you see not how great a share of honor God would have her enjoy, in
that he has taken you away from your father, and has linked you to her? What
then, a man may say, if our duty is done, and yet she does not follow the
example? "Yet if the unbelieving departs, let him depart; the brother or the sister

is not under bondage in such cases." [1 Corinthians 7:15]
However, when you hear of "fear," demand that fear which becomes a free
woman, not as though thou were exacting it of a slave. For she is your own
body; and if you do this, you reproach yourself in dishonoring your own body.
And of what nature is this "fear"? It is the not contradicting, the not rebelling,
the not being fond of the preëminence. It is enough that fear be kept within these
bounds. But if you love, as you are commanded, you will make it yet greater. Or
rather it will not be any longer by fear that you will be doing this, but love itself
will have its effect. The sex is somehow weaker, and needs much support, much
condescension.
But what will they say, who are knit together in second marriages? I speak
not at all in condemnation of them, God forbid; for the Apostle himself permits
them, though indeed by way of condescension.
Supply her with everything. Do everything and endure trouble for her sake.
Necessity is laid upon you.
Here he does not think it right to introduce his counsel, as he in many cases
does, with examples from them that are without. That of Christ, so great and
forcible, were alone enough; and more especially as regards the argument of
subjection. "A man shall leave," he says, "his father and mother." Behold, this
then is from without. But he does not say, and "shall dwell with," but "shall
cleave unto," thus showing the closeness of the union, and the fervent love. Nay,
he is not content with this, but further by what he adds, he explains the
subjection in such a way as that the two appear no longer two. He does not say,
"one spirit," he does not say, "one soul" (for that is manifest, and is possible to
any one), but so as to be "one flesh." She is a second authority, possessing indeed
an authority, and a considerable equality of dignity; but at the same time the
husband has somewhat of superiority. In this consists most chiefly the well-being
of the house. For he took that former argument, the example of Christ, to show
that we ought not only to love, but also to govern; "that she may be," says he,
"holy and without blemish." But the word "flesh" has reference to love— and the