FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.66, C.2.

nearer to the reason. Consequently justice, which is in the will,
excels the remaining moral virtues; and fortitude, which is in the
irascible part, stands before temperance, which is in the
concupiscible, which has a smaller share of reason, as stated in
Ethic. vii, 6.
The question can be taken in another way, as referring to virtues of
the same species. In this way, according to what was said above
(Question 52, Article 1), when we were treating of the intensity of
habits, virtue may be said to be greater or less in two ways: first, in
itself; secondly with regard to the subject that partakes of it. If we
consider it in itself, we shall call it greater or little, according to the
things to which it extends. Now whosoever has a virtue, e.g.
temperance, has it in respect of whatever temperance extends to.
But this does not apply to science and art: for every grammarian
does not know everything relating to grammar. And in this sense the
Stoics said rightly, as Simplicius states in his Commentary on the
Predicaments, that virtue cannot be more or less, as science and art
can; because the nature of virtue consists in a maximum.
If, however, we consider virtue on the part of the subject, it may then
be greater or less, either in relation to different times, or in different
men. Because one man is better disposed than another to attain to
the mean of virtue which is defined by right reason; and this, on
account of either greater habituation, or a better natural disposition,
or a more discerning judgment of reason, or again a greater gift of
grace, which is given to each one "according to the measure of the
giving of Christ," as stated in Eph. 4:9. And here the Stoics erred, for
they held that no man should be deemed virtuous, unless he were, in
the highest degree, disposed to virtue. Because the nature of virtue
does not require that man should reach the mean of right reason as
though it were an indivisible point, as the Stoics thought; but it is
enough that he should approach the mean, as stated in Ethic. ii, 6.
Moreover, one same indivisible mark is reached more nearly and
more readily by one than by another: as may be seen when several
arches aim at a fixed target.
Reply to Objection 1: This equality is not one of absolute quantity,
but of proportion: because all virtues grow in a man proportionately,
as we shall see further on (Article 2).
Reply to Objection 2: This "limit" which belongs to virtue, can have
the character of something "more" or "less" good, in the ways

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.66, C.2.

explained above: since, as stated, it is not an indivisible limit.
Reply to Objection 3: God does not work by necessity of nature, but
according to the order of His wisdom, whereby He bestows on men
various measures of virtue, according to Eph. 4:7: "To every one of
you is given grace according to the measure of the giving of Christ."