SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.109, C.4.

remain unchanged: otherwise neither did he lie in promising---since
he promised what he had in his mind, due circumstances being
taken for granted---nor was he faithless in not keeping his promise,
because circumstances are no longer the same. Hence the Apostle,
though he did not go to Corinth, whither he had promised to go (2
Cor. 1), did not lie, because obstacles had arisen which prevented
him.
Reply to Objection 6: An action may be considered in two ways.
First, in itself, secondly, with regard to the agent. Accordingly a
jocose lie, from the very genus of the action, is of a nature to
deceive; although in the intention of the speaker it is not told to
deceive, nor does it deceive by the way it is told. Nor is there any
similarity in the hyperbolical or any kind of figurative expressions,
with which we meet in Holy Writ: because, as Augustine says (Lib.
De Mend. v), "it is not a lie to do or say a thing figuratively: because
every statement must be referred to the thing stated: and when a
thing is done or said figuratively, it states what those to whom it is
tendered understand it to signify."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.109, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether every lie is a mortal sin?

Objection 1: It seems that every lie is a mortal sin. For it is written
(Ps. 6:7): "Thou wilt destroy all that speak a lie," and (Wis. 1:11):
"The mouth that belieth killeth the soul." Now mortal sin alone
causes destruction and death of the soul. Therefore every lie is a
mortal sin.
Objection 2: Further, whatever is against a precept of the decalogue
is a mortal sin. Now lying is against this precept of the decalogue:
"Thou shalt not bear false witness." Therefore every lie is a mortal
sin.
Objection 3: Further, Augustine says (De Doctr. Christ. i, 36): "Every
liar breaks his faith in lying, since forsooth he wishes the person to
whom he lies to have faith in him, and yet he does not keep faith with
him, when he lies to him: and whoever breaks his faith is guilty of
iniquity." Now no one is said to break his faith or "to be guilty of
iniquity," for a venial sin. Therefore no lie is a venial sin.
Objection 4: Further, the eternal reward is not lost save for a mortal
sin. Now, for a lie the eternal reward was lost, being exchanged for a
temporal meed. For Gregory says (Moral. xviii) that "we learn from
the reward of the midwives what the sin of lying deserves: since the
reward which they deserved for their kindness, and which they might
have received in eternal life, dwindled into a temporal meed on
account of the lie of which they were guilty." Therefore even an
officious lie, such as was that of the midwives, which seemingly is
the least of lies, is a mortal sin.
Objection 5: Further, Augustine says (Lib. De Mend. xvii) that "it is a
precept of perfection, not only not to lie at all, but not even to wish to
lie." Now it is a mortal sin to act against a precept. Therefore every
lie of the perfect is a mortal sin: and consequently so also is a lie
told by anyone else, otherwise the perfect would be worse off than
others.
On the contrary, Augustine says on Ps. 5:7, "Thou wilt destroy," etc.:
"There are two kinds of lie, that are not grievously sinful yet are not
devoid of sin, when we lie either in joking, or for the sake of our
neighbor's good." But every mortal sin is grievous. Therefore jocose