even of receiving the Lord in his house. Wherefore even when he said, "My
servant lies sick," he did not add, "speak," for fear lest he should be unworthy to
obtain the gift; but he merely made known his affliction. And when he saw
Christ zealous in His turn, not even so did he spring forward, but still continues
to keep to the end his own proper measure.
And if any one should say, "wherefore did not Christ honor him in return?"
we would say this, that He did make return to him in honor, and that
exceedingly: first by bringing out his mind, which thing chiefly appeared by His
not coming to his house; and in the second place, by introducing him into His
kingdom, and preferring him to the whole Jewish nation. For because he made
himself out unworthy even to receive Christ into his house, he became worthy
both of a kingdom, and of attaining unto those good things which Abraham
enjoyed.
"But wherefore," one may say, "was not the leper commended, who showed
forth things greater than these?" For he did not so much as say, "speak the
word," but what was far more, "be willing only," which is what the prophet says
concerning the Father, "He has done whatsoever He pleased." But he also was
commended. For when He said, "Offer the gift that Moses commanded, for a
testimony unto them," [Matthew 8:4] He means nothing else but, "you shall be
an accuser of them, in that you believed." And besides, it was not the same for
one that was a Jew to believe, and for one from without that nation. For that the
centurion was not a Jew is evident, both from his being a centurion and from its
being said, "I have not found so great faith, no, not in Israel." And it was a very
great thing for a man who was out of the list of the Jewish people to admit so
great a thought. For he did no less than imagine to himself, as it seems to me, the
armies in Heaven; or that the diseases and death, and everything else, were so
subject to Him, as his soldiers to himself.
Wherefore he said likewise, "For I also am a man set under authority;" that
is, You are God, and I man; I under authority, but Thou not under authority. If I
therefore, being a man, and under authority, can do so much; far more He, both

as God, and as not under authority. Thus with the strongest expression he desires
to convince Him, that he says this, as one giving not a similar example, but one
far exceeding. For if I (said he), being equal in honor to them whom I command,
and under authority, yet by reason of the trifling superiority of my rank am able
to do such great things; and no man contradicts me, but what I command, that is
done, though the injunctions be various ("for I say to this man, go, and he goes;
and to another, come, and he comes": [Matthew 8:9]) much more will You
Yourself be able.
And some actually read the place in this way, "For if I, being a man," and
having inserted a stop, they add, "having soldiers under authority under me."
But mark thou, I pray you, how he signified that Christ is able both to
overcome even death as a slave, and to command it as its master. For in saying,
"come, and he comes," and "go, and he goes;" he expresses this: "If You should
command his end not to come upon him, it will not come."
Do you see how believing he was? For that which was afterwards to be
manifest to all, here is one who already has made it evident; that He has power
both of death and of life, and "leads down to the gates of hell, and brings up
again." [1 Samuel xxvi] Nor was he speaking of soldiers only, but also of slaves;
which related to a more entire obedience.
5. But nevertheless, though having such great faith, he still accounted
himself to be unworthy. Christ however, signifying that he was worthy to have
Him enter into his house, did much greater things, marvelling at him, and
proclaiming him, and giving more than he had asked. For he came indeed
seeking for his servant health of body, but went away, having received a
kingdom. Do you see how the saying had been already fulfilled, "Seek the
kingdom of heaven, and all these things shall be added unto you." For, because
he evinced great faith, and lowliness of mind, He both gave him heaven, and
added unto him health.
And not by this alone did He honor him, but also by signifying upon whose
casting out he is brought in. For now from this time forth He proceeds to make