things for which indulgences are granted, indulgences cannot avail
them directly. However, they profit secondarily and indirectly the
person for whom one does that which is the cause of the indulgence.
This is sometimes feasible and sometimes not, according to the
different forms of indulgence. For if the form of indulgence be such
as this: "Whosoever does this or that shall gain so much
indulgence," he who does this cannot transfer the fruit of the
indulgence to another, because it is not in his power to apply to a
particular person the intention of the Church who dispenses the
common suffrages whence indulgences derive their value, as stated
above (Question 27, Article 3, ad 2). If, however, the indulgence be
granted in this form: "Whosoever does this or that, he, his father, or
any other person connected with him and detained in purgatory, will
gain so much indulgence," an indulgence of this kind will avail not
only a living but also a deceased person. For there is no reason why
the Church is able to transfer the common merits, whereon
indulgences are based, to the living and not to the dead. Nor does it
follow that a prelate of the Church can release souls from purgatory
just as he lists, since for indulgences to avail there must be a fitting
cause for granting them, as stated above (Question 26, Article 3).

### ARTICLE 11. Whether the burial service profits the dead?

Objection 1: It would seem that the burial service profits the dead.
For Damascene (Serm.: De his qui in fide dormierunt) quotes
Athanasius as saying: "Even though he who has departed in
godliness be taken up to heaven, do not hesitate to call upon God
and to burn oil and wax at his tomb; for such things are pleasing to
God and receive a great reward from Him." Now the like pertain to
the burial service. Therefore the burial service profits the dead.
Objection 2: Further, according to Augustine (De Cura pro mort. iii),
"In olden times the funerals of just men were cared for with dutiful
piety, their obsequies celebrated, their graves provided, and
themselves while living charged their children touching the burial or
even the translation of their bodies." But they would not have done
this unless the tomb and things of this kind conferred something on
the dead. Therefore the like profit the dead somewhat.
Objection 3: Further, no one does a work of mercy on some one's
behalf unless it profit him. Now burying the dead is reckoned among
the works of mercy, therefore Augustine says (De Cura pro Mort. iii):
"Tobias, as attested by the angel, is declared to have found favor
with God by burying the dead." Therefore such like burial
observances profit the dead.
Objection 4: Further, it is unbecoming to assert that the devotion of
the faithful is fruitless. Now some, out of devotion, arrange for their
burial in some religious locality. Therefore the burial service profits
the dead.
Objection 5: Further, God is more inclined to pity than to condemn.
Now burial in a sacred place is hurtful to some if they be unworthy:
wherefore Gregory says (Dial. iv): "If those who are burdened with
grievous sins are buried in the church this will lead to their more
severe condemnation rather than to their release." Much more,
therefore, should we say that the burial service profits the good.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Cura pro Mort. iii): "Whatever
service is done the body is no aid to salvation, but an office of
humanity."