consideration of his own sins, and the judgment of them, can make any progress.
But when you are always busy about other men's matters, when will you pay any
heed to your own evils?
16. Let us flee then, beloved, let us flee slander! knowing that it is the very
gulph of Satan, and the place where he lurks with his snares. For in order that we
may be careless of our own state, and may thus render our account heavier, the
devil leads us into this custom. But more than this it is not only a very serious
matter, that we shall hereafter have to give account of what we have spoken, but
that we shall make our own offenses the heavier by these means; depriving
ourselves of all excuse. For he who scans with bitterness the conduct of others,
can never obtain pardon for the sins committed by himself. For God will
determine the sentence, not only from the nature of our transgressions, but from
the judgment which you have passed upon others. Therefore He gave the
admonition, "Judge not, that you be not judged." [Matthew 7:1] For the sin, of
whatever kind, will not there appear any more such as it was when committed,
but will receive a great and unpardonable addition from the judgment passed by
you upon your fellow servants. For as he who is humane, and merciful, and
forgiving, cuts away the greater mass of his sins, so he who is bitter, and cruel,
and implacable, greatly increases the magnitude of his own offenses. Let us then
expel from our mouth all slander, knowing that if we do not abstain from it,
though we might feed upon ashes, this austerity would avail us nothing. "For not
that which enters into, but that which comes out of the mouth defiles the man."
[Matthew 15:17-18] If any one were to stir up a cesspool, when you were
passing, say, would you not reproach and rate the man who did it? This then also
do with respect to the slanderer. For the stirred cesspool does not so grossly
offend the sense of those who smell that ill savour, as the stirring up other men's
sins, and the exposure of an impure life, offends and disturbs the soul of those
who hear of it. Therefore let us abstain from evil speaking, from foul language,
from blasphemy; and let us not speak ill of our neighbour, nor of God!
17. For many of our evil speakers have run into such madness, as to lift up

their own tongue from their fellow servants against their Master. But how great
an evil this is, you may learn from the affairs in which we are now involved. A
man is insulted, and, lo! We are all fearing and trembling, both those who were
guilty of the insult, and those who are conscious of nothing of the kind! But God
is insulted every day! Why do I say every day?— every hour rather, by the rich,
by the poor, by those who are at ease, by the afflicted, by those who calumniate,
and those who are calumniated, and yet no one ever hears a word of this!
Therefore He has permitted our fellow servant to be insulted, in order that from
the danger which has happened through this insult, you may learn the benignity
of the Lord! And notwithstanding that this is our first and only offense, we do
not on that account expect to gain an excuse, or pardon. But we provoke God
every day, and we show no signs of returning to Him, and yet He endures it with
all long-suffering! Do you see then how great the benignity of the Lord is? Yet,
in this present outrage, those who had done amiss were taken and thrust into
prison, and paid the penalty; nevertheless we are still in fear, for he who has
been insulted has not as yet heard what has taken place, nor pronounced
sentence, and we are all trembling. But God every day hears of the insults
offered Him, and no one heeds it, although God is thus merciful and loving
toward man. With Him it suffices only to acknowledge the sin, and so to cancel
the accusation. But with man it is altogether the reverse. When those who have
sinned confess, then they are punished the more; which indeed has happened in
the present instance. And some have perished by the sword, some by fire; some
given to wild beasts, and not men only, but children. And neither this immaturity
of age, nor the tumult of the people, nor the circumstance that they were
infuriated by demons when they perpetrated these deeds; nor that the exaction
was thought to be intolerable; nor poverty, nor having offended in company with
all; nor promising that they would never hereafter dare to repeat such deeds; nor
anything else, could at all rescue them; but they were led away to the pit, without
reprieve; armed soldiers conducting and guarding them on either side, lest any
one should carry off the criminals; while mothers also followed afar off, seeing