they rise against the Archangels. Nor, on the other hand, can the irrational
creatures proudly exalt themselves over us; but where the nature is equal in
dignity, and the gift one, and where one has no more than another, how shall this
be prevented?
And yet surely these are the very reasons why you ought not to rise up
against your neighbors. For if all things are common, and one has nothing more
than another, whence this mad folly? We partake of the same nature, partake
alike of soul and body, we breathe the same air, we use the same food. Whence
this rebellious rising of one against another? And yet truly the being able by
one's virtue to overcome the incorporeal powers, that were enough to lead to
arrogance; or rather arrogance it would not be, for with good reason am I highminded, and exceedingly high-minded against the evil spirit. And behold even
Paul, how high-minded he was against that evil spirit. For when the evil spirit
was speaking great and marvelous things concerning him, he made him hold his
peace, and endured him not even in his flattery. For when that damsel, "who had
the spirit of divination," cried, saying, "These men are the servants of the most
high God, which show unto us the way of salvation" [Acts 16:16-17], he rebuked
him severely, and silenced his forward tongue. And again he elsewhere writes,
and says, "God shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly." [Romans 16:20] Will
the difference of nature have any effect? Perceivest thou not that the difference
between natures has no effect whatever, but only the difference of purpose?
Because of their principle therefore they are far worse than all. Well, a man may
say, but I am not rising up against an Angel, because there is so vast a distance
between my nature and his. And yet surely you ought no more to rise up against
a man than against an Angel, for the Angel indeed differs from you in nature, a
matter which can be neither an honor to him, nor a disgrace to you: whereas man
differs from man not at all in nature, but in principle; and there is such a thing as
an Angel too even among men. So that if you rise not up against Angels, much
more should you not against men, against those who have become angels in this
our nature; for should any one among men become as virtuous as an Angel, that

man is in a far higher degree superior to you, than an Angel is. And why so?
Because what the one possesses by nature, the other has achieved of his own
purpose. And again, because the Angel has his home far from you in distance
also, and dwells in Heaven; whereas this man is living with you, and giving an
impulse to your emulation. And indeed he lives farther apart from you than the
Angel. For "our citizenship," says the Apostle, "is in Heaven." [Philippians 3:20]
And to show you that this man has his home still farther distant, hear where his
Head is seated; upon the throne, says he, the royal throne! And the farther distant
that throne is from us, the farther is he also.
Well, but I see him, you will say, in the enjoyment of honor, and I am led to
jealousy. Why, this is the very thing which has turned all things upside down,
which has filled not the world only, but the Church also, with countless troubles.
And just as fierce blasts setting in across a calm harbor, render it more dangerous
than any rock, or than any strait whatever; so the lust of glory entering in,
overturns and confounds everything.
You have oftentimes been present at the burning of large houses. You have
seen how the smoke keeps rising up to Heaven; and if no one comes near to put
a stop to the mischief, but every one keeps looking to himself, the flame spreads
freely on, and devours everything. And oftentimes the whole city will stand
around; they will stand round indeed as spectators of the evil, not to aid nor
assist. And there you may see them one and all standing round, and doing
nothing but each individual stretching out his hand, and pointing out to some one
who may be just come to the spot, either a flaming brand that moment flying
through a window, or beams hurled down, or the whole circuit of the walls
forced out, and tumbling violently to the ground. Many too there are of the more
daring and venturesome, who will have the hardihood even to come close to the
very buildings themselves while they are burning, not in order to stretch forth a
hand towards them, and to put a stop to the mischief, but that they may the more
fully enjoy the sight, being able from the nearer place to observe closely all that
which often escapes those at a distance. Then if the house happen to be large and