1 Corinthians 8:8
9. "But meat does not commend us to God. For neither if we eat are we the
better, nor if we eat not are we the worse." Do you see how again he takes down
their high spirit? In that, after saying that "not only they but all of us have
knowledge," and that "no one knows any thing as he ought to know," and that
"knowledge puffs up;" then having soothed them, and said that "this knowledge
is not in all," and that "weakness is the cause of these being defiled," in order
that they might not say, "And what is it to us, if knowledge be not in all? Why
then has not such an one knowledge? Why is he weak?"— I say, in order that
they might not rejoin in these terms, he did not proceed immediately to point out
clearly that for fear of the other's harm one ought to abstain: but having first
made but a sort of skirmish upon mention of him, he points out what is more
than this. What then is this? That although no one were injured nor any
perversion of another ensued, not even in this case were it right so to do. For the
former topic by itself is laboring in vain. Since he that hears of another being
hurt while himself has the gain, is not very apt to abstain; but then rather he does
so, when he finds out that he himself is no way advantaged by the thing.
Wherefore he sets this down first, saying, "But meat commends us not to God."
See how cheap he holds that which was accounted to spring from perfect
knowledge! "For neither if we eat are we the better," (that is, stand higher in
God's estimation, as if we had done any thing good or great:) "nor if we eat not
are we the worse," that is, fall in any way short of others. So far then he has
signified that the thing itself is superfluous, and as nothing. For that which being
done profits not, and which being left undone injures not, must be superfluous.
10. But as he goes on, he discloses all the harm which was likely to arise
from the matter. For the present, however, that which befell the brethren is his
subject.

1 Corinthians 8:9
"For take heed," says he, "lest by any means this liberty of yours become a
stumbling-block to the weak among the brethren." ([τῶν ἀδελφῶν] not in rec.
text.)
He did not say, "Your liberty has become a stumbling-block," nor did he
positively affirm it that he might not make them more shameless; but how?
"Take heed;" frightening them, and making them ashamed, and leading them to
disavow any such conduct. And he said not, "This your knowledge," which
would have sounded more like praise; nor "this your perfectness;" but, "your
liberty;" a thing which seemed to savor more of rashness and obstinacy and
arrogance. Neither said he, "To the brethren," but, "To those of the brethren who
are weak;" enhancing his accusation from their not even sparing the weak, and
those too their brethren. For let it be so that you correct them not, nor arouse
them: yet why trip them up, and make them to stumble, when you ought to
stretch out the hand? But for that you have no mind: well then, at least avoid
casting them down. Since if one were wicked, he required punishment; if weak,
healing: but now he is not only weak, but also a brother.