they inquired of the neighbors. "And while Peter thought, the Spirit said unto
him, Arise, get you down, and go, nothing doubting, for I have sent them." (v. 19,
20.) And he does not say, For to this end did the vision appear unto you; but, "I
have sent them. Then Peter went down" [Acts 10:21]— this is the way the Spirit
must be obeyed, without demanding reasons. For it is sufficient for all assurance
to be told by Him, This do, this believe: nothing more (is needed)— "Then Peter
went down, and said, Behold, I am he whom you seek: what is the cause
wherefore you have come?" He saw a soldier, saw a man: it was not that he was
afraid, on the contrary, having first confessed that he was the person whom they
sought, then he asks for the cause (of their coming); that it may not be supposed
that the reason of his asking the cause, was, that he wished to hide himself: (he
asks it) in order, that if it be immediately urgent, he may also go forth with them,
but if not, may receive them as guests. "And they said, etc. into his house." [Acts
10:22] This he had ordered them. Do not think he has done this out of contempt:
not as of contempt has he sent, but so he was ordered. "And Cornelius was
waiting for them, and had called together his kinsmen and near friends." [Acts
10:24] It was right that his kinsmen and friends should be gathered to him. But
being there present, they would have heard from him (what had happened).
See how great the virtue of alms, both in the former discourse, and here!
There, it delivered from death temporal; here, from death eternal; and opened the
gates of heaven. Such are the pains taken for the bringing of Cornelius to the
faith, that both an angel is sent, and the Spirit works, and the chief of the
Apostles is fetched to him, and such a vision is shown, and, in short, nothing is
left undone. How many centurions were there not besides, and tribunes, and
kings, and none of them obtained what this man did! Hear, all you that are in
military commands, all you that stand beside kings. "A just man," it says,
"fearing God; devout" (v. 2, and 22); and what is more than all, with all his
house. Not as we (who): that our servants may be afraid of us, do everything. but
not that they may be devout. And over the domestics too, so * *. Not so this
man; but he was "one that feared God with all his house" [Acts 10:2], for he was

as the common father of those with him, and of all the others (under his
command.) But observe what (the soldier) says himself. For, fearing * *, he adds
this also: "well reported of by all the nation." For what if he was uncircumcised?
Nay, but those give him a good report. Nothing like alms: great is the virtue of
this practice, when the alms is poured forth from pure stores; for it is like a
fountain discharging mud, when it issues from unjust stores, but when from just
gains, it is as a limpid and pure stream in a paradise, sweet to the sight, sweet to
the touch, both light and cool, when given in the noon-day heat. Such is alms.
Beside this fountain, not poplars and pines, nor cypresses, but other plants than
these, and far better, of goodly stature: friendship with God, praise with men,
glory to Godward, good-will from all; blotting out of sins, great boldness,
contempt of wealth. This is the fountain by which the plant of love is nourished:
for nothing is so wont to nourish love, as the being merciful: it makes its
branches to lift themselves on high. This fountain is better than that in Paradise
[Genesis 2:10]; a fountain, not dividing into four heads, but reaching unto
Heaven itself: this gives birth to that river "which springs up into eternal life"
[John 4:14]: on this let Death light, and like a spark it is extinguished by the
fountain: such, wherever it drops, are the mighty blessings it causes. This
quenches, even as a spark, the river of fire: this so strangles that worm, as naught
else can do. [Mark 9:44] He that has this, shall not gnash his teeth. Of the water
of this, let there be dropped upon the chains, and it dissolves them: let it but
touch the firebrands, it quenches all.— A fountain does not give out streams for
a while and anon run dry—else must it be no more a fountain—but ever gushes:
so let our fountain give out more copiously of the streams of mercy (in alms).
This cheers him that receives: this is alms, to give out not only a copious, but a
perennial, stream. If you would that God rain down His mercy upon you as from
fountains, have thou also a fountain. And yet there is no comparison (between
God's fountain and yours): for if you open the mouths of this fountain, such are
the mouths of God's Fountain as to surpass every abyss. God does but seek to get
an opportunity on our part, and pours forth from His storehouses His blessings.