And that His greatness is not defective, but contains all things, and extends even to us, and is with
us, every one will confess who entertains worthy conceptions of God.

### Chapter XX.—That one God formed all things in the world, by means of the Word and the
Holy Spirit: and that although He is to us in this life invisible and incomprehensible,
nevertheless He is not unknown; inasmuch as His works do declare Him, and His Word has
shown that in many modes He may be seen and known.

1. As regards His greatness, therefore, it is not possible to know God, for it is impossible that
the Father can be measured; but as regards His love (for this it is which leads us to God by His
Word), when we obey Him, we do always learn that there is so great a God, and that it is He who
by Himself has established, and selected, and adorned, and contains all things; and among the all
things, both ourselves and this our world. We also then were made, along with those things which
are contained by Him. And this is He of whom the Scripture says, "And God formed man, taking
clay of the earth, and breathed into his face the breath of life." It was not angels, therefore, who
made us, nor who formed us, neither had angels power to make an image of God, nor any one else,
except the Word of the Lord, nor any Power remotely distant from the Father of all things. For God
did not stand in need of these [beings], in order to the accomplishing of what He had Himself
determined with Himself beforehand should be done, as if He did not possess His own hands. For
with Him were always present the Word and Wisdom, the Son and the Spirit, by whom and in
whom, freely and spontaneously, He made all things, to whom also He speaks, saying, "Let Us
make man after Our image and likeness;" He taking from Himself the substance of the creatures
[formed], and the pattern of things made, and the type of all the adornments in the world.
2. Truly, then, the Scripture declared, which says, "First of all believe that there is one God,
who has established all things, and completed them, and having caused that from what had no
being, all things should come into existence:" He who contains all things, and is Himself contained
by no one. Rightly also has Malachi said among the prophets: "Is it not one God who hath established
us? Have we not all one Father?" In accordance with this, too, does the apostle say, "There is
one God, the Father, who is above all, and in us all." Likewise does the Lord also say: "All things
are delivered to Me by My Father;" manifestly by Him who made all things; for He did not
deliver to Him the things of another, but His own. But in all things [it is implied that] nothing has

This quotation is taken from the Shepherd of Hermas, book ii. sim. 1.

been kept back [from Him], and for this reason the same person is the Judge of the living and the
dead; "having the key of David: He shall open, and no man shall shut: He shall shut, and no man
shall open." For no one was able, either in heaven or in earth, or under the earth, to open the
book of the Father, or to behold Him, with the exception of the Lamb who was slain, and who
redeemed us with His own blood, receiving power over all things from the same God who made
all things by the Word, and adorned them by [His] Wisdom, when "the Word was made flesh;"
that even as the Word of God had the sovereignty in the heavens, so also might He have the
sovereignty in earth, inasmuch as [He was] a righteous man, "who did no sin, neither was there
found guile in His mouth;" and that He might have the pre-eminence over those things which
are under the earth, He Himself being made "the first-begotten of the dead;" and that all things,
as I have already said, might behold their King; and that the paternal light might meet with and rest
upon the flesh of our Lord, and come to us from His resplendent flesh, and that thus man might
attain to immortality, having been invested with the paternal light.
3. I have also largely demonstrated, that the Word, namely the Son, was always with the Father;
and that Wisdom also, which is the Spirit, was present with Him, anterior to all creation, He declares
by Solomon: "God by Wisdom founded the earth, and by understanding hath He established the
heaven. By His knowledge the depths burst forth, and the clouds dropped down the dew." And
again: "The Lord created me the beginning of His ways in His work: He set me up from everlasting,
in the beginning, before He made the earth, before He established the depths, and before the fountains
of waters gushed forth; before the mountains were made strong, and before all the hills, He brought
me forth." And again: "When He prepared the heaven, I was with Him, and when He established
the fountains of the deep; when He made the foundations of the earth strong, I was with Him
preparing [them]. I was He in whom He rejoiced, and throughout all time I was daily glad before
His face, when He rejoiced at the completion of the world, and was delighted in the sons of men."
4. There is therefore one God, who by the Word and Wisdom created and arranged all things;
but this is the Creator (Demiurge) who has granted this world to the human race, and who, as regards
His greatness, is indeed unknown to all who have been made by Him (for no man has searched out
His height, either among the ancients who have gone to their rest, or any of those who are now
alive); but as regards His love, He is always known through Him by whose means He ordained all
things. Now this is His Word, our Lord Jesus Christ, who in the last times was made a man among
men, that He might join the end to the beginning, that is, man to God. Wherefore the prophets,