THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.83, C.3.

Reply to Objection 4: As a rule mass ought to be said in the day and
not in the night, because Christ is present in this sacrament, Who
says (Jn. 9:4,5): "I must work the works of Him that sent Me, whilst it
is day: because the night cometh when no man can work; as long as
I am in the world, I am the light of the world." Yet this should be done
in such a manner that the beginning of the day is not to be taken
from midnight; nor from sunrise, that is, when the substance of the
sun appears above the earth; but when the dawn begins to show:
because then the sun is said to be risen when the brightness of his
beams appears. Accordingly it is written (Mk. 16:1) that "the women
came to the tomb, the sun being now risen"; though, as John relates
(Jn. 20:1), "while it was yet dark they came to the tomb." It is in this
way that Augustine explains this difference (De Consens. Evang. iii).
Exception is made on the night of Christmas eve, when mass is
celebrated, because our Lord was born in the night (De Consecr.,
dist. 1). And in like manner it is celebrated on Holy Saturday towards
the beginning of the night, since our Lord rose in the night, that is,
"when it was yet dark, before the sun's rising was manifest."
Reply to Objection 5: As is set down in the decree (De Consecr., dist.
1), in virtue of a decree of Pope Alexander II, "it is enough for a priest
to celebrate one mass each day, because Christ suffered once and
redeemed the whole world; and very happy is he who can worthily
celebrate one mass. But there are some who say one mass for the
dead, and another of the day, if need be. But I do not deem that those
escape condemnation who presume to celebrate several masses
daily, either for the sake of money, or to gain flattery from the laity."
And Pope Innocent III says (Extra, De Celebr. Miss., chap.
Consuluisti) that "except on the day of our Lord's birth, unless
necessity urges, it suffices for a priest to celebrate only one mass
each day."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.83, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether this sacrament ought to be celebrated in

a house and with sacred vessels?
Objection 1: It seems that this sacrament ought not to be celebrated
in a house and with sacred vessels. For this sacrament is a
representation of our Lord's Passion. But Christ did not suffer in a
house, but outside the city gate, according to Heb. 1:12: "Jesus, that
He might sanctify the people by His own blood, suffered without the
gate." Therefore, it seems that this sacrament ought not to be
celebrated in a house, but rather in the open air.
Objection 2: Further, in the celebration of this sacrament the Church
ought to imitate the custom of Christ and the apostles. But the house
wherein Christ first wrought this sacrament was not consecrated,
but merely an ordinary supper-room prepared by the master of the
house, as related in Lk. 22:11,12. Moreover, we read (Acts 2:46) that
"the apostles were continuing daily with one accord in the temple;
and, breaking bread from house to house, they took their meat with
gladness." Consequently, there is no need for houses, in which this
sacrament is celebrated, to be consecrated.
Objection 3: Further, nothing that is to no purpose ought to be done
in the Church, which is governed by the Holy Ghost. But it seems
useless to consecrate a church, or an altar, or such like inanimate
things, since they are not capable of receiving grace or spiritual
virtue. Therefore it is unbecoming for such consecrations to be
performed in the Church.
Objection 4: Further, only Divine works ought to be recalled with
solemnity, according to Ps. 91:5: "I shall rejoice in the works of Thy
hands." Now the consecration of a church or altar, is the work of a
man; as is also the consecration of the chalice, and of the ministers,
and of other such things. But these latter consecrations are not
commemorated in the Church. Therefore neither ought the
consecration of a church or of an altar to be commemorated with
solemnity.
Objection 5: Further, the truth ought to correspond with the figure.
But in the Old Testament, which was a figure of the New, the altar
was not made of hewn stones: for, it is written (Ex. 20:24): "You shall
make an altar of earth unto Me . . . and if thou make an altar of stone