with the flesh. Abraham also with Isaac and his grandson shone brightly, having
the flesh; and Joseph in the flesh struggled against that abandoned woman. But
why speak I of the flesh? For though thou place a chain upon the flesh, no harm
is done. "Though I am bound," says Paul, yet "the word of God is not bound." [2
Timothy 2:9] And why speak I of bonds and chains? Add to these the prison, and
bars, yet neither are these any hindrance to virtue; at least so Paul has instructed
us. For the bond of the soul is not iron but cowardice, and the desire of wealth,
and the ten thousand passions. These bind us, though our body be free. "But,"
says some one, "these have their origin from the body." An excuse this, and a
false pretense. For had they been produced from the body, all would have
undergone them. For as we cannot escape weariness, and sleep, and hunger, and
thirst, since they belong to our nature; so too these, if they were of the same
kind, would not allow any one to be exempt from their tyranny; but since many
escape them, it is clear that such things are the faults of a careless soul. Let us
then put a stop to this, and not accuse the body, but subdue it to the soul, that
having it under command, we may enjoy the everlasting good things, through the
grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever
and ever. Amen.

Homily 76 on the Gospel of John
John 14:31-15:1
"Arise, let us go hence. I am the true Vine, (you are the branches, ) and My
Father is the Husbandman."
1. ' Ignorance' makes the soul timid and unmanly, just as instruction in
heavenly doctrines makes it great and sublime. For when it has enjoyed no care,
it is in a manner timid, not by nature but by will. For when I see the man who
once was brave, now become a coward, I say that this latter feeling no longer
belongs to nature, for what is natural is immutable. Again, when I see those who
but now were cowards all at once become daring, I pass the same judgment, and
refer all to will. Since even the disciples were very fearful, before they had
learned what they ought, and had been deemed worthy of the gift of the Spirit;
yet afterwards they became bolder than lions. So Peter, who could not bear the
threat of a damsel, was hung with his head downwards, and was scourged, and
though he endured ten thousand dangers, would not be silent, but enduring what
he endured as though it were a dream, in such a situation spoke boldly; but not
so before the Crucifixion. Wherefore Christ said, "Arise, let us go hence." "But
why, tell me? Did he not know the hour at which Judas would come upon Him?
Or perhaps He feared lest he should come and seize them, and lest the plotters
should be upon him before he had furnished his most excellent teaching." Away
with the thought! These things are far from His dignity. "If then He did not fear,
why did He remove them, and then after finish ing His discourse lead them into a
garden known to Judas? And even had Judas come, could He not have blinded
their eyes, as He also did when the traitor was not present? Why did He remove
them?" He allows the disciples a little breathing time. For it was likely that they,
as being in a conspicuous place, would tremble and fear, both on the account of