them up and educating them. As if he should say, You have received from them
great care. They are departed. You can not requite them. For thou did not bring
them forth, nor nourish them. Requite them in their descendants, repay the debt
through the children. "Let them learn first to show piety at home." Here he more
simply exhorts them to acts of kindness; then to excite them the more, he adds,
"For that is good and acceptable before God." And as he had spoken of
those "who are widows indeed," he declares who is indeed a widow.
Ver. 5. "Now she that is a widow indeed, and desolate, trusts in God, and
continues in supplications and prayers night and day. But she that lives in
pleasure is dead while she lives."
She who being a widow has not made choice of a worldly life, is a widow
indeed; she who trusts in God as she ought, and continues instant in prayer night
and day, is a widow indeed. Not that she, who has children, is not a widow
indeed. For he commends her who brings up children as she ought. But if any
one has not children, he means, she is desolate, and her he consoles, saying, that
she is most truly a widow, who has lost not only the consolation of a husband,
but that arising from children, yet she has God in the place of all. She is not the
worse for not having children, but He fills up her need with consolation, in that
she is without children. What he says amounts to this. Grieve not, when it is said
that a widow ought to bring up children, as if, because you have no children your
worth were on that account inferior. You are a widow indeed, whereas she who
lives in pleasure is dead while she lives.
But since many who have children choose the state of widowhood, not to
cut off the occasions of a worldly life, but rather to enhance them, that they may
do what they will with the greater license, and indulge the more freely in worldly
lusts: therefore he says, "She that lives in pleasure is dead while she lives."
Ought not a widow then to live in pleasure? Surely not. If then when nature and
age is weak, a life of pleasure is not allowable, but leads to death, eternal death;
what have men to say, who live a life of pleasure? But he says with reason, "She
that lives in pleasure is dead while she lives." But that you may see this, let us

now see what is the state of the dead, and what of the living, and in which shall
we place such an one? The living perform the works of life, of that future life,
which is truly life. And Christ has declared what are the works of that future life,
with which we ought always to be occupied. "Come, inherit the kingdom
prepared for you from the foundation of the world. For I was an hungered, and
you gave me meat. I was thirsty, and you gave me drink." [Matthew 25:34-35]
The living differ from the dead, not only in that they behold the sun, and breathe
the air, but in that they are doing some good. For if this be wanting, the living are
not better than the dead. That you may learn this, hear how it is possible that
even the dead should live. For it is said, "God is not the God of the dead, but of
the living." [Matthew 22:32] But this again you say is a riddle. Let us therefore
solve them both. A man who lives in pleasure, is dead while he lives. For he
lives only to his belly. In his other senses he lives not. He sees not what he ought
to see, he hears not what he ought to hear, he speaks not what he ought to speak.
Nor does he perform the actions of the living. But as he who is stretched upon a
bed, with his eyes closed, and his eyelids fast, perceives nothing that is passing;
so it is with this man, or rather not so, but worse. For the one is equally
insensible to things good and evil, but the latter is sensible to things evil only,
but as insensible as the former to things good. Thus he is dead. For nothing
relating to the life to come moves or affects him. For intemperance, taking him
into her own bosom, as into some dark and dismal cavern, full of all
uncleanness, causes him to dwell altogether in darkness, like the dead. For when
all his time is spent between feasting and drunkenness, is he not dead, and buried
in darkness? Even in the morning when he seems to be sober, he is not sober in
reality, since he has not yet rid and cleansed himself of yesterday's excess and is
still longing for a repetition, and in that his evening and noon he passes in revels,
and all the night, and most of the morning in deep sleep.
Is he then to be numbered with the living? Who can describe that storm that
comes of luxury, that assails his soul and body? For as a sky continually clouded
admits not the sunbeams to shine through it, so the fumes of luxury and wine