would see God, who is love itself, with the inner sight by which He can be
seen. Therefore he who does not love his brother whom he sees, how can
he love God, whom on that account he does not see, because God is love,
which he has not who does not love his brother? Neither let that further
question disturb us, how much of love we ought to spend upon our
brother, and how much upon God: incomparably more upon God than
upon ourselves, but upon our brother as much as upon ourselves; and we
love ourselves so much the more, the more we love God. Therefore we
love God and our neighbor from one and the same love; but we love God
for the sake of God, and ourselves and our neighbors for the sake of God.

### CHAP. 9.—OUR LOVE OF THE RIGHTEOUS IS KINDLED FROM LOVE ITSELF OF THE UNCHANGEABLE FORM OF RIGHTEOUSNESS.

13. For why is it, pray, that we burn when we hear and read, "Behold, now
is the accepted time; behold, now is the day of salvation: giving no offense
in anything, that the ministry be not blamed: but in all things approving
ourselves as the ministers of God, in much patience, in afflictions, in
necessities, in distresses, in stripes, in imprisonments, in tumults, in
labors, in watchings, in fastings; by pureness, by knowledge, by longsuffering, by kindness, by the Holy Ghost, by love unfeigned, by the word
of truth, by the power of God, by the armor of righteousness on the right
hand and on the left, by honor and dishonor, by evil report and good
report: as deceivers, and yet true; as unknown, and yet well known; as
dying, and, behold, we live; as chastened, and not killed; as sorrowful, yet
alway rejoicing; as poor, yet making many rich; as having nothing, and
yet possessing all things?" Why is it that we are inflamed with love of the
Apostle Paul, when we read these things, unless that we believe him so to
have lived? But we do not believe that the ministers of God ought so to
live because we have heard it from any one, but because we behold it
inwardly within ourselves, or rather above ourselves, in the truth itself.
Him, therefore, whom we believe to have so lived, we love for that which
we see. And except we loved above all else that form which we discern as
always steadfast and unchangeable, we should not for that reason love
him, because we hold fast in our belief that his life, when he was living in
the flesh, was adapted to, and in harmony with, this form. But somehow
we are stirred up the more to the love of this form itself, through the

belief by which we believe some one to have so lived; and to the hope by
which we no more at all despair, that we, too, are able so to live; we who
are men, from this fact itself, that some men have so lived, so that we
both desire this more ardently, and pray for it more confidently. So both
the love of that form, according to which they are believed to have lived,
makes the life of these men themselves to be loved by us; and their life
thus believed stirs up a more burning love towards that same form; so
that the more ardently we love God, the more certainly and the more
calmly do we see Him, because we behold in God the unchangeable form
of righteousness, according to which we judge that man ought to live.
Therefore faith avails to the knowledge and to the love of God, not as
though of one altogether unknown, or altogether not loved; but so that
thereby He may be known more clearly, and loved more steadfastly.