wrath of God upon the sons of disobedience." He said not, "upon you," but,
"upon the sons of disobedience."
"In the which you also walked aforetime, when you lived in them." In order
to shame them, he says, "when you lived in them," and implying praise, as now
no more so living: at that time they might.
Ver. 8. "But now put away all these also."
He speaks always both universally and particularly; but this is from
earnestness.
Ver. 8, 9. "Anger, wrath, malice, railing, shameful speaking out of your
mouth. Lie not one to another."
"Shameful speaking," he says, "out of your mouth," clearly intimating that it
pollutes it.
Ver. 9, 10. "Seeing that you have put off the old man with his doings, and
have put on the new man, which is being renewed unto knowledge after the
image of Him that created him."
It is worth enquiring here, what can be the reason why he calls the corrupt
life, "members," and "man," and "body," and again the virtuous life, the same.
And if "the man" means "sins," how is it that he says, "with his doings"? For
once he said, "the old man," showing that this is not man, but the other. The
moral choice does rather determine one than the substance, and is rather "man"
than the other. For his substance casts him not into hell, nor leads him into the
kingdom, but men themselves: and we neither love nor hate any one so far as he
is man, but so far as he is such or such a man. If then the substance be the body,
and in either sort cannot be accountable, how does he say that it is evil? But
what is that he says, "with his doings"? He means the choice, with the acts. And
he calls him "old," on purpose to show his deformity, and hideousness, and
imbecility; and "new," as if to say, Do not expect that it will be with this one
even as with the other, but the reverse: for ever as he farther advances, he
hastens not on to old age, but to a youthfulness greater than the preceding. For
when he has received a fuller knowledge, he is both counted worthy of greater

things, and is in more perfect maturity, in higher vigor; and this, not from
youthfulness alone, but from that "likeness" also, "after" which he is. Lo! The
best life is styled a creation, after the image of Christ: for this is the meaning of,
"after the image of Him that created him," for Christ too came not finally to old
age, but was so beautiful as it is not even possible to tell.
Ver. 11. "Where there cannot be Greek and Jew, circumcision and
uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, bondman, freeman: but Christ is all, and
in all."
Lo! Here is a third encomium of this "man." With him, there is no
difference admitted either of nation, or of rank, or of ancestry, seeing he has
nothing of externals, nor needs them; for all external things are such as these,
"circumcision, and uncircumcision, bondman, freeman, Greek," that is,
proselyte, "and Jew," from his ancestors. If you have only this "man," you will
obtain the same things with the others that have him.
"But Christ," he says, "is all, and in all": Christ will be all things to you,
both rank, and descent, "and" Himself "in you all." Or he says another thing, to
wit, that you all have become one Christ, being His body.
Ver. 12. "Put on, therefore, as the elect of God, holy and beloved."
He shows the easiness of virtue, so that they might both possess it
continually, and use it as the greatest ornament. The exhortation is accompanied
also with praise, for then its force is greatest. For they had been before holy, but
not elect; but now both "elect, and holy, and beloved."
"A heart of compassion." He said not "mercy," but with greater emphasis
used the two words. And he said not, that it should be as towards brethren, but,
as fathers towards children. For tell me not that he sinned, therefore he said "a
heart." And he said not "compassion," lest he should place them in light
estimation, but "a heart of compassion, kindness, humility, meekness,
longsuffering; forbearing one another, and forgiving each other, if any man have
a complaint against any: even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye."
Again, he speaks after the class, and he always does it; for from kindness