SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.183, C.8.

of "perfecters," whereas religious are in the position of being
"perfected"; the former of which pertains to action, and the latter to
passion. Whence it is evident that the state of perfection is more
excellent in bishops than in religious.
Reply to Objection 1: Renunciation of one's possessions may be
considered in two ways. First, as being actual: and thus it is not
essential, but a means, to perfection, as stated above (Article 3).
Hence nothing hinders the state of perfection from being without
renunciation of one's possessions, and the same applies to other
outward practices. Secondly, it may be considered in relation to
one's preparedness, in the sense of being prepared to renounce or
give away all: and this belongs directly to perfection. Hence
Augustine says (De Questions. Evang. ii, qu. 11): "Our Lord shows
that the children of wisdom understand righteousness to consist
neither in eating nor in abstaining, but in bearing want patiently."
Wherefore the Apostle says (Phil. 4:12): "I know . . . both to abound
and to suffer need." Now bishops especially are bound to despise all
things for the honor of God and the spiritual welfare of their flock,
when it is necessary for them to do so, either by giving to the poor of
their flock, or by suffering "with joy the being stripped of" their "own
goods" [Heb. 10:34].
Reply to Objection 2: That bishops are busy about things pertaining
to the love of their neighbor, arises out of the abundance of their
love of God. Hence our Lord asked Peter first of all whether he loved
Him, and afterwards committed the care of His flock to him. And
Gregory says (Pastor. i, 5): "If the pastoral care is a proof of love, he
who refuses to feed God's flock, though having the means to do so,
is convicted of not loving the supreme Pastor." And it is a sign of
greater love if a man devotes himself to others for his friend's sake,
than if he be willing only to serve his friend.
Reply to Objection 3: As Gregory says (Pastor. ii, 1), "a prelate
should be foremost in action, and more uplifted than others in
contemplation," because it is incumbent on him to contemplate, not
only for his own sake, but also for the purpose of instructing others.
Hence Gregory applies (Hom. v in Ezech.) the words of Ps. 144:7,
"They shall publish the memory . . . of Thy sweetness," to perfect
men returning after their contemplation.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.183, C.8.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.183, C.9.

### ARTICLE 8. Whether parish priests and archdeacons are more

perfect than religious?
Objection 1: It would seem that also parish priests and archdeacons
are more perfect than religious. For Chrysostom says in his Dialogue
(De Sacerdot. vi): "Take for example a monk, such as Elias, if I may
exaggerate somewhat, he is not to be compared with one who, cast
among the people and compelled to carry the sins of many, remains
firm and strong." A little further on he says: "If I were given the
choice, where would I prefer to please, in the priestly office, or in the
monastic solitude, without hesitation I should choose the former."
Again in the same book (ch. 5) he says: "If you compare the toils of
this project, namely of the monastic life, with a well-employed
priesthood, you will find them as far distant from one another as a
common citizen is from a king." Therefore it would seem that priests
who have the cure of souls are more perfect than religious.
Objection 2: Further, Augustine says (ad Valerium, Ep. xxi): "Let thy
religious prudence observe that in this life, and especially at these
times, there is nothing so difficult, so onerous, so perilous as the
office of bishop, priest, or deacon; while in God's sight there is no
greater blessing, if one engage in the fight as ordered by our
Commander-in-chief." Therefore religious are not more perfect than
priests or deacons.
Objection 3: Further, Augustine says (Ep. lx, ad Aurel.): "It would be
most regrettable, were we to exalt monks to such a disastrous
degree of pride, and deem the clergy deserving of such a grievous
insult," as to assert that 'a bad monk is a good clerk,' "since
sometimes even a good monk makes a bad clerk." And a little before
this he says that "God's servants," i.e. monks, "must not be allowed
to think that they may easily be chosen for something better,"
namely the clerical state, "if they should become worse thereby,"
namely by leaving the monastic state. Therefore it would seem that
those who are in the clerical state are more perfect than religious.
Objection 4: Further, it is not lawful to pass from a more perfect to a
less perfect state. Yet it is lawful to pass from the monastic state to a
priestly office with a cure attached, as appears (XVI, qu. i, can. Si
quis monachus) from a decree of Pope Gelasius, who says: "If there
be a monk, who by the merit of his exemplary life is worthy of the