SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.185, C.5.

children, and his temporalities which serve for their upkeep. Hence
the Apostle says (1 Cor. 7:32,33): "He that is without a wife is
solicitous for the things that belong to the Lord, how he may please
God: but he that is with a wife is solicitous for the things of the
world, how he may please his wife."
Therefore perpetual continence, as well as voluntary poverty, is
requisite for religious perfection. Wherefore just as Vigilantius was
condemned for equaling riches to poverty, so was Jovinian
condemned for equaling marriage to virginity.
Reply to Objection 1: The perfection not only of poverty but also of
continence was introduced by Christ Who said (Mt. 19:12): "There
are eunuchs who have made themselves eunuchs, for the kingdom
of heaven," and then added: "He that can take, let him take it." And
lest anyone should be deprived of the hope of attaining perfection,
he admitted to the state of perfection those even who were married.
Now the husbands could not without committing an injustice forsake
their wives, whereas men could without injustice renounce riches.
Wherefore Peter whom He found married, He severed not from his
wife, while "He withheld from marriage John who wished to
marry" [Prolog. in Joan.].
Reply to Objection 2: As Augustine says (De Bono Conjug. xxii), "the
chastity of celibacy is better than the chastity of marriage, one of
which Abraham had in use, both of them in habit. For he lived
chastely, and he might have been chaste without marrying, but it
was not requisite then." Nevertheless if the patriarchs of old had
perfection of mind together with wealth and marriage, which is a
mark of the greatness of their virtue, this is no reason why any
weaker person should presume to have such great virtue that he can
attain to perfection though rich and married; as neither does a man
unarmed presume to attack his enemy, because Samson slew many
foes with the jaw-bone of an ass. For those fathers, had it been
seasonable to observe continence and poverty, would have been
most careful to observe them.
Reply to Objection 3: Such ways of living as admit of the use of
marriage are not the religious life simply and absolutely speaking,
but in a restricted sense, in so far as they have a certain share in
those things that belong to the religious state.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.185, C.5.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.185, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether obedience belongs to religious

perfection?
Objection 1: It would seem that obedience does not belong to
religious perfection. For those things seemingly belong to religious
perfection, which are works of supererogation and are not binding
upon all. But all are bound to obey their superiors, according to the
saying of the Apostle (Heb. 13:17), "Obey your prelates, and be
subject to them." Therefore it would seem that obedience does not
belong to religious perfection.
Objection 2: Further, obedience would seem to belong properly to
those who have to be guided by the sense of others, and such
persons are lacking in discernment. Now the Apostle says (Heb.
5:14) that "strong meat is for the perfect, for them who by custom
have their senses exercised to the discerning of good and evil."
Therefore it would seem that obedience does not belong to the state
of the perfect.
Objection 3: Further, if obedience were requisite for religious
perfection, it would follow that it is befitting to all religious. But it is
not becoming to all; since some religious lead a solitary life, and
have no superior whom they obey. Again religious superiors
apparently are not bound to obedience. Therefore obedience would
seem not to pertain to religious perfection.
Objection 4: Further, if the vow of obedience were requisite for
religion, it would follow that religious are bound to obey their
superiors in all things, just as they are bound to abstain from all
venery by their vow of continence. But they are not bound to obey
them in all things, as stated above (Question 104, Article 5), when we
were treating of the virtue of obedience. Therefore the vow of
obedience is not requisite for religion.
Objection 5: Further, those services are most acceptable to God
which are done freely and not of necessity, according to 2 Cor. 9:7,
"Not with sadness or of necessity." Now that which is done out of
obedience is done of necessity of precept. Therefore those good
works are more deserving of praise which are done of one's own
accord. Therefore the vow of obedience is unbecoming to religion
whereby men seek to attain to that which is better.