FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.78, C.4.

the impulse of the sensitive appetite, as when anyone sins through
passion. Yet neither of these amounts to a sin through certain
malice; for then alone does anyone sin through certain malice, when
his will is moved to evil of its own accord. This may happen in two
ways. First, through his having a corrupt disposition inclining him to
evil, so that, in respect of that disposition, some evil is, as it were,
suitable and similar to him; and to this thing, by reason of its
suitableness, the will tends, as to something good, because
everything tends, of its own accord, to that which is suitable to it.
Moreover this corrupt disposition is either a habit acquired by
custom, or a sickly condition on the part of the body, as in the case
of a man who is naturally inclined to certain sins, by reason of some
natural corruption in himself. Secondly, the will, of its own accord,
may tend to an evil, through the removal of some obstacle: for
instance, if a man be prevented from sinning, not through sin being
in itself displeasing to him, but through hope of eternal life, or fear of
hell, if hope give place to despair, or fear to presumption, he will end
in sinning through certain malice, being freed from the bridle, as it
were.
It is evident, therefore, that sin committed through certain malice,
always presupposes some inordinateness in man, which, however,
is not always a habit: so that it does not follow of necessity, if a man
sins through certain malice, that he sins through habit.
Reply to Objection 1: To do an action as an unjust man does, may be
not only to do unjust things through certain malice, but also to do
them with pleasure, and without any notable resistance on the part
of reason, and this occurs only in one who has a habit.
Reply to Objection 2: It is true that a man does not fall suddenly into
sin from certain malice, and that something is presupposed; but this
something is not always a habit, as stated above.
Reply to Objection 3: That which inclines the will to evil, is not
always a habit or a passion, but at times is something else.
Moreover, there is no comparison between choosing good and
choosing evil: because evil is never without some good of nature,
whereas good can be perfect without the evil of fault.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.78, C.4.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.78, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether it is more grievous to sin through certain

malice than through passion?
Objection 1: It would seem that it is not more grievous to sin through
certain malice than through passion. Because ignorance excuses
from sin either altogether or in part. Now ignorance is greater in one
who sins through certain malice, than in one who sins through
passion; since he that sins through certain malice suffers from the
worst form of ignorance, which according to the Philosopher (Ethic.
vii, 8) is ignorance of principle, for he has a false estimation of the
end, which is the principle in matters of action. Therefore there is
more excuse for one who sins through certain malice, than for one
who sins through passion.
Objection 2: Further, the more a man is impelled to sin, the less
grievous his sin, as is clear with regard to a man who is thrown
headlong into sin by a more impetuous passion. Now he that sins
through certain malice, is impelled by habit, the impulse of which is
stronger than that of passion. Therefore to sin through habit is less
grievous than to sin through passion.
Objection 3: Further, to sin through certain malice is to sin through
choosing evil. Now he that sins through passion, also chooses evil.
Therefore he does not sin less than the man who sins through
certain malice.
On the contrary, A sin that is committed on purpose, for this very
reason deserves heavier punishment, according to Job 34:26: "He
hath struck them as being wicked, in open sight, who, as it were, on
purpose, have revolted from Him." Now punishment is not increased
except for a graver fault. Therefore a sin is aggravated through being
done on purpose, i.e. through certain malice.
I answer that, A sin committed through malice is more grievous than
a sin committed through passion, for three reasons. First, because,
as sin consists chiefly in an act of the will, it follows that, other
things being equal, a sin is all the more grievous, according as the
movement of the sin belongs more to the will. Now when a sin is
committed through malice, the movement of sin belongs more to the
will, which is then moved to evil of its own accord, than when a sin is
committed through passion, when the will is impelled to sin by