Reply to Objection 1: Although many merits and demerits will have
escaped our memory, yet there will be none of them but will remain
somewhat in its effect, because those merits which are not deadened
will remain in the reward accorded to them, while those that are
deadened remain in the guilt of ingratitude, which is increased
through the fact that a man sinned after receiving grace. In like
manner those demerits which are not blotted out by repentance
remain in the debt of punishment due to them, while those which
have been blotted out by repentance remain in the remembrance of
repentance, which they will recall together with their other merits.
Hence in each man there will be something whereby he will be able
to recollect his deeds. Nevertheless, as Augustine says (De Civ. Dei
xx), the Divine energy will especially conduce to this.
Reply to Objection 2: Each one's conscience will bear certain marks
of the deeds done by him; and it does not follow that these marks
are the guilt alone, as stated above.
Reply to Objection 3: Although charity is now the cause of sorrow
for sin, yet the saints in heaven will be so full of joy, that they will
have no room for sorrow; and so they will not grieve for their sins,
but rather will they rejoice in the Divine mercy, whereby their sins
are forgiven them. Even so do the angels rejoice now in the Divine
justice whereby those whom they guard fall headlong into sin
through being abandoned by grace. and whose salvation none the
less they eagerly watch over.
Reply to Objection 4: The wicked will know all the good they have
done, and this will not diminish their pain; indeed, it will increase it,
because the greatest sorrow is to have lost many goods: for which
reason Boethius says (De Consol. ii) that "the greatest misfortune is
to have been happy."

### ARTICLE 2. Whether every one will be able to read all that is in

another's conscience?
Objection 1: It seems that it will be impossible for every one to read
all that is in another's conscience. For the knowledge of those who
rise again will not be clearer than that of the angels, equality with
whom is promised us after the resurrection (Mt. 22:30). Now angels
cannot read one another's thoughts in matters dependent on the freewill, wherefore they need to speak in order to notify such things to
one another [FP, Question 107]. Therefore after rising again we shall
be unable to read what is contained in another's conscience.
Objection 2: Further, whatever is known is known either in itself, or
in its cause, or in its effect. Now the merits or demerits contained in
a person's conscience cannot be known by another in themselves,
because God alone enters the heart and reads its secrets. Neither
will it be possible for them to be known in their cause, since all will
not see God Who alone can act on the will, whence merits and
demerits proceed. Nor again will it be possible to know them from
their effect, since there will be many demerits, which through being
wholly blotted out by repentance will leave no effect remaining.
Therefore it will not be possible for every one to know all that is in
another's conscience.
Objection 3: Further, Chrysostom says (Hom. xxxi in Ep. ad Hebr.),
as we have quoted before (Sent. iv, D, 17): "If thou remember thy
sins now, and frequently confess them before Cod and beg pardon
for them, thou wilt very soon blot them out; but if thou forget them,
thou wilt then remember them unwillingly, when they will be made
public, and declared before all thy friends and foes, and in the
presence of the holy angels." Hence it follows that this publication
will be the punishment of man's neglect in omitting to confess his
sins. Therefore the sins which a man has confessed will not be made
known to others.
Objection 4: Further, it is a relief to know that one has had many
associates in sin, so that one is less ashamed thereof. If therefore
every one were to know the sin of another, each sinner's shame
would be much diminished, which is unlikely. Therefore every one
will not know the sins of all.