happiness can be equal to this. And may it come to pass, that we all having
obtained what has been mentioned, may do all to the glory of God; to whom,
with the Only-Begotten Son and the Holy Ghost, be glory for ever and ever.
Amen.

Homily 7 on the Gospel of John
John 1:9
"That was the true Light, which lights every man that comes into the world."
1. The reason, O children greatly beloved, why we entertain you portion by
portion with the thoughts taken from the Scriptures, and do not at once pour all
forth to you, is, that the retaining what is successively set before you may be
easy. For even in building, one who before the first stones are settled lays on
others, constructs a rotten wall altogether, and easily thrown down: while one
who waits that the mortar may first get hard, and so adds what remains little by
little, finishes the whole house firmly, and makes it strong, not one to last for a
short time, or easily to fall to pieces. These builders we imitate, and in like
manner build up your souls. For we fear lest, while the first foundation is but
newly laid, the addition of the succeeding speculations may do harm to the
former, through the insufficiency of the intellect to contain them all at once.
What now is it that has been read to us today?
"That was the true Light, which lights every man that comes into the
world." For since above in speaking of John he said, that he came "to bear
witness of that Light"; and that he was sent in these our days; lest any one at
hearing this should, on account of the recent coming of the witness, conceive
some like suspicion concerning Him, who is witnessed of, he has carried up the
imagination, and transported it to that existence which is before all beginning,
which has neither end nor commencement.
"And how is it possible," says one, "that being a Son, He should possess this
(nature)?" We are speaking of God, and do you ask how? And do you not fear
nor shudder? Yet should any one ask you, "How should our souls and bodies
have endless life in the world to come? " you will laugh at the question, on the

ground that it does not belong to the intellect of man to search into such
questions, but that he ought only to believe, and not to be over-curious on the
subject mentioned, since he has a sufficient proof of the saying, in the power of
Him who spoke it. And if we say, that He, who created our souls and bodies, and
who incomparably excels all created things, is without beginning, will you
require us to say "How?" Who could assert this to be the act of a well-ordered
soul, or of sound reason? You have heard that "That was the true Light": why are
you vainly and rashly striving to overshoot by force of reasoning this Life which
is unlimited? You cannot do it. Why seek what may not be sought? Why be
curious about what is incomprehensible? Why search what is unsearchable?
Gaze upon the very source of the sunbeams. You cannot; yet you are neither
vexed nor impatient at your weakness; how then have you become so daring and
headlong in greater matters? The son of thunder, John who sounds the spiritual
trumpet, when he had heard from the Spirit the was, enquired no farther. And are
you, who share not in his grace, but speak from your own wretched reasonings,
ambitious to exceed the measure of his knowledge? Then for this very reason
you will never be able even to reach to the measure of his knowledge. For this is
the craft of the devil: he leads away those who obey him from the limits assigned
by God, as though to things much greater: but when, having enticed us by these
hopes, he has cast us out of the grace of God, he not only gives nothing more,
(how can he, devil as he is?) but does not even allow us to return again to our
former situation, where we dwelt safely and surely, but leads us about in all
directions wandering and not having any standing ground. So he caused the first
created man to be banished from the abode of Paradise. Having puffed him up
with the expectation of greater knowledge and honor, he expelled him from what
he already possessed in security. For he not only did not become like a god as
(the devil) promised him, but even fell beneath the dominion of death; having
not only gained no further advantage by eating of the tree, but having lost no
small portion of the knowledge which he possessed, through hope of greater
knowledge. For the sense of shame, and the desire to hide himself because of his