C. 3. The cogitative faculty is united to the potential intellect, the principle of human
intelligence, only by its action of preparing phantasms for the active intellect to render
them actual terms of intelligence and perfections of the potential intellect. But this
preliminary activity of the cogitative faculty does not always remain the same in us.
Therefore it cannot be the means whereby man is conjoined with the specific principle
of the human species, or made a member of that species.
C. 4. If the potential intellect of this and that man were numerically one and the same,
the act of understanding would be one and the same in both which is an impossibility.
D. But if it is said that the act of understanding is multiplied according to the diversity of
impressions in phantasy, that supposition cannot stand.
D. 3. For the potential intellect understands a man, not as this individual man, but as
man simply, according to the specific essence of the race. But this specific essence
remains one, however much impressions in phantasy are multiplied, whether in the
same man or in different men. Therefore no multiplication of phantasms can be the
cause of multiplication of the act of understanding in the potential intellect, considering
the same species; and thus we shall still have numerically one action in different men.
D. 4. The proper subject in which the habit of knowledge resides is the potential
intellect. But an accident, so long as it remains specifically one, is multiplied only by
coming to reside in different subjects. If then the potential intellect is one in all men, any
habit of knowledge specifically the same, say, the habit of grammar, must be
numerically the same in all men, which is unthinkable.
E. But to this they say that the subject of the habit of knowledge is not the potential
intellect, but the passive intellect and the cogitative faculty (Chap.LX): which it
cannot be.
E. 1. For, as Aristotle shows in the Ethics (II, i), like acts engender like habits; and like
habits reproduce like acts. Now by the acts of the potential intellect there comes to be
the habit of knowledge in us; and we are competent for the same acts by possession of
the habit of knowledge. Therefore the habit of knowledge is in the potential intellect, not
in the passive.
E. 2. Scientific knowledge is of demonstrated conclusions; and demonstrated
conclusions, like their premises, are universal truths. Science therefore is in that
faculty which takes cognisance of universals. But the passive intellect is not cognisant
of universals, but of particular notions.
F. The error of placing the habit of scientific knowledge in the passive intellect seems to
have arisen from the observation that men are found more or less apt for the study of
science according to theseveral dispositions of the cogitative faculty and the phantasy.