Thus the Law introduces many things even by the one commandment. If then
you are circumcised, but not on the eighth day, or on the eighth day, but no
sacrifice is offered, or a sacrifice is offered, but not in the prescribed place, or in
the prescribed place, but not the accustomed objects, or if the accustomed
objects, but thou be unclean, or if clean yet not purified by proper rules, every
thing is frustrated. Wherefore he says, "that he is a debtor to the whole Law."
Fulfil not a part, but the whole, if the Law is of force; but if it be not of force, not
even a part.
Ver. 4. "You are severed from Christ, you who would be justified by the
Law; you are fallen away from grace."
Having established his point, he at length declares their danger of the
severest punishment. When a man recurs to the Law, which cannot save him, and
falls from grace, what remains but an inexorable retribution, the Law being
powerless, and grace rejecting him?
Thus having aggravated their alarm, and disquieted their mind, and shown
them all the shipwreck they were about to suffer, he opens to them the haven of
grace which was near at hand. This is ever his wont, and he shows that in this
quarter salvation is easy and secure, subjoining the words,
Ver. 5. "For we through the Spirit by faith wait for the hope of
righteousness."
We need none of those legal observances, he says; faith suffices to obtain
for us the Spirit, and by Him righteousness, and many and great benefits.
Ver. 6. "For in Jesus Christ neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision; but faith working through love."
Observe the great boldness with which he now encounters them; Let him
that has put on Christ, he says, no longer be careful about such matters. Having
before said that Circumcision was hurtful, how is it that he now considers it
indifferent? It is indifferent as to those who had it previously to the Faith, but not
as to those who are circumcised after the Faith was given. Observe too the view
in which he places it, by setting it by the side of Uncircumcision; it is Faith that

makes the difference. As in the selection of wrestlers, whether they be hooknosed or flat-nosed, black or white, is of no importance in their trial, it is only
necessary to seek that they be strong and skilful; so all these bodily accidents do
not injure one who is to be enrolled under the New Covenant, nor does their
presence assist him.
What is the meaning of "working through love?" Here he gives them a hard
blow, by showing that this error had crept in because the love of Christ had not
been rooted within them. For to believe is not all that is required, but also to
abide in love. It is as if he had said, Had you loved Christ as you ought, you
would not have deserted to bondage, nor abandoned Him who redeemed you,
nor treated with contumely Him who gave you freedom. Here he also hints at
those who have plotted against them, implying that they would not have dared to
do so, had they felt affection towards them. He wishes too by these words to
correct their course of life.
Ver. 7. "You were running well; who did hinder you?"
This is not an interrogation, but an expression of doubt and sorrow. How
has such a course been cut short? Who has been able to do this? You who were
superior to all and in the rank of teachers, have not even continued in the
position of disciples. What has happened? Who could do this? These are rather
the words of one who is exclaiming and lamenting, as he said before, "Who did
bewitch you?" [Galatians 3:1]
Ver. 8. "This persuasion came not of him that calls you."
He who called you, called you not to such fluctuations, he did not lay down
a Law, that you should judaize. Then, that no one might object, "Why do you
thus magnify and aggravate the matter by your words; one commandment only
of the Law have we kept, and yet you make this great outcry?" hear how he
terrifies them, not by things present but future in these words:
Ver. 9. "A little leaven leavens the whole lump."
And thus this slight error, he says, if not corrected, will have power (as the
leaven has with the lump) to lead you into complete Judaism.