Gal. vi. 14. The words !" #$%&"' do not occur in the Greek text.

are subjected. And others of them, with great craftiness, adapted such parts of Scripture to their
own figments, lead away captive from the truth those who do not retain a stedfast faith in one God,
the Father Almighty, and in one Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God.

### Chapter IV.—Account given by the heretics of the formation of Achamoth; origin of the
visible world from her disturbances.

1. The following are the transactions which they narrate as having occurred outside of the
Pleroma: The enthymesis of that Sophia who dwells above, which they also term Achamoth,
being removed from the Pleroma, together with her passion, they relate to have, as a matter of
course, become violently excited in those places of darkness and vacuity [to which she had been
banished]. For she was excluded from light and the Pleroma, and was without form or figure,
like an untimely birth, because she had received nothing [from a male parent]. But the Christ
dwelling on high took pity upon her; and having extended himself through and beyond Stauros,
he imparted a figure to her, but merely as respected substance, and not so as to convey intelligence.
Having effected this, he withdrew his influence, and returned, leaving Achamoth to herself, in order
that she, becoming sensible of her suffering as being severed from the Pleroma, might be influenced
by the desire of better things, while she possessed in the meantime a kind of odour of immortality
left in her by Christ and the Holy Spirit. Wherefore also she is called by two names—Sophia after
her father (for Sophia is spoken of as being her father), and Holy Spirit from that Spirit who is
along with Christ. Having then obtained a form, along with intelligence, and being immediately
deserted by that Logos who had been invisibly present with her—that is, by Christ —she strained
herself to discover that light which had forsaken her, but could not effect her purpose, inasmuch
as she was prevented by Horos. And as Horos thus obstructed her further progress, he exclaimed,
Iao, whence, they say, this name Iao derived its origin. And when she could not pass by Horos
mentioned.

Probably corresponding to the Hebrew !'!(, Jehovah.

on account of that passion in which she had been involved, and because she alone had been left
without, she then resigned herself to every sort of that manifold and varied state of passion to which
she was subject; and thus she suffered grief on the one hand because she had not obtained the object
of her desire, and fear on the other hand, lest life itself should fail her, as light had already done,
while, in addition, she was in the greatest perplexity. All these feelings were associated with
ignorance. And this ignorance of hers was not like that of her mother, the first Sophia, an Æon, due
to degeneracy by means of passion, but to an [innate] opposition [of nature to knowledge].
Moreover, another kind of passion fell upon her (Achamoth), namely, that of desiring to return to
him who gave her life.
2. This collection [of passions] they declare was the substance of the matter from which this
world was formed. For from [her desire of] returning [to him who gave her life], every soul belonging
to this world, and that of the Demiurge himself, derived its origin. All other things owed their
beginning to her terror and sorrow. For from her tears all that is of a liquid nature was formed; from
her smile all that is lucent; and from her grief and perplexity all the corporeal elements of the world.
For at one time, as they affirm, she would weep and lament on account of being left alone in the
midst of darkness and vacuity; while, at another time, reflecting on the light which had forsaken
her, she would be filled with joy, and laugh; then, again, she would be struck with terror; or, at
other times, would sink into consternation and bewilderment.
3. Now what follows from all this? No light tragedy comes out of it, as the fancy of every man
among them pompously explains, one in one way, and another in another, from what kind of passion
and from what element being derived its origin. They have good reason, as seems to me, why they
should not feel inclined to teach these things to all in public, but only to such as are able to pay a
high price for an acquaintance with such profound mysteries. For these doctrines are not at all
similar to those of which our Lord said, "Freely ye have received, freely give." They are, on the
contrary, abstruse, and portentous, and profound mysteries, to be got at only with great labour by
such as are in love with falsehood. For who would not expend all that he possessed, if only he might
learn in return, that from the tears of the enthymesis of the Æon involved in passion, seas, and
fountains, and rivers, and every liquid substance derived its origin; that light burst forth from her
smile; and that from her perplexity and consternation the corporeal elements of the world had their
formation?
4. I feel somewhat inclined myself to contribute a few hints towards the development of their
system. For when I perceive that waters are in part fresh, such as fountains, rivers, showers, and
so on, and in part salt; such as those in the sea, I reflect with myself that all such waters cannot be
derived from her tears, inasmuch as these are of a saline quality only. It is clear, therefore, that the
Achamoth never possessed this knowledge, her nature being from the first opposed to it.