SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.135, C.2.

to the goods of the present life, which will not remain in heaven: but
they will remain in their relation to the end, which will be in heaven.
Thus justice will not be in heaven in relation to buying and selling
and other matters pertaining to the present life, but it will remain in
the point of being subject to God. In like manner the act of patience,
in heaven, will not consist in bearing things, but in enjoying the
goods to which we had aspired by suffering. Hence Augustine says
(De Civ. Dei xiv) that "patience itself will not be in heaven, since
there is no need for it except where evils have to be borne: yet that
which we shall obtain by patience will be eternal."
Reply to Objection 2: As Augustine says (De Patientia ii; v) "properly
speaking those are patient who would rather bear evils without
inflicting them, than inflict them without bearing them. As for those
who bear evils that they may inflict evil, their patience is neither
marvelous nor praiseworthy, for it is no patience at all: we may
marvel at their hardness of heart, but we must refuse to call them
patient."
Reply to Objection 3: As stated above (FS, Question 11, Article 1),
the very notion of fruit denotes pleasure. And works of virtue afford
pleasure in themselves, as stated in Ethic. i, 8. Now the names of the
virtues are wont to be applied to their acts. Wherefore patience as a
habit is a virtue. but as to the pleasure which its act affords, it is
reckoned a fruit, especially in this, that patience safeguards the mind
from being overcome by sorrow.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.135, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether patience is the greatest of the virtues?

Objection 1: It seems that patience is the greatest of the virtues. For
in every genus that which is perfect is the greatest. Now "patience
hath a perfect work" (James 1:4). Therefore patience is the greatest
of the virtues.
Objection 2: Further, all the virtues are directed to the good of the
soul. Now this seems to belong chiefly to patience; for it is written
(Lk. 21:19): "In your patience you shall possess your souls."
Therefore patience is the greatest of the virtues.
Objection 3: Further, seemingly that which is the safeguard and
cause of other things is greater than they are. But according to
Gregory (Hom. xxxv in Evang.) "patience is the root and safeguard of
all the virtues." Therefore patience is the greatest of the virtues.
On the contrary, It is not reckoned among the four virtues which
Gregory (Moral. xxii) and Augustine (De Morib. Eccl. xv) call
principal.
I answer that, Virtues by their very nature are directed to good. For it
is virtue that "makes its possessor good, and renders the latter's
work good" (Ethic. ii, 6). Hence it follows that a virtue's superiority
and preponderance over other virtues is the greater according as it
inclines man to good more effectively and directly. Now those
virtues which are effective of good, incline a man more directly to
good than those which are a check on the things which lead man
away from good: and just as among those that are effective of good,
the greater is that which establishes man in a greater good (thus
faith, hope, and charity /are greater than prudence and justice); so
too among those that are a check on things that withdraw man from
good, the greater virtue is the one which is a check on a greater
obstacle to good. But dangers of death, about which is fortitude, and
pleasures of touch, with which temperance is concerned, withdraw
man from good more than any kind of hardship, which is the object
of patience. Therefore patience is not the greatest of the virtues, but
falls short, not only of the theological virtues, and of prudence and
justice which directly establish man in good, but also of fortitude
and temperance which withdraw him from greater obstacles to good.