THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.53, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether Christ was the first to rise from the

dead?
Objection 1: It would seem that Christ was not the first to rise from
the dead, because we read in the Old Testament of some persons
raised to life by Elias and Eliseus, according to Heb. 11:35: "Women
received their dead raised to life again": also Christ before His
Passion raised three dead persons to life. Therefore Christ was not
the first to rise from the dead.
Objection 2: Further, among the other miracles which happened
during the Passion, it is narrated (Mt. 27:52) that "the monuments
were opened, and many bodies of the saints who had slept rose
again." Therefore Christ was not the first to rise from the dead.
Objection 3: Further, as Christ by His own rising is the cause of our
resurrection, so by His grace He is the cause of our grace, according
to Jn. 1:16: "Of His fulness we all have received." But in point of time
some others had grace previous to Christ---for instance all the
fathers of the Old Testament. Therefore some others came to the
resurrection of the body before Christ.
On the contrary, It is written (1 Cor. 15:20): "Christ is risen from the
dead, the first fruits of them that sleep---because," says the gloss,
"He rose first in point of time and dignity."
I answer that, Resurrection is a restoring from death to life. Now a
man is snatched from death in two ways: first of all, from actual
death, so that he begins in any way to live anew after being actually
dead: in another way, so that he is not only rescued from death, but
from the necessity, nay more, from the possibility of dying again.
Such is a true and perfect resurrection, because so long as a man
lives, subject to the necessity of dying, death has dominion over him
in a measure, according to Rm. 8:10: "The body indeed is dead
because of sin." Furthermore, what has the possibility of existence,
is said to exist in some respect, that is, in potentiality. Thus it is
evident that the resurrection, whereby one is rescued from actual
death only, is but an imperfect one.
Consequently, speaking of perfect resurrection, Christ is the first of
them who rise, because by rising He was the first to attain life utterly

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.53, C.4.

immortal, according to Rm. 6:9: "Christ rising from the dead dieth
now no more." But by an imperfect resurrection, some others have
risen before Christ, so as to be a kind of figure of His Resurrection.
And thus the answer to the first objection is clear: because both
those raised from the dead in the old Testament, and those raised by
Christ, so returned to life that they had to die again.
Reply to Objection 2: There are two opinions regarding them who
rose with Christ. Some hold that they rose to life so as to die no
more, because it would be a greater torment for them to die a second
time than not to rise at all. According to this view, as Jerome
observes on Mt. 27:52,53, we must understand that "they had not
risen before our Lord rose." Hence the Evangelist says that "coming
out of the tombs after His Resurrection, they came into the holy city,
and appeared to many." But Augustine (Ep. ad Evod. clxiv) while
giving this opinion, says: "I know that it appears some, that by the
death of Christ the Lord the same resurrection was bestowed upon
the righteous as is promised to us in the end; and if they slept not
again by laying aside their bodies, it remains to be seen how Christ
can be understood to be 'the first-born of the dead,' if so many
preceded Him unto that resurrection. Now if reply be made that this
is said by anticipation, so that the monuments be understood to
have been opened by the earthquake while Christ was still hanging
on the cross, but that the bodies of the just did not rise then but after
He had risen, the difficulty still arises---how is it that Peter asserts
that it was predicted not of David but of Christ, that His body would
not see corruption, since David's tomb was in their midst; and thus
he did not convince them, if David's body was no longer there; for
even if he had risen soon after his death, and his flesh had not seen
corruption, his tomb might nevertheless remain. Now it seems hard
that David from whose seed Christ is descended, was not in that
rising of the just, if an eternal rising was conferred upon them. Also
that saying in the Epistle to the Hebrews (11:40) regarding the
ancient just would be hard to explain, 'that they should not be
perfected without us,' if they were already established in that
incorruption of the resurrection which is promised at the end when
we shall be made perfect": so that Augustine would seem to think
that they rose to die again. In this sense Jerome also in commenting
on Matthew (27:52,53) says: "As Lazarus rose, so also many of the
bodies of the saints rose, that they might bear witness to the risen
Christ." Nevertheless in a sermon for the Assumption [Ep. ix ad Paul.
et Eustoch.] he seems to leave the matter doubtful. But Augustine's