Marcus seems to have retreated before his terrible castigation, taking himself off to regions beyond
the Pyrenees. But the pacific name he bears, was rendered yet more illustrious by his interposition
to compose the Easter Controversy, then threatening to impair, if not to destroy, the unity of the
Church. The beautiful concordat between East and West, in which Polycarp and Anicetus had left
the question, was now disturbed by Victor, Bishop of Rome, whose turbulent spirit would not accept
the compromise of his predecessor. Irenæus remonstrates with him in a catholic spirit, and overrules
his impetuous temper. At the Council of Nice, the rule for the observance of Easter was finally
settled by the whole Church; and the forbearing example of Irenæus, no doubt contributed greatly
to this happy result. The blessed peacemaker survived this great triumph, for a short time only,
closing his life, like a true shepherd, with thousands of his flock, in the massacre (a.d. 202) stimulated
by the wolfish Emperor Severus.
The Introductory Notice of the learned translators is as follows:—
The work of Irenæus Against Heresies is one of the most precious remains of early Christian
antiquity. It is devoted, on the one hand, to an account and refutation of those multiform Gnostic
heresies which prevailed in the latter half of the second century; and, on the other hand, to an
exposition and defence of the Catholic faith.
In the prosecution of this plan, the author divides his work into five books. The first of these
contains a minute description of the tenets of the various heretical sects, with occasional brief
remarks in illustration of their absurdity, and in confirmation of the truth to which they were opposed.
In his second book, Irenæus proceeds to a more complete demolition of those heresies which he
has already explained, and argues at great length against them, on grounds principally of reason.
The three remaining books set forth more directly the true doctrines of revelation, as being in utter
antagonism to the views held by the Gnostic teachers. In the course of this argument, many passages
of Scripture are quoted and commented on; many interesting statements are made, bearing on the
rule of faith; and much important light is shed on the doctrines, held, as well as the practices
observed, by the Church of the second century.
It may be made matter of regret, that so large a portion of the work of Irenæus is given to an
exposition of the manifold Gnostic speculations. Nothing more absurd than these has probably ever
been imagined by rational beings. Some ingenious and learned men have indeed endeavoured to
reconcile the wild theories of these heretics with the principles of reason; but, as Bishop Kaye
remarks (Eccl. Hist. of the Second and Third Centuries, p. 524), "a more arduous or unpromising
Rambaut. An attempt has been made, in rendering this important author into English, to adhere as closely as possible to the
original. It would have been far easier to give a loose and flowing translation of the obscure and involved sentences of Irenæus;
but the object has been studiously kept in view, to place the English reader, as much as possible, in the position of one who has
immediate access to the Greek or Latin text.