[where new existences begin.] These, again, and others which are above and below, will have their
beginnings at certain other points, and so on ad infinitum; so that their thoughts would never rest
in one God, but, in consequence of seeking after more than exists, would wander away to that which
has no existence, and depart from the true God.
4. These remarks are, in like manner, applicable against the followers of Marcion. For his two
gods will also be contained and circumscribed by an immense interval which separates them from
one another. But then there is a necessity to suppose a multitude of gods separated by an immense
distance from each other on every side, beginning with one another, and ending in one another.
Thus, by that very process of reasoning on which they depend for teaching that there is a certain
Pleroma or God above the Creator of heaven and earth, any one who chooses to employ it may
maintain that there is another Pleroma above the Pleroma, above that again another, and above
Bythus another ocean of Deity, while in like manner the same successions hold with respect to the
sides; and thus, their doctrine flowing out into immensity, there will always be a necessity to
conceive of other Pleroma, and other Bythi, so as never at any time to stop, but always to continue
seeking for others besides those already mentioned. Moreover, it will be uncertain whether these
which we conceive of are below, or are, in fact, themselves the things which are above; and, in like
manner, [it will be doubtful] respecting those things which are said by them to be above, whether
they are really above or below; and thus our opinions will have no fixed conclusion or certainty,
but will of necessity wander forth after worlds without limits, and gods that cannot be numbered.
5. These things, then, being so, each deity will be contented with his own possessions, and will
not be moved with any curiosity respecting the affairs of others; otherwise he would be unjust, and
rapacious, and would cease to be what God is. Each creation, too, will glorify its own maker, and
will be contented with him, not knowing any other; otherwise it would most justly be deemed an
apostate by all the others, and would receive a richly-deserved punishment. For it must be either
that there is one Being who contains all things, and formed in His own territory all those things
which have been created, according to His own will; or, again, that there are numerous unlimited
creators and gods, who begin from each other, and end in each other on every side; and it will then
be necessary to allow that all the rest are contained from without by some one who is greater, and
that they are each of them shut up within their own territory, and remain in it. No one of them all,
therefore, is God. For there will be [much] wanting to every one of them, possessing [as he will
do] only a very small part when compared with all the rest. The name of the Omnipotent will thus
be brought to an end, and such an opinion will of necessity fall to impiety.