proportion thereto. But the operations of the intellect, which does
not act through the body, do not need a body as their instrument,
except to supply phantasms through the senses. Moreover, the
operations of the sensitive soul, as we have seen, cannot be
attributed to the heavenly bodies. Accordingly, the union of a soul to
a heavenly body cannot be for the purpose of the operations of the
intellect. It remains, then, only to consider whether the movement of
the heavenly bodies demands a soul as the motive power, not that
the soul, in order to move the heavenly body, need be united to the
latter as its form; but by contact of power, as a mover is united to
that which he moves. Wherefore Aristotle (Phys. viii, text. 42,43),
after showing that the first mover is made up of two parts, the
moving and the moved, goes on to show the nature of the union
between these two parts. This, he says, is effected by contact which
is mutual if both are bodies; on the part of one only, if one is a body
and the other not. The Platonists explain the union of soul and body
in the same way, as a contact of a moving power with the object
moved, and since Plato holds the heavenly bodies to be living
beings, this means nothing else but that substances of spiritual
nature are united to them, and act as their moving power. A proof
that the heavenly bodies are moved by the direct influence and
contact of some spiritual substance, and not, like bodies of specific
gravity, by nature, lies in the fact that whereas nature moves to one
fixed end which having attained, it rests; this does not appear in the
movement of heavenly bodies. Hence it follows that they are moved
by some intellectual substances. Augustine appears to be of the
same opinion when he expresses his belief that all corporeal things
are ruled by God through the spirit of life (De Trin. iii, 4).
From what has been said, then, it is clear that the heavenly bodies
are not living beings in the same sense as plants and animals, and
that if they are called so, it can only be equivocally. It will also be
seen that the difference of opinion between those who affirm, and
those who deny, that these bodies have life, is not a difference of
things but of words.
Reply to Objection 1: Certain things belong to the adornment of the
universe by reason of their proper movement; and in this way the
heavenly luminaries agree with others that conduce to that
adornment, for they are moved by a living substance.
Reply to Objection 2: One being may be nobler than another
absolutely, but not in a particular respect. While, then, it is not

conceded that the souls of heavenly bodies are nobler than the souls
of animals absolutely it must be conceded that they are superior to
them with regard to their respective forms, since their form perfects
their matter entirely, which is not in potentiality to other forms;
whereas a soul does not do this. Also as regards movement the
power that moves the heavenly bodies is of a nobler kind.
Reply to Objection 3: Since the heavenly body is a mover moved, it
is of the nature of an instrument, which acts in virtue of the agent:
and therefore since this agent is a living substance the heavenly
body can impart life in virtue of that agent.
Reply to Objection 4: The movements of the heavenly bodies are
natural, not on account of their active principle, but on account of
their passive principle; that is to say, from a certain natural aptitude
for being moved by an intelligent power.
Reply to Objection 5: The heaven is said to move itself in as far as it
is compounded of mover and moved; not by the union of the mover,
as the form, with the moved, as the matter, but by contact with the
motive power, as we have said. So far, then, the principle that moves
it may be called intrinsic, and consequently its movement natural
with respect to that active principle; just as we say that voluntary
movement is natural to the animal as animal (Phys. viii, text. 27).