those great and intolerable ills. For I bid you not look at the ruin of his
substance, nor at the loss of his children, nor at that incurable plague, nor at his
wife's device against him; but at those things which are far more grievous than
these.
"And what," says one, "did Job suffer more grievous than these? For from
his history there is nothing more than these for us to learn." Because we are
asleep, we do not learn, since he surely that is anxious, and searches well for the
pearl, will know of many more particulars than these. For the more grievous, and
apt to infuse greater perplexity, were different.
And first, his knowing nothing certain about the kingdom of heaven, and
the resurrection; which indeed he also spoke of, lamenting. "For I shall not live
always, that I should suffer long." Next, his being conscious to himself of many
good works. Thirdly, his being conscious of no evil thing. Fourthly, his
supposing that at God's hands he was undergoing it; or if at the devil's, this again
was enough to offend him. Fifthly, his hearing his friends accusing him of
wickedness, "For you have not been scourged," say they, "according to what
your sins deserve." [Job 11:6] Sixthly, his seeing such as lived in wickedness
prospering, and exulting over him. Seventhly, not having any other to whom he
might look as even having ever suffered such things.
8. And if you would learn how great these things are, consider our present
state. For if now, when we are looking for a kingdom, and hoping for a
resurrection, and for the unutterable blessings, and are conscious to ourselves of
countless evil deeds, and when we have so many examples, and are partakers of
so high a philosophy; should any persons lose a little gold, and this often, after
having taken it by violence, they deem life not to be lived in, having no wife to
lay sore on them, nor bereaved of children, nor reproached by friends, nor
insulted by servants, but rather having many to comfort them, some by words,
some by deeds; of how noble crowns must not he be worthy, who seeing what he
had gotten together by honest labor, snatched away from him for nought and at
random, and after all that, undergoing temptations without number, like sleet, yet

throughout all abides unmoved, and offers to the Lord his due thanksgiving for it
all?
Why, though no one had spoken any of the other taunts, yet his wife's words
alone were sufficient utterly to shake a very rock. Look, for example, at her
craft. No mention of money, none of camels, and flocks, and herds, (for she was
conscious of her husband's self command with regard to these), but of what was
harder to bear than all these, I mean, their children; and she deepens the tragedy,
and adds to it her own influence.
Now if when men were in wealth, and suffering no distress, in many things
and oft have women prevailed on them: imagine how courageous was that soul,
which repulsed her, assaulting him with such powerful weapons, and which trod
under foot the two most tyrannical passions, desire and pity. And yet many
having conquered desire, have yielded to pity. That noble Joseph, for instance,
held in subjection the most tyrannical of pleasures, and repulsed that strange
woman, plying him as she did with innumerable devices; but his tears he
contained not, but when he saw his brethren that had wronged him, he was all on
fire with that passion, and quickly cast off the mask, and discovered the part he
had been playing. But when first of all she is his wife, and when her words are
piteous, and the moment favorable for her, as well as his wounds and his stripes,
and those countless waves of calamities; how can one otherwise than rightly
pronounce the soul impassive to so great a storm to be firmer than any adamant?
Allow me freely to say, that the very apostles, if not inferior to this blessed
man, are at least not greater than he was. For they indeed were comforted by the
suffering for Christ; and this medicine was so sufficient daily to relieve them,
that the Lord puts it everywhere, saying, "for me, for my sake," and, "If they call
me, the master of the house, Beelzebub." [Matthew 10:25] But he was destitute
of this encouragement, and of that from miracles, and of that from grace; for
neither had he so great power of the Spirit.
And what is yet greater, nourished in much delicacy, not from among
fishermen, and publicans, and such as lived frugally, but after enjoyment of so