THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.32, C.4.

the seed, but like the man who begot him. And if the likeness be
perfect, the sonship is perfect, whether in God or in man. But if the
likeness be imperfect, the sonship is imperfect. Thus in man there is
a certain imperfect likeness to God, both as regards his being
created to God's image and as regards His being created unto the
likeness of grace. Therefore in both ways man can be called His son,
both because he is created to His image and because he is likened to
Him by grace. Now, it must be observed that what is said in its
perfect sense of a thing should not be said thereof in its imperfect
sense: thus, because Socrates is said to be naturally a man, in the
proper sense of "man," never is he called man in the sense in which
the portrait of a man is called a man, although, perhaps, he may
resemble another man. Now, Christ is the Son of God in the perfect
sense of sonship. Wherefore, although in His human nature He was
created and justified, He ought not to be called the Son of God,
either in respect of His being created or of His being justified, but
only in respect of His eternal generation, by reason of which He is
the Son of the Father alone. Therefore nowise should Christ be
called the Son of the Holy Ghost, nor even of the whole Trinity.
Reply to Objection 1: Christ was conceived of the Virgin Mary, who
supplied the matter of His conception unto likeness of species. For
this reason He is called her Son. But as man He was conceived of
the Holy Ghost as the active principle of His conception, but not unto
likeness of species, as a man is born of his father. Therefore Christ
is not called the Son of the Holy Ghost.
Reply to Objection 2: Men who are fashioned spiritually by the Holy
Ghost cannot be called sons of God in the perfect sense of sonship.
And therefore they are called sons of God in respect of imperfect
sonship, which is by reason of the likeness of grace, which flows
from the whole Trinity.
But with Christ it is different, as stated above.
The same reply avails for the Third Objection.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.32, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the Blessed Virgin cooperated actively in

the conception of Christ's body?
Objection 1: It would seem that the Blessed Virgin cooperated
actively in the conception of Christ's body. For Damascene says (De
Fide Orth. iii) that "the Holy Ghost came upon the Virgin, purifying
her, and bestowing on her the power to receive and to bring forth the
Word of God." But she had from nature the passive power of
generation, like any other woman. Therefore He bestowed on her an
active power of generation. And thus she cooperated actively in
Christ's conception.
Objection 2: Further, all the powers of the vegetative soul are active,
as the Commentator says (De Anima ii). But the generative power, in
both man and woman, belongs to the vegetative soul. Therefore,
both in man and woman, it cooperates actively in the conception of
the child.
Objection 3: Further, in the conception of a child the woman supplies
the matter from which the child's body is naturally formed. But
nature is an intrinsic principle of movement. Therefore it seems that
in the very matter supplied by the Blessed Virgin there was an active
principle.
On the contrary, The active principle in generation is called the
"seminal virtue." But, as Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. x), Christ's
body "was taken from the Virgin, only as to corporeal matter, by the
Divine power of conception and formation, but not by any human
seminal virtue." Therefore the Blessed Virgin did not cooperate
actively in, the conception of Christ's body.
I answer that, Some say that the Blessed Virgin cooperated actively
in Christ's conception, both by natural and by a supernatural power.
By natural power, because they hold that in all natural matter there is
an active principle. otherwise they believe that there would be no
such thing as natural transformation. But in this they are deceived.
Because a transformation is said to be natural by reason not only of
an active but also of a passive intrinsic principle: for the Philosopher
says expressly (Phys. viii) that in heavy and light things there is a
passive, and not an active, principle of natural movement. Nor is it
possible for matter to be active in its own formation, since it is not in