return and insulted? You have injured yourself in regard to your soul, for for the
words which you have said you are about to render account there; and this I wish
you to know chiefly of all, that the Christian, and faithful man, no one is able to
injure in regard to the soul, not even the devil himself; and not only is this
wonderful, that God has made us inaccessible to all his designs, but that he has
constituted us fit for the practice of virtue, and there is no hinderance, if we will,
even though we be poor, weak in body, outcast, nameless, bondservants. For
neither poverty, nor infirmity, nor deformity of body, nor servitude, nor any other
of such things could ever become a hinderance to virtue; and why do I say, poor,
and a bondservant, and nameless? Even if you are a prisoner, not even this would
be ever any hinderance to you as regards virtue. And how this is I proceed to say.
Has any of your household grieved you and provoked you? dismiss your wrath
against him. Have bonds, and poverty, and obscurity been any hinderance to you
in this respect? And why do I say hinderance? They have both helped and
contributed to restrain pride. Have you seen another prospering? Do not envy
him. For not even in this case is poverty a bar. Again, whenever you need to
pray, do so with a sober and watchful mind, and nothing shall be a bar even in
that case. Show all meekness, forbearance, self-restraint, gravity. For these
things need no external helps. And this especially is the chief point about virtue,
that it has no necessity for wealth, power, glory, nor anything of that kind, but of
a sanctified soul alone, and it seeks for nothing more. And behold, also, the same
thing happening in respect of grace. For if any one be lame, if he has had his
eyes put out, if he be maimed in body, if he has fallen into the last extremity of
weakness, grace is not hindered from coming by any of these things. For it only
seeks a soul receiving it with readiness, and all these external things it passes
over. For in the case of worldly soldiers, those who are about to enlist them for
the army seek for stature of body and healthy condition, and it is not only
necessary that he who is about to become a soldier should have these alone, but
he must also be free. For if anybody be a slave, he is rejected. But the King of
Heaven seeks for nothing of this kind, but receives slaves into his army, and

aged people, and the languid in limb, and is not ashamed. What is more merciful
than this? What could be more kind? For he seeks for what is in our own power,
but they seek for what is not in our power. For to be a slave or free is not our
doing. To be tall, again, or short is not in our own power, or to be aged, or well
grown, and such like. But to be forbearing and kind, and so forth, are matters of
our own choice; and God demands of us only those things of which we have
control. And quite reasonably. For He does not call us to grace because of his
own need, but because of doing us kindness; but kings, because of services
required by them; and they carry men off to an outward and material warfare, but
He to a spiritual combat; and it is not only in the case of heathen wars, but in the
case of the games also that one may see the same analogy. For they who are
about to be brought into the theatre, do not descend to the contest until the herald
himself takes them beneath the gaze of all, and leads them round, shouting out
and saying, "Has any one a charge against this person?" although in that case
the struggle is not concerned with the soul, but with the body. Wherefore then do
you demand proofs of nobleness? But in this case there is nothing of the kind,
but all is different, our contest not consisting of hand locked in hand, but in
philosophy of soul, and excellence of mind. The president of our conflicts does
the opposite. For he does not take us, and lead us round and say, "Has any one a
charge against this man?" but cries out, Though all men, though demons, stand
up with the devil and accuse him of extreme and unspeakable crimes, I reject
him not, nor abhor him, but removing him from his accusers, and freeing him
from his wickedness, thus I bring him to the contest. And this is very reasonable.
For there indeed the president contributes nothing towards the victory, in the
case of the combatants, but stands still in the midst. But here, the President of the
contests for holiness becomes a fellow-combatant, and helper, sharing with them
the conflict against the devil.
4. And not only is this the wonderful thing that he remits our sins, but that
he not even reveals them nor makes them manifest and patent, nor compels us to
come forward into the midst, and to tell out our errors, but bids us make our