had a fountain of gold gushing forth with continual flood, and flowing the more
as more was drawn from it; and there were another place which had a treasure
buried in the earth; from which would you desire to be enriched? Would it not be
from the first? Plainly. But that this may not be a mere conception in words,
consider the saying in reference to the air and the sun. For these are seized by all,
and satisfy all. These, however, whether men enjoy or do not enjoy them, abide
the same undiminished: but what I spoke of is a much greater thing; for spiritual
wisdom abides not the same distributed or not distributed: but it rather increases
in the distribution.
But if any endure not what I have said, but still cleave to the poverty of
worldly things, snatching at the things which endure diminution: even in respect
of those again, let him call to mind the food of manna [Exodus 16:20] and
tremble at the example of that punishment. For what happened in that instance,
this same result may one now also see in the case of covetous men. But what
then happened in worms were bred from their covetousness. This also now
happens in their case. For the measure of the food is the same for all; we having
but one stomach to fill; only you who eat luxuriously have more to get rid of.
And as in that case they who in their houses gathered more than the lawful
quantity, gathered not manna, but more worms and rottenness; just so both in
luxury and in covetousness, the gluttonous and drunken gather not more dainties
but more corruption.
6. Nevertheless, so much worse than they are the men of our time, in that
they experienced this once for all and received correction; but these every day
bringing into their own houses this worm much more grievous than that, neither
perceive it nor are satiated. For that these things do resemble those in respect of
our useless labor on them: (for in regard of punishment these are much worse:)
here is the proof for you to consider.
Wherein, I ask, differs the rich man from the poor? Has he not one body to
clothe? One belly to feed? In what then has he the advantage? In cares, in
spending himself, in disobeying God, in corrupting the flesh, in wasting the soul.

Yea, these are the things in which he has the advantage of the poor: since if he
had many stomachs to fill, perhaps he might have somewhat to say, as that his
need was more and the necessity of expense greater. But even "now they may,"
says one, "reply, that they fill many bellies, those of their domestics, those of
their hand-maidens." But this is done, not through need nor for humanity's sake,
but from mere pride: whence one cannot put up with their excuse.
For why have you many servants? Since as in our apparel we ought to
follow our need only, and in our table, so also in our servants. What need is there
then? None at all. For, in fact, one master need only employ one servant; or
rather two or three masters one servant. But if this be grievous, consider them
that have none and enjoy more prompt attendance. For God has made men
sufficient to minister unto themselves, or rather unto their neighbor also. And if
you believe it not, hear Paul saying, "These hands ministered unto my
necessities, and to them that were with me." [Acts 20:34] After that he, the
teacher of the world and worthy of heaven, disdained not to serve innumerable
others; do you think it a disgrace, unless you carry about whole herds of slaves,
not knowing that this in truth is what most of all brings shame upon you? For to
that end did God grant us both hands and feet, that we might not stand in need of
servants. Since not at all for need's sake was the class of slaves introduced, else
even along with Adam had a slave been formed; but it is the penalty of sin and
the punishment of disobedience. But when Christ came, He put an end also to
this. "For in Christ Jesus there is neither bond nor free." [Galatians 3:28] So that
it is not necessary to have a slave: or if it be at all necessary, let it be about one
only, or at the most two. What mean the swarms of servants? For as the sellers of
sheep and the slave-dealers, so do our rich men take their round, in the baths and
in the forum.
However, I will not be too exact. We will allow you to keep a second
servant. But if you collect many, thou dost it not for humanity's sake, but in selfindulgence. Since if it be in care for them, I bid you occupy none of them in
ministering to yourself, but when you have purchased them and hast taught them