thing to rise up out of the very abysses of wickedness.
Heard ye not how that harlot, that went beyond all in lasciviousness,
outshone all in godly reverence. Not the harlot in the gospels do I mean, but the
one in our generation, who came from Phœnice, that most lawless city. For she
was once a harlot among us, having the first honors on the stage, and great was
her name everywhere, not in our city only, but even as far as the Cilicians and
Cappadocians. And many estates did she ruin, and many orphans did she
overthrow; and many accused her of sorcery also, as weaving such toils not by
her beauty of person only, but also by her drugs. This harlot once won even the
brother of the empress, for mighty indeed was her tyranny.
But all at once, I know not how, or rather I do know well, for it was being
so minded, and converting, and bringing down upon herself God's grace, she
despised all those things, and having cast away the arts of the devils, mounted up
to heaven.
And indeed nothing was more vile than she was, when she was on the
stage; nevertheless, afterwards she outwent many in exceeding continence, and
having clad herself with sackcloth, all her time she thus disciplined herself. On
the account of this woman both the governor was stirred up, and soldiers armed,
yet they had not strength to carry her off to the stage, nor to lead her away from
the virgins that had received her.
This woman having been counted worthy of the unutterable mysteries, and
having exhibited a diligence proportionate to the grace (given her) so ended her
life, having washed off all through grace, and after her baptism having shown
forth much self-restraint. For not even a mere sight of herself did she allow to
those who were once her lovers, when they had come for this, having shut
herself up, and having passed many years, as it were, in a prison. Thus "shall the
last be first, and the first last;" thus do we in every case need a fervent soul, and
there is nothing to hinder one from becoming great and admirable:
4. Let no man then of them that live in vice despair; let no man who lives in
virtue slumber. Let neither this last be confident, for often the harlot will pass

him by; nor let the other despair, for it is possible for him to pass by even the
first.
Hear what God says unto Jerusalem, "I said, after she had committed all
these whoredoms, Turn thou unto me, and she returned not." [Jeremiah 3:7]
When we have come back unto the earnest love of God, He remembers not the
former things. God is not as man, for He reproaches us not with the past, neither
does He say, Why were you absent so long a time? When we repent; only let us
approach Him as we ought. Let us cleave to Him earnestly, and rivet our hearts
to His fear.
Such things have been done not under the new covenant only, but even
under the old. For what was worse than Manasseh? But he was able to appease
God. What more blessed than Solomon? But when he slumbered, he fell. Or
rather I can show even both things to have taken place in one, in the father of
this man, for he the same person became at different times both good and bad.
What more blessed than Judas? But he became a traitor. What more wretched
than Matthew? But he became an evangelist. What worse than Paul? But he
became an apostle. What more to be envied than Simon? But he became even
himself the most wretched of all.
How many other such changes would you see, both to have taken place of
old, and now taking place every day? For this reason then I say, Neither let him
on the stave despair, nor let him in the church be confident. For to this last it is
said, "Let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall;" [1 Corinthians 10:12]
and to the other, "Shall not he that falls arise?" [Jeremiah 8:4] and, "Lift up the
hands which hang down, and the feeble knees." Again, to these He says,
"Watch;" but to those, "Awake, you that sleepest and arise from the dead."
[Ephesians 5:14] For these need to preserve what they have, and those to become
what they are not; these to preserve their health, those to be delivered from their
infirmity, for they are sick; but many even of the sick become healthy, and of the
healthy many by remissness grow infirm.
To the one then He says, "Behold, you are made whole, sin no more, lest a