him by warming. Similar is the case with the art of teaching: for in the pupil there is an
active principle making for knowledge, namely, the understanding, and those primary
axioms which are naturally understood; and therefore knowledge is acquired in two
ways, -- without teaching, by a man's own finding out, and again by teaching. The
teacher therefore begins to teach in the same way that the discoverer begins to find out,
by offering for the consideration of the scholar elements of knowledge already
possessed by him: because all education and all knowledge starts from pre-existing
knowledge, drawing conclusions from elements already in the mind, and proposing
sensible examples whereby there may be formed in the scholar's soul those
impressions of phantasy which are necessary or intelligence. And because the
working of the teacher from without would effect nothing, unless borne out by an internal
principle of knowledge, which is within us by the gift of God, so it is said among
theologians that man teaches by rendering the service of ministry, but God by working
within: so too the physician is called nature's minister in healing.
A final remark. Since the Commentator makes the passive intellect the residence of
habits of knowledge (Chap.LX), the unity of the potential intellect helps not at all to
the numerical unity of knowledge in master and scholar: for certainly the passive
intellect is not the same in different men, since it is an organic faculty. Hence, on his
own showing, this argument does not serve his purpose.

intelligibility, is materiality." You cannot understand `house' in such a way that your
intelligence is limited to this house now before you, so that, if you happened to
encounter another, you would not know what it was. To understand is to take for a type.

## CHAPTER LXXVI--That the Active Intellect is not a separately Subsisting Intelligence,
but a Faculty of the Soul
WE may further conclude that neither is the active intellect one in all men, as Alexander
and Avicenna suppose, though they do not suppose the potential intellect to be one in
all men.
4. Plato supposed knowledge in us to be caused by Ideas, which he took to subsist
apart by themselves. But clearly the first principle on which our knowledge depends is
the active intellect. If therefore the active intellect is something subsisting apart by itself,
the difference will be none, or but slight, between this opinion and that of Plato, which
the Philosopher rejects.
5. If the active intellect is an intelligence subsisting apart, its action upon us will either
be continual and uninterrupted, or at least we must say that it is not continued or broken
off at our pleasure. Now its action is to make the impressions on our phantasy actual
terms of intelligence. Either therefore it will do this always or not always. If not always,
still it will not do it at our discretion. Either therefore we must be always in the act of
understanding, or it will not be in our power actually to understand when we wish.
But it may be said that the active intellect, so far as with it lies, is always in action, but
that the impressions in our phantasy are not always becoming actual terms of
intelligence, but only when they are disposed thereto; and they are disposed thereto by
the act of the cogitative faculty, the use of which is in our power; and therefore actually
to understand is in our power; and this is why not all men understand the things whereof
they have the impressions in their phantasy, because not all have at command a
suitable act of the cogitative faculty, but only those who are accustomed and trained
thereto. But this answer does not appear to be altogether sufficient. That the
impressions in phantasy are marshalled by the cogitative faculty to the end that they
may become actual terms of understanding and move the potential intellect, does not
seem a sufficient account, if it be coupled with the supposition of the potential intellect
being a separately subsistent intelligence. This seems to go with the theory of those
who say that inferior agents supply only predispositions to final perfection, but that final
perfection is the work of an extrinsic agency: which is contrary to the mind of Aristotle: