SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.13, C.4.

ignorance or weakness, deserves less punishment, whereas he that
sins through certain malice, can offer no excuse in alleviation of his
punishment. Likewise those who blasphemed against the Son of
Man before His Godhead was revealed, could have some excuse, on
account of the weakness of the flesh which they perceived in Him,
and hence, they deserved less punishment; whereas those who
blasphemed against His very Godhead, by ascribing to the devil the
works of the Holy Ghost, had no excuse in diminution of their
punishment. Wherefore, according to Chrysostom's commentary
(Hom. xlii in Matth.), the Jews are said not to be forgiven this sin,
neither in this world nor in the world to come, because they were
punished for it, both in the present life, through the Romans, and in
the life to come, in the pains of hell. Thus also Athanasius adduces
the example of their forefathers who, first of all, wrangled with Moses
on account of the shortage of water and bread; and this the Lord
bore with patience, because they were to be excused on account of
the weakness of the flesh: but afterwards they sinned more
grievously when, by ascribing to an idol the favors bestowed by God
Who had brought them out of Egypt, they blasphemed, so to speak,
against the Holy Ghost, saying (Ex. 32:4): "These are thy gods, O
Israel, that have brought thee out of the land of Egypt." Therefore the
Lord both inflicted temporal punishment on them, since "there were
slain on that day about three and twenty thousand men" (Ex. 32:28),
and threatened them with punishment in the life to come, saying,
(Ex. 32:34): "I, in the day of revenge, will visit this sin . . . of theirs."
Secondly, this may be understood to refer to the guilt: thus a disease
is said to be incurable in respect of the nature of the disease, which
removes whatever might be a means of cure, as when it takes away
the power of nature, or causes loathing for food and medicine,
although God is able to cure such a disease. So too, the sin against
the Holy Ghost is said to be unpardonable, by reason of its nature, in
so far as it removes those things which are a means towards the
pardon of sins. This does not, however, close the way of forgiveness
and healing to an all-powerful and merciful God, Who, sometimes, by
a miracle, so to speak, restores spiritual health to such men.
Reply to Objection 1: We should despair of no man in this life,
considering God's omnipotence and mercy. But if we consider the
circumstances of sin, some are called (Eph. 2:2) "children of
despair".
Reply to Objection 2: This argument considers the question on the

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.13, C.4.

part of God's omnipotence, not on that of the circumstances of sin.
Reply to Objection 3: In this life the free-will does indeed ever remain
subject to change: yet sometimes it rejects that whereby, so far as it
is concerned, it can be turned to good. Hence considered in itself
this sin is unpardonable, although God can pardon it.