Cerdon, too, Marcion's predecessor, himself arrived in the time of Hyginus, who was the ninth
bishop. Coming frequently into the Church, and making public confession, he thus remained,
one time teaching in secret, and then again making public confession; but at last, having been
denounced for corrupt teaching, he was excommunicated from the assembly of the brethren.
Marcion, then, succeeding him, flourished under Anicetus, who held the tenth place of the episcopate.
But the rest, who are called Gnostics, take rise from Menander, Simon's disciple, as I have shown;
and each one of them appeared to be both the father and the high priest of that doctrine into which
he has been initiated. But all these (the Marcosians) broke out into their apostasy much later, even
during the intermediate period of the Church.

### Chapter V.—Christ and His apostles, without any fraud, deception, or hypocrisy, preached
that one God, the Father, was the founder of all things. They did not accommodate their
doctrine to the prepossessions of their hearers.

1. Since, therefore, the tradition from the apostles does thus exist in the Church, and is permanent
among us, let us revert to the Scriptural proof furnished by those apostles who did also write the
Gospel, in which they recorded the doctrine regarding God, pointing out that our Lord Jesus Christ
is the truth, and that no lie is in Him. As also David says, prophesying His birth from a virgin,
and the resurrection from the dead, "Truth has sprung out of the earth." The apostles, likewise,
being disciples of the truth, are above all falsehood; for a lie has no fellowship with the truth, just
as darkness has none with light, but the presence of the one shuts out that of the other. Our Lord,
therefore, being the truth, did not speak lies; and whom He knew to have taken origin from a defect,
He never would have acknowledged as God, even the God of all, the Supreme King, too, and His
own Father, an imperfect being as a perfect one, an animal one as a spiritual, Him who was without
the Pleroma as Him who was within it. Neither did His disciples make mention of any other God,
or term any other Lord, except Him, who was truly the God and Lord of all, as these most vain
sophists affirm that the apostles did with hypocrisy frame their doctrine according to the capacity
of their hearers, and gave answers after the opinions of their questioners,—fabling blind things for
the blind, according to their blindness; for the dull according to their dulness; for those in error
according to their error. And to those who imagined that the Demiurge alone was God, they preached
this passage, probably counted the apostles as the first step in the episcopal succession. As Irenæus tells us in the preceding
chapter, Linus is to be counted as the first bishop.
anticipating the sentence of the Church, by quitting it altogether. See Valesius's note in his edition of Eusebius.