to take breath, says, "He spoke unto us by [His] Son," "whom He appointed Heir
of all things." For the name of Son is so far common. For where a true [Son] it is
understood of, He is above all: but however that may be, for the present he
proves that He is from above.
And see how he says it: "Whom He appointed," says he, "heir of all things."
The phrase, "He appointed Heir," is humble. Then he placed them on the higher
step, adding, "by whom also He made the worlds." Then on a higher still, and
after which there is no other, "who being the brightness of His glory, and the
express image of His person." Truly he has led them to unapproachable light, to
the very brightness itself. And before they are blinded see how he gently leads
them down again, saying, "and upholding all things by the word of His power,
when He had by Himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the
Majesty." He does not simply say, "He sat down," but "after the purifying, He sat
down," for he has touched on the Incarnation, and his utterance is again lowly.
Then again having said a little by the way (for he says, "on the right hand of
the Majesty on high"), [he turns] again to what is lowly; "being made so much
better than the angels, as He has by inheritance obtained a more excellent name
than they." Henceforward then he treats here of that which is according to the
flesh, since the phrase "being made better" does not express His essence
according to the Spirit, (for that was not "made" but "begotten,") but according
to the flesh: for this was "made." Nevertheless the discourse here is not about
being called into existence. But just as John says, "He that comes after me, is
preferred before me" [John 1:15-30], that is, higher in honor and esteem; so also
here, "being made so much better than the angels"— that is, higher in esteem
and better and more glorious, "by how much He has obtained by inheritance a
more excellent name than they." Do you see that he is speaking of that which is
according to the flesh? For this Name, God the Word ever had; He did not
afterwards "obtain it by inheritance"; nor did He afterwards become "better than
the Angels, when He had purged our sins"; but He was always "better," and
better without all comparison. For this is spoken of Him according to the flesh.

So truly it is our way also, when we talk of man, to speak things both high
and low. Thus, when we say, "Man is nothing," "Man is earth," "Man is ashes,"
we call the whole by the worse part. But when we say, "Man is an immortal
animal," and "Man is rational, and of kin to those on high," we call again the
whole by the better part. So also, in the case of Christ, sometimes Paul
discourses from the less and sometimes from the better; wishing both to establish
the economy, and also to teach about the incorruptible nature.
4. Since then "He has purged our sins," let us continue pure; and let us
receive no stain, but preserve the beauty which He has implanted in us, and His
comeliness undefiled and pure, "not having spot or wrinkle or any such thing."
[Ephesians 5:27] Even little sins are "a spot and a wrinkle," such a thing, I mean,
as Reproach, Insult, Falsehood.
Nay, rather not even are these small, but on the contrary very great: yea so
great as to deprive a man even of the kingdom of Heaven. How, and in what
manner? "He that calls his brother fool, is in danger" (He says) "of hellfire."
[Matthew 5:22] But if it be so with him who calls a man "fool," which seems to
be the slightest of all things, and rather mere children's talk; what sentence of
punishment will not he incur, who calls him malignant and crafty and envious,
and casts at him ten thousand other reproaches? What more fearful than this?
Now suffer, I beseech you, the word [of exhortation]. For if he that "does"
[anything] to "one of the least, does it to Him" [Matthew 25:40], and he that
"does it not to one of the least does it not to Him" [Matthew 25:45], how is it not
the same also in the matter of good or evil speaking? He that reviles his brother,
reviles God: and he that honors his brother, honors God. Let us train therefore
our tongue to speak good words. For "refrain," it is said, "your tongue from
evil." [Psalm 34:13] For God gave it not that we should speak evil, that we
should revile, that we should calumniate one another; but to sing hymns to God
withal, to speak those things which "give grace to the hearers" [Ephesians 4:29],
things for edification, things for profit.
Have you spoken evil of a man? What is your gain, entangling yourself in