which was already known but afterwards had fallen into oblivion, "makes
known" by recalling it into memory.
And when he called them "brethren," even from hence he laid the
foundation of no mean part of the proof of his assertions. For by no other cause
became we "brethren," but by the dispensation of Christ according to the flesh.
And this is just the reason why he thus called them, at the same time soothing
and courting them, and likewise reminding them of their innumerable blessings.
And what comes next again is demonstrative of the same. What then is this?
"The gospel." For the sum of the gospels has its original hence, from God having
become man and having been crucified and having risen again. This gospel also
Gabriel preached to the Virgin, this also the prophets to the world, this also the
apostles all of them.
"Which I preached unto you, which also ye received, wherein also ye stand.
By which also you are saved, in what word I preached unto you; if you hold it
fast, except ye believed in vain."
Do you see how he calls themselves to be witnesses of the things spoken?
And he says not, "which you heard," but, "which you received," demanding it of
them as a kind of deposit, and showing that not in word only, but also by deeds
and signs and wonders they received it, and that they should hold it safe.
Next, because he was speaking of the things long past, he referred also to
the present time, saying, "wherein also ye stand," taking the vantage ground of
them that disavowal might be out of their power, though they wished it never so
much. And this is why at the beginning he said not, "I teach you," but, 'I make
known unto you' what has already been made manifest.
And how says he that they who were so tossed with waves "stand?" He
feigns ignorance to profit them; which also he does in the case of the Galatians,
but not in like manner. For inasmuch as he could not in that case affect
ignorance, he frames his address in another way, saying, "I have confidence
toward you in the Lord, that you will be none otherwise minded." [Galatians
5:10] He said not, "that you were none otherwise minded," because their fault

was acknowledged and evident, but he answers for the future; and yet this too
was uncertain; but it was to draw them to him more effectually. Here however he
does feign ignorance, saying, "wherein also ye stand."
Then comes the advantage; "by which also you are saved, in what words I
preached it unto you." "So then, this present exposition is for doctrine clearness
and interpretation. For the doctrine itself ye need not," says he, "to learn, but to
be reminded of it and corrected." And these things he says, leaving them no
room to plunge into recklessness once for all.
But what is, "in what word I preached it unto you?" After what manner did
I say, says he, "that the resurrection takes place? For that there is a resurrection
I would not say that you doubt: but you seek perhaps to obtain a clearer
knowledge of that saying. This then will I provide for you: for indeed I am well
assured that you hold the doctrine." Next, because he was directly affirming,
"wherein also ye stand;" that he might not thereby make them more remiss, he
alarms them again, saying, "If you hold it fast, except ye believed in vain;"
intimating that the stroke is on the chief head, and the contest for no common
things but in behalf of the whole of the faith. And for the present he says it with
reserve, but as he goes on and waxes warm, he throws off the veil and proceeds
to cry out , and say, "But if Christ has not been raised then is our preaching vain,
your faith also is vain: you are yet in your sins:" but in the beginning not so: for
thus it was expedient to proceed, gently and by degrees.