FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.114, C.8.

after a fall is called just, and likewise the prayer whereby this
restoration is besought is called just, because it tends to justice; and
not that it depends on justice by way of merit, but only on mercy.
Reply to Objection 2: Anyone may congruously merit for another his
first grace, because there is no impediment (at least, on the part of
him who merits), such as is found when anyone recedes from justice
after the merit of grace.
Reply to Objection 3: Some have said that no one "absolutely"
merits life everlasting except by the act of final grace, but only
"conditionally," i.e. if he perseveres. But it is unreasonable to say
this, for sometimes the act of the last grace is not more, but less
meritorious than preceding acts, on account of the prostration of
illness. Hence it must be said that every act of charity merits eternal
life absolutely; but by subsequent sin, there arises an impediment to
the preceding merit, so that it does not obtain its effect; just as
natural causes fail of their effects on account of a supervening
impediment.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.114, C.9.

### ARTICLE 8. Whether a man may merit the increase of grace or

charity?
Objection 1: It would seem that a man cannot merit an increase of
grace or charity. For when anyone receives the reward he merited no
other reward is due to him; thus it was said of some (Mt. 6:2): "They
have received their reward." Hence, if anyone were to merit the
increase of charity or grace, it would follow that, when his grace has
been increased, he could not expect any further reward, which is
unfitting.
Objection 2: Further, nothing acts beyond its species. But the
principle of merit is grace or charity, as was shown above (Articles 2,
4). Therefore no one can merit greater grace or charity than he has.
Objection 3: Further, what falls under merit a man merits by every
act flowing from grace or charity, as by every such act a man merits
life everlasting. If, therefore, the increase of grace or charity falls
under merit, it would seem that by every act quickened by charity a
man would merit an increase of charity. But what a man merits, he
infallibly receives from God, unless hindered by subsequent sin; for
it is written (2 Tim. 1:12): "I know Whom I have believed, and I am
certain that He is able to keep that which I have committed unto
Him." Hence it would follow that grace or charity is increased by
every meritorious act; and this would seem impossible since at
times meritorious acts are not very fervent, and would not suffice for
the increase of charity. Therefore the increase of charity does not
come under merit.
On the contrary, Augustine says (super Ep. Joan.; cf. Ep. clxxxvi)
that "charity merits increase, and being increased merits to be
perfected." Hence the increase of grace or charity falls under merit.
I answer that, As stated above (Articles 6,7), whatever the motion of
grace reaches to, falls under condign merit. Now the motion of a
mover extends not merely to the last term of the movement, but to
the whole progress of the movement. But the term of the movement
of grace is eternal life; and progress in this movement is by the
increase of charity or grace according to Prov. 4:18: "But the path of
the just as a shining light, goeth forward and increaseth even to
perfect day," which is the day of glory. And thus the increase of