The economy and the distribution of income

202. The need to resolve the structural causes of poverty cannot be delayed, not only for the
pragmatic reason of its urgency for the good order of society, but because society needs to be
cured of a sickness which is weakening and frustrating it, and which can only lead to new crises.
Welfare projects, which meet certain urgent needs, should be considered merely temporary
responses. As long as the problems of the poor are not radically resolved by rejecting the absolute
autonomy of markets and financial speculation and by attacking the structural causes of
inequality, no solution will be found for the world’s problems or, for that matter, to any
problems. Inequality is the root of social ills.

203. The dignity of each human person and the pursuit of the common good are concerns which
ought to shape all economic policies. At times, however, they seem to be a mere addendum
imported from without in order to fill out a political discourse lacking in perspectives or plans for
true and integral development. How many words prove irksome to this system! It is irksome when
the question of ethics is raised, when global solidarity is invoked, when the distribution of goods is
mentioned, when reference in made to protecting labour and defending the dignity of the
powerless, when allusion is made to a God who demands a commitment to justice. At other times
these issues are exploited by a rhetoric which cheapens them. Casual indifference in the face of
such questions empties our lives and our words of all meaning. Business is a vocation, and a

noble vocation, provided that those engaged in it see themselves challenged by a greater meaning
in life; this will enable them truly to serve the common good by striving to increase the goods of
this world and to make them more accessible to all.

204. We can no longer trust in the unseen forces and the invisible hand of the market. Growth in
justice requires more than economic growth, while presupposing such growth: it requires
decisions, programmes, mechanisms and processes specifically geared to a better distribution of
income, the creation of sources of employment and an integral promotion of the poor which goes
beyond a simple welfare mentality. I am far from proposing an irresponsible populism, but the
economy can no longer turn to remedies that are a new poison, such as attempting to increase
profits by reducing the work force and thereby adding to the ranks of the excluded.

205. I ask God to give us more politicians capable of sincere and effective dialogue aimed at
healing the deepest roots – and not simply the appearances – of the evils in our world! Politics,
though often denigrated, remains a lofty vocation and one of the highest forms of charity,
inasmuch as it seeks the common good. We need to be convinced that charity “is the
principle not only of micro-relationships (with friends, with family members or within small groups)
but also of macro-relationships (social, economic and political ones)”. I beg the Lord to grant
us more politicians who are genuinely disturbed by the state of society, the people, the lives of the
poor! It is vital that government leaders and financial leaders take heed and broaden their
horizons, working to ensure that all citizens have dignified work, education and healthcare. Why
not turn to God and ask him to inspire their plans? I am firmly convinced that openness to the
transcendent can bring about a new political and economic mindset which would help to break
down the wall of separation between the economy and the common good of society.