enveloping his brain, as if it were some rock, and casting over it a thick mist,
suffer not reason to exert itself, but overspread the drunken man with profound
darkness. With him who is thus affected, how great must be the storm within,
how violent the tumult. As when a flood of water has risen, and has surmounted
the entrances of the workshops, we see all the inmates in confusion, and using
tubs and pitchers and sponges, and many other contrivances to bale it out, that it
may not both undermine the building, and spoil all that is contained in it: so it is
when luxury overwhelms the soul; its reasonings within are disturbed. What is
already collected, cannot be discharged, and by the introduction of more, a
violent storm is raised. For look not at the cheerful and merry countenance, but
examine the interior, and you will see it full of deep dejection. If it were possible
to bring the soul into view, and to behold it with our bodily eyes, that of the
luxurious would seem depressed, mournful, miserable, and wasted with
leanness; for the more the body grows sleek and gross, the more lean and weakly
is the soul; and the more one is pampered, the more is the other hampered. As,
when the pupil of the eye has the external coats over it too thick, it cannot put
forth the power of vision, and look out, because the light is excluded by the thick
covering, and darkness often ensues; so when the body is constantly full fed, the
soul must be invested with grossness. But the dead rot, and are corrupted, you
say; and an unwholesome moisture distills from them. So in her "that lives in
pleasure," may be seen rheums, and phlegm, catarrh, hiccough, vomitings,
eructations, and the like, which, as too unseemly, I forbear to name. For such is
the dominion of luxury, that it makes one endure things, which we do not even
think proper to mention.
But you still ask, how is the body dissolved while it yet eats and drinks?
Surely this is no sign of human life, since creatures without reason too eat and
drink. Where the soul lies dead, what do eating and drinking avail? The dead
body, that is invested with a flowery garment, is not benefited by it, and when a
blooming body invests a dead soul, the soul is not benefited. For when its whole
discourse is of cooks, and caterers, and confectioners, and it utters nothing pious,

is it not dead? For let us consider what is man? The Heathens say that he is a
rational animal, mortal, capable of intelligence and knowledge. But let us not
take our definition from them, but whence? From the sacred writings. Where
then has the Scripture given a definition of man? Hear its words. "There was a
man perfect and upright, one that feared God, and eschewed evil." [Job 1:2] This
was indeed a man! Again, another says, "Man is great, and the merciful man is
precious." [Proverbs 20:6, Septuagint] Those who answer not to this description,
though they partake of mind, and are never so capable of knowledge, the
Scripture refuses to acknowledge them as men, but calls them dogs, and horses,
and serpents, and foxes, and wolves, and if there be any animals more
contemptible. If such then is man, he that lives in pleasure is not a man; for how
can he be, who never thinks of anything that he ought? Luxury and sobriety
cannot exist together: they are destructive of one another. Even the Heathens say,
"A heavy paunch bears not a subtle mind."
Such as these the Scripture calls men without souls. "My Spirit (it is said)
shall not always abide in these men, because they are flesh." [Genesis 6:3,
Septuagint] Yet they had a soul, but because it was dead in them, He calls them
flesh. For as in the case of the virtuous, though they have a body, we say, "he is
all soul, he is all spirit," so the reverse is said of those who are otherwise. So
Paul also said of those, who did not fulfill the works of the flesh, "You are not in
the flesh." [Romans 8:9] Thus those who live in luxury are not in the soul or in
the spirit.
Moral. "She that lives in pleasure is dead while she lives." Hear this, you
women, that pass your time in revels and intemperance, and who neglect the
poor, pining and perishing with hunger, while you are destroying yourself with
continual luxury. Thus you are the causes of two deaths, of those who are dying
of want, and of your own, both through ill measure. But if out of your fullness
you tempered their want, you would save two lives. Why do you thus gorge your