Eucharist is the sign of ecclesiastical unity, wherefore by reason of
the deed done its effect can pass to another, which is not the case
with the other sacraments.
Reply to Objection 4: According to a gloss this passage may be
expounded in two ways. First, thus: "If the dead rise not again, nor
did Christ rise again, why are they baptized for them? i.e. for sins,
since they are not pardoned if Christ rose not again, because in
Baptism not only Christ's passion but also His resurrection operates,
for the latter is in a sense the cause of our spiritual resurrection."
Secondly, thus: There have been some misguided persons who were
baptized for those who had departed this life without baptism,
thinking that this would profit them: and according to this
explanation the Apostle is speaking, in the above words, merely
according to the opinion of certain persons.
Reply to Objection 5: In the office of the Mass there is not only a
sacrifice but also prayers. Hence the suffrage of the Mass contains
two of the things mentioned by Augustine (De Cura pro Mort. xviii),
namely "prayer" and "sacrifice." As regards the sacrifice offered the
Mass profits equally the departed, no matter in whose honor it be
said: and this is the principal thing done in the Mass. But as regards
the prayers, that Mass is most profitable in which the prayers are
appointed for this purpose. Nevertheless, this defect may be
supplied by the greater devotion, either of the one who says Mass, or
of the one who orders the Mass to be said, or again, by the
intercession of the saint whose suffrage is besought in the Mass.
Reply to Objection 6: This offering of candles or oil may profit the
departed in so far as they are a kind of alms: for they are given for
the worship of the Church or for the use of the faithful.

### ARTICLE 10. Whether the indulgences of the Church profit the

dead?
Objection 1: It would seem that the indulgences granted by the
Church profit even the dead. First, on account of the custom of the
Church, who orders the preaching of a crusade in order that some
one may gain an indulgence for himself and for two or three and
sometimes even ten souls, both of the living and of the dead. But
this would amount to a deception unless they profited the dead.
Therefore indulgences profit the dead.
Objection 2: Further, the merit of the whole Church is more
efficacious than that of one person. Now personal merit serves as a
suffrage for the departed, for instance in the case of almsgiving.
Much more therefore does the merit of the Church whereon
indulgences are founded.
Objection 3: Further, the indulgences of the Church profit those who
are members of the Church. Now those who are in purgatory are
members of the Church, else the suffrages of the Church would not
profit them. Therefore it would seem that indulgences profit the
departed.
On the contrary, In order that indulgences may avail a person, there
must be a fitting cause for granting the indulgence [Question 25,
Article 2]. Now there can be no such cause on the part of the dead,
since they can do nothing that is of profit to the Church, and it is for
such a cause that indulgences are chiefly granted. Therefore,
seemingly, indulgences profit not the dead.
Further, indulgences are regulated according to the decision of the
party who grants them. If, therefore, indulgences could avail the
dead, it would be in the power of the party granting them to release a
deceased person entirely from punishment: which is apparently
absurd.
I answer that, An indulgence may profit a person in two ways: in one
way, principally; in another, secondarily. It profits principally the
person who avails himself of an indulgence, who, namely, does that
for which the indulgence is granted, for instance one who visits the
shrine of some saint. Hence since the dead can do none of those