not waiting upon God, but occupied with mere worldly questions, then, "taking seven other spirits
more wicked than himself," and inflating the minds of these men with the notion of their being
able to conceive of something beyond God, and having fitly prepared them for the reception of
deceit, he implants within them the Ogdoad of the foolish spirits of wickedness.

### Chapter XVII.—The theory of the Marcosians, that created things were made after the image
of things invisible.
1. I wish also to explain to thee their theory as to the way in which the creation itself was formed
through the mother by the Demiurge (as it were without his knowledge), after the image of things
invisible. They maintain, then, that first of all the four elements, fire, water, earth, and air, were
produced after the image of the primary Tetrad above, and that then, we add their operations, viz.,
heat, cold, dryness, and humidity, an exact likeness of the Ogdoad is presented. They next reckon
up ten powers in the following manner:—There are seven globular bodies, which they also call
heavens; then that globular body which contains these, which also they name the eighth heaven;
and, in addition to these, the sun and moon. These, being ten in number, they declare to be types
of the invisible Decad, which proceeded from Logos and Zoe. As to the Duodecad, it is indicated
by the zodiacal circle, as it is called; for they affirm that the twelve signs do most manifestly shadow
forth the Duodecad, the daughter of Anthropos and Ecclesia. And since the highest heaven, beating
upon the very sphere [of the seventh heaven], has been linked with the most rapid precession of
the whole system, as a check, and balancing that system with its own gravity, so that it completes
the cycle from sign to sign in thirty years,—they say that this is an image of Horus, encircling their
thirty-named mother. And then, again, as the moon travels through her allotted space of heaven
in thirty days, they hold, that by these days she expresses the number of the thirty Æons. The sun
also, who runs through his orbit in twelve months, and then returns to the same point in the circle,
makes the Duodecad manifest by these twelve months; and the days, as being measured by twelve
hours, are a type of the invisible Duodecad. Moreover, they declare that the hour, which is the
twelfth part of the day, is composed of thirty parts, in order to set forth the image of the Triacontad.
Also the circumference of the zodiacal circle itself contains three hundred and sixty degrees (for
each of its signs comprises thirty); and thus also they affirm, that by means of this circle an image
is preserved of that connection which exists between the twelve and the thirty. Still further, asserting
that the earth is divided into twelve zones, and that in each zone it receives power from the heavens,
according to the perpendicular [position of the sun above it], bringing forth productions