and slothfulness; the one quickly casting a man down from the very arch of the
heavens; the other not suffering the fallen to rise again. Wherefore with respect
to the one, Paul said, "Let him that thinks he stands take heed lest he fall:" [1
Corinthians 10:12] but unto the other, Today if you will hear His voice, harden
not your hearts: [Hebrews 4:7] and again, "Lift up the hands that hang down and
the palsied knees." [Hebrews 12:12] And him too that had committed fornication
but repented, he therefore quickly refreshes, "that such an one might not be
swallowed up with his overmuch sorrow?" [2 Corinthians 2:7]
Why then in regard of other griefs art you cast down, O man? Since if for
sins, where only grief is beneficial, excess works much mischief, much more for
all other things. For wherefore do you grieve? That you have lost money? Nay,
think of those that are not even filled with bread, and you shall very speedily
obtain consolation. And in each of the things that are grievous to you mourn not
the things that have happened, but for the disasters that have not happened give
thanks. Had you money and did you lose it? Weep not for the loss, but give
thanks for the time when you enjoyed it. Say like Job, "Have we received good
at the hand of the Lord, and shall we not receive evil?" [Job 2:10] And together
with that use this argument also; that even if you lost your money, yet your body
you have still sound and hast not with your poverty to grieve that it also is
maimed. But has your body too endured some outrage? Yet is not this the bottom
of human calamities, but in the middle of the cask you are as yet carried along.
For many along with poverty and maiming, both wrestle with a demon and
wander in deserts: others again endure other things more grievous than these.
For may it never be our lot to suffer all that it is possible for one to bear.
These things then ever considering, bear in mind them that suffer worse,
and be vexed at none of those things: but when you sin, only then sigh, then
weep; I forbid you not, nay I enjoin you rather; though even then with
moderation, remembering that there is returning, there is reconciliation. But do
you see others in luxury and yourself in poverty: and another in goodly robes,
and in preeminence? Look not however on these things alone, but also on the

miseries that arise out of these. And in your poverty too, consider not the
beggary alone, but the pleasure also thence arising do thou take into account. For
wealth has indeed a cheerful mask, but its inward parts are full of gloom; and
poverty the reverse. And should you unfold each man's conscience, in the soul of
the poor you will see great security and freedom: but in that of the rich,
confusions, disorders, tempests. And if you grieve, seeing him rich, he too is
vexed much more than thou when he beholds one richer than himself. And as
you fear him, even so does he another, and he has no advantage over you in this.
But you are vexed to see him in office, because you are in a private station and
one of the governed. Recollect however the day of his ceasing to hold office.
And even before that day the tumults, the perils, the fatigues, the flatteries, the
sleepless nights, and all the miseries.
9. And these things we say to those who have no mind for high morality:
since if you know this, there are other and greater things whereby we may
comfort you: but for the present we must use the coarser topics to argue with
you. When therefore you see one that is rich, think of him that is richer than he,
and you will see him in the same condition with yourself. And after him look
also on him that is poorer than yourself, consider how many have gone to bed
hungry, and have lost their patrimony, and live in a dungeon, and pray for death
every day. For neither does poverty breed sadness, nor wealth pleasure, but both
the one and the other our own thoughts are wont to produce in us. And consider,
beginning from beneath: the scavenger grieves and is vexed that he cannot be rid
of this his business so wretched and esteemed so disgraceful: but if you rid him
of this, and cause him, with security, to have plenty of the necessaries of life, he
will grieve again that he has not more than he wants: and if you grant him more,
he will wish to double them again, and will therefore vex himself no less than
before: and if you grant him twofold or threefold, he will be out of heart again
because he has no part in the state: and if you provide him with this also, he will
count himself wretched because he is not one of the highest officers of state. And
when he has obtained this honor, he will mourn that he is not a ruler; and when