certainly be so, I will relate to you an ancient piece of history, that you may
understand that no armies, nor warlike weapons, nor money, nor multitude of
subjects, nor any other such things are wont to make sovereigns so illustrious, as
wisdom of soul and gentleness. It is related of the blessed Constantine, that on
one occasion, when a statue of himself had been pelted with stones, and many
were instigating him to proceed against the perpetrators of the outrage; saying,
that they had disfigured his whole face by battering it with stones, he stroked his
face with his hand, and smiling gently, said, "I am quite unable to perceive any
wound inflicted upon my face. The head appears sound, and the face also quite
sound." Thus these persons, overwhelmed with shame, desisted from their
unrighteous counsel.
This saying, even to the present day, all repeat; and length of time has
neither weakened nor extinguished the memory of such exalted wisdom. How
much more illustrious is such an action, than any number of warlike trophies!
Many and great titles did he build, and many barbarous tribes did he conquer;
not one of which we now remember; but this saying is repeated over and over
again, to the present day; and those who follow us, as well as those who come
after them, will all hear of it. Nor indeed is this the only admirable thing; that
they will hear of it; but that when men speak of it, they do so with approbation
and applause; and those who hear of it, receive it with the like; and there is no
one who, when he has heard it, is able to remain silent, but each at once cries
out, and applauds the man who uttered it, and prays that innumerable blessings
may be his lot even now deceased. But if among men, this saying has gained him
so much honour, how many crowns will he obtain with the merciful God!
12. And why need I speak of Constantine, and other men's examples, when
it were fitting that I should exhort you by considerations nearer home, and drawn
from your own praiseworthy actions. You remember how but lately, when this
feast was near at hand, you sent an epistle to every part of the world giving
orders that the inmates of the prisons should be set free, and their crimes be
pardoned. And as if this were not sufficient to give proof of your generosity, you

said in your letters, "O that it were possible for me to recal and to restore those
who are dead, and to bring them back to their former state of life!" Remember
now these words. Behold the season of recalling and restoring the deceased, and
bringing them back to former life! For these are indeed already dead, even
before the sentence has been pronounced; and the city has now taken up its
tabernacle at the very gates of Hades! Therefore raise it up again, which you can
do without money, without expense, without loss of time or labour! It is
sufficient merely for you to open your lips, and you will restore to life the city
which at present lies in darkness. Grant now, that henceforth it may bear an
appellation derived from your philanthropy; for it will not be so much indebted
to the kindness of him who first founded it, as it will be to your sentence. And
this is exceedingly reasonable; for he but gave it its beginning, and departed; but
you, when it had grown up and become great; and when it was fallen, after all
that great prosperity; will have been its restorer. There would have been nothing
so wonderful in your having delivered it from danger, when enemies had
captured, and barbarians overrun it, as in your now sparing it. That, many of the
Emperors have frequently done; but should you alone accomplish this, you will
be first in doing it, and that beyond all expectation. And the former of these good
deeds, the protection of your subjects, is not at all wonderful or extraordinary;
but is one of those events which are of continual occurrence; but the latter, the
dismissal of wrath after the endurance of such provocations, is something which
surpasses human nature.
13. Reflect, that the matter now for your consideration is not respecting this
city only, but is one that concerns your own glory; or rather, one that affects the
cause of Christianity in general. Even now the Gentiles, and Jews, and the whole
empire as well as the barbarians, (for these last have also heard of these events,)
are eagerly looking to you, and waiting to see what sentence you will pronounce
with regard to these transactions. And should you decree a humane and merciful
one; all will applaud the decision, and glorify God, and say one to another,
"Heavens! How great is the power of Christianity, that it restrains and bridles a