THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.3, C.6.

Therefore the Divine power could have united human nature to the
Person of the Father or of the Holy Ghost, as It united it to the
Person of the Son. And hence we must say that the Father or the
Holy Ghost could have assumed flesh even as the Son.
Reply to Objection 1: The temporal sonship, whereby Christ is said
to be the Son of Man, does not constitute His Person, as does the
eternal Sonship; but is something following upon the temporal
nativity. Hence, if the name of son were transferred to the Father or
the Holy Ghost in this manner, there would be no confusion of the
Divine Persons.
Reply to Objection 2: Adoptive sonship is a certain participation of
natural sonship; but it takes place in us, by appropriation, by the
Father, Who is the principle of natural sonship, and by the gift of the
Holy Ghost, Who is the love of the Father and Son, according to Gal.
4:6: "God hath sent the Spirit of His Son into your hearts crying,
Abba, Father." And therefore, even as by the Incarnation of the Son
we receive adoptive sonship in the likeness of His natural sonship,
so likewise, had the Father become incarnate, we should have
received adoptive sonship from Him, as from the principle of the
natural sonship, and from the Holy Ghost as from the common bond
of Father and Son.
Reply to Objection 3: It belongs to the Father to be innascible as to
eternal birth, and the temporal birth would not destroy this. But the
Son of God is said to be sent in regard to the Incarnation, inasmuch
as He is from another, without which the Incarnation would not
suffice for the nature of mission.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.3, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether several Divine Persons can assume one

and the same individual nature?
Objection 1: It would seem that two Divine Persons cannot assume
one and the same individual nature. For, this being granted, there
would either be several men or one. But not several, for just as one
Divine Nature in several Persons does not make several gods, so
one human nature in several persons does not make several men.
Nor would there be only one man, for one man is "this man," which
signifies one person; and hence the distinction of three Divine
Persons would be destroyed, which cannot be allowed. Therefore
neither two nor three Persons can take one human nature.
Objection 2: Further, the assumption is terminated in the unity of
Person, as has been said above (Article 2). But the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost are not one Person. Therefore the three Persons cannot
assume one human nature.
Objection 3: Further, Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii, 3,4), and
Augustine (De Trin. i, 11,12,13), that from the Incarnation of God the
Son it follows that whatever is said of the Son of God is said of the
Son of Man, and conversely. Hence, if three Persons were to assume
one human nature, it would follow that whatever is said of each of
the three Persons would be said of the man; and conversely, what
was said of the man could be said of each of the three Persons.
Therefore what is proper to the Father, viz. to beget the Son, would
be said of the man, and consequently would be said of the Son of
God; and this could not be. Therefore it is impossible that the three
Persons should assume one human nature.
On the contrary, The Incarnate Person subsists in two natures. But
the three Persons can subsist in one Divine Nature. Therefore they
can also subsist in one human nature in such a way that the human
nature be assumed by the three Persons.
I answer that, As was said above (Question 2, Article 5, ad 1), by the
union of the soul and body in Christ neither a new person is made
nor a new hypostasis, but one human nature is assumed to the
Divine Person or hypostasis, which, indeed, does not take place by
the power of the human nature, but by the power of the Divine
Person. Now such is the characteristic of the Divine Persons that