changed them into pruning-hooks for reaping the corn, [that is], into instruments used for peaceful
purposes, and that they are now unaccustomed to fighting, but when smitten, offer also the other
cheek, then the prophets have not spoken these things of any other person, but of Him who
effected them. This person is our Lord, and in Him is that declaration borne out; since it is He
Himself who has made the plough, and introduced the pruning-hook, that is, the first semination
of man, which was the creation exhibited in Adam, and the gathering in of the produce in the
last times by the Word; and, for this reason, since He joined the beginning to the end, and is the
Lord of both, He has finally displayed the plough, in that the wood has been joined on to the iron,
and has thus cleansed His land; because the Word, having been firmly united to flesh, and in its
mechanism fixed with pins, has reclaimed the savage earth. In the beginning, He figured forth
the pruning-hook by means of Abel, pointing out that there should be a gathering in of a righteous
race of men. He says, "For behold how the just man perishes, and no man considers it; and righteous
men are taken away, and no man layeth it to heart." These things were acted beforehand in Abel,
were also previously declared by the prophets, but were accomplished in the Lord's person; and
the same [is still true] with regard to us, the body following the example of the Head.
5. Such are the arguments proper [to be used] in opposition to those who maintain that the
prophets [were inspired] by a different God, and that our Lord [came] from another Father, if
perchance [these heretics] may at length desist from such extreme folly. This is my earnest object
in adducing these Scriptural proofs, that confuting them, as far as in me lies, by these very passages,
I may restrain them from such great blasphemy, and from insanely fabricating a multitude of gods.

### Chapter XXXV.—A refutation of those who allege that the prophets uttered some predictions
under the inspiration of the highest, others from the Demiurge. Disagreements of the
Valentinians among themselves with regard to these same predictions.
1. Then again, in opposition to the Valentinians, and the other Gnostics, falsely so called, who
maintain that some parts of Scripture were spoken at one time from the Pleroma (a summitate)
through means of the seed [derived] from that place, but at another time from the intermediate
abode through means of the audacious mother Prunica, but that many are due to the Creator of the

Matt. v. 39.
the general meaning may be guessed.

world, from whom also the prophets had their mission, we say that it is altogether irrational to bring
down the Father of the universe to such straits, as that He should not be possessed of His own
proper instruments, by which the things in the Pleroma might be perfectly proclaimed. For of whom
was He afraid, so that He should not reveal His will after His own way and independently, freely,
and without being involved with that spirit which came into being in a state of degeneracy and
ignorance? Was it that He feared that very many would be saved, when more should have listened
to the unadulterated truth? Or, on the other hand, was He incapable of preparing for Himself those
who should announce the Saviour's advent?
2. But if, when the Saviour came to this earth, He sent His apostles into the world to proclaim
with accuracy His advent, and to teach the Father's will, having nothing in common with the doctrine
of the Gentiles or of the Jews, much more, while yet existing in the Pleroma, would He have
appointed His own heralds to proclaim His future advent into this world, and having nothing in
common with those prophecies originating from the Demiurge. But if, when within the Pleroma,
He availed Himself of those prophets who were under the law, and declared His own matters through
their instrumentality; much more would He, upon His arrival hither, have made use of these same
teachers, and have preached the Gospel to us by their means. Therefore let them not any longer
assert that Peter and Paul and the other apostles proclaimed the truth, but that it was the scribes and
Pharisees, and the others, through whom the law was propounded. But if, at His advent, He sent
forth His own apostles in the spirit of truth, and not in that of error, He did the very same also in
the case of the prophets; for the Word of God was always the self-same: and if the Spirit from the
Pleroma was, according to these men's system, the Spirit of light, the Spirit of truth, the Spirit of
perfection, and the Spirit of knowledge, while that from the Demiurge was the spirit of ignorance,
degeneracy, and error, and the offspring of obscurity; how can it be, that in one and the same being
there exists perfection and defect, knowledge and ignorance, error and truth, light and darkness?
But if it was impossible that such should happen in the case of the prophets, for they preached the
word of the Lord from one God, and proclaimed the advent of His Son, much more would the Lord
Himself never have uttered words, on one occasion from above, but on another from degeneracy
below, thus becoming the teacher at once of knowledge and of ignorance; nor would He have ever
glorified as Father at one time the Founder of the world, and at another Him who is above this one,
as He does Himself declare: "No man putteth a piece of a new garment upon an old one, nor do
they put new wine into old bottles." Let these men, therefore, either have nothing whatever to
do with the prophets, as with those that are ancients, and allege no longer that these men, being
sent beforehand by the Demiurge, spake certain things under that new influence which pertains to
the Pleroma; or, on the other hand, let them be convinced by our Lord, when He declares that new
wine cannot be put into old bottles.
3. But from what source could the offspring of their mother derive his knowledge of the mysteries
within the Pleroma, and power to discourse regarding them? Suppose that the mother, while beyond