For we have done our part, by giving them advice: but if they do not listen to it
no harm will result to us from that. For blame would attach to us not for failing
to persuade, but for failing to advise: and after prolonged and continual
exhortation and counsel they and not we, have to reckon henceforth with God.
I have been anxious at any rate to know clearly, whether you continue to
exhort your brethren, and if they remain all the time in the same condition of
indolence: otherwise I would never have given you any trouble: as it is, I have
fears that they may remain uncorrected in consequence of your neglect and
indifference. For it is impossible that a man who continually has the benefit of
exhortation and instruction should not become better and more diligent. The
proverb which I am about to cite is certainly a common one, nevertheless it
confirms this very truth. For "a perpetual dropping of water" it says, "wears a
rock," yet what is softer than water? And what is harder than a rock?
Nevertheless perpetual action conquers nature: and if it conquers nature much
more will it be able to prevail over the human will. Christianity is no child's play,
my beloved: no matter of secondary importance. I am continually saying these
things, and yet I effect nothing.
2. How am I distressed, think you, when I call to mind that on the festival
days the multitudes assembled resemble the broad expanse of the sea, but now
not even the smallest part of that multitude is gathered together here? Where are
they now who oppress us with their presence on the feast days? I look for them,
and am grieved on their account when I mark what a multitude are perishing of
those who are in the way of salvation, how large a loss of brethren I sustain, how
few are reached by the things which concern salvation, and how the greater part
of the body of the Church is like a dead and motionless carcass. "And what
concern is that to us?" you say. The greatest possible concern if you pay no
attention to your brethren, if you do not exhort and advise, if you put no
constraint on them, and do not forcibly drag them hither, and lead them away out
of their deep indolence. For that one ought not to be useful to himself alone, but
also to many others, Christ declared plainly, when He called us salt,

[Matthew 5:13] and leaven, and light: [Matthew 5:14] for these things are useful
and profitable to others. For a lamp does not shine for itself, but for those who
are sitting in darkness: and you are a lamp not that you may enjoy the light by
yourself, but that you may bring back yonder man who has gone astray. For what
profit is a lamp if it does not give light to him who sits in darkness? And what
profit is a Christian when he benefits no one, neither leads any one back to
virtue? Again salt is not an astringent to itself but braces up those parts of the
body which have decayed, and prevents them from falling to pieces and
perishing. Even so do thou, since God has appointed you to be spiritual salt, bind
and brace up the decayed members, that is the indolent and sordid brethren, and
having rescued them from their indolence as from some form of corruption,
unite them to the rest of the body of the Church. And this is the reason why He
called you leaven: for leaven also does not leaven itself, but, little though it is, it
affects the whole lump however big it may be. So also do ye: although you are
few in number, yet be ye many and powerful in faith, and in zeal towards God.
As then the leaven is not weak on account of its littleness, but prevails owing to
its inherent heat, and the force of its natural quality, so ye also will be able to
bring back a far larger number than yourselves, if you will, to the same degree of
zeal as your own. Now if they make the summer season their excuse: for I hear
of their saying things of this kind, "the present stifling heat is excessive, the
scorching sun is intolerable, we cannot bear being trampled and crushed in the
crowd, and to be steaming all over with perspiration and oppressed by the heat
and confined space:" I am ashamed of them, believe me: for such excuses are
womanish: indeed even in their case who have softer bodies, and a weaker
nature, such pretexts do not suffice for justification. Nevertheless, even if it
seems a disgrace to make a reply to a defence of this kind, yet is it necessary. For
if they put forward such excuses as these and do not blush, much more does it
behoove us not to be ashamed of replying to these things. What then am I to say
to those who advance these pretexts? I would remind them of the three children
in the furnace and the flame, who when they saw the fire encircling them on all