Ex. xxv. 31, etc.

among the Æons, and illuminates the whole Pleroma. They have carefully enumerated the curtains
as being ten, declaring these a type of the ten Æons; but they have forgotten to count the coverings
of skin, which were eleven in number. Nor, again, have they measured the size of these very
curtains, each curtain being eight-and-twenty cubits in length. And they set forth the length of
the pillars as being ten cubits, with a reference to the Decad of Æons. "But the breadth of each
pillar was a cubit and a half;" and this they do not explain, any more than they do the entire
number of the pillars or of their bars, because that does not suit the argument. But what of the
anointing oil, which sanctified the whole tabernacle? Perhaps it escaped the notice of the Saviour,
or, while their Mother was sleeping, the Demiurge of himself gave instructions as to its weight;
and on this account it is out of harmony with their Pleroma, consisting, as it did, of five hundred
shekels of myrrh, five hundred of cassia, two hundred and fifty of cinnamon, two hundred and fifty
of calamus, and oil in addition, so that it was composed of five ingredients. The incense also, in
like manner, [was compounded] of stacte, onycha, galbanum, mint, and frankincense, all which do
in no respect, either as to their mixture or weight, harmonize with their argument. It is therefore
unreasonable and altogether absurd [to maintain] that the types were not preserved in the sublime
and more imposing enactments of the law; but in other points, when any number coincides with
their assertions, to affirm that it was a type of the things in the Pleroma; while [the truth is, that]
every number occurs with the utmost variety in the Scriptures, so that, should any one desire it, he
might form not only an Ogdoad, and a Decad, and a Duodecad, but any sort of number from the
Scriptures, and then maintain that this was a type of the system of error devised by himself.
4. But that this point is true, that that number which is called five, which agrees in no respect
with their argument, and does not harmonize with their system, nor is suitable for a typical
manifestation of the things in the Pleroma, [yet has a wide prevalence,] will be proved as follows
from the Scriptures. Soter is a name of five letters; Pater, too, contains five letters; Agape (love),
too, consists of five letters; and our Lord, after blessing the five loaves, fed with them five
thousand men. Five virgins were called wise by the Lord; and, in like manner, five were styled

Ex. xxvi. 16.

Some such supplement as this seems requisite, but the syntax in the Latin text is very confused.

foolish. Again, five men are said to have been with the Lord when He obtained testimony from
the Father,—namely, Peter, and James, and John, and Moses, and Elias. The Lord also, as the fifth
person, entered into the apartment of the dead maiden, and raised her up again; for, says [the
Scripture], "He suffered no man to go in, save Peter and James, and the father and mother of the
maiden." The rich man in hell declared that he had five brothers, to whom he desired that one
rising from the dead should go. The pool from which the Lord commanded the paralytic man to go
into his house, had five porches. The very form of the cross, too, has five extremities, two in
length, two in breadth, and one in the middle, on which [last] the person rests who is fixed by the
nails. Each of our hands has five fingers; we have also five senses; our internal organs may also be
reckoned as five, viz., the heart, the liver, the lungs, the spleen, and the kidneys. Moreover, even
the whole person may be divided into this number [of parts],—the head, the breast, the belly, the
thighs, and the feet. The human race passes through five ages first infancy, then boyhood, then
youth, then maturity, and then old age. Moses delivered the law to the people in five books. Each
table which he received from God contained five commandments. The veil covering the holy
of holies had five pillars. The altar of burnt-offering also was five cubits in breadth. Five priests
were chosen in the wilderness,—namely, Aaron, Nadab, Abiud, Eleazar, Ithamar. The ephod
and the breastplate, and other sacerdotal vestments, were formed out of five materials; for they
combined in themselves gold, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen. And there were
five kings of the Amorites, whom Joshua the son of Nun shut up in a cave, and directed the
people to trample upon their heads. Any one, in fact, might collect many thousand other things of
the same kind, both with respect to this number and any other he chose to fix upon, either from the
Scriptures, or from the works of nature lying under his observation. But although such is the