had unjustly cast them into prison, "And besought them to depart out of the city"
[Acts 16:39]: begged them as a favor. And they went to the house of Lydia, and
having confirmed her, so departed. For it was not right to leave their hostess in
distress and anxiety. But they went out, not in compliance with the request of
those rulers, but hasting to the preaching: the city having been sufficiently
benefited by the miracle: for it was fit they should not be there any longer. For in
the absence of them that wrought it, the miracle appeared greater, itself crying
out more loudly: the faith of the jailer was a voice in itself. What equal to this?
He is put in bonds, and looses, being bound: looses a twofold bond: him that
bound him, he looses by being bound. These are indeed works of (supernatural)
grace.
(f) Let us constantly bear in mind this jailer, not the miracle: how, prisoner
as he was (the Apostle), persuaded his jailer. What say the heathen? "And of
what things," say they, "was such a man as this to be persuaded— a vile,
wretched creature, of no understanding, full of all that is bad and nothing else,
and easily brought over to anything? For these, say they, are the things, a tanner,
a purple-seller, an eunuch, slaves, and women believed." This is what they say.
What then will they be able to say, when we produce the men of rank and
station, the centurion, the proconsul, those from that time to the present, the
rulers themselves, the emperors? But for my part, I speak of something else,
greater than this: let us look to these very persons of no consideration. "And
where is the wonder?" say you. Why, this, I say, is a wonder. For, if a person be
persuaded about any common things, it is no wonder: but if resurrection, a
kingdom of heaven, a life of philosophic self-command, be the subjects, and,
discoursing of these to persons of mean consideration, one persuades them, it
will be more wonderful than if one persuaded wise men. For when there is no
danger attending the things of which one persuades people, then (the objector)
might with some plausibility allege want of sense on their part: but when (the
preacher) says— to the slave, as you will have it— "If you be persuaded by me,
it is at your peril, you will have all men for your enemies, you must die, you must

suffer evils without number," and yet for all this, convinces that man's soul, there
can be no more talk here of want of sense. Since, if indeed the doctrines
contained what was pleasant, one might fairly enough say this: but if, what the
philosohers would never have chosen to learn, this the slave does learn, then is
the wonder greater. And, if you will, let us bring before us the tanner himself,
and see what were the subjects on which Peter conversed with him: or if you
will, this same jailer. What then said Paul to him? "That Christ rose again," say
you; "that there is a resurrection of the dead, and a kingdom: and he had no
difficulty in persuading him, a man easily led to anything." How? Said he
nothing about the mode of life; that he must be temperate, that he must be
superior to money, that he must not be unmerciful, that he must impart of his
good things to others? For it cannot be said, that the being persuaded to these
things also was from the want of power of mind; no, to be brought to all this
required a great soul. For be it so, that as far as the doctrines went, they were
rendered more apt to receive these by their want of intelligence: but to accept
such a virtuous, self-denying rule of life, how could that be owing to any defect
of understanding? So that the less understanding the person may have, if
nevertheless he is persuaded to things, to which even philosophers were unable
to persuade their fellow philosophers, the greater the wonder— when women
and slaves are persuaded of these truths, and prove it by their actions, of which
same truths the Platos and all the rest of them were never able to persuade any
man. And why say I, "any man?" Say rather, not themselves even: on the
contrary, that money is not to be despised, Plato persuaded (his disciples) by
getting, as he did, such an abundance of property, and golden rings, and goblets;
and that the honor to be had from the many is not to be despised, this Socrates
himself shows, for all that he may philosophize without end on this point: for in
everything he did, he had an eye to fame. And if you were conversant with his
discourses, I might go at great length into this subject, and show what a deal of
insincerity ([εἰρωνείαν]) there was in them—if at least we may believe what his
disciple says of him—and how that all his writings have their ground-work in