they who have become enemies of God, and are provoking Him to anger, should
enjoy sunshine and showers, and all the rest; who being men surpass the
barbarity of wild beasts, setting themselves one against another, and by the biting
of their neighbors staining their own tongues with blood: after the spiritual table,
and His so great benefits, and His innumerable injunctions.
Therefore, considering these things, let us cast up that venom; let us put an
end to our enmities, and let us make the prayers that become such as we are.
Instead of the brutality of devils, let us take upon us the mildness of angels; and
in whatsoever things we may have been injured, let us, consider ing our own
case, and the reward appointed us for this commandment, soften our anger; let us
assuage the billows, that we may both pass through the present life calmly, and
when we have departed there, may find our Lord such as we have been towards
our fellow-servants. And if this be a heavy and fearful thing, let us make it light
and desirable; and let us open the glorious gates of confidence towards Him; and
what we had not strength to effect by abstaining from sin, that let us accomplish
by becoming gentle to them who have sinned against us (for this surely is not
grievous, nor burdensome); and let us by doing kindnesses to our enemies, lay
up beforehand much mercy for ourselves.
For so both during this present life all will love us, and above all others,
God will both befriend and crown us, and will count us worthy of all the good
things to come; unto which may we all attain, by the grace and love towards man
of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and might for ever and ever. Amen.

## Homily 20 on Matthew

Matt. VI. 16.
"And when you fast, be not as the hypocrites, of a sad countenance. For
they disfigure their faces, that they may appear unto men to fast."
Here it were well to sigh aloud, and to wail bitterly: for not only do we
imitate the hypocrites, but we have even surpassed them. For I know, yea I know
many, not merely fasting and making a display of it, but neglecting to fast, and
yet wearing the masks of them that fast, and cloaking themselves with an excuse
worse than their sin.
For "I do this," say they, "that I may not offend the many." What do you
say? There is a law of God which commands these things, and do you talk of
offense? And do you think that in keeping it you are offending, in transgressing
it, delivering men from offense? And what can be worse than this folly?
Will you not leave off becoming worse than the very hypocrites, and
making your hypocrisy double? And when you consider the great excess of this
evil, will you not be abashed at the force of the expression now before us? In
that He did not say, "they act a part," merely, but willing also to touch them
more deeply, He says, "For they disfigure their faces;" that is, they corrupt, they
mar them.
But if this be a disfiguring of the face, to appear pale for vainglory, what
should we say concerning the women who corrupt their faces with colorings and
paintings to the ruin of the unchaste sort of young men? For while those harm
themselves only, these women harm both themselves and them who behold
them. Wherefore we should fly both from the one pest and from the other,
keeping at distance enough and to spare. For so He not only commanded to
make no display, but even to seek to be concealed. Which thing He had done
before likewise.