SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.99, C.3.

I answer that, The sacraments of the New Law are of all things most
spiritual, inasmuch as they are the cause of spiritual grace, on which
no price can be set, and which is essentially incompatible with a nongratuitous giving. Now the sacraments are dispensed through the
ministers of the Church, whom the people are bound to support,
according to the words of the Apostle (1 Cor. 9:13), "Know you not,
that they who work in the holy place, eat the things that are of the
holy place; and they that serve the altar, partake with the altar?"
Accordingly we must answer that to receive money for the spiritual
grace of the sacraments, is the sin of simony, which cannot be
excused by any custom whatever, since "custom does not prevail
over natural or divine law" [Cap. Cum tanto, de Consuetud.; FS,
Question 97, Article 3]. Now by money we are to understand
anything that has a pecuniary value, as the Philosopher states
(Ethic. iv, 1). On the other hand, to receive anything for the support
of those who administer the sacraments, in accordance with the
statutes of the Church and approved customs, is not simony, nor is
it a sin. For it is received not as a price of goods, but as a payment
for their need. Hence a gloss of Augustine on 1 Tim. 5:17, "Let the
priests that rule well," says: "They should look to the people for a
supply to their need, but to the Lord for the reward of their ministry."
Reply to Objection 1: In a case of necessity anyone may baptize. And
since nowise ought one to sin, if the priest be unwilling to baptize
without being paid, one must act as though there were no priest
available for the baptism. Hence the person who is in charge of the
child can, in such a case, lawfully baptize it, or cause it to be
baptized by anyone else. He could, however, lawfully buy the water
from the priest, because it is merely a bodily element. But if it were
an adult in danger of death that wished to be baptized, and the priest
were unwilling to baptize him without being paid, he ought, if
possible, to be baptized by someone else. And if he is unable to have
recourse to another, he must by no means pay a price for Baptism,
and should rather die without being baptized, because for him the
baptism of desire would supply the lack of the sacrament.
Reply to Objection 2: The priest receives money, not as the price for
consecrating the Eucharist, or for singing the Mass (for this would
be simoniacal), but as payment for his livelihood, as stated above.
Reply to Objection 3: The money exacted of the person absolved is

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.99, C.3.

not the price of his absolution (for this would be simoniacal), but a
punishment of a past crime for which he was excommunicated.
Reply to Objection 4: As stated above, "custom does not prevail over
natural or divine law" whereby simony is forbidden. Wherefore the
custom, if such there be, of demanding anything as the price of a
spiritual thing, with the intention of buying or selling it, is manifestly
simoniacal, especially when the demand is made of a person
unwilling to pay. But if the demand be made in payment of a stipend
recognized by custom it is not simoniacal, provided there be no
intention of buying or selling, but only of doing what is customary,
and especially if the demand be acceded to voluntarily. In all these
cases, however, one must beware of anything having an appearance
of simony or avarice, according to the saying of the Apostle (1
Thess. 5:22), "From all appearance of evil restrain yourselves."
Reply to Objection 5: It would be simoniacal to buy off the opposition
of one's rivals, before acquiring the right to a bishopric or any
dignity or prebend, by election, appointment or presentation, since
this would be to use money as a means of obtaining a spiritual thing.
But it is lawful to use money as a means of removing unjust
opposition, after one has already acquired that right.
Reply to Objection 6: Some [Innocent IV on Cap. Cum in Ecclesia, de
Simonia] say that it is lawful to give money for Matrimony because
no grace is conferred thereby. But this is not altogether true, as we
shall state in the Third Part of the work [XP, Question 42, Article 3].
Wherefore we must reply that Matrimony is not only a sacrament of
the Church, but also an office of nature. Consequently it is lawful to
give money for Matrimony considered as an office of nature, but
unlawful if it be considered as a sacrament of the Church. Hence,
according to the law [Cap. Cum in Ecclesia, de Simonia], it is
forbidden to demand anything for the Nuptial Blessing.