blessings, let us flee from vice and choose virtue. For thus shall we both enjoy
delight, and obtain the crowns to come, unto which God grant we may all attain,
by the grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory
and might forever and ever. Amen.

## Homily 68 on Matthew

Matt. XXI. 33-44.
" Hear another parable. There was a certain householder, which planted a
vineyard, and hedged it round about, and dug a winepress, and built a tower, and
let it out to husbandmen, and went into a far country. And when the time of the
fruit drew near, he sent his servants to receive the fruits. And the husbandmen
took the servants, and beat some, and killed some, and stoned some. Again he
sent other servants more than the first: and they did unto them likewise. But last
he sent unto them his son, saying, It may be they will reverence my son. But when
the husbandmen saw the son, they said among themselves, This is the heir, come,
let us kill him, and let us seize on his inheritance. And they cast him out of the
vineyard, and slew him. When the Lord therefore of the vineyard comes, what
will he do to those husbandmen? They say unto Him, He will miserably destroy
those wicked men, and will let out his vineyard to other husbandmen, which shall
render him the fruits in their seasons. Jesus says unto them, Did ye never read in
the Scriptures, The Stone which the builders rejected, the same has become the
head of the corner?"
Many things does He intimate by this parable, God's providence, which had
been exercised towards them from the first; their murderous disposition from the
beginning; that nothing had been omitted of whatever pertained to a heedful care
of them; that even when prophets had been slain, He had not turned away from
them, but had sent His very Son; that the God both of the New and of the Old
Testament was one and the same; that His death should effect great blessings;
that they were to endure extreme punishment for the crucifixion, and their crime;
the calling of the Gentiles, the casting out of the Jews.
Therefore He puts it after the former parable, that He may show even
hereby the charge to be greater, and highly unpardonable. How, and in what

way? That although they met with so much care, they were worse than harlots
and publicans, and by so much.
And observe also both His great care, and the excessive idleness of these
men. For what pertained to the husbandmen, He Himself did, the hedging it
round about, the planting the vineyard, and all the rest, and He left little for them
to do; to take care of what was there, and to preserve what was given to them.
For nothing was left undone, but all accomplished; and not even so did they
gain, and this, when they had enjoyed such great blessings from Him. For when
they had come forth out of Egypt, He gave a law, and set up a city, and built a
temple, and prepared an altar.
"And went into a far country;" that is, He bore long with them, not always
bringing the punishments close upon their sins; for by His going into a far
country, He means His great long-suffering.
And "He sent His servants," that is, the prophets, "to receive the fruit;" that
is, their obedience, the proof of it by their works. But they even here showed
their wickedness, not only by failing to give the fruit, after having enjoyed so
much care, which was the sign of idleness, but also by showing anger towards
them that came. For they that had not to give when they owed, should not have
been indignant, nor angry, but should have entreated. But they not only were
indignant, but even filled their hands with blood, and while deserving
punishment, themselves inflicted punishment.
Therefore He sent both a second, and a third company, both that the
wickedness of these might be shown, and the love towards man of Him who sent
them.
And wherefore sent He not His Son immediately? In order that they might
condemn themselves for the things done to the others, and leave off their wrath,
and reverence Him when He came. There are also other reasons, but for the
present let us go on to what is next. But what means, "It may be they will
reverence?" It is not the language of one ignorant, away with the thought! But of
one desiring to show the sin to be great; and without any excuse. Since Himself