THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.69, C.7.

Reply to Objection 4: The carnal intention of those who take children
to be baptized does not hurt the latter, as neither does one's sin hurt
another, unless he consent. Hence Augustine says in his letter to
Boniface (Ep. xcviii): "Be not disturbed because some bring children
to be baptized, not in the hope that they may be born again to eternal
life by the spiritual grace, but because they think it to be a remedy
whereby they may preserve or recover health. For they are not
deprived of regeneration, through not being brought for this
intention."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.69, C.8.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether the effect of Baptism is to open the gates

of the heavenly kingdom?
Objection 1: It seems that it is not the effect of Baptism, to open the
gates of the heavenly kingdom. For what is already opened needs no
opening. But the gates of the heavenly kingdom were opened by
Christ's Passion: hence it is written (Apoc. 4:1): "After these things I
looked and behold (a great) door was opened in heaven." Therefore
it is not the effect of Baptism, to open the gates of the heavenly
kingdom.
Objection 2: Further, Baptism has had its effects ever since it was
instituted. But some were baptized with Christ's Baptism, before His
Passion, according to Jn. 3:22,26: and if they had died then, the
gates of the heavenly kingdom would not have been opened to them,
since none entered therein before Christ, according to Mic. 2:13: "He
went up that shall open the way before them." Therefore it is not the
effect of Baptism, to open the gates of the heavenly kingdom.
Objection 3: Further, the baptized are still subject to death and the
other penalties of the present life, as stated above (Article 3). But
entrance to the heavenly kingdom is opened to none that are subject
to punishment: as is clear in regard to those who are in purgatory.
Therefore it is not the effect of Baptism, to open the gates of the
heavenly kingdom.
On the contrary, on Lk. 3:21, "Heaven was opened," the gloss of
Bede says: "We see here the power of Baptism; from which when a
man comes forth, the gates of the heavenly kingdom are opened
unto him."
I answer that, To open the gates of the heavenly kingdom is to
remove the obstacle that prevents one from entering therein. Now
this obstacle is guilt and the debt of punishment. But it has been
shown above (Articles 1,2) that all guilt and also all debt of
punishment are taken away by Baptism. It follows, therefore, that the
effect of Baptism is to open the gates of the heavenly kingdom.
Reply to Objection 1: Baptism opens the gates of the heavenly
kingdom to the baptized in so far as it incorporates them in the
Passion of Christ, by applying its power to man.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.69, C.8.