Powers who rule indiscriminately, a place is given to the
Principalities, who are appointed to individual kingdoms, and to the
Angels who are given charge over individual men, as we have
explained above (FP, Question 113, Articles 1,2). Consequently there
should be a like order of authority in the Church Militant, so that an
indiscriminate authority over all should be vested in one individual,
and that there should be others under him, having distinct authority
over various people. Now the use of the keys implies a certain power
to exercise authority, whereby the one on whom the keys are used,
becomes the proper matter of that act. Therefore he that has power
over all indiscriminately, can use the keys on all, whereas those who
have received authority over distinct persons, cannot use the keys
on everyone, but only on those over whom they are appointed,
except in cases of necessity, when the sacraments should be
refused to no one.
Reply to Objection 1: A twofold power is required in order to absolve
from sins, namely, power of order and power of jurisdiction. The
former power is equally in all priests, but not the latter. And
therefore, when our Lord (Jn. 20:23) gave all the apostles in general,
the power of forgiving sins, this is to be understood of the power
which results from receiving orders, wherefore these words are
addressed to priests when they are ordained. But to Peter in
particular He gave the power of forgiving sins (Mt. 16:19), that we
may understand that he has the power of jurisdiction before the
others. But the power of orders, considered in itself, extends to all
who can be absolved: wherefore our Lord said indeterminately,
"Whose sins you shall forgive, they are forgiven them," on the
understanding that this power should be used in dependence on the
power given to Peter, according to His appointment.
Reply to Objection 2: A material key can open only its own lock. nor
can any active force act save on its own matter. Now a man becomes
the matter of the power of order by jurisdiction: and consequently no
one can use the key in respect of another over whom he has not
jurisdiction.
Reply to Objection 3: The people of Israel were one people, and had
but one temple, so that there was no need for a distinction in priestly
jurisdiction, as there is now in the Church which comprises various
peoples and nations.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether a priest can always absolve his subject?

Objection 1: It would seem that a priest cannot always absolve his
subject. For, as Augustine says (De vera et false Poenitentia), "no
man should exercise the priestly office, unless he be free from those
things which he condemns in others." But a priest might happen to
share in a sin committed by his subject, e.g. by knowledge of a
woman who is his subject. Therefore it seems that he cannot always
use the power of the keys on his subjects.
Objection 2: Further, by the power of the keys a man is healed of all
his shortcomings. Now it happens sometimes that a sin has attached
to it a defect of irregularity or a sentence of excommunication, from
which a simple priest cannot absolve. Therefore it seems that he
cannot use the power of the keys on such as are shackled by these
things in the above manner.
Objection 3: Further, the judgment and power of our priesthood was
foreshadowed by the judgment of the ancient priesthood. Now
according to the Law, the lesser judges were not competent to
decide all cases, and had recourse to the higher judges, according to
Ex. 24:14: "If any question shall arise" among you, "you shall refer it
to them." It seems, therefore, that a priest cannot absolve his subject
from graver sins, but should refer him to his superior.
On the contrary, Whoever has charge of the principal has charge of
the accessory. Now priests are charged with the dispensation of the
Eucharist to their subjects, to which sacrament the absolution of
sins is subordinate [Question 17, Article 2, ad 1]. Therefore, as far as
the power of the keys is concerned, a priest can absolve his subject
from any sins whatever.
Further, grace, however small, removes all sin. But a priest
dispenses sacraments whereby grace is given. Therefore, as far as
the power of the keys is concerned, he can absolve from all sins.
I answer that, The power of order, considered in itself, extends to the
remission of all sins. But since, as stated above, the use of this
power requires jurisdiction which inferiors derive from their
superiors, it follows that the superior can reserve certain matters to
himself, the judgment of which he does not commit to his inferior;