SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.146, C.4.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.146, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether all are bound to keep the fasts of the

Church?
Objection 1: It would seem that all are bound to keep the fasts of the
Church. For the commandments of the Church are binding even as
the commandments of God, according to Lk. 10:16, "He that heareth
you heareth Me." Now all are bound to keep the commandments of
God. Therefore in like manner all are bound to keep the fasts
appointed by the Church.
Objection 2: Further, children especially are seemingly not exempt
from fasting, on account of their age: for it is written (Joel 2:15):
"Sanctify a fast," and further on (Joel 2:16): "Gather together the
little ones, and them that suck the breasts." Much more therefore are
all others bound to keen the fasts.
Objection 3: Further, spiritual things should be preferred to
temporal, and necessary things to those that are not necessary. Now
bodily works are directed to temporal gain; and pilgrimages, though
directed to spiritual things, are not a matter of necessity. Therefore,
since fasting is directed to a spiritual gain, and is made a necessary
thing by the commandment of the Church, it seems that the fasts of
the Church ought not to be omitted on account of a pilgrimage, or
bodily works.
Objection 4: Further, it is better to do a thing willingly than through
necessity, as stated in 2 Cor. 9:7. Now the poor are wont to fast
through necessity, owing to lack of food. Much more therefore ought
they to fast willingly.
On the contrary, It seems that no righteous man is bound to fast. For
the commandments of the Church are not binding in opposition to
Christ's teaching. But our Lord said (Lk. 5:34) that "the children of
the bridegroom cannot fast whilst the bridegroom is with them." Now
He is with all the righteous by dwelling in them in a special manner
[FP, Question 8, Article 3], wherefore our Lord said (Mt. 28:20):
"Behold I am with you . . . even to the consummation of the world."
Therefore the righteous are not bound by the commandment of the
Church to fast.
I answer that, As stated above (FS, Question 90, Article 2; FS,

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.146, C.5.

Question 98, Articles 2,6), general precepts are framed according to
the requirements of the many. Wherefore in making such precepts
the lawgiver considers what happens generally and for the most
part, and he does not intend the precept to be binding on a person in
whom for some special reason there is something incompatible with
observance of the precept. Yet discretion must be brought to bear on
the point. For if the reason be evident, it is lawful for a man to use
his own judgment in omitting to fulfil the precept, especially if
custom be in his favor, or if it be difficult for him to have recourse to
superior authority. on the other hand, if the reason be doubtful, one
should have recourse to the superior who has power to grant a
dispensation in such cases. And this must be done in the fasts
appointed by the Church, to which all are bound in general, unless
there be some special obstacle to this observance.
Reply to Objection 1: The commandments of God are precepts of the
natural law, which are, of themselves, necessary for salvation. But
the commandments of the Church are about matters which are
necessary for salvation, not of themselves, but only through the
ordinance of the Church. Hence there may be certain obstacles on
account of which certain persons are not bound to keep the fasts in
question.
Reply to Objection 2: In children there is a most evident reason for
not fasting, both on account of their natural weakness, owing to
which they need to take food frequently, and not much at a time, and
because they need much nourishment owing to the demands of
growth, which results from the residuum of nourishment. Wherefore
as long as the stage of growth lasts, which as a rule lasts until they
have completed the third period of seven years, they are not bound
to keep the Church fasts: and yet it is fitting that even during that
time they should exercise themselves in fasting, more or less, in
accordance with their age. Nevertheless when some great calamity
threatens, even children are commanded to fast, in sign of more
severe penance, according to Jonas 3:7, "Let neither men nor
beasts . . . taste anything . . . nor drink water."
Reply to Objection 3: Apparently a distinction should be made with
regard to pilgrims and working people. For if the pilgrimage or
laborious work can be conveniently deferred or lessened without
detriment to the bodily health and such external conditions as are
necessary for the upkeep of bodily or spiritual life, there is no reason
for omitting the fasts of the Church. But if one be under the