2 Corinthians 7:16
"I rejoice therefore, that in every thing I am of good courage concerning
you." Do you see that he rejoices more on their account; 'because,' he says, 'you
have in no particular shamed your teacher, nor show yourselves unworthy of my
testimony.' So that he joyed not so much for Titus?' sake, that he enjoyed so great
honor; as for their own, that they had displayed so much good feeling. For that
he may not be imagined to joy rather on Titus?' account, observe how in this
place also he states the reason. As then he said above, "If in anything I have
gloried to him on your behalf I was not put to shame;" so here also, "In
everything I am of good courage concerning you." 'Should need require me to
rebuke, I have no apprehension of your being alienated; or again to boast, I fear
not to be convicted of falsehood; or to praise you as obeying the rein, or as
loving, or as full of zeal, I have confidence in you. I bade you cut off, and you
did cut off; I bade you receive, and you did receive; I said before Titus that you
were great and admirable kind of people and knew to reverence teachers: ye
proved these things true by your conduct. And he learned these things not so
much from me as from you. At any rate when he returned, he had become a
passionate lover of you: your behavior having surpassed what he had been told.'

2 Corinthians 8:1
2. "Moreover, brethren, we make known to you the grace of God which has
been given in the Churches of Macedonia."
Having encouraged them with these encomiums, he again tries exhortation.
For on this account he mingled these praises with his rebuke, that he might not
by proceeding from rebuke to exhortation make what he had to say ill received;
but having soothed their ears, might by this means pave the way for his
exhortation. For he purposes to discourse of almsgiving; wherefore also he says
beforehand, "I rejoice that in everything I am of good courage concerning you;"
by their past good works, making them the more ready to this duty also. And he
said not at once, 'Therefore give alms,' but observe his wisdom, how he draws
from a distance and from on high the preparation for his discourse. For he says,
"I make known to you the grace of God which has been given in the Churches of
Macedonia." For that they might not be uplifted he calls what they did "grace;"
and while relating what others did he works greater zeal in them by his
encomiums on others. And he mentions together two praises of the
Macedonians, or rather three; namely, that they bear trials nobly; and that they
know how to pity; and that, though poor, they had displayed profuseness in
almsgiving, for their property had been also plundered. And when he wrote his
Epistle to them, it was as signifying this that he said, "For you became imitators
of the Churches of God which are in Judæa, for you also suffered the same
things of your own countrymen, even as they did of the Jews." [1 Thessalonians
2:14] Hear what he said afterwards in writing to the Hebrews, "For you took
joyfully the spoiling of your possessions." [Hebrews 10:34] But He calls what
they did "grace," not in order to keep them humble merely; but both to provoke
them to emulation and to prevent what he said from proving invidious.
Wherefore he also added the name of "brethren" so as to undermine all envious