saying thus, "That no man go beyond or defraud his brother in the matter." [1
Thessalonians 4:6] Others again injure not the wife or property, but the
reputation of their neighbor, and this too is unrighteousness. For "a good name is
better than great riches." [Proverbs 22:1] But some say that this also is said of
Paul about doctrines. Still there is nothing to prevent its having been said of
both. But what it is "to hold the truth in unrighteousness," learn from the sequel.
Ver. 19. "Because that which may be known of God is manifest in them, for
God has showed it unto them."
But this glory they invested stocks and stones with. As then he which is
entrusted with the goods of the king, and is ordered to spend them upon the
king's glory, if he waste these upon robbers, and harlots, and witches, and make
these splendid out of the king's stores, he is punished as having done the
kingdom the greatest wrong. Thus they also who after having received the
knowledge of God and of His glory, invested idols therewith, "held the truth in
unrighteousness," and, at least as far as was in their power, dealt unrighteously
by the knowledge, by not using it upon fitting objects. Now, has what was said
become clear to you, or must one make it still clearer? Perhaps it were needful to
say somewhat more. What then is it which is here said? The knowledge of
Himself God placed in men from the beginning. But this knowledge they
invested stocks and stones with, and so dealt unrighteously to the truth, as far at
least as they might. For it abides unchanged, having its own glory immutable.
"And whence is it plain that He placed in them this knowledge, O Paul?"
"Because," says he, "that which may be known of Him is manifest in them." This,
however, is an assertion, not a proof. But do thou make it good, and show me
that the knowledge of God was plain to them, and that they willingly turned
aside. Whence was it plain then? Did He send them a voice from above? By no
means. But what was able to draw them to Him more than a voice, that He did,
by putting before them the Creation, so that both wise, and unlearned, and
Scythian, and barbarian, having through sight learned the beauty of the things
which were seen, might mount up to God. Wherefore he says,

Ver. 20. "For the invisible things of Him from the Creation of the world are
clearly seen, being understood by the things which are made."
Which also the prophet said, "The heavens declare the glory of God."
[Psalm 19:1] For what will the Greeks (i.e. Heathen) say in that day? That "we
were ignorant of You?" Did ye then not hear the heaven sending forth a voice by
the sight, while the well-ordered harmony of all things spoke out more clearly
than a trumpet? Did ye not see the hours of night and day abiding unmoved
continually, the goodly order of winter, spring, and the other seasons remaining
both sure and unmoved, the tractableness ([εὐγνωμοσύνην]) of the sea amid all
its turbulence and waves? All things abiding in order and by their beauty and
their grandeur, preaching aloud of the Creator? For all these things and more
than these does Paul sum up in saying, "The invisible things of Him from the
creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by the things which are
made, even His eternal Power and Godhead; so that they are without excuse."
And yet it is not for this God has made these things, even if this came of it. For it
was not to bereave them of all excuse, that He set before them so great a system
of teaching, but that they might come to know Him. But by not having
recognized Him they deprived themselves of every excuse, and then to show
how they are bereaved of excuse, he says,
Ver. 21. "Because that, when they knew God, they glorified Him not as
God."
This is the one greatest charge; and the second after it is their also
worshipping idols, as Jeremy too in accusing them said, "This people has
committed two evils: they have forsaken me the fountain of living water, and
have dug for themselves broken cisterns." [Jeremiah 2:13] And then as a sign of
their having known God, and not used their knowledge upon a fit object, he
adduces this very thing, that they knew gods. Wherefore he adds, "because that,
when they knew God, they glorified Him not as God." And he names the cause
through which they fell into such senselessness. What then is it? They trusted
everything to their reasonings. Still he does not word it so, but in a much sharper