FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.35, C.5.

extrinsic, it happens that species belonging to contrary genera, are
not only not contrary to one another, but also that they have a
certain mutual affinity or fittingness. The reason of this is that where
there is one same relation to two contraries, there is contrariety; e.g.
to approach to a white thing, and to approach to a black thing, are
contraries; whereas contrary relations to contrary things, implies a
certain likeness, e.g. to recede from something white, and to
approach to something black. This is most evident in the case of
contradiction, which is the principle of opposition: because
opposition consists in affirming and denying the same thing, e.g.
"white" and "non-white"; while there is fittingness and likeness in
the affirmation of one contrary and the denial of the other, as, if I
were to say "black" and "not white."
Now sorrow and pleasure, being passions, are specified by their
objects. According to their respective genera, they are contrary to
one another: since one is a kind of "pursuit," the other a kind of
"avoidance," which "are to the appetite, what affirmation and denial
are to the intellect" (Ethic. vi, 2). Consequently sorrow and pleasure
in respect of the same object, are specifically contrary to one
another: whereas sorrow and pleasure in respect of objects that are
not contrary but disparate, are not specifically contrary to one
another, but are also disparate; for instance, sorrow at the death of a
friend, and pleasure in contemplation. If, however, those diverse
objects be contrary to one another, then pleasure and sorrow are not
only specifically contrary, but they also have a certain mutual
fittingness and affinity: for instance to rejoice in good and to sorrow
for evil.
Reply to Objection 1: Whiteness and blackness do not take their
species from their relationship to something extrinsic, as pleasure
and sorrow do: wherefore the comparison does not hold.
Reply to Objection 2: Genus is taken from matter, as is stated in
Metaph. viii, 2; and in accidents the subject takes the place of matter.
Now it has been said above that pleasure and sorrow are generically
contrary to one another. Consequently in every sorrow the subject
has a disposition contrary to the disposition of the subject of
pleasure: because in every pleasure the appetite is viewed as
accepting what it possesses, and in every sorrow, as avoiding it.
And therefore on the part of the subject every pleasure is a remedy
for any kind of sorrow, and every sorrow is a hindrance of all manner
of pleasure: but chiefly when pleasure is opposed to sorrow

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.35, C.5.

specifically.
Wherefore the Reply to the Third Objection is evident. Or we may say
that, although not every sorrow is specifically contrary to every
pleasure, yet they are contrary to one another in regard to their
effects: since one has the effect of strengthening the animal nature,
while the other results in a kind of discomfort.