some in preference to others. Thus it is clear that love precedes
election in the order of reason, and election precedes predestination.
Whence all the predestinate are objects of election and love.
Reply to Objection 1: If the communication of the divine goodness in
general be considered, God communicates His goodness without
election; inasmuch as there is nothing which does not in some way
share in His goodness, as we said above (Question 6, Article 4). But
if we consider the communication of this or that particular good, He
does not allot it without election; since He gives certain goods to
some men, which He does not give to others. Thus in the conferring
of grace and glory election is implied.
Reply to Objection 2: When the will of the person choosing is incited
to make a choice by the good already pre-existing in the object
chosen, the choice must needs be of those things which already
exist, as happens in our choice. In God it is otherwise; as was said
above (Question 20, Article 2). Thus, as Augustine says (De Verb. Ap.
Serm. 11): "Those are chosen by God, who do not exist; yet He does
not err in His choice."
Reply to Objection 3: God wills all men to be saved by His
antecedent will, which is to will not simply but relatively; and not by
His consequent will, which is to will simply.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether the foreknowledge of merits is the cause

of predestination?
Objection 1: It seems that foreknowledge of merits is the cause of
predestination. For the Apostle says (Rm. 8:29): "Whom He
foreknew, He also predestined." Again a gloss of Ambrose on Rm.
9:15: "I will have mercy upon whom I will have mercy" says: "I will
give mercy to him who, I foresee, will turn to Me with his whole
heart." Therefore it seems the foreknowledge of merits is the cause
of predestination.
Objection 2: Further, Divine predestination includes the divine will,
which by no means can be irrational; since predestination is "the
purpose to have mercy," as Augustine says (De Praed. Sanct. ii, 17).
But there can be no other reason for predestination than the
foreknowledge of merits. Therefore it must be the cause of reason of
predestination.
Objection 3: Further, "There is no injustice in God" (Rm. 9:14). Now it
would seem unjust that unequal things be given to equals. But all
men are equal as regards both nature and original sin; and inequality
in them arises from the merits or demerits of their actions. Therefore
God does not prepare unequal things for men by predestinating and
reprobating, unless through the foreknowledge of their merits and
demerits.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (Titus 3:5): "Not by works of
justice which we have done, but according to His mercy He saved
us." But as He saved us, so He predestined that we should be saved.
Therefore, foreknowledge of merits is not the cause or reason of
predestination.
I answer that, Since predestination includes will, as was said above
(Article 4), the reason of predestination must be sought for in the
same way as was the reason of the will of God. Now it was shown
above (Question 19, Article 5), that we cannot assign any cause of
the divine will on the part of the act of willing; but a reason can be
found on the part of the things willed; inasmuch as God wills one
thing on account of something else. Wherefore nobody has been so
insane as to say that merit is the cause of divine predestination as
regards the act of the predestinator. But this is the question,