THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.35, C.8.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether Christ should have been born in

Bethlehem?
Objection 1: It would seem that Christ should not have been born in
Bethlehem. For it is written (Is. 2:3): "The law shall come forth from
Sion, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem." But Christ is truly
the Word of God. Therefore He should have come into the world at
Jerusalem.
Objection 2: Further, it is said (Mt. 2:23) that it is written of Christ that
"He shall be called a Nazarene"; which is taken from Is. 11:1: "A
flower shall rise up out of his root"; for "Nazareth" is interpreted "a
flower." But a man is named especially from the place of his birth.
Therefore it seems that He should have been born in Nazareth, where
also He was conceived and brought up.
Objection 3: Further, for this was our Lord born into the world, that
He might make known the true faith. according to Jn. 18:37: "For this
was I born, and for this came I into the world; that I should give
testimony to the truth." But this would have been easier if He had
been born in the city of Rome, which at that time ruled the world;
whence Paul, writing to the Romans (1:8) says: "Your faith is spoken
of in the whole world." Therefore it seems that He should not have
been born in Bethlehem.
On the contrary, It is written (Mich. 5:2): "And thou, Bethlehem,
Ephrata . . . out of thee shall He come forth unto Me, that is to be the
ruler in Israel."
I answer that, Christ willed to be born in Bethlehem for two reasons.
First, because "He was made . . . of the seed of David according to
the flesh," as it is written (Rm. 1:3); to whom also was a special
promise made concerning Christ; according to 2 Kgs. 23:1: "The
man to whom it was appointed concerning the Christ of the God of
Jacob . . . said." Therefore He willed to be born at Bethlehem, where
David was born, in order that by the very birthplace the promise
made to David might be shown to be fulfilled. The Evangelist points
this out by saying: "Because He was of the house and of the family
of David." Secondly, because, as Gregory says (Hom. viii in Evang.):
"Bethlehem is interpreted 'the house of bread.' It is Christ Himself
who said, 'I am the living Bread which came down from heaven.'"

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.35, C.8.

Reply to Objection 1: As David was born in Bethlehem, so also did
he choose Jerusalem to set up his throne there, and to build there
the Temple of God, so that Jerusalem was at the same time a royal
and a priestly city. Now, Christ's priesthood and kingdom were
"consummated" principally in His Passion. Therefore it was
becoming that He should choose Bethlehem for His Birthplace and
Jerusalem for the scene of His Passion.
At the same time, too, He put to silence the vain boasting of men
who take pride in being born in great cities, where also they desire
especially to receive honor. Christ, on the contrary, willed to be born
in a mean city, and to suffer reproach in a great city.
Reply to Objection 2: Christ wished "to flower" by His holy life, not in
His carnal birth. Therefore He wished to be fostered and brought up
at Nazareth. But He wished to be born at Bethlehem away from
home; because, as Gregory says (Hom. viii in Evang.), through the
human nature which He had taken, He was born, as it were, in a
foreign place---foreign not to His power, but to His Nature. And,
again, as Bede says on Lk. 2:7: "In order that He who found no room
at the inn might prepare many mansions for us in His Father's
house."
Reply to Objection 3: According to a sermon in the Council of
Ephesus [P. iii, cap. ix]: "If He had chosen the great city of Rome, the
change in the world would be ascribed to the influence of her
citizens. If He had been the son of the Emperor, His benefits would
have been attributed to the latter's power. But that we might
acknowledge the work of God in the transformation of the whole
earth, He chose a poor mother and a birthplace poorer still."
"But the weak things of the world hath God chosen, that He may
confound the strong" (1 Cor. 1:27). And therefore, in order the more
to show His power, He set up the head of His Church in Rome itself,
which was the head of the world, in sign of His complete victory, in
order that from that city the faith might spread throughout the world;
according to Is. 26:5,6: "The high city He shall lay low . . . the feet of
the poor," i.e. of Christ, "shall tread it down; the steps of the needy,"
i.e. of the apostles Peter and Paul.