things, for which a woman and an aged one too is punished?
Yet no one gives a thought to these things, no one searches them out. And
this I have been compelled to say, not from any wish to free the priests from
these charges, but to spare you. They indeed suffer no harm at your hands, even
if it is with cause and justice that they are thus charged of being greedy of gain;
for, whether you speak, or whether you forbear, they must there give an account
to the Judge, so that your words hurt them not at all; but if your words are false
besides, they for their part gain by these false accusations, while you hurt
yourselves by these means. But it is not so with you; for be the things true,
which you bring against them, or be they false, you speak ill of them to your
hurt. And how so? If they be true, in that you judge your Teachers, and subvert
order, you do it to your hurt. For if we must not judge a brother, much less a
Teacher. But if they be false, the punishment and retribution is intolerable; for of
"every idle word you shall give account." [Matthew 12:36] For your sake then I
thus act and labor.
But as I said, no one searches out these things, no one busies himself about
these things, no one communes with himself on any of these things. Would ye
that I should add still more? "Whosoever forsakes not all that he has, says the
Christ, is not worthy of Me." [Luke 14:33; Matthew 10:37] What when he says,
"It is hard for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven"? [Matthew 19:23;
Mark 10:24] What when he says again, "Woe unto you that are rich, for you have
received your consolation"? [Luke 6:24] No one searches this out, no one bears
it in mind, no one reasons with himself, but all sit as severe inquisitors on other
men's cases. Yet this is to make themselves sharers in the charges. But listen, that
for your own sake I may free the priests from the charges, which you say lie
against them, for the persuasion that they transgress the law of God, inclines you
not a little towards evil. Come then, let us examine this matter. Christ said,
"Provide neither gold nor silver, neither two coats, neither shoes, nor girdle, nor
yet staves." [Matthew 10:9-10] What then? Tell me, did Peter transgress this
command? Surely he did so, in having a girdle and a garment, and shoes, for

listen to the words of the Angel, "Gird yourself, and bind on your sandals."
[Acts 12:8] And yet he had no such great need of sandals, for at that season a
man may go even unshod; their great use is in the winter, and yet he had them.
What shall we say of Paul, when he writes thus to Timothy, "Do your diligence
to come before winter"? [2 Timothy 4:21] He gives him orders too and says,
"The cloak that I left at Troas with Carpus bring when you come, and the books,
especially the parchments." [2 Timothy 4:13] See he speaks of a cloak, and no
one can say that he had not another which he wore; for if he did not wear one at
all, it were superfluous to order this one to be brought, and if he could not be
without one to wear, it is clear he had a second.
What shall we say of his remaining "two whole years in his own hired
dwelling"? [Acts 28:30] Did then this chosen vessel disobey Christ? This man
who said, "Yet I live; and yet no longer I, but Christ lives in me" [Galatians
2:20], concerning whom Christ testified, saying, "He is a chosen vessel unto
Me"? [Acts 9:15] I ought to leave this difficulty with you, without supplying any
solution to the question. I ought to exact of you this penalty for your negligence
in the Scriptures, for this is the origin of all such difficulties. For we know not
the Scriptures, we are not trained in the law of God, and so we become sharp
inquirers into the faults of others, while we take no account of our own. I ought
then to have exacted from you this penalty. But what shall I do? Fathers freely
give to their sons many things beyond what is fitting: when their fatherly
compassion is kindled, on seeing their child with downcast look, and wasted
with grief, they themselves also feel sharper pangs than he, and rest not until
they have removed the ground of his dejection.
So be it at least here, be ye at least dejected at not receiving, that you may
receive well. What then is it? They opposed not, far be it; but diligently followed
the commands of Christ, for those commands were but for a season, and not
enduring; and this I say not from conjecture, but from the divine Scriptures. And
how? Luke relates that Christ said to His disciples, "When I sent you forth
without purse, and wallet, and girdle, and shoes, did you lack anything? And