SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.131, C.2.

virtuous who does virtuous deeds for the sake of human glory, as
Augustine proves (De Civ. Dei v).
Reply to Objection 3: It is requisite for man's perfection that he
should know himself; but not that he should be known by others,
wherefore it is not to be desired in itself. It may, however, be desired
as being useful for something, either in order that God may be
glorified by men, or that men may become better by reason of the
good they know to be in another man, or in order that man, knowing
by the testimony of others' praise the good which is in him, may
himself strive to persevere therein and to become better. In this
sense it is praiseworthy that a man should "take care of his good
name," and that he should "provide good things in the sight of God
and men": but not that he should take an empty pleasure in human
praise.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.131, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether vainglory is opposed to magnanimity?

Objection 1: It seems that vainglory is not opposed to magnanimity.
For, as stated above (Article 1), vainglory consists in glorying in
things that are not, which pertains to falsehood; or in earthly and
perishable things, which pertains to covetousness; or in the
testimony of men, whose judgment is uncertain, which pertains to
imprudence. Now these vices are not contrary to magnanimity.
Therefore vainglory is not opposed to magnanimity.
Objection 2: Further, vainglory is not, like pusillanimity, opposed to
magnanimity by way of deficiency, for this seems inconsistent with
vainglory. Nor is it opposed to it by way of excess, for in this way
presumption and ambition are opposed to magnanimity, as stated
above (Question 130, Article 2; Question 131, Article 2): and these
differ from vainglory. Therefore vainglory is not opposed to
magnanimity.
Objection 3: Further, a gloss on Phil. 2:3, "Let nothing be done
through contention, neither by vainglory," says: "Some among them
were given to dissension and restlessness, contending with one
another for the sake of vainglory." But contention [Question 38] is
not opposed to magnanimity. Neither therefore is vainglory.
On the contrary, Tully says (De Offic. i) under the heading,
"Magnanimity consists in two things: We should beware of the
desire for glory, since it enslaves the mind, which a magnanimous
man should ever strive to keep untrammeled." Therefore it is
opposed to magnanimity.
I answer that, As stated above (Question 103, Article 1, ad 3), glory is
an effect of honor and praise: because from the fact that a man is
praised, or shown any kind of reverence, he acquires charity in the
knowledge of others. And since magnanimity is about honor, as
stated above (Question 129, Articles 1,2), it follows that it also is
about glory: seeing that as a man uses honor moderately, so too
does he use glory in moderation. Wherefore inordinate desire of
glory is directly opposed to magnanimity.
Reply to Objection 1: To think so much of little things as to glory in
them is itself opposed to magnanimity. Wherefore it is said of the