SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.153, C.7.

guardianship of her parents, is a determinate species of lust.
Reply to Objection 1: Although a virgin is free from the bond of
marriage, she is not free from her father's power. Moreover, the seal
of virginity is a special obstacle to the intercourse of fornication, in
that it should be removed by marriage only. Hence seduction is not
simple fornication, since the latter is intercourse with harlots,
women, namely, who are no longer virgins, as a gloss observes on 2
Cor. 12:, "And have not done penance for the uncleanness and
fornication," etc.
Reply to Objection 2: Ambrose here takes seduction in another
sense, as applicable in a general way to any sin of lust. Wherefore
seduction, in the words quoted, signifies the intercourse between a
married man and any woman other than his wife. This is clear from
his adding: "Nor is it lawful for the husband to do what the wife may
not." In this sense, too, we are to understand the words of Num.
5:13: "If the adultery is secret, and cannot be provided by witnesses,
because she was not found in adultery [stupro]."
Reply to Objection 3: Nothing prevents a sin from having a greater
deformity through being united to another sin. Now the sin of lust
obtains a greater deformity from the sin of injustice, because the
concupiscence would seem to be more inordinate, seeing that it
refrains not from the pleasurable object so that it may avoid an
injustice. In fact a twofold injustice attaches to it. One is on the part
of the virgin, who, though not violated by force, is nevertheless
seduced, and thus the seducer is bound to compensation. Hence it
is written (Ex. 22:16,17): "If a man seduce a virgin not yet espoused,
and lie with her, he shall endow her and have her to wife. If the
maid's father will not give her to him, he shall give money according
to the dowry, which virgins are wont to receive." The other injury is
done to the maid's father: wherefore the seducer is bound by the
Law to a penalty in his regard. For it is written (Dt. 22:28,29): "If a
man find a damsel that is a virgin, who is not espoused, and taking
her, lie with her, and the matter come to judgment: he that lay with
her shall give to the father of the maid fifty sicles of silver, and shall
have her to wife, and because he hath humbled her, he may not put
her away all the days of his life": and this, lest he should prove to
have married her in mockery, as Augustine observes. [Questions. in
Dt., qu. xxxiv.]

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.153, C.7.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.153, C.8.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether rape is a species of lust, distinct from

seduction?
Objection 1: It would seem that rape is not a species of lust, distinct
from seduction. For Isidore says (Etym. v, 26) that "seduction
[stuprum], or rape, properly speaking, is unlawful intercourse, and
takes its name from its causing corruption: wherefore he that is
guilty of rape is a seducer." Therefore it seems that rape should not
be reckoned a species of lust distinct from seduction.
Objection 2: Further, rape, apparently, implies violence. For it is
stated in the Decretals (XXXVI, qu. 1 [Append. Grat. ad can. Lex illa])
that "rape is committed when a maid is taken away by force from her
father's house that after being violated she may be taken to wife."
But the employment of force is accidental to lust, for this essentially
regards the pleasure of intercourse. Therefore it seems that rape
should not be reckoned a determinate species of lust.
Objection 3: Further, the sin of lust is curbed by marriage: for it is
written (1 Cor. 7:2): "For fear of fornication, let every man have his
own wife." Now rape is an obstacle to subsequent marriage, for it
was enacted in the council of Meaux: "We decree that those who are
guilty of rape, or of abducting or seducing women, should not have
those women in marriage, although they should have subsequently
married them with the consent of their parents." Therefore rape is
not a determinate species of lust distinct from seduction.
Objection 4: Further, a man may have knowledge of his newly
married wife without committing a sin of lust. Yet he may commit
rape if he take her away by force from her parents' house, and have
carnal knowledge of her. Therefore rape should not be reckoned a
determinate species of lust.
On the contrary, Rape is unlawful sexual intercourse, as Isidore
states (Etym. v, 26). But this pertains to the sin of lust. Therefore
rape is a species of lust.
I answer that, Rape, in the sense in which we speak of it now, is a
species of lust: and sometimes it coincides with seduction;
sometimes there is rape without seduction, and sometimes
seduction without rape.