please, let us investigate the meals of rich and poor, and ask the guests which
they are who enjoy the purest and most genuine pleasure; is it they who recline
for a full day on couches, and join breakfast and dinner together, and distend
their stomach, and blunt their senses, and sink the vessel by an overladen cargo
of food, and waterlog the ship, and drench it as in some shipwreck of the body,
and devise fetters, and manacles, and gags, and bind their whole body with the
band of drunkenness and surfeit more grievous than an iron chain, and enjoy no
sound pure sleep undisturbed by frightful dreams, and are more miserable than
madmen and introduce a kind of self-imposed demon into the soul and display
themselves as a laughing stock to the gaze of their servants, or rather to the
kinder sort among them as a tragical spectacle eliciting tears, and cannot
recognize any of those who are present, and are incapable of speaking or hearing
but have to be carried away from their couches to their bed—or is it they who
are sober and vigilant, and limit their eating by their need, and sail with a
favourable breeze, and find hunger and thirst the best relish in their food and
drink? For nothing is so conducive to enjoyment and health as to be hungry and
thirsty when one attacks the viands, and to identify satiety with the simple
necessity of food, never overstepping the limits of this, nor imposing a load upon
the body too great for its strength.
8. But if you disbelieve my statement study the physical condition, and the
soul of each class. Are not the bodies vigorous of those who live thus moderately
(for do not tell me of that which rarely happens, although some may be weak
from some other circumstance, but form your judgment from those instances
which are of constant occurrence), I say are they not vigorous, and their senses
clear, fulfilling their proper function with much ease? Whereas the bodies of the
others are flaccid and softer than wax, and beset with a crowd of maladies? For
gout soon fastens upon them, and untimely palsy, and premature old age, and
headache, and flatulence, and feebleness of digestion, and loss of appetite, and
they require constant attendance of physicians, and perpetual doseing, and daily
care. Are these things pleasurable? Tell me. Who of those that know what

pleasure really is would say so? For pleasure is produced when desire leads the
way, and fruition follows: now if there is fruition, but desire is nowhere to be
found, the conditions of pleasure fail and vanish. On this account also invalids,
although the most charming food is set before them, partake of it with a feeling
of disgust and sense of oppression: because there is no desire which gives a keen
relish to the enjoyment of it. For it is not the nature of the food, or of the drink,
but the appetite of the eaters which is wont to produce the desire, and is capable
of causing pleasure. Therefore also a certain wise man who had an accurate
knowledge of all that concerned pleasure, and understood how to moralize about
these things said "the full soul mocks at honeycombs:" showing that the
conditions of pleasure consist not in the nature of the meal, but in the disposition
of the eaters. Therefore also the prophet recounting the wonders in Egypt and in
the desert mentioned this in connection with the others "He satisfied them with
honey out of the rock." And yet nowhere does it appear that honey actually
sprang forth for them out of the rock: what then is the meaning of the
expression? Because the people being exhausted by much toil and long
travelling, and distressed by great thirst rushed to the cool spring, their craving
for drink serving as a relish, the writer wishing to describe the pleasures which
they received from those fountains called the water honey, not meaning that the
element was converted into honey, but that the pleasure received from the water
rivalled the sweetness of honey, inasmuch as those who partook of it rushed to it
in their eagerness to drink.
Since then these things are so and no one can deny it, however stupid he
may be: is it not perfectly plain that pure, undiluted, and lively pleasure is to be
found at the tables of the poor? Whereas at the tables of the rich there is
discomfort, and disgust and defilement? As that wise man has said "even sweet
things seem to be a vexation."
9. But riches some one will say procure honour for those who possess them,
and enable them to take vengeance on their enemies with ease. And is this a
reason, pray, why riches seem to you desirable and worth contending for—that