the former reproach us with our offenses, they stir us up, even against our will,
to the amendment of them. So many teachers has He set over us, in order that the
discovery of what is profitable, and the regulation of our conduct, might be easy
to us, the multitude of those things which urge us on toward it not permitting us
to fall away from what is expedient for us. For although we should despise
parents, yet while we fear magistrates, we shall in any case be more submissive
than otherwise. And though we may set them at nought when we sin, we can
never escape the rebuke of conscience: and if we dishonour and repel this, yet
while fearing the opinion of the many, we shall be the better for it. And though
we are destitute of shame with regard to this, the fear of the laws will press on us
so as to restrain us, however reluctantly.
11. Thus fathers and teachers take the young in hand, and bring them into
order; and lawgivers and magistrates, those who are grown up. And servants, as
being more inclined to listlessness, in addition to what has been previously
mentioned, have their masters to constrain them to temperance; and wives have
their husbands. And many are the walls which environ our race on all sides, lest
it should too easily slide away, and fall into wickedness. Beside all these too;
sicknesses and calamities instruct us. For poverty restrains, and losses sober us,
and danger subdues us, and there are many other things of this sort. Does neither
father, nor teacher, nor prince, nor lawgiver, nor judge make you fear? Does no
friend move you to shame, nor enemy sting you? Does no master chastise? Does
no husband instruct? Does no conscience correct you? Still, when bodily
sickness comes, it often sets all right; and a loss has made the audacious man to
become gentle. And what is more than this, heavy misfortunes, which befal not
only ourselves but others too, are often of great advantage to us; and we who
ourselves suffered nothing, yet beholding others enduring punishment, have been
no less sobered by it than they.
12. And with respect to right deeds, any one may see that this happens; for
as when the bad are punished others become better, so whenever the good
achieve any thing right, many are urged onward to a similar zeal: a thing which

has also taken place with respect to the avoiding of oaths. For many persons,
observing that others had laid aside the evil practice of oaths, took a pattern from
their diligence, and got the better of the sin; wherefore we are the more disposed
to touch again on the subject of this admonition. For let no one tell me that
"many" have accomplished this; this is not what is desired, but that "all" should
do so; and until I see this I cannot take breath. That Shepherd had a hundred
sheep, and yet when one of them had wandered away, he took no account of the
safety of the ninety and nine, until he found the one that was lost, and restored it
again to the flock. [Matthew 18:12-13] Do you see not that this also happens
with respect to the body; for if by striking against any obstacle, we have only
turned back a nail, the whole body sympathizes with the member. Say not this;
that only a certain few have failed; but consider this point, that these few being
unreformed, will corrupt many others. Although there was but one who had
committed fornication among the Corinthians, yet Paul so groaned as if the
whole city were lost. And very reasonably, for he knew that if that member were
not chastened, the disease progressing onward would at length attack all the rest.
I saw, but lately, in the court of justice, those distinguished men bound and
conducted through the forum; and while some were wondering at this
extraordinary degradation, others said there was nothing to wonder at; for that,
where there is matter of treason, rank must go for nothing. Is it not then much
more true that rank must be of no avail where is impiety?
13. Thinking therefore of these things, let us arouse ourselves; for if you
bring not your own endeavours to the task, every thing on our part is to no
purpose. And why so? Because it is not with the office of teaching, as it is with
other arts. For the silversmith, when he has fabricated a vessel of any kind, and
laid it aside, will find it on the morrow just as he left it. And the worker in brass,
and the stone-cutter, and every other artificer, will each again take his own work
in hand, whatever it is, just in the state he quitted it. But it is not so with us, but
altogether the reverse; for we have not lifeless vessels to forge, but reasonable
souls. Therefore we do not find you such as we leave you, but when we have