FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.8, C.3.

understand" designates the simple act of the understanding. Now
the simple act of a power is referred to that which is in itself the
object of that power. But that which is good and willed in itself is the
end. Wherefore volition, properly speaking, is of the end itself. On
the other hand, the means are good and willed, not in themselves,
but as referred to the end. Wherefore the will is directed to them,
only in so far as it is directed to the end: so that what it wills in them,
is the end. Thus, to understand, is properly directed to things that
are known in themselves, i.e. first principles: but we do not speak of
understanding with regard to things known through first principles,
except in so far as we see the principles in those things. For in
morals the end is what principles are in speculative science (Ethic.
viii, 8).
Reply to Objection 1: The Philosopher is speaking of the will in
reference to the simple act of the will; not in reference to the power
of the will.
Reply to Objection 2: There are different powers for objects that
differ in genus and are on an equality; for instance, sound and color
are different genera of sensibles, to which are referred hearing and
sight. But the useful and the righteous are not on an equality, but are
as that which is of itself, and that which is in relation to another. Now
such like objects are always referred to the same power; for
instance, the power of sight perceives both color and light by which
color is seen.
Reply to Objection 3: Not everything that diversifies habits,
diversifies the powers: since habits are certain determinations of
powers to certain special acts. Moreover, every practical art
considers both the end and the means. For the art of the helmsman
does indeed consider the end, as that which it effects; and the
means, as that which it commands. On the other hand, the shipbuilding art considers the means as that which it effects; but it
considers that which is the end, as that to which it refers what it
effects. And again, in every practical art there is an end proper to it
and means that belong properly to that art.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.8, C.3.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.8, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the will is moved by the same act to the

end and to the means?
Objection 1: It would seem that the will is moved by the same act, to
the end and to the means. Because according to the Philosopher
(Topic. iii, 2) "where one thing is on account of another there is only
one." But the will does not will the means save on account of the
end. Therefore it is moved to both by the same act.
Objection 2: Further, the end is the reason for willing the means, just
as light is the reason of seeing colors. But light and colors are seen
by the same act. Therefore it is the same movement of the will,
whereby it wills the end and the means.
Objection 3: Further, it is one and the same natural movement which
tends through the middle space to the terminus. But the means are
in comparison to the end, as the middle space is to the terminus.
Therefore it is the same movement of the will whereby it is directed
to the end and to the means.
On the contrary, Acts are diversified according to their objects. But
the end is a different species of good from the means, which are a
useful good. Therefore the will is not moved to both by the same act.
I answer that, Since the end is willed in itself, whereas the means, as
such, are only willed for the end, it is evident that the will can be
moved to the end, without being moved to the means; whereas it
cannot be moved to the means, as such, unless it is moved to the
end. Accordingly the will is moved to the end in two ways: first, to
the end absolutely and in itself; secondly, as the reason for willing
the means. Hence it is evident that the will is moved by one and the
same movement, to the end, as the reason for willing the means; and
to the means themselves. But it is another act whereby the will is
moved to the end absolutely. And sometimes this act precedes the
other in time; for example when a man first wills to have health, and
afterwards deliberating by what means to be healed, wills to send for
the doctor to heal him. The same happens in regard to the intellect:
for at first a man understands the principles in themselves; but
afterwards he understands them in the conclusions, inasmuch as he
assents to the conclusions on account of the principles.