fountains in the world, our torment were but growing greater; even if we were to
drink up ten thousand rivers, our state of punishment were more distressing. And
thou also, if you were to receive the goods of the whole world, and still to covet,
wouldest make your punishment the greater, the more things you had tasted of.
Fancy not then, that from having gathered a great sum together you shall have
anything of pleasure, but rather by declining to be rich. But if you covet to be
rich you will be always under the scourge. For this is a kind of love that does not
reach its aim; and the longer journey you have gone, the further off you keep
from the end.
Is not this a paradox then, a derangement, a madness in the extreme? Let us
then forsake this first of evils, or rather let us not even touch this covetousness at
all. Yet, if we have touched it, let us spring away from its first motions
([προοιμίων]). For this is the advice the writer of the Proverbs gives us, when he
speaks about the harlot: "Spring away," he says, "tarry not, neither go thou near
to the door of her house" [Proverbs 5:8]: this same thing I would say to you
about the love of money. For if by entering gradually you fall into this ocean of
madness, you will not be able to get up out of it with ease, and as if you were in
whirlpools, struggle as often as ever you may, it will not be easy for you to get
clear; so after falling into this far worse abyss of covetousness, you will destroy
your own self, with all that belongs to you. [Acts 8:20] And so my advice is that
we be on our watch against the beginning, and avoid little evils, for the great
ones are gendered by these. For he who gets into a way of saying at every sin,
This matters nothing! will little by little ruin himself entirely. At all events it is
this which has introduced vice; which has opened the doors to the robber (5
manuscripts devil), which has thrown down the walls of cities, this saying at
each sin, "This matters nothing!" Thus in the case of the body too, the greatest of
diseases grow up, when trifling ones are made light of. If Esau had not first been
a traitor to his birthright, he would not have become unworthy of the blessings.
If he had not rendered himself unworthy of the blessings, he would not have had
the desire of going on to fratricide. If Cain had not fallen in love with the first

place, but had left that to God, he would not have had the second place. Again,
when he had the second place, if he had listened to the advice, he would not have
travailed with the murder. Again, if after doing the murder he had come to
repentance, when God called him, and had not answered in an irreverent way, he
would not have had to suffer the subsequent evils. But if those before the Law
did owing to this listlessness come to the very bottom of misery, only consider
what is to become of us, who are called to a greater contest, unless we take strict
heed unto ourselves, and make speed to quench the sparks of evil deeds before
the whole pile is kindled. Take an instance of my meaning. Are you in the habit
of false swearing? Do not stop at this only, but away with all swearing, and you
will have no further need of trouble. For it is far harder for a man that swears to
keep from false swearing, than to abstain from swearing altogether. Are you an
insulting and abusive person? A striker too? Lay down as a law for yourself not
to be angry or brawl in the least, and with the root the fruit also will be gotten rid
of. Are you lustful and dissipated? Make it your rule again not even to look at a
woman [Job 31:1], or to go up into the theatre, or to trouble yourself with the
beauty of other people whom you see about. For it is far easier not even to look
at a woman of good figure, than after looking and taking in the lust, to thrust out
the perturbation that comes thereof, the struggle being easier in the preliminaries
([προοιμίοις]). Or rather we have no need of a struggle at all if we do not throw
the gates open to the enemy, or take in the seeds of mischief ([κακίας]). And this
is why Christ chastised the man who looks unchastely upon a woman [Matthew
5:28], that He might free us from greater labor, before the adversary became
strong, bidding us cast him out of the house while he may be cast out even with
ease. For what need to have superfluous trouble, and to get entangled with the
enemies, when without entanglement we may erect the trophy, and before the
wrestling seize upon the prize? For it is not so great a trouble not to look upon
beautiful women, as it is while looking to restrain one's self. Or rather the first
would be no trouble at all, but immense toil and labor comes on after looking.
Since then this trouble is less (most manuscripts add, "to the incontinent"), or