bloodthirsty men. That they are not drunken, he shows immediately by his very
voice, that they are not beside themselves, as the soothsayers: and this too, that
they were not constrained by some compulsory force. What is meant by, "with
the eleven?" They expressed themselves through one common voice, and he was
the mouth of all. The eleven stood by as witnesses to what he said. "He lifted up
his voice," it is said. That is, he spoke with great confidence, that they might
perceive the grace of the Spirit. He who had not endured the questioning of a
poor girl, now in the midst of the people, all breathing murder, discourses with
such confidence, that this very thing becomes an unquestionable proof of the
Resurrection: in the midst of men who could deride and make a joke of such
things as these! What effrontery, think you, must go to that! What impiety, what
shamelessness! For wherever the Holy Spirit is present, He makes men of gold
out of men of clay. Look, I pray you, at Peter now: examine well that timid one,
and devoid of understanding; as Christ said, "Are ye also yet without
understanding?" [Matthew 15:16] the man, who after that marvellous confession
was called "Satan." [Matthew 16:23] Consider also the unanimity of the
Apostles. They themselves ceded to him the office of speaking; for it was not
necessary that all should speak. "And he lifted up his voice," and spoke out to
them with great boldness. Such a thing it is to be a spiritual man! Only let us also
bring ourselves into a state meet for the grace from above, and all becomes easy.
For as a man of fire falling into the midst of straw would take no harm, but do it
to others: not he could take any harm, but they, in assailing him, destroy
themselves. For the case here was just as if one carrying hay should attack one
bearing fire: even so did the Apostles encounter these their adversaries with
great boldness.
For what did it harm them, though they were so great a multitude? Did they
not spend all their rage? Did they not turn the distress upon themselves? Of all
mankind were ever any so possessed with both rage and terror, as those became
possessed? Were they not in an agony, and were dismayed, and trembled? For
hear what they say, "Do ye wish to bring this man's blood upon us?" [Acts 5:28]

Did they (the Apostles) not fight against poverty and hunger: against ignominy
and infamy (for they were accounted deceivers): did they not fight against
ridicule and wrath and mockery?— for in their case the contraries met: some
laughed at them, others punished them—were they not made a mark for the
wrathful passions, and for the merriment, of whole cities? Exposed to factions
and conspiracies: to fire, and sword, and wild beasts? Did not war beset them
from every quarter, in ten thousand forms? And were they any more affected in
their minds by all these things, than they would have been at seeing them in a
dream or in a picture? With bare body they took the field against all the armed,
though against them all men had arbitrary power [against them, were]: terrors of
rulers, force of arms, in cities and strong walls: without experience, without skill
of the tongue, and in the condition of quite ordinary men, matched against
juggling conjurors, against impostors, against the whole throng of sophists, of
rhetoricians, of philosophers grown mouldy in the Academy and the walks of the
Peripatetics, against all these they fought the battle out. And the man whose
occupation had been about lakes, so mastered them, as if it cost him not so much
ado as even a contest with dumb fishes: for just as if the opponents he had to
outwit were indeed more mute than fishes, so easily did he get the better of
them! And Plato, that talked a deal of nonsense in his day, is silent now, while
this man utters his voice everywhere; not among his own countrymen alone, but
also among Parthians, and Medes, and Elamites, and in India, and in every part
of the earth, and to the extremities of the world. Where now is Greece, with her
big pretentions? Where the name of Athens? Where the ravings of the
philosophers? He of Galilee, he of Bethsaida, he, the uncouth rustic, has
overcome them all. Are you not ashamed— confess it— at the very name of the
country of him who has defeated you? But if you hear his own name too, and
learn that he was called Cephas, much more will you hide your faces. This, this
has undone you quite; because you esteem this a reproach, and account glibness
of tongue a praise, and want of glibness a disgrace. You have not followed the
road you ought to have chosen, but leaving the royal road, so easy, so smooth,