SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.61, C.3.

necessary for salvation to restore what has been taken unjustly.
Reply to Objection 1: When it is impossible to repay the equivalent, it
suffices to repay what one can, as in the case of honor due to God
and our parents, as the Philosopher states (Ethic. viii, 14). Wherefore
when that which has been taken cannot be restored in equivalent,
compensation should be made as far as possible: for instance if one
man has deprived another of a limb, he must make compensation
either in money or in honor, the condition of either party being duly
considered according to the judgment of a good man.
Reply to Objection 2: There are three ways in which one may take
away another's good name. First, by saying what is true, and this
justly, as when a man reveals another's sin, while observing the right
order of so doing, and then he is not bound to restitution. Secondly,
by saying what is untrue and unjustly, and then he is bound to
restore that man's good name, by confessing that he told an untruth.
Thirdly, by saying what is true, but unjustly, as when a man reveals
another's sin contrarily to the right order of so doing, and then he is
bound to restore his good name as far as he can, and yet without
telling an untruth; for instance by saying that he spoke ill, or that he
defamed him unjustly; or if he be unable to restore his good name,
he must compensate him otherwise, the same as in other cases, as
stated above (ad 1).
Reply to Objection 3: The action of the man who has defamed
another cannot be undone, but it is possible, by showing him
deference, to undo its effect, viz. the lowering of the other man's
personal dignity in the opinion of other men.
Reply to Objection 4: There are several ways of preventing a man
from obtaining a benefice. First, justly: for instance, if having in view
the honor of God or the good of the Church, one procures its being
conferred on a more worthy subject, and then there is no obligation
whatever to make restitution or compensation. Secondly, unjustly, if
the intention is to injure the person whom one hinders, through
hatred, revenge or the like. In this case, if before the benefice has
been definitely assigned to anyone, one prevents its being conferred
on a worthy subject by counseling that it be not conferred on him,
one is bound to make some compensation, after taking account of
the circumstances of persons and things according to the judgment
of a prudent person: but one is not bound in equivalent, because that
man had not obtained the benefice and might have been prevented

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.61, C.3.

in many ways from obtaining it. If, on the other hand, the benefice
had already been assigned to a certain person, and someone, for
some undue cause procures its revocation, it is the same as though
he had deprived a man of what he already possessed, and
consequently he would be bound to compensation in equivalent, in
proportion, however, to his means.