carnal?" [1 Corinthians 3:3] Let us then become spiritual, and bridle this
dreadful wild beast. Anger differs nothing from madness, it is a temporary devil,
or rather it is a thing worse than having a devil; for one that has a devil may be
excused, but the angry man deserves ten thousand punishments, voluntarily
casting himself into the pit of destruction, and before the hell which is to come
suffering punishment from this already, by bringing a certain restless turmoil and
never silent storm of fury, through all the night and through all the day, upon the
reasonings of his soul. Let us therefore, that we may deliver ourselves from the
punishment here and the vengeance hereafter, cast out this passion, and show
forth all meekness and gentleness, that we may find rest for our souls both here
and in the Kingdom of Heaven. To which may we all attain, through the grace
and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom and with whom, to the
Father and the Holy Spirit be glory, now and ever and world without end. Amen.

Homily 49 on the Gospel of John
John 7:9-10
"When He had said these words unto them, He abode still in Galilee. But when
His brethren had gone up, then went He up also unto the feast, not openly, but as
it were in secret."
1. The things done by Christ after the manner of men, are not so done only
to establish the Incarnation, but also to educate us for virtue. For had He done all
as God, how could we have known, on falling in with such things as we wished
not, what we must do? As, for instance, when He was in this very place, and the
Jews would have killed Him, He came into the midst of them, and so appeased
the tumult. Now had He done this continually, how should we, not being able to
do so, and yet falling into the like case, have known in what way we ought to
deal with the matter, whether to perish at once, or even to use some contrivance
in order that the word might go forward? Since, therefore, we who have no
power could not have understood what to do on coming into the midst of our
foes, on this account we are taught this very thing by Him. For, says the
Evangelist, Jesus, "when He had said these words, abode in Galilee; but when
His brethren had gone up, then went He up also unto the feast, not openly, but as
it were in secret." The expression, "when His brethren had gone up," is that of
one showing that He chose not to go up with them. On which account He abode
where He was, and manifested not Himself, although they in a manner urged
Him to do so. But why did He, who ever spoke openly, do so now "as it were in
secret"? The writer says not "secretly," but, "as it were in secret." For thus, as I
have said, He seemed to be instructing us how to manage matters. And, apart
from this, it was not the same to come among them when heated and restive, as
to do so afterwards when the feast was ended.