my words shall seem unworthy to read them.

Only so much ought one require of me as the intuition of human reason can approximate about
the sublime truths of the Godhead. For in the case of other arts, the same limit is also established,
namely, that which by the way of reason one can attain. Now, medicine does not always effect
the cure of the patient. But no blame will be placed upon the physician if he has omitted none of
the things which he ought to have done; and the same is true in other matters.

Moreover, in proportion to the difficulty of a problem, the pardoning of error ought to be the
more easily granted. You must also determine this: whether the seeds of speculation, gathered
from the writings of the blessed Augustine, have in my work borne fruit.

Now, therefore, let us undertake at this point the discussion of the proposed question.

### St. Thomas' Commentary

To this work the author prefixes a preface, in which he does three things: First, he briefly
indicates the causes of the work, in doing which he inclines his hearer to accept what he says.
Secondly, he adds an excuse or explanation in which he gains the good will of his hearer, where
he says: "I restrain my pen." In the third place, he points out that the source of his work and, in a
certain way, its teaching, is the doctrine of St. Augustine, and in doing this he renders his hearer
attentive, when he says: "You must also determine this: whether the seeds of speculation,
gathered from the writings of blessed Augustine, have in my work borne fruit."

He likewise sets forth in the first part the four causes of his work.

1) First, the material cause, when he says: "the problem which has been for so long a time the
subject of my investigation," that is, about the Trinity of Persons of the one God; and in these
words he implies both the difficulty of the matter, because he has carried on the investigation for
a very long time, and also the diligence of the study with which he has for so long a period
investigated it, as "investigation" is understood by us, although it can also be understood to mean
investigation by many; because from the beginning of the existence of the Church, this question
has especially continued to challenge the cleverest minds of Christians.

2) Secondly, he indicates the proximate or secondary efficient cause when he says: "the feeble
spark of my mind." Moreover, he speaks also of the first or principal cause when he adds: "that
the divine light has deigned to enkindle."

Now the proximate cause of this investigation is, indeed, the intellect of the author, which is
rightly termed a spark. "For fire," as Dionysius says (XV Coel. hier.), "especially serves to
signify properties of the divinity: at once by reason of its subtlety, of its light, and also by reason
of its place and motion."