killing of the animal is only the means. Similarly the fornicator has
merely pleasure for his object, and the deformity of sin is only an
accompaniment. Now the evil that accompanies one good, is the
privation of another good. Never therefore would evil be sought
after, not even accidentally, unless the good that accompanies the
evil were more desired than the good of which the evil is the
privation. Now God wills no good more than He wills His own
goodness; yet He wills one good more than another. Hence He in no
way wills the evil of sin, which is the privation of right order towards
the divine good. The evil of natural defect, or of punishment, He does
will, by willing the good to which such evils are attached. Thus in
willing justice He wills punishment; and in willing the preservation of
the natural order, He wills some things to be naturally corrupted.
Reply to Objection 1: Some have said that although God does not
will evil, yet He wills that evil should be or be done, because,
although evil is not a good, yet it is good that evil should be or be
done. This they said because things evil in themselves are ordered
to some good end; and this order they thought was expressed in the
words "that evil should be or be done." This, however, is not correct;
since evil is not of itself ordered to good, but accidentally. For it is
beside the intention of the sinner, that any good should follow from
his sin; as it was beside the intention of tyrants that the patience of
the martyrs should shine forth from all their persecutions. It cannot
therefore be said that such an ordering to good is implied in the
statement that it is a good thing that evil should be or be done, since
nothing is judged of by that which appertains to it accidentally, but
by that which belongs to it essentially.
Reply to Objection 2: Evil does not operate towards the perfection
and beauty of the universe, except accidentally, as said above (ad 1).
Therefore Dionysius in saying that "evil would conduce to the
perfection of the universe," draws a conclusion by reduction to an
absurdity.
Reply to Objection 3: The statements that evil exists, and that evil
exists not, are opposed as contradictories; yet the statements that
anyone wills evil to exist and that he wills it not to be, are not so
opposed; since either is affirmative. God therefore neither wills evil
to be done, nor wills it not to be done, but wills to permit evil to be
done; and this is a good.

### ARTICLE 10. Whether God has free-will?

Objection 1: It seems that God has not free-will. For Jerome says, in
a homily on the prodigal son [Ep. 146, ad Damas]; "God alone is He
who is not liable to sin, nor can be liable: all others, as having freewill, can be inclined to either side."
Objection 2: Further, free-will is the faculty of the reason and will, by
which good and evil are chosen. But God does not will evil, as has
been said (Article 9). Therefore there is not free-will in God.
On the contrary, Ambrose says (De Fide ii, 3): "The Holy Spirit
divideth unto each one as He will, namely, according to the free
choice of the will, not in obedience to necessity."
I answer that, We have free-will with respect to what we will not of
necessity, nor be natural instinct. For our will to be happy does not
appertain to free-will, but to natural instinct. Hence other animals,
that are moved to act by natural instinct, are not said to be moved by
free-will. Since then God necessarily wills His own goodness, but
other things not necessarily, as shown above (Article 3), He has free
will with respect to what He does not necessarily will.
Reply to Objection 1: Jerome seems to deny free-will to God not
simply, but only as regards the inclination to sin.
Reply to Objection 2: Since the evil of sin consists in turning away
from the divine goodness, by which God wills all things, as above
shown (De Fide ii, 3), it is manifestly impossible for Him to will the
evil of sin; yet He can make choice of one of two opposites,
inasmuch as He can will a thing to be, or not to be. In the same way
we ourselves, without sin, can will to sit down, and not will to sit
down.