THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.58, C.4.

belong to the Son essentially, just as to the Father; and this is to be
in equality with the Father. Secondly, according to the grace of
union, which, on the contrary, implies distinction of nature, and unity
of person. According to this, Christ as man is the Son of God, and
consequently sits at the Father's right hand; yet so that the
expression "as" does not denote condition of nature, but unity of
suppositum, as explained above (Question 16, Articles 10,11).
Thirdly, the said approach can be understood according to habitual
grace, which is more fully in Christ than in all other creatures, so
much so that human nature in Christ is more blessed than all other
creatures, and possesses over all other creatures royal and judiciary
power.
So, then, if "as" denote condition of nature, then Christ, as God, sits
"at the Father's right hand," that is, "in equality with the Father"; but
as man, He sits "at the right hand of the Father," that is, "in the
Father's mightier gifts beyond all other creatures," that is to say, "in
greater beatitude," and "exercising judiciary power." But if "as"
denote unity of person, thus again as man, He sits at the Father's
right hand "as to equality of honor," inasmuch as with the same
honor we venerate the Son of God with His assumed nature, as was
said above (Question 25, Article 1).
Reply to Objection 1: Christ's humanity according to the conditions
of His nature has not the glory or honor of the Godhead, which it has
nevertheless by reason of the Person with whom it is united. Hence
Damascene adds in the passage quoted: "In which," that is, in the
glory of the Godhead, "the Son of God existing before ages, as God
and consubstantial with the Father, sits in His conglorified flesh; for,
under one adoration the one hypostasis, together with His flesh, is
adored by every creature."
Reply to Objection 2: Christ as man is subject to the Father, if "as"
denote the condition of nature: in which respect it does not belong to
Him as man to sit at the Father's right hand, by reason of their
mutual equality. But it does thus belong to Him to sit at the right
hand of the Father, according as is thereby denoted the excellence
of beatitude and His judiciary power over every creature.
Reply to Objection 3: It does not belong to Christ's human nature to
be in equality with the Father, but only to the Person who assumed
it; but it does belong even to the assumed human nature to share in
God's mightier gifts, in so far as it implies exaltation above other

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.58, C.4.

creatures.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.58, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether it is proper to Christ to sit at the right

hand of the Father?
Objection 1: It would seem that it is not proper to Christ to sit at the
right hand of the Father, because the Apostle says (Eph. 2:4,6):
"God . . . hath raised us up together, and hath made us sit together in
the heavenly places through Christ Jesus." But to be raised up is not
proper to Christ. Therefore for like reason neither is it proper to Him
to sit "on the right hand" of God "on high" (Heb. 1:3).
Objection 2: Further, as Augustine says (De Symb. i): "For Christ to
sit at the right hand of the Father, is to dwell in His beatitude." But
many more share in this. Therefore it does not appear to be proper to
Christ to sit at the right hand of the Father.
Objection 3: Further, Christ Himself says (Apoc. 3:21): "To him that
shall overcome, I will give to sit with Me in My throne: as I also have
overcome, and am set down with My Father in His throne." But it is
by sitting on His Father's throne that Christ is seated at His right
hand. Therefore others who overcome likewise, sit at the Father's
right hand.
Objection 4: Further, the Lord says (Mt. 20:23): "To sit on My right or
left hand, is not Mine to give to you, but to them for whom it is
prepared by My Father." But no purpose would be served by saying
this, unless it was prepared for some. Consequently, to sit at the
right hand is not proper to Christ.
On the contrary, It is written (Heb. 1:13): "To which of the angels said
He at any time: Sit thou on My right hand, i.e. 'in My mightier gifts,'"
or "'as my equal in the Godhead'"? as if to answer: "To none." But
angels are higher than other creatures. Therefore, much less does it
belong to anyone save Christ to sit at the Father's right hand.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 3), Christ is said to sit at the
Father's right hand inasmuch as He is on equality with the Father in
respect of His Divine Nature, while in respect of His humanity, He
excels all creatures in the possession of Divine gifts. But each of
these belongs exclusively to Christ. Consequently, it belongs to no
one else, angel or man, but to Christ alone, to sit at the right hand of
the Father.