of the Holy Ghost, but as being permitted lest greater evils should be
perpetrated.
Reply to Objection 3: This likeness of permission must not be
applied to every detail, but only to the cause which was the same in
both cases, since both permissions were granted in order to avoid
some form of wickedness.
Reply to Objection 4: Although their hardness of heart excused them
not from sin, the permission given on account of that hardness
excused them. For certain things are forbidden those who are
healthy in body, which are not forbidden the sick, and yet the sick
sin not by availing themselves of the permission granted to them.
Reply to Objection 5: A good may be omitted in two ways. First, in
order to obtain a greater good, and then the omission of that good
becomes virtuous by being directed to a greater good; thus Jacob
rightly omitted to have only one wife, on account of the good of the
offspring. In another way a good is omitted in order to avoid a
greater evil, and then if this is done with the authority of one who
can grant a dispensation, the omission of that good is not sinful, and
yet it does not also become virtuous. In this way the indissolubility
of marriage was suspended in the law of Moses in order to avoid a
greater evil, namely wife-murder. Hence Chrysostom says that "he
removed the guilt from the sin." For though divorce remained
inordinate, for which reason it is called a sin, it did not incur the debt
of punishment, either temporal or eternal, in so far as it was done by
Divine permission: and thus its guilt was taken away from it. And
therefore he says again [Hom. xxxii in Opus Imperfectum] that
"divorce was permitted, an evil indeed, yet lawful." Those who hold
the first opinion understand by this only that divorce incurred the
debt of temporal punishment.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether it was lawful for a divorced wife to have

another husband?
Objection 1: It would seem that it was lawful for a divorced wife to
have another husband. For in divorce the husband did a greater
wrong by divorcing his wife than the wife by being divorced. But the
husband could, without sin, marry another wife. Therefore the wife
could without sin, marry another husband.
Objection 2: Further, Augustine, speaking about bigamy, says (De
Bono Conjug. xv, xviii) that "when it was the manner it was no sin."
Now at the time of the Old Law it was the custom for a wife after
divorce to marry another husband: "When she is departed and
marrieth another husband," etc. Therefore the wife sinned not by
marrying another husband.
Objection 3: Further, our Lord showed that the justice of the New
Testament is superabundant in comparison with the justice of the
Old Testament (Mt. 5). Now He said that it belongs to the
superabundant justice of the New Testament that the divorced wife
marry not another husband (Mt. 5:32). Therefore it was lawful in the
Old Law.
Objection 4: On the contrary, are the words of Mt. 5:32, "He that shall
marry her that is put away committeth adultery." Now adultery was
never permitted in the Old Law. Therefore it was not lawful for the
divorced wife to have another husband.
Objection 5: Further, it is written (Dt. 24:3) that a divorced woman
who marries another husband "is defiled, and is become abominable
before the Lord." Therefore she sinned by marrying another
husband.
I answer that, According to the first above mentioned opinion (Article
3), she sinned by marrying another husband after being divorced,
because her first marriage still held good. For "the woman . . . whilst
her husband liveth, is bound to the law of her husband" (Rm. 7:2):
and she could not have several husbands at one time. But according
to the second opinion, just as it was lawful by virtue of the Divine
dispensation for a husband to divorce his wife, so could the wife
marry another husband, because the indissolubility of marriage was