FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.106, C.4.

the justification of the Law might be fulfilled in us."
A second reason may be taken from the perfection of the New Law.
Because a thing is not brought to perfection at once from the outset,
but through an orderly succession of time; thus one is at first a boy,
and then a man. And this reason is stated by the Apostle (Gal.
3:24,25): "The Law was our pedagogue in Christ that we might be
justified by faith. But after the faith is come, we are no longer under a
pedagogue."
The third reason is found in the fact that the New Law is the law of
grace: wherefore it behoved man first of all to be left to himself
under the state of the Old Law, so that through falling into sin, he
might realize his weakness, and acknowledge his need of grace. This
reason is set down by the Apostle (Rm. 5:20): "The Law entered in,
that sin might abound: and when sin abounded grace did more
abound."
Reply to Objection 1: Mankind on account of the sin of our first
parents deserved to be deprived of the aid of grace: and so "from
whom it is withheld it is justly withheld, and to whom it is given, it is
mercifully given," as Augustine states (De Perfect. Justit. iv) [Ep.
ccvii; De Pecc. Mer. et Rem. ii, 19]. Consequently it does not follow
that there is respect of persons with God, from the fact that He did
not offer the Law of grace to all from the beginning of the world,
which Law was to be published in due course of time, as stated
above.
Reply to Objection 2: The state of mankind does not vary according
to diversity of place, but according to succession of time. Hence the
New Law avails for all places, but not for all times: although at all
times there have been some persons belonging to the New
Testament, as stated above (Article 1, ad 3).
Reply to Objection 3: Things pertaining to the health of the body are
of service to man as regards his nature, which sin does not destroy:
whereas things pertaining to the health of the soul are ordained to
grace, which is forfeit through sin. Consequently the comparison will
not hold.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.106, C.4.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.106, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the New Law will last till the end of the

world?
Objection 1: It would seem that the New Law will not last until the
end of the world. Because, as the Apostle says (1 Cor. 13:10), "when
that which is perfect is come, that which is in part shall be done
away." But the New Law is "in part," since the Apostle says (1 Cor.
13:9): "We know in part and we prophesy in part." Therefore the New
Law is to be done away, and will be succeeded by a more perfect
state.
Objection 2: Further, Our Lord (Jn. 16:13) promised His disciples the
knowledge of all truth when the Holy Ghost, the Comforter, should
come. But the Church knows not yet all truth in the state of the New
Testament. Therefore we must look forward to another state, wherein
all truth will be revealed by the Holy Ghost.
Objection 3: Further, just as the Father is distinct from the Son and
the Son from the Father, so is the Holy Ghost distinct from the Father
and the Son. But there was a state corresponding with the Person of
the Father, viz. the state of the Old Law, wherein men were intent on
begetting children: and likewise there is a state corresponding to the
Person of the Son: viz. the state of the New Law, wherein the clergy
who are intent on wisdom (which is appropriated to the Son) hold a
prominent place. Therefore there will be a third state corresponding
to the Holy Ghost, wherein spiritual men will hold the first place.
Objection 4: Further, Our Lord said (Mt. 24:14): "This Gospel of the
kingdom shall be preached in the whole world . . . and then shall the
consummation come." But the Gospel of Christ is already preached
throughout the whole world: and yet the consummation has not yet
come. Therefore the Gospel of Christ is not the Gospel of the
kingdom, but another Gospel, that of the Holy Ghost, is to come yet,
like unto another Law.
On the contrary, Our Lord said (Mt. 24:34): "I say to you that this
generation shall not pass till all (these) things be done": which
passage Chrysostom (Hom. lxxvii) explains as referring to "the
generation of those that believe in Christ." Therefore the state of
those who believe in Christ will last until the consummation of the
world.