SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.56, C.4.

apprehend a thing absolutely: wherefore the right which we call
natural, is common to us and other animals according to the first
kind of commensuration. But the right of nations falls short of
natural right in this sense, as the jurist [Digest. i, 1; De Just. et Jure i]
says because "the latter is common to all animals, while the former
is common to men only." On the other hand to consider a thing by
comparing it with what results from it, is proper to reason, wherefore
this same is natural to man in respect of natural reason which
dictates it. Hence the jurist Gaius says (Digest. i, 1; De Just. et Jure i,
9): "whatever natural reason decrees among all men, is observed by
all equally, and is called the right of nations." This suffices for the
Reply to the First Objection.
Reply to Objection 2: Considered absolutely, the fact that this
particular man should be a slave rather than another man, is based,
not on natural reason, but on some resultant utility, in that it is
useful to this man to be ruled by a wiser man, and to the latter to be
helped by the former, as the Philosopher states (Polit. i, 2).
Wherefore slavery which belongs to the right of nations is natural in
the second way, but not in the first.
Reply to Objection 3: Since natural reason dictates matters which
are according to the right of nations, as implying a proximate
equality, it follows that they need no special institution, for they are
instituted by natural reason itself, as stated by the authority quoted
above

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.56, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether paternal right and right of dominion

should be distinguished as special species?
Objection 1: It would seem that "paternal right" and "right of
dominion" should not be distinguished as special species. For it
belongs to justice to render to each one what is his, as Ambrose
states (De Offic. i, 24). Now right is the object of justice, as stated
above (Article 1). Therefore right belongs to each one equally; and
we ought not to distinguish the rights of fathers and masters as
distinct species.
Objection 2: Further, the law is an expression of what is just, as
stated above (Article 1, ad 2). Now a law looks to the common good
of a city or kingdom, as stated above (FS, Question 90, Article 2), but
not to the private good of an individual or even of one household.
Therefore there is no need for a special right of dominion or paternal
right, since the master and the father pertain to a household, as
stated in Polit. i, 2.
Objection 3: Further, there are many other differences of degrees
among men, for instance some are soldiers, some are priests, some
are princes. Therefore some special kind of right should be allotted
to them.
On the contrary, The Philosopher (Ethic. v, 6) distinguishes right of
dominion, paternal right and so on as species distinct from civil
right.
I answer that, Right or just depends on commensuration with
another person. Now "another" has a twofold signification. First, it
may denote something that is other simply, as that which is
altogether distinct; as, for example, two men neither of whom is
subject to the other, and both of whom are subjects of the ruler of
the state; and between these according to the Philosopher (Ethic. v,
6) there is the "just" simply. Secondly a thing is said to be other from
something else, not simply, but as belonging in some way to that
something else: and in this way, as regards human affairs, a son
belongs to his father, since he is part of him somewhat, as stated in
Ethic. viii, 12, and a slave belongs to his master, because he is his
instrument, as stated in Polit. i, 2 [Ethic. viii, 11]. Hence a father is
not compared to his son as to another simply, and so between them