heads, and will make the vengeance sore. For he that knew many to have sinned,
and was not sobered, but himself has committed the same sins again, and not the
same only, but also far more grievous, would justly deserve to suffer a far more
grievous punishment than they. For like as, if he had been minded, he would
have gained greatly, had he grown better by their examples, even so, since he
continued without amendment, he is liable to a heavier vengeance, as having had
the benefit of more warning by them who had sinned before and been punished,
and having reaped no advantage.
3. Then He directs His speech unto the city, in this way too being minded to
correct His hearers, and says, "O Jerusalem, Jerusalem!" [Matthew 23:37] What
means the repetition? This is the manner of one pitying her, and bemoaning her,
and greatly loving her. For, like as unto a woman beloved, herself indeed ever
loved, but who had despised Him that loved her, and therefore on the point of
being punished, He pleads, being now about to inflict the punishment. Which He
does in the prophets also, using these words, "I said, Turn thou unto me, and she
returned not." [Jeremiah 3:7]
Then having called her, He tells also her blood-stained deeds, "Thou that
killest the prophets, and stone them that are sent unto you, how often would I
have gathered your children together, and you would not," in this way also
pleading for His own dealings; not even with these things have you turned me
aside, nor withdrawn me from my great affection toward you, but it was my
desire even so, not once or twice, but often to draw you unto me. "For how often
would I have gathered your children together, even as a hen gathers her
chickens, and you would not." And this He says, to show that they were ever
scattering themselves by their sins. And His affection He indicates by the
similitude; for indeed the creature is warm in its love towards its brood. And
everywhere in the prophets is this same image of the wings, and in the song of
Moses and in the Psalms, indicating His great protection and care.
"But ye would not," He says. "Behold your house is left desolate,"
[Matthew 23:38] stripped of the succor which comes from me. Surely it was the

same, who also was before protecting them, and holding them together, and
preserving them; surely it was He who was ever chastening them. And He
appoints a punishment, which they had ever dreaded exceedingly; for it declared
the entire overthrow of their polity. "For I say unto you, You shall not see me
henceforth, till you shall say, Blessed is He that comes in the name of the Lord."
[Matthew 23:39] And this is the language of one that loves earnestly, earnestly
drawing them unto Him by the things to come, not merely warning them by the
past; for of the future day of His second coming does He here speak.
What then? Did they not see Him from that time? But it is not that hour
which He means in saying, Henceforth, but the time up to His crucifixion.
For since they were forever accusing Him of this, that He was a kind of
rival God, and a foe to God, He moves them to love Him by this, namely, by
showing Himself to be of one accord with His Father; and He indicates Himself
to be the same that was in the prophets. Wherefore also He uses the same words
as did the prophets.
And by these He intimated both His resurrection, and His second coming,
and made it plain even to the utterly unbelieving, that then most surely they
should worship Him. And how did He make this plain? By speaking of many
things that were first to be, that He should send prophets, that they should kill
them; that it should be in the synagogues; that they should suffer the utmost
extremities; that their house should be left desolate; that they should undergo
things more grievous than any, and such as never were undergone before. For all
these things are enough to furnish even to the most senseless and contentious a
clear proof of that which should come to pass at His coming.
For I will ask them, Did He send the prophets and wise men? Did they slay
them in their synagogue? Was their house left desolate? Did all the vengeance
come upon that generation? It is quite plain that it was so, and no man gainsays
it. As then all these things came to pass, so shall those also come to pass, and
most surely they shall submit then.
But they shall derive thence no advantage in the way of defense, as neither