Hebrews 13:7
3. "Remember them which have the rule over you." This he was laboring to
say above: therefore "Follow peace with all men." [Hebrews 12:14] He gave this
exhortation also to the Thessalonians, to "hold them in honor exceedingly." [1
Thessalonians 5:13]
"Remember" (he says) "them which have the rule over you, who have
spoken unto you the word of God, whose faith follow, considering the end of
their conversation." What kind of following is this? Truly the best: for he says,
beholding their life, "follow their faith." For from a pure life [comes] faith.
Or else by "faith," he means steadfastness. How so? Because they believe in
the things to come. For they would not have shown forth a pure life, if they had
questioned about the things to come, if they had doubted. So that here also he is
applying a remedy to the same [evil].

Hebrews 13:8-9
"Jesus Christ the same yesterday and today and for ever. Be not carried
about with various and strange doctrines. For it is good that the heart be
established with grace, not with meats, which have not profited them that have
been occupied therein."
In these words, "Jesus Christ the same yesterday and today and for ever,"
"yesterday" means all the time that is past: "today," the present: "for ever," the
endless which is to come. That is to say: You have heard of an High Priest, but
not an High Priest who fails. He is always the same. As though there were some
who said, 'He is not, another will come,' he says this, that He who was
"yesterday and today," is "the same also for ever." For even now the Jews say,
that another will come; and having deprived themselves of Him that is will fall
into the hands of Antichrist.
"Be not carried about with various and strange doctrines." Not "with
strange doctrines" only, but neither with "various ones."
"For it is a good thing that the heart be established with grace, not with
meats which have not profited them that have been occupied therein." Here he
gently hints at those who introduce the observance of "meats." For by Faith all
things are pure. There is need then of Faith, not of "meats."

Hebrews 13:10
For [Hebrews 13:10] "we have an altar whereof they have no right to eat
which serve the Tabernacle." Not as the Jewish [ordinances], are those among
us, as it is not lawful even for the High Priest to partake of them. So that since he
had said, "Do not observe," and this seemed to be [the language] of one who is
throwing down his own building, he again turns it round. What, have not we
then observances as well (he says)? [Yea we have], and we observe them very
earnestly too, not sharing them even with the priests themselves.

Hebrews 13:11-13
4. "For the bodies of those beasts whose blood is brought into the sanctuary
by the High Priest for sin, are burned without the camp. Wherefore Jesus also,
that He might sanctify the people with His own blood, suffered" (he says)
"without the gate." Do you see the type shining forth? "For sin," he says, and
"suffered without the gate." [Hebrews 13:13] "Let us go forth therefore to Him
without the camp, bearing His reproach," that is, suffering the same things;
having communion with Him in His sufferings. He was crucified without as a
condemned person: neither let us then be ashamed to "go forth out" [of the
world].