Consequently, since man is merely an instrument in the use of the
keys, however much he may through sin be deprived of grace,
whereby sins are forgiven, yet he is by no means deprived of the use
of the keys.
Reply to Objection 1: The gift of the Holy Ghost is requisite for the
use of the keys, not as being indispensable for the purpose, but
because it is unbecoming for the user to use them without it, though
he that submits to them receives their effect.
Reply to Objection 2: An earthly king can be cheated and deceived in
the matter of his treasure, and so he does not entrust his enemy with
the dispensation thereof. But the King of heaven cannot be cheated,
because all tends to His own glory, even the abuse of the keys by
some, for He can make good come out of evil, and produce many
good effects through evil men. Hence the comparison fails.
Reply to Objection 3: Augustine speaks of the remission of sins in
so far as holy men co-operate therein, not by virtue of the keys, but
by merit of congruity. Hence He says that God confers the
sacraments even through evil men, and among the other
sacraments, absolution which is the use of the keys should be
reckoned: but that through "members of the Dove," i.e. holy men, He
grants forgiveness of sins, in so far as He remits sins on account of
their intercession.
We might also reply that by "members of the Dove" he means all
who are not cut off from the Church, for those who receive the
sacraments from them, receive grace, whereas those who receive
the sacraments from those who are cut off from the Church, do not
receive grace, because they sin in so doing, except in the case of
Baptism, which, in cases of necessity, may be received even from
one who is excommunicate.
Reply to Objection 4: The prayer which the wicked priest proffers on
his own account, is not efficacious: but that which he makes as a
minister of the Church, is efficacious through the merit of Christ. Yet
in both ways the priest's prayer should profit those who are subject
to him.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether those who are schismatics, heretics,

excommunicate, suspended or degraded have the use of the
keys?
Objection 1: It would seem that those who are schismatics, heretics,
excommunicate, suspended or degraded have the use of the keys.
For just as the power of the keys results from orders, so does the
power of consecration. But the above cannot lose the use of the
power of consecration, since if they do consecrate it is valid, though
they sin in doing so. Therefore neither can they lose the use of the
keys.
Objection 2: Further, any active spiritual power in one who has the
use of his free-will can be exercised by him when he wills. Now the
power of the keys remains in the aforesaid, for, since it is only
conferred with orders, they would have to be reordained when they
return to the Church. Therefore, since it is an active power, they can
exercise it when they will.
Objection 3: Further, spiritual grace is hindered by guilt more than
by punishment. Now excommunication, suspension and degradation
are punishments. Therefore, since a man does not lose the use of
the keys on account of guilt, it seems that he does not lose it on
account of the aforesaid.
On the contrary, Augustine says (Tract. cxxi in Joan.) that the
"charity of the Church forgives sins." Now it is the charity of the
Church which unites its members. Since therefore the above are
disunited from the Church, it seems that they have not the use of the
keys in remitting sins.
Further, no man is absolved from sin by sinning. Now it is a sin for
anyone to seek absolution of his sins from the above, for he
disobeys the Church in so doing. Therefore he cannot be absolved
by them: and so the same conclusion follows.
I answer that, In all the above the power of the keys remains as to its
essence, but its use is hindered on account of the lack of matter. For
since the use of the keys requires in the user authority over the
person on whom they are used, as stated above (Question 17, Article
2, ad 2), the proper matter on whom one can exercise the use of the