same; when he sees that he himself has sinned, he is rendered humble and
modest. If we act thus, if we thus regulate ourselves, we shall be able to obtain
the good things which are promised, through the grace and lovingkindness of our
Lord Jesus Christ, with whom, etc.

## Homily 10 on Philippians

[Philippians 3:1-3]
"Finally, my brethren, rejoice in the Lord. To write the same things to you,
to me indeed is not irksome, but for you it is safe. Beware of the dogs, beware of
the evil workers, beware of the concision. For we are the circumcision, who
worship God in the spirit, and glory in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in
the flesh."
[Dejection] and care, whenever they strain the soul beyond due measure,
bereave it of its native force. And therefore Paul relieves the Philippians, who
were in great despondency, and they were in despondency because they did not
know how matters were with Paul; they were in despondency because they
thought that it was already over with him, because of the preaching, because of
Epaphroditus. It is in giving them assurance on all these points that he introduces
the words, "Finally, my brethren, rejoice." "You no longer have," he says, "cause
for despondency. You have Epaphroditus, for whose sake you were grieved; you
have Timothy; I am myself coming to you; the Gospel is gaining ground. What is
henceforth wanting to you? Rejoice!"
Now he calls the Galatians indeed "children" [Galatians 4:19], but these
"brethren." For when he aims either to correct anything or to show his fondness,
he calls them "children"; but when he addresses them with greater honor,
"brethren" is the title. "Finally, my brethren," he says, "rejoice in the Lord." He
said rightly "in the Lord," not "after the world." for this is no rejoicing. These
tribulations, he says, which are according to Christ bring joy. "To write the same
things to you, to me indeed is not irksome, but for you it is safe. Beware of the
dogs." Do you mark how he forbears to bring in the exhortation at the
beginning? But after he had given them much commendation, after he had
shown his admiration of them, then he does this, and again repeats his

commendation. For this mode of speech seems to bear somewhat hard upon
them. Wherefore he overshadows it on every side. But whom does he style
"dogs"? There were at this place some of those, whom he hints at in all his
Epistles, base and contemptible Jews, greedy of vile lucre and fond of power,
who, desiring to draw aside many of the faithful, preached both Christianity and
Judaism at the same time, corrupting the Gospel. As then they were not easily
discernible, therefore he says, "beware of the dogs": the Jews are no longer
children; once the Gentiles were called dogs, but now the Jews. Wherefore?
Because as the Gentiles were strangers both to God and to Christ, even so are
these become this now. And he shows forth their shamelessness and violence,
and their infinite distance from the relation of children, for that the Gentiles were
once called "dogs," hear what the Canaanitish woman says, "Yea, Lord: for even
the dogs eat of the crumbs which fall from their masters' table." [Matthew 15:27]
But that they might not have this advantage, since even dogs are at the table, he
adds that, whereby he makes them aliens also, saying, "Beware of the evil
workers"; he admirably expressed himself, "beware of the evil workers"; they
work, he means, but for a bad end, and a work that is much worse than idleness,
plucking up what is laid in goodly order.
"Beware," he says, "of the concision." The rite of circumcision was
venerable in the Jews' account, forasmuch as the Law itself gave way thereto,
and the Sabbath was less esteemed than circumcision. For that circumcision
might be performed the Sabbath was broken; but that the Sabbath might be kept,
circumcision was never broken; and mark, I pray, the dispensation of God. This
is found to be even more solemn than the Sabbath, as not being omitted at
certain times. When then it is done away, much more is the Sabbath. Wherefore
Paul makes a concision of the name, and says, "Beware of the concision"; and he
did not say "that circumcision is evil, that it is superfluous," lest he should strike
the men with dismay, but he manages it more wisely, withdrawing them from the
thing, but gratifying them with the word, nay, rather with the thing too, in a more
serious way. But not so in the case of the Galatians, for since in that case the