SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.82, C.10.

of our Lord." For since prayer interprets our desires, as it were,
before God, then alone is it right to ask for something in our prayers
when it is right that we should desire it. Now in the Lord's Prayer not
only do we ask for all that we may rightly desire, but also in the order
wherein we ought to desire them, so that this prayer not only
teaches us to ask, but also directs all our affections. Thus it is
evident that the first thing to be the object of our desire is the end,
and afterwards whatever is directed to the end. Now our end is God
towards Whom our affections tend in two ways: first, by our willing
the glory of God, secondly, by willing to enjoy His glory. The first
belongs to the love whereby we love God in Himself, while the
second belongs to the love whereby we love ourselves in God.
Wherefore the first petition is expressed thus: "Hallowed be Thy
name," and the second thus: "Thy kingdom come," by which we ask
to come to the glory of His kingdom.
To this same end a thing directs us in two ways: in one way, by its
very nature, in another way, accidentally. Of its very nature the good
which is useful for an end directs us to that end. Now a thing is
useful in two ways to that end which is beatitude: in one way,
directly and principally, according to the merit whereby we merit
beatitude by obeying God, and in this respect we ask: "Thy will be
done on earth as it is in heaven"; in another way instrumentally, and
as it were helping us to merit, and in this respect we say: "Give us
this day our daily bread," whether we understand this of the
sacramental Bread, the daily use of which is profitable to man, and in
which all the other sacraments are contained, or of the bread of the
body, so that it denotes all sufficiency of food, as Augustine says (ad
Probam, Ep. cxxx, 11), since the Eucharist is the chief sacrament,
and bread is the chief food: thus in the Gospel of Matthew we read,
"supersubstantial," i.e. "principal," as Jerome expounds it.
We are directed to beatitude accidentally by the removal of
obstacles. Now there are three obstacles to our attainment of
beatitude. First, there is sin, which directly excludes a man from the
kingdom, according to 1 Cor. 6:9,10, "Neither fornicators, nor
idolaters, etc., shall possess the kingdom of God"; and to this refer
the words, "Forgive us our trespasses." Secondly, there is
temptation which hinders us from keeping God's will, and to this we
refer when we say: "And lead us not into temptation," whereby we do
not ask not to be tempted, but not to be conquered by temptation,
which is to be led into temptation. Thirdly, there is the present penal
state which is a kind of obstacle to a sufficiency of life, and to this

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.82, C.10.