Eph. iv. 10.

wisdom of God. Wherefore also Isaiah says: "Thus saith the Lord, Behold, I deposit in the
foundations of Zion a stone, precious, elect, the chief, the corner-one, to be had in honour." So,
then, we understand that His advent in human nature was not by the will of a man, but by the will
of God.
8. Wherefore also Moses giving a type, cast his rod upon the earth, in order that it, by
becoming flesh, might expose and swallow up all the opposition of the Egyptians, which was lifting
itself up against the pre-arranged plan of God; that the Egyptians themselves might testify that
it is the finger of God which works salvation for the people, and not the son of Joseph. For if He
were the son of Joseph, how could He be greater than Solomon, or greater than Jonah, or greater
than David, when He was generated from the same seed, and was a descendant of these men?
And how was it that He also pronounced Peter blessed, because he acknowledged Him to be the
Son of the living God?3730
9. But besides, if indeed He had been the son of Joseph, He could not, according to Jeremiah,
be either king or heir. For Joseph is shown to be the son of Joachim and Jechoniah, as also Matthew
sets forth in his pedigree. But Jechoniah, and all his posterity, were disinherited from the kingdom;
Jeremiah thus declaring, "As I live, saith the Lord, if Jechoniah the son of Joachim king of Judah
had been made the signet of my right hand, I would pluck him thence, and deliver him into the
hand of those seeking thy life." And again: "Jechoniah is dishonoured as a useless vessel, for
he has been cast into a land which he knew not. Earth, hear the word of the Lord: Write this man
a disinherited person; for none of his seed, sitting on the throne of David, shall prosper, or be a
prince in Judah." And again, God speaks of Joachim his father: "Therefore thus saith the Lord
concerning Joachim his father, king of Judea, There shall be from him none sitting upon the throne
of David: and his dead body shall be cast out in the heat of day, and in the frost of night. And I will
look upon him, and upon his sons, and will bring upon them, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem,
upon the land of Judah, all the evils that I have pronounced against them." Those, therefore, who
say that He was begotten of Joseph, and that they have hope in Him, do cause themselves to be
disinherited from the kingdom, failing under the curse and rebuke directed against Jechoniah and

Matt. xii. 41, 42.

Jer. xxii. 24, 25.

his seed. Because for this reason have these things been spoken concerning Jechoniah, the [Holy]
Spirit foreknowing the doctrines of the evil teachers; that they may learn that from his seed—that
is, from Joseph—He was not to be born but that, according to the promise of God, from David's
belly the King eternal is raised up, who sums up all things in Himself, and has gathered into Himself
the ancient formation [of man].
10. For as by one man's disobedience sin entered, and death obtained [a place] through sin; so
also by the obedience of one man, righteousness having been introduced, shall cause life to fructify
in those persons who in times past were dead. And as the protoplast himself Adam, had his
substance from untilled and as yet virgin soil ("for God had not yet sent rain, and man had not tilled
the ground"), and was formed by the hand of God, that is, by the Word of God, for "all things
were made by Him," and the Lord took dust from the earth and formed man; so did He who is
the Word, recapitulating Adam in Himself, rightly receive a birth, enabling Him to gather up Adam
[into Himself], from Mary, who was as yet a virgin. If, then, the first Adam had a man for his father,
and was born of human seed, it were reasonable to say that the second Adam was begotten of
Joseph. But if the former was taken from the dust, and God was his Maker, it was incumbent that
the latter also, making a recapitulation in Himself, should be formed as man by God, to have an
analogy with the former as respects His origin. Why, then, did not God again take dust, but wrought
so that the formation should be made of Mary? It was that there might not be another formation
called into being, nor any other which should [require to] be saved, but that the very same formation
should be summed up [in Christ as had existed in Adam], the analogy having been preserved.