this world to a needy person is evil, and to take away such substance from him who has
it is good: which is absurd. It is therefore a good thing to have worldly substance, and to
fling it entirely away by voluntary poverty is evil.
Reply. Wealth is a good thing for man, so far as it is directed to rational good, but not in
itself: hence poverty may very well be better than wealth, if by poverty man finds
his way to a more perfect good.
Arg. 5. Occasions of evil are to be shunned. But poverty is an occasion of evil, leading
men on to thefts, flatteries, perjuries, and the like.
Reply. Neither riches, nor poverty, nor any other exterior condition is of itself the good of
man. Such things are good only as tending to the good of reason. Hence vice may arise
out of any of them, when they are not turned to man's use according to the rule of
reason. Still not for that are they to be accounted simply evil, but only the abuse of them
is evil.
Arg. 6. Virtue, lying in the mean, is spoilt by either extreme. There is a virtue called
liberality, which consists in giving where one should give, and holding one's hand where
one should hold it. On the side of defect is the vice of stinginess, which holds its hand in
all cases indiscriminately. On the side of excess is the vice of lavish giving away of
everything, as is done by those who embrace voluntary poverty, a vice akin to
prodigality.
Reply. The golden mean is not determined according to quantity of exterior goods, but
according to the rule of reason. Hence sometimes it happens that what is extreme in
quantity of some exterior commodity is the mean according to the rule of reason. There
is none who tends to great things more than the magnanimous man, or who in
expenditure surpasses the munificent, or princely man. The rule of reason does
not measure the mere quantity of commodity employed, but the condition of the person
and his intention, fitness of place, time, and the like, also many conditions of virtue.
Therefore one does not run counter to virtue by voluntary poverty, even though one
abandon all things. Nor is this an act of prodigality, seeing that it is done with a due end
and other due conditions. To expose oneself to death, under due conditions, is an act of
fortitude and a virtue: yet that is going far beyond the abandonment of one's
possessions.

the latter days. Vigilantius was a contemporary of St Jerome, who one night in the year
406 sat up and finished a Liber contra Vigilantium at a sitting.

CHAPTERS CXXXIII, CXXXVI--Of various Modes of Living adopted by the Votaries of
Voluntary Poverty
FIRST MODE. The first mode is for the possessions of all to be sold, and all to live in
common on [the capital fund accumulated by] the price, as was done under the
Apostles at Jerusalem: As many as had possessions in lands or houses sold them, and
laid the price at the feet of the Apostles, and division was made to each according to the
need of each (Acts iv, 34, 35).
Criticism. It is not easy to induce many men with great possessions to take up this mode
of life; and if the amount realised out of the possessions of a few rich is divided among
many recipients, it will not last long.
Reply. This mode will do, but not for a long time. And therefore we do not read of the
Apostles instituting this inode of living when they passed to the nations among whom
the Church was to take root and endure.
Second Mode. To have possessions in common, sufficient to provide for all members of
the community out of what the property brings in, as is done in most monasteries.
Criticism. Earthly possessions breed solicitude, as well for the gathering in of the returns
as also for the defence of them against acts of fraud and violence; and this solicitude is
all the greater as greater possessions are required for the support of many. In this way
then the end of voluntary poverty is defeated, at least in the case of many, who have the
procuratorship of these possessions. Besides, common possession is wont to be a
source of discord.
Reply. The administration of these common possessions may be left to the care of one
or a few persons, and the rest remain without solicitude for temporals, free to attend to
spiritual things. Nor do they who undertake this solicitude for others lose any of the
perfection of their life: for what they seem to lose by defect of quiet they recover in the
service of charity, in which perfection consists. Nor is there any loss of concord by
occasion of this mode of common possessions. For they who adopt voluntary poverty
ought to be persons who despise temporal things; and such persons are not the men to
quarrel over temporals.
Third mode. To live by the labour of one's hands, as St Paul did and advised others to
do. We have not eaten bread of any one for nothing, but in labour and fatigue, night and
day working, not to be a burden to any of you: not that we had not authority to act
otherwise, but to present ourselves to you as a model for you to imitate: for when we
were with you, we laid down to you the rule, if any man not work, neither let him eat (2
Thess. iii, 8-10).
Criticism. It seems folly for one to abandon what is necessary, and afterwards try to get
it back again by labour. Moreover, whereas the end of the counsel of voluntary poverty
is the readier following of Christ in freedom from worldly solicitudes, earning one's