says here in the sealing up of his letter.
"Knowing that you will also do more than I say."
At the same time in saying this he excited him. For he would have been
ashamed, though for nothing else, if having such credit with him as this, that he
would do more than he said—he should not do so much.
Ver. 22. "But withal prepare me also a lodging: for I trust that through your
prayers I shall be given unto you."
This also was the part of one who was exceedingly confident— or rather
this too was in behalf of Onesimus, that not being indifferent, but knowing that
he upon his return would know the things relating to him, they might lay aside
all remembrance of the wrong, and might the rather grant the favor. For great
was the influence and the honor of Paul residing among them, of Paul in his age,
of Paul after imprisonment. Again, it is a proof of their love that he says that
they pray; and to attribute to them so much as that they pray for "him." For
although I be now in danger, yet nevertheless you will see me if you pray for it.
Ver. 23. "Epaphras, my fellow-prisoner in Christ Jesus, salutes you."
He was sent by the Colossians, so that from this it appears that Philemon
was also at Colossæ. And he calls him his "fellow-prisoner," showing that he
also was in much tribulation, so that if not on his own account, yet on account of
the other, it was right that he should be heard. For he that is in tribulation, and
overlooks himself, and is concerned for others, deserves to be heard.
And he puts him to shame from another consideration, if his countryman is
a fellow-prisoner with Paul and suffers affliction with him, and he himself does
not grant him a favor in behalf of his own servant. And he has added, "my
fellow-prisoner in Christ Jesus," instead of on account of Christ.
Ver. 24. "Mark, Aristarchus, Demas, Luke, my fellow-workers."
Why then does he put Luke last? And yet he elsewhere says, "Only Luke is
with me" [2 Timothy 4:11], and "Demas," he says, was one of those who
"forsook him, having loved the present world." [2 Timothy 4:10] All these
things, although they are mentioned elsewhere, yet nevertheless ought not to be

passed over here without enquiry, nor ought we merely to hear them as things of
course. But how comes he to say that he who forsook him salutes them? For
"Erastus," he says, "abode at Corinth." [2 Timothy 4:20] He adds Epaphras,
both as known to them, and being of their country. And Mark, as being himself
also an admirable man. Why then does he number Demas with these? Perhaps it
was after this that he became more remiss, when he saw the dangers multiplied.
But Luke being last became first. And from these indeed he salutes him, urging
him the more to obedience, and calls them his fellow-laborers, and in this way
shames him into granting the request.
Ver. 25. "The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit. Amen."
Moral. He has closed his Epistle with a prayer. And indeed prayer is a great
good, salutary, and preservative of our souls. But it is great when we do things
worthy of it, and do not render ourselves unworthy. And thou too, therefore,
when you go to the priest, and he shall say to you, "The Lord will have mercy on
you, my son," do not confide in the word only, but add also works. Do acts
worthy of mercy, God will bless you, my son, if indeed you do things worthy of
blessing. He will bless you, if you show mercy to your neighbor. For the things
which we wish to obtain from God, of those we ought first to impart to our
neighbors. But if we deprive our neighbors of them, how can we wish to obtain
them? "Blessed," He says, "are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy."
[Matthew 5:7] For if men show mercy to such, much more will God, but to the
unmerciful by no means. "For he shall have judgment without mercy to him that
has showed no mercy." [James 2:13]
An excellent thing is mercy! Why then have you not done it to another? Do
you wish to be pardoned, when you offend, why then do you not yourself pardon
him who has offended you? But you come to God, asking of Him the kingdom
of heaven, and you yourself dost not give money when it is begged of you. For
this cause we do not obtain mercy, because we do not show mercy. But why?
You say. Is not this also a part of mercy, to show mercy to the unmerciful? Nay!
For he that treated with the greatest kindness the hard-hearted cruel man, that