affliction, that school-mistress of heavenly wisdom, that mother of piety. When
riches were done away with, wickedness also disappeared. True, say you, for this
is the very thing I am asking about; but whence comes all the wickedness there
is now? How is it that it came into the minds of those three thousand and five
thousand straightway, to choose virtue, and that they simultaneously became
Christian philosophers, whereas now hardly one is to be found? How was it that
they then were in such harmony? What was it, that made them resolute and
active? What was it that so suddenly inflamed them? The reason is, that they
drew near with much piety; that honors were not so sought after as they are now;
that they transferred their thoughts to things future, and looked for nothing of
things present. This is the sign of an ardent mind, to encounter perils; this was
their idea of Christianity. We take a different view, we seek our comfort here.
The result is, that we shall not even obtain this, when the time has come. "What
are we to do?" asked those men. We, just the contrary— "What shall we do?"
What behooved to be done, they did. We, quite the reverse. Those men
condemned themselves, despaired of saving themselves. This is what made them
such as they were. They knew what a gift they had received. But how can you
become like them, when you do everything in an opposite spirit? They heard,
and were immediately baptized. They did not speak those cold words which we
do now, nor did they contrive delays (p. 47, note 3); and yet they had heard all
the requirements: but that word, "Save yourselves from this generation," made
them to be not sluggish; rather they welcomed the exhortation; and that they did
welcome it, they proved by their deeds, they showed what manner of men they
were. They entered at once the lists, and took off the coat; whereas we do enter,
but we intend to fight with our coat on. This is the cause that our antagonist has
so little trouble, for we get entangled in our own movements, and are continually
thrown down. We do precisely the same thing as he who, having to cope with a
man frantic, breathing fire; and seeing him, a professed wrestler, covered with
dust, tawny, stripped, clotted with dirt from the sand and sun, and running down
with sweat and oil and dirt; himself, smelling of perfumes, should put on his

silken garments, and his gold shoes, and his robe hanging down to his heels, and
his golden trinkets on the head, and so descend into the arena, and grapple with
him. Such a one will not only be impeded, but being taken up with the sole idea
of not staining or rending his fine clothes, will tumble at the very first onset, and
withal will suffer that which he chiefly dreaded, the damage of those his fond
delights. The time for the contest has come, and say, are you putting on your
silks? It is the time of exercise, the hour of the race, and are you adorning
yourself as for a procession? Look not to outward things, but to the inward. For
by the thoughts about these things the soul is hampered on all sides, as if by
strong cords, so that she cannot let you raise a hand, or contend against the
adversary; and makes you soft and effeminate. One may think himself, even
when released from all these ties, well off, to be enabled to conquer that impure
power. And on this account Christ too did not allow the parting with riches alone
to suffice, but what says He? "Sell whatsoever you have, and give to the poor,
and come and follow Me." [Mark 10:21] Now if, even when we cast away our
riches, we are not yet in a safe position, but stand still in need of some further art
and close practice; much more, if we retain them, shall we fail to achieve great
things, and, instead thereof, become a laughing-stock to the spectators, and to the
evil one himself. For even though there were no devil, though there were none to
wrestle with us, yet ten thousand roads on all sides lead the lover of money to
hell. Where now are they who ask why the devil was made ([διατί ὁ δ.
γέγονεν];)? Behold here the devil has no hand in the work, we do it all ourselves.
Of a truth they of the hills might have a right to speak thus, who after they had
given proof of their temperance, their contempt of wealth and disregard of all
such things, have infinitely preferred to abandon father, and houses, and lands,
and wife, and children. Yet, they are the last to speak so: but the men who at no
time ought to say it, these do say it. Those are indeed wrestlings with the devil;
these he does not think worth entering into. You will say, But it is the devil who
instils this same covetousness. Well, flee from it, do not harbor it, O man.
Suppose now, you see one flinging out filth from some upper story, and at the