they nourish the most dangerous passion in our nature, leading on anger into
action, swelling the empty bubbles of ambition, and stimulating and urging men
to arrogance? Why these are just the very reasons why we ought resolutely to
turn our backs upon riches, because they introduce certain fierce and dangerous
wild beasts into our heart depriving us of the real honour which we might
receive from all, and introducing to deluded men another which is the opposite
of this, only painted over with its colours, and persuading them to fancy that it is
the same, when by nature it is not so, but only seems to be so to the eye. For as
the beauty of courtesans, made up as it is of dyes and pigments, is destitute of
real beauty, yet makes a foul and ugly face appear fair and beautiful to those who
are deluded by it when it is not so in reality: even so also riches force flattery to
look like honour. For I beg you not to consider the praises which are openly
bestowed through fear and fawning: for these are only tints and pigments; but
unfold the conscience of each of those who flatter you in this fashion, and inside
it you will see countless accusers declaring against you, and loathing and
detesting you more than your bitterest adversaries and foes. And if ever a change
of circumstances should occur which would remove and expose this mask which
fear has manufactured, just as the sun when it emits a hotter ray than usual
discloses the real countenances of those women whom I mentioned, then you
will see clearly that all through the former time you were held in the greatest
contempt by those who paid court to you, and you fancied you were enjoying
honour from those who thoroughly hated you, and in their heart poured infinite
abuse upon you, and longed to see you involved in extreme calamities. For there
is nothing like virtue to produce honour—honour neither forced nor feigned, nor
hidden under a mask of deceit, but real and genuine, and able to stand the test of
hard times.
10. But do you wish to take vengeance on those who have annoyed you?
This, as I was saying just now, is the very reason why wealth ought specially to
be avoided. For it prepares you to thrust the sword against yourself, and renders
you liable to a heavier account in the future day of reckoning, and makes your

punishment intolerable. For revenge is so great an evil that it actually revokes
the mercy of God, and cancels the forgiveness of countless sins which has been
already bestowed. For he who received remission of the debt of ten thousand
talents, and after having obtained so great a boon by merely asking for it then
made a demand of one hundred pence from his fellow servant, a demand, that is,
for satisfaction for his transgression against himself, in his severity towards his
fellow servant recorded his own condemnation; and for this reason and no other
he was delivered to the tormentors, and racked, and required to pay back the ten
thousand talents; and he was not allowed the benefit of any excuse or defence,
but suffered the most extreme penalty, having been commanded to deposit the
whole debt which the lovingkindness of God had formerly remitted.
[Matthew 18:23-35] Is this then the reason, pray, why wealth is so earnestly
pursued by you, because it so easily conducts you into sin of this kind? Nay
verily, this is why you ought to abhor it as a foe and an adversary teeming with
countless murders. But poverty, some one will say, disposes men to be
discontented and often also to utter profane words, and condescend to mean
actions. It is not poverty which does this, but littleness of soul: for Lazarus also
was poor, aye! very poor: and besides poverty he suffered from infirmity, a
bitterer trial than any form of poverty, and one which makes poverty more
severely felt; and in addition to infirmity there was a total absence of protectors,
and difficulty in finding any to supply his wants, which increased the bitterness
of poverty and infirmity. For each of these things is painful in itself, but when
there are none to minister to the sufferer's wants, the suffering becomes greater,
the flame more painful, the distress more bitter, the tempest fiercer, the billows
stronger, the furnace hotter. And if one examines the case thoroughly there was
yet a fourth trial besides these— the unconcern and luxury of the rich man who
dwelt hard by. And if you would find a fifth thing, serving as fuel to the flame,
you will see quite clearly that he was beset by it. For not only was that rich man
living luxuriously, but twice, and thrice, or rather indeed several times in the day
he saw the poor man: for he had been laid at his gate, being a grievous spectacle