cleave to that form but by loving it? Why then do we love another whom
we believe to be righteous, and do not love that form itself wherein we see
what is a righteous mind, that we also may be able to be righteous? Is it
that unless we loved that also, we should not love him at all, whom
through it we love; but whilst we are not righteous, we love that form too
little to allow of our being able to be righteous? The man therefore who is
believed to be righteous, is loved through that form and truth which he
who loves discerns and understands within himself; but that very form
and truth itself cannot be loved from any other source than itself. For we
do not find any other such thing besides itself, so that by believing we
might love it when it is unknown, in that we here already know another
such thing. For whatsoever of such a kind one may have seen, is itself;
and there is not any other such thing, since itself alone is such as itself is.
He therefore who loves men, ought to love them either because they are
righteous, or that they may become righteous. For so also he ought to love
himself, either because he is righteous, or that he may become righteous;
for in this way he loves his neighbor as himself without any risk. For he
who loves himself otherwise, loves himself wrongfully, since he loves
himself to this end that he may be unrighteous; therefore to this end that
he may be wicked; and hence it follows next that he does not love himself;
for, "He who loveth iniquity, hateth his own soul."

### CHAP. 7.—OF TRUE LOVE, BY WHICH WE ARRIVE AT THE KNOWLEDGE OF THE TRINITY. GOD IS TO BE SOUGHT, NOT OUTWARDLY, BY SEEKING TO DO WONDERFUL THINGS WITH THE ANGELS, BUT INWARDLY, BY IMITATING THE PIETY OF GOOD ANGELS.

10. No other thing, then, is chiefly to be regarded in this inquiry, which
we make concerning the Trinity and concerning knowing God, except
what is true love, nay, rather what is love. For that is to be called love
which is true, otherwise it is desire; and so those who desire are said
improperly to love, just as they who love are said improperly to desire.
But this is true love, that cleaving to the truth we may live righteously,
and so may despise all mortal things in comparison with the love of men,
whereby we wish them to live righteously. For so we should be prepared
also to die profitably for our brethren, as our Lord Jesus Christ taught us

by His example. For as there are two commandments on which hang all
the Law and the prophets, love of God and love of our neighbor; not
without cause the Scripture mostly puts one for both: whether it be of
God only, as is that text, "For we know that all things work together for
good to them that love God;" and again, "But if any man love God, the
same is known of Him;" and that, "Because the love of God is shed abroad
in our hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given unto us;" and many other
passages; because he who loves God must both needs do what God has
commanded, and loves Him just in such proportion as he does so;
therefore he must needs also love his neighbor, because God has
commanded it: or whether it be that Scripture only mentions the love of
our neighbor, as in that text, "Bear ye one another's burdens, and so fulfill
the law of Christ;" and again, "For all the law is fulfilled in one word, even
in this, Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself;" and in the Gospel, "All
things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to
them; for this is the Law and the prophets." And many other passages
occur in the sacred writings, in which only the love of our neighbor seems
to be commanded for perfection, while the love of God is passed over in
silence; whereas the Law and the prophets hang on both precepts. But
this, too, is because be who loves his neighbor must needs also love above
all else love itself. But "God is love; and he that dwelleth in love, dwelleth
in God." Therefore he must needs above all else love God.
11. Wherefore they who seek God through those Powers which rule over
the world, or parts of the world, are removed and cast away far from Him;
not by intervals of space, but by difference of affections: for they endeavor
to find a path outwardly, and forsake their own inward things, within
which is God. Therefore, even although they may either have heard some
holy heavenly Power, or in some way or another may have thought of it,
yet they rather covet its deeds at which human weakness marvels, but do
not imitate the piety by which divine rest is acquired. For they prefer,
through pride, to be able to do that which an angel does, more than,
through devotion, to be that which an angel is. For no holy being rejoices
in his own power, but in His from whom he has the power which he filly
can have; and he knows it to be more a mark of power to be united to the
Omnipotent by a pious will, than to be able, by his own power and will, to
do what they may tremble at who are not able to do such things.