SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.78, C.3.

Reply to Objection 1: Even as legal justice is "all virtue" (Question
58, Article 5) as regards its subject and matter, so legal injustice is
materially "all sin." It is in this way that Ambrose defined sin,
considering it from the point of view of legal injustice.
Reply to Objection 2: The natural inclination concerns the precepts
of the natural law. Again, a laudable custom has the force of a
precept; since as Augustine says in an epistle On the Fast of the
Sabbath (Ep. xxxvi), "a custom of God's people should be looked
upon as law." Hence both sin and transgression may be against a
laudable custom and against a natural inclination.
Reply to Objection 3: All these species of sin may include
transgression, if we consider them not under their proper aspects,
but under a special aspect, as stated above. The sin of omission,
however, is altogether distinct from the sin of transgression.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.78, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether omission is a special sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that omission is not a special sin. For
every sin is either original or actual. Now omission is not original
sin, for it is not contracted through origin nor is it actual sin, for it
may be altogether without act, as stated above (FS, Question 71,
Article 5) when we were treating of sins in general. Therefore
omission is not a special sin.
Objection 2: Further, every sin is voluntary. Now omission
sometimes is not voluntary but necessary, as when a woman is
violated after taking a vow of virginity, or when one lose that which
one is under an obligation to restore, or when a priest is bound to
say Mass, and is prevented from doing so. Therefore omission is not
always a sin.
Objection 3: Further, it is possible to fix the time when any special
sin begins. But this is not possible in the case of omission, since
one is not altered by not doing a thing, no matter when the omission
occurs, and yet the omission is not always sinful. Therefore
omission is not a special sin.
Objection 4: Further, every special sin is opposed to a special virtue.
But it is not possible to assign any special virtue to which omission
is opposed, both because the good of any virtue can be omitted, and
because justice to which it would seem more particularly opposed,
always requires an act, even in declining from evil, as stated above
(Article 1, ad 2), while omission may be altogether without act.
Therefore omission is not a special sin.
On the contrary, It is written (James 4:17): "To him . . . who knoweth
to do good and doth it not, to him it is sin."
I answer that, omission signifies the non-fulfilment of a good, not
indeed of any good, but of a good that is due. Now good under the
aspect of due belongs properly to justice; to legal justice, if the thing
due depends on Divine or human law; to special justice, if the due is
something in relation to one's neighbor. Wherefore, in the same way
as justice is a special virtue, as stated above (Question 58, Articles
6,7), omission is a special sin distinct from the sins which are
opposed to the other virtues; and just as doing good, which is the