What say you? Are you not afraid to utter such a thing, and to set the same
store by horses and mules and couches and footstools, as by Christ an hungered?
Or rather not even comparing them at all, but giving the larger share to these,
and to Him meting out with difficulty a scant share? Do you not know that all
belongs to Him, both you and yours? Do you not know that He fashioned your
body, as well as gave you a soul, and apportioned you the whole world? But you
are not for giving a little recompense to Him. But if you let a little hut, you
require the rent with the utmost rigor, and though reaping the whole of His
creation, and dwelling in so wide a world, you have not courage to lay down
even a little rent, but has given up to vainglory yourself and all you have. For
this is that whereof all these things come. The horse is none the better above his
natural excellence for having this ornament, neither yet is the person mounted
upon him, for sometimes he is only in the less esteem for it; since many neglect
the rider and turn their eyes to the horse's ornaments, and to the attendants
behind and before, and to the fan-bearers. But the man, who is lackeyed by
these, they hate and turn their heads from, as a common enemy. But this does not
happen when you adorn your soul, for then men, and angels, and the Lord of
angels, all weave you a crown. And so, if you are in love with glory, stand aloof
from the things which you are now doing, and show your taste not in your house,
but in your soul, that you may become brilliant and conspicuous. For now
nothing can be more cheap than you are, with your soul unfurnished, and but the
handsomeness of your house for a screen. But if you are impatient of hearing me
speak in this way, listen to what one of those that are without did, and at all
events be shamed by their philosophy. For it is said that a certain one of them,
who went into a palace that shone with gold in abundance, and glistened with the
great beauty of the marbles and the columns, when he saw the floor strewed with
carpets in all directions, spat in the face of the master of the house, and when
found fault with for it said, that since there was no other part of the house where
he could do this, he was obliged to do this affront to his face. See how ridiculous
a man is, who displays his taste in exteriors, and how little he is in the eyes of all

reasonable men. And with good reason. For if a person were to leave your wife
to be clad in rags, and to be neglected, and clothed your maid-servants with
brilliant dresses, you would not bear it meekly, but wouldest be exasperated, and
say that it was insulting in the extreme. Reason then in this way about your soul.
When you display your taste in walls then, and pavement, and furniture, and
other things of the kind, and do not give liberally in alms, or practise the other
parts of a religious life ([φιλοσοφίαν]); you do nothing less than this, or rather
what is worse than this by far. For the difference between servant and mistress is
nothing, but between soul and flesh, there is a great disparity. But if it be so with
the flesh, much more is it with a house or a couch or a footstool. What kind of
excuse then do you deserve, who puttest silver on all these, but for it hast no
regard, though it be covered with filthy rags, squalid, hungry, and full of
wounds, torn by hounds unnumbered [Luke 16:20-21]; and after all this fanciest
that you shall get you glory by displaying your taste in externals wound about
you? And this is the very height of phrenzy, while ridiculed, reproached,
disgraced, dishonored, and falling into the severest punishment, still to be vain
of these things! Wherefore, I beseech you, laying all this to heart, let us become
sober-minded, late as it is, and become our own masters, and transfer this
adorning from outward things to our souls. For so it will abide safe from
spoiling, and will make us equal to the angels, and will entertain us with
unaltering good, which may we all attain by the grace and love toward man, etc.