men do not receive it. But the fault is, indolence, for no one that has
understanding receives the other. For among the Greeks even, they who did
receive that doctrine, were those who in their definition of pleasure affirmed it to
be the "end," but they who loved virtue, would not receive it, but they cast it out
as absurd. But if among the Greeks this were so, much more will it hold good
with the doctrine of the Resurrection. And observe, I pray you, how the devil has
established two contrary things: for in order that we may neglect virtue; and pay
honor to demons, he brought in this Necessity, and by means of each he procured
the belief of both. What reason then will he be able to give, who obstinately
disbelieves a thing so admirable, and is persuaded by those who talk so idly? Do
not then support yourself with the consolation, that you will meet with
forgiveness; but let us, collecting all our strength, stir ourselves up to virtue, and
let us live truly to God, in Christ Jesus our Lord, etc.

## Homily 3 on Colossians

[Colossians 1:15-18]
"Who is the Image of the invisible God, the Firstborn of all creation: for in
Him were all things created, in the heavens, and upon the earth, things visible
and things invisible, whether thrones or dominions or principalities or powers:
all things have been created through Him, and unto Him; and He is before all
things, and in Him all things consist. And He is the head of the body, the
Church."
Today it is necessary for me to pay the debt, which yesterday I deferred, in
order that I might address it to your minds when in full force. Paul, discoursing
as we showed of the dignity of the Son, says these words: "Who is the Image of
the invisible God." Whose image then will you have Him be? God's? Then he is
exactly like the one to whom you assign Him. For if as a man's image, say so,
and I will have done with you as a madman. But if as God and God's Son, God's
image, he shows the exact likeness. Wherefore has no Angel anywhere been
called either "image" or "son," but man both? Wherefore? Because in the former
case indeed the exaltedness of their nature might presently have thrust the many
into this impiety ; but in the other case the mean and low nature is a pledge of
security against this, and will not allow any, even should they desire it, to suspect
anything of the kind, nor to bring down the Word so low. For this cause, where
the meanness is great, the Scripture boldly asserts the honor, but where the
nature is higher, it forbears. "The Image of the Invisible" is itself also invisible,
and invisible in like manner, for otherwise it would not be an image. For an
image, so far as it is an image, even among us, ought to be exactly similar, as, for
example, in respect of the features and the likeness. But here indeed among us,
this is by no means possible; for human art fails in many respects, or rather fails
in all, if you examine with accuracy. But where God is, there is no error, no