are the boastings of the Jews. "We are the seed of Abraham," "we are Israelites."
They never mention their own righteous deeds. Wherefore John cried out to
them, saying, "Think not to say that we have Abraham to our father." [Matthew
3:9] And why did not Christ confute them, for they had often been in bondage to
the Egyptians, Babylonians, and many others? Because His words were not to
gain honor for Himself, but for their salvation, for their benefit, and toward this
object He was pressing. For He might have spoken of the four hundred years, He
might have spoken of the seventy, He might have spoken of the years of bondage
during the time of the Judges, at one time twenty, at another two, at another
seven; He might have said that they had never ceased being in bondage. But He
desired not to show that they were slaves of men, but that they were slaves of
sin, which is the most grievous slavery, from which God alone can deliver; for to
forgive sins belongs to none other. And this too they allowed. Since then they
confessed that this was the work of God, He brings them to this point, and says,

John 8:34
"Whosoever commits sin is the servant of sin."
Showing that this is the freedom of which He speaks, the freedom from this
service.

John 8:35
"The servant abides not in the house, but the Son abides forever."
Gently too from this He casts down the things of the Law, alluding to
former times. For that they may not run back to them and say, "We have the
sacrifices which Moses commanded, they are able to deliver us," He adds these
words, since otherwise what connection would the saying have? For "all have
sinned, and come short of the glory of God, being justified freely by His grace"
[Romans 3:23-24], even the priests themselves. Wherefore Paul also says of the
priest, that "he ought as for the people so also for himself to offer for sins, for
that he also is compassed about with infirmity." [Hebrews 5:3] And this is
signified by His saying, "The servant abides not in the house." Here also He
shows His equal honor with the Father, and the difference between slave and
free. For the parable has this meaning, that is, "the servant has no power," this is
the meaning of "abides not."
2. But why when speaking of sins does He mention a "house"? It is to show
that as a master has power over his house, so He over all. And the, "abides not,"
is this," has not power to grant favors, as not being master of the house"; but the
Son is master of the house. For this is the, "abides forever," by a metaphor drawn
from human things. That they may not say, "who are you?" "All is Mine, (He
says,) for I am the Son, and dwell in My Father's house," calling by the name of
"house" His power. As in another place He calls the Kingdom His Father's
house, "In My Father's house are many mansions." [Hebrews 14:2] For since the
discourse was of freedom and bondage, He with reason used this metaphor,
telling them that they had no power to set free.