such species.
Reply to Objection 5: Since the essence of the soul is immaterial,
created by the supreme intellect, nothing prevents that power which
it derives from the supreme intellect, and whereby it abstracts from
matter, flowing from the essence of the soul, in the same way as its
other powers.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether the active intellect is one in all?

Objection 1: It would seem that there is one active intellect in all. For
what is separate from the body is not multiplied according to the
number of bodies. But the active intellect is "separate," as the
Philosopher says (De Anima iii, 5). Therefore it is not multiplied in
the many human bodies, but is one for all men.
Objection 2: Further, the active intellect is the cause of the universal,
which is one in many. But that which is the cause of unity is still
more itself one. Therefore the active intellect is the same in all.
Objection 3: Further, all men agree in the first intellectual concepts.
But to these they assent by the active intellect. Therefore all agree in
one active intellect.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (De Anima iii, 5) that the
active intellect is as a light. But light is not the same in the various
things enlightened. Therefore the same active intellect is not in
various men.
I answer that, The truth about this question depends on what we
have already said (Article 4). For if the active intellect were not
something belonging to the soul, but were some separate substance,
there would be one active intellect for all men. And this is what they
mean who hold that there is one active intellect for all. But if the
active intellect is something belonging to the soul, as one of its
powers, we are bound to say that there are as many active intellects
as there are souls, which are multiplied according to the number of
men, as we have said above (Question 76, Article 2). For it is
impossible that one same power belong to various substances.
Reply to Objection 1: The Philosopher proves that the active intellect
is separate, by the fact that the passive intellect is separate:
because, as he says (De Anima iii, 5), "the agent is more noble than
the patient." Now the passive intellect is said to be separate,
because it is not the act of any corporeal organ. And in the same
sense the active intellect is also called "separate"; but not as a
separate substance.
Reply to Objection 2: The active intellect is the cause of the

universal, by abstracting it from matter. But for this purpose it need
not be the same intellect in all intelligent beings; but it must be one
in its relationship to all those things from which it abstracts the
universal, with respect to which things the universal is one. And this
befits the active intellect inasmuch as it is immaterial.
Reply to Objection 3: All things which are of one species enjoy in
common the action which accompanies the nature of the species,
and consequently the power which is the principle of such action;
but not so as that power be identical in all. Now to know the first
intelligible principles is the action belonging to the human species.
Wherefore all men enjoy in common the power which is the principle
of this action: and this power is the active intellect. But there is no
need for it to be identical in all. Yet it must be derived by all from one
principle. And thus the possession by all men in common of the first
principles proves the unity of the separate intellect, which Plato
compares to the sun; but not the unity of the active intellect, which
Aristotle compares to light.