more miserable than those who go after it? Knowing then this, let us endure all
for virtue, so shall we enjoy true pleasure, through the grace and lovingkindness
of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom to the Father and the Holy Ghost be glory,
now and ever, and world without end. Amen.

Homily 37 on the Gospel of John
John 5:6-7
"Jesus says unto him, Will you be made whole? The impotent man answered
Him, Yea, Sir, but I have no man, when the water is troubled, to put me into the
pool."
1. Great is the profit of the divine Scriptures, and all-sufficient is the aid
which comes from them. And Paul declared this when he said, "Whatsoever
things were written aforetime, were written aforetime for our admonition upon
whom the ends of the world have come, that we through patience and comfort of
the Scriptures might have hope." [Romans 15:4, 1 Corinthians 10:11] For the
divine oracles are a treasury of all manner of medicines, so that whether it be
needful to quench pride, to lull desire to sleep, to tread under foot the love of
money, to despise pain, to inspire confidence, to gain patience, from them one
may find abundant resource. For what man of those who struggle with long
poverty or who are nailed to a grievous disease, will not, when he reads the
passage before us, receive much comfort? Since this man who had been paralytic
for thirty and eight years, and who saw each year others delivered, and himself
bound by his disease, not even so fell back and despaired, though in truth not
merely despondency for the past, but also hopelessness for the future, was
sufficient to over-strain him. Hear now what he says, and learn the greatness of
his sufferings. For when Christ had said, "Will you be made whole?" "Yea, Lord,"
he says, "but I have no man, when the water is troubled, to put me into the pool."
What can be more pitiable than these words? What more sad than these
circumstances? Do you see a heart crushed through long sickness? Do you see
all violence subdued? He uttered no blasphemous word, nor such as we hear the
many use in reverses, he cursed not his day, he was not angry at the question, nor
did he say, "Have You come to make a mock and a jest of us, that Thou asks

whether I desire to be made whole?" but replied gently, and with great mildness,
"Yea, Lord"; yet he knew not who it was that asked him, nor that He would heal
him, but still he mildly relates all the circumstances and asks nothing further, as
though he were speaking to a physician, and desired merely to tell the story of
his sufferings. Perhaps he hoped that Christ might be so far useful to him as to
put him into the water, and desired to attract Him by these words. What then
says Jesus?

John 5:8
"Rise, take up your bed, and walk."
Now some suppose that this is the man in Matthew who was "lying on a
bed" [Matthew 9:2]; but it is not so, as is clear in many ways. First, from his
wanting persons to stand forward for him. That man had many to care for and to
carry him, this man not a single one; wherefore he said, "I have no man."
Secondly, from the manner of answering; the other uttered no word, but this man
relates his whole case. Thirdly, from the season and the time; this man was
healed at a feast, and on the Sabbath, that other on a different day. The places too
were different; one was cured in a house, the other by the pool. The manner also
of the cure was altered; there Christ said, "Your sins be forgiven you," but here
He braced the body first, and then cared for the soul. In that case there was
remission of sins, (for He says, "Your sins be forgiven you,") but in this, warning
and threats to strengthen the man for the future; "Sin no more, lest a worse thing
come unto you." [John 5:14] The charges also of the Jews are different; here they
object to Jesus, His working on the Sabbath, there they charge Him with
blasphemy.
Consider now, I pray you, the exceeding wisdom of God. He raised not up
the man at once, but first makes him familiar by questioning, making way for the
coming faith; nor does He only raise, but bids him "take up his bed," so as to
confirm the miracle that had been wrought, and that none might suppose what
was done to be illusion or a piece of acting. For he would not, unless his limbs
had been firmly and thoroughly compacted, have been able to carry his bed. And
this Christ often does, effectually silencing those who would fain be insolent. So
in the case of the loaves, that no one might assert that the men had been merely
satisfied, and that what was done was an illusion, He caused that there should be
many relics of the loaves. So to the leper that was cleansed He said, "Go, show
yourself to the priest" [Matthew 8:4]; at once providing most certain proof of the