1 Corinthians 10:18
5. "Behold Israel after the flesh: have not they which eat the sacrifices
communion with the altar?"
Again, from the old covenant he leads them unto this point also. For
because they were far beneath the greatness of the things which had been
spoken, he persuades them both from former things and from those to which
they were accustomed. And he says well, "according to the flesh," as though
they themselves were according to the Spirit. And what he says is of this nature:
"even from persons of the grosser sort ye may be instructed that they who eat the
sacrifices, have communion with the altar." Do you see how he intimates that
they who seemed to be perfect have not perfect knowledge, if they know not
even this, that the result of these sacrifices to many oftentimes is a certain
communion and friendship with devils, the practice drawing them on by
degrees? For if among men the fellowship of salt and the table becomes an
occasion and token of friendship, it is possible that this may happen also in the
case of devils.
But do thou, I pray, consider, how with regard to the Jews he said not, "they
are par-takers with God," but, "they have communion with the altar;" for what
was placed thereon was burnt: but in respect to the Body of Christ, not so. But
how? It is "a Communion of the Lord's Body." For not with the altar, but with
Christ Himself, do we have communion.
But having said that they have "communion with the altar," afterwards
fearing lest he should seem to discourse as if the idols had any power and could
do some injury, see again how he overthrows them, saying,

1 Corinthians 10:19
"What say I then? That an idol is any thing? Or that a thing sacrificed to
idols is any thing?"
As if he had said, "Now these things I affirm, and try to withdraw you from
the idols, not as though they could do any injury or had any power: for an idol is
nothing; but I wish you to despise them." "And if you will have us despise them,"
says one, "wherefore do you carefully withdraw us from them?" Because they are
not offered to your Lord.

1 Corinthians 10:20
"For that which the Gentiles sacrifice," says he, "they sacrifice to demons,
and not to God."
Do not then run to the contrary things. For neither if you were a king's son,
and having the privilege of your father's table, should leave it and choose to
partake of the table of the condemned and the prisoners in the dungeon, would
your father permit it, but with great vehemence he would withdraw you; not as
though the table could harm you, but because it disgraces your nobility and the
royal table. For verily these too are servants who have offended; dishonored,
condemned, prisoners reserved for intolerable punishment, accountable for ten
thousand crimes. How then are you not ashamed to imitate the gluttonous and
vulgar crew, in that when these condemned persons set out a table, you run there
and partakest of the viands? Here is the cause why I seek to withdraw you. For
the intention of the sacrificers, and the person of the receivers, makes the things
set before you unclean.
"And I would not that you should have communion with demon." Perceivest
thou the kindness of a careful father? Perceivest thou also the very word, what
force it has to express his feeling? "For it is my wish," says he, "that you have
nothing in common with them."
6. Next, because he brought in the saying by way of exhortation, lest any of
the grosser sort should make light of it as having license, because he said, "I
would not," and, "judge ye;" he positively affirms in what follows and lays down
the law, saying,