Lord, according to Lk. 24:39, "A spirit hath not flesh and bones as
you see Me to have," and Job 19:26, "In my flesh I shall see God," my
Saviour: and the nature of flesh and bone is incompatible with the
aforesaid rarity.
Consequently another kind of subtlety must be assigned to glorified
bodies, by saying that they are subtle on account of the most
complete perfection of the body. But this completeness is explained
by some in relation to the fifth, or heavenly, essence, which will be
then predominant in them. This, however, is impossible, since first of
all the fifth essence can nowise enter into the composition of a body,
as we have shown above (Sent. D, 12, qu. 1). Secondly, because
granted that it entered into the composition of the human body, it
would be impossible to account for its having a greater
predominance over the elemental nature then than now, unless--either the amount of the heavenly nature in human bodies were
increased (thus human bodies would not be of the same stature,
unless perhaps elemental matter in man were decreased, which is
inconsistent with the integrity of those who rise again)---or unless
elemental nature were endowed with the properties of the heavenly
nature through the latter's dominion over the body, and in that case
a natural power would be the cause of a property of glory, which
seems absurd.
Hence others say that the aforesaid completeness by reason of
which human bodies are said to be subtle will result from the
dominion of the glorified soul (which is the form of the body) over
the body, by reason of which dominion the glorified body is said to
be "spiritual," as being wholly subject to the spirit. The first
subjection whereby the body is subject to the soul is to the effect of
its participating in its specific being, in so far as it is subject to the
soul as matter to form; and secondly it is subject to the soul in
respect of the other operations of the soul, in so far as the soul is a
principle of movement. Consequently the first reason for spirituality
in the body is subtlety, and, after that, agility and the other
properties of a glorified body. Hence the Apostle, as the masters
expound, in speaking of spirituality indicates subtlety: wherefore
Gregory says (Moral. xiv, 56) that "the glorified body is said to be
subtle as a result of a spiritual power."
This suffices for the Replies to the Objections which refer to the
subtlety of rarefaction.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether by reason of this subtlety a glorified

body is able to be in the same place with another body not
glorified?
Objection 1: It would seem that by reason of this subtlety a body is
able to be in the same place with another body not glorified. For
according to Phil. 3:21, "He will reform the body of our lowness
made like to the body of His glory." Now the body of Christ was able
to be in the same place with another body, as appears from the fact
that after His Resurrection He went in to His disciples, the doors
being shut (Jn. 20:19,26). Therefore also the glorified bodies by
reason of their subtlety will be able to be in the same place with
other bodies not glorified.
Objection 2: Further, glorified bodies will be superior to all other
bodies. Yet by reason of their superiority certain bodies, to wit the
solar rays, are able now to occupy the same place together with
other bodies. Much more therefore is this befitting glorified bodies.
Objection 3: Further, a heavenly body cannot be severed, at least as
regards the substance of the spheres: hence it is written (Job 37:18)
that "the heavens . . . are most strong, as if they were of molten
brass." If then the subtlety of a glorified body will not enable it to be
in the same place together with another body, it will never be able to
ascend to the empyrean, and this is erroneous.
Objection 4: Further, a body which is unable to be in the same place
with another body can be hindered in its movement or even
surrounded by others standing in its way. But this cannot happen to
glorified bodies. Therefore they will be able to be together in the
same place with other bodies.
Objection 5: Further, as point is to point, so is line to line, surface to
surface, and body to body. Now two points can be coincident, as in
the case of two lines touching one another, and two lines when two
surfaces are in contact with one another, and two surfaces when two
bodies touch one another, because "contiguous things are those
whose boundaries coincide" (Phys. vi, 6). Therefore it is not against
the nature of a body to be in the same place together with another
body. Now whatever excellence is competent to the nature of a body
will all be bestowed on the glorified body. Therefore a glorified body,