glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon." For as in the earthly bodies
there is a difference, so also in the heavenly; and that difference no ordinary one,
but reaching even to the uttermost: there being not only a difference between sun
and moon, and stars, but also between stars and stars. For what though they be
all in the heaven? Yet some have a larger, others a less share of glory. What do
we learn from hence? That although they be all in God's kingdom, all shall not
enjoy the same reward; and though all sinners be in hell, all shall not endure the
same punishment. Wherefore he added,

1 Corinthians 15:42
"So also is the resurrection of the dead."
"So," How? With considerable difference. Then leaving this doctrine as
sufficiently proved, he again comes to the proof itself of the resurrection and the
manner of it, saying,
5. "It is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption." And observe his
consideration. As in the case of seeds, he used the term proper to bodies, saying,
"it is not quickened, except it die:" so in the case of bodies, the expression
belonging to seeds, saying, "it is sown in corruption, it is raised in
incorruption." He said not, "is produced ," that you might not think it a work of
the earth, but is "raised." And by sowing here, he means not our generation in
the womb, but the burial in the earth of our dead bodies, their dissolution, their
ashes. Wherefore having said, "it is sown in corruption, it is raised in
incorruption," he adds,

1 Corinthians 15:43
"It is sown in dishonor." For what is more unsightly than a corpse in
dissolution? "It is raised in glory."
"It is sown in weakness." For before thirty days the whole is gone, and the
flesh cannot keep itself together nor hold out for one day. "It is raised in power."
For there shall nothing prevail against it for all the future.
Here is why he stood in need of those former analogies, lest many on
hearing of these things, that they are "raised in incorruption and glory and
power," might suppose that there is no difference among those who rise again.
For all indeed rise again, both in power and in incorruption; and in this glory of
their incorruption yet are not all in the same state of honor and safety.

1 Corinthians 15:44
"It is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body. There is a natural
body, and there is a spiritual body."
What do you say? Is not "this" body spiritual? It is indeed spiritual, but that
will be much more so. For now oftentimes both the abundant grace of the Holy
Ghost flies away on men's committing great sins; and again, the Spirit
continuing present, the life of the flesh depends on the soul: and the result in
such a case is a void, without the Spirit. But in that day not so: rather he abides
continually in the flesh of the righteous, and the victory shall be His, the natural
soul also being present.
For either it was some such thing which he intimated by saying, "a spiritual
body," or that it shall be lighter and more subtle and such as even to be wafted
upon air; or rather he meant both these. And if you disbelieve the doctrine,
behold the heavenly bodies which are so glorious and (for this time) so durable,
and abide in undecaying tranquillity; and believe thou from hence, that God can
also make these corruptible bodies incorruptible and much more excellent than
those which are visible.