FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.99, C.6.

through others, as the very word seems to denote.
From this it is clear that all the precepts of the Law are either moral,
ceremonial, or judicial; and that other ordinances have not the
character of a precept, but are directed to the observance of the
precepts, as stated above.
Reply to Objection 1: Justice alone, of all the virtues, implies the
notion of duty. Consequently moral matters are determinable by law
in so far as they belong to justice: of which virtue religion is a part,
as Tully says (De Invent. ii). Wherefore the legal just cannot be
anything foreign to the ceremonial and judicial precepts.
The Replies to the other Objections are clear from what has been
said.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.99, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether the Old Law should have induced men to

the observance of its precepts, by means of temporal
promises and threats?
Objection 1: It would seem that the Old Law should not have induced
men to the observance of its precepts, by means of temporal
promises and threats. For the purpose of the Divine law is to subject
man to God by fear and love: hence it is written (Dt. 10:12): "And
now, Israel, what doth the Lord thy God require of thee, but that thou
fear the Lord thy God, and walk in His ways, and love Him?" But the
desire for temporal goods leads man away from God: for Augustine
says (Qq. lxxxiii, qu. 36), that "covetousness is the bane of charity."
Therefore temporal promises and threats seem to be contrary to the
intention of a lawgiver: and this makes a law worthy of rejection, as
the Philosopher declares (Polit. ii, 6).
Objection 2: Further, the Divine law is more excellent than human
law. Now, in sciences, we notice that the loftier the science, the
higher the means of persuasion that it employs. Therefore, since
human law employs temporal threats and promises, as means of
persuading man, the Divine law should have used, not these, but
more lofty means.
Objection 3: Further, the reward of righteousness and the
punishment of guilt cannot be that which befalls equally the good
and the wicked. But as stated in Eccles. 9:2, "all" temporal "things
equally happen to the just and to the wicked, to the good and the
evil, to the clean and to the unclean, to him that offereth victims, and
to him that despiseth sacrifices." Therefore temporal goods or evils
are not suitably set forth as punishments or rewards of the
commandments of the Divine law.
On the contrary, It is written (Is. 1:19,20): "If you be willing, and will
hearken to Me, you shall eat the good things of the land. But if you
will not, and will provoke Me to wrath: the sword shall devour you."
I answer that, As in speculative sciences men are persuaded to
assent to the conclusions by means of syllogistic arguments, so too
in every law, men are persuaded to observe its precepts by means of
punishments and rewards. Now it is to be observed that, in
speculative sciences, the means of persuasion are adapted to the