these questions? "Give thanks for all things." "But what," say you, "if a heathen
should ask the question? How am I to answer him? He desires to learn from me
whether there is a Providence, for he himself denies that there is any being thus
exercising foresight." Turn round then, and ask him the same question yourself.
He will deny therefore that there is a Providence. Yet that there is a Providence,
is plain from what you have said; but that it is incomprehensible, is plain from
those things whereof we cannot discover the reason. For if in things where men
are the disposers, we oftentimes do not understand the method of the disposition,
and in truth many of them appear to us inconsistent, and yet at the same time we
acquiesce, how much more will this be so in the case of God? However, with
God nothing either is inconsistent, or appears so to the faithful. Wherefore let us
"give thanks for all things," let us give Him glory for all things.
"Subjecting yourselves one to another," he says, "in the fear of Christ." For
if you submit yourself for a ruler's sake, or for money's sake, or from
respectfulness, much more from the fear of Christ. Let there be an interchange of
service and submission. For then will there be no such thing as slavish service.
Let not one sit down in the rank of a freeman, and the other in the rank of a
slave; rather it were better that both masters and slaves be servants to one
another—far better to be a slave in this way than free in any other; as will be
evident from hence. Suppose the case of a man who should have an hundred
slaves, and he should in no way serve them; and suppose again a different case,
of an hundred friends, all waiting upon one another. Which will lead the happier
life? Which with the greater pleasure, with the more enjoyment? In the one case
there is no anger, no provocation, no wrath, nor anything else of the kind
whatever; in the other all is fear and apprehension. In the one case too the whole
is forced, in the other is of free choice. In the one case they serve one another
because they are forced to do so, in the other with mutual gratification. Thus
does God will it to be; for this He washed His disciples' feet. Nay more, if you
have a mind to examine the matter nicely, there is indeed on the part of masters a
return of service. For what if pride suffer not that return of service to appear? Yet

if the slave on the one hand render his bodily service, and thou maintain that
body, and supply it with food and clothing and shoes, this is an exchange of
service: because unless thou render your service as well, neither will he render
his, but will be free, and no law will compel him to do it if he is not supported. If
this then is the case with servants, where is the absurdity, if it should also
become the case with free men. "Subjecting yourselves in the fear," says he, "of
Christ." How great then the obligation, when we shall also have a reward. But he
does not choose to submit himself to you? However do thou submit yourself; not
simply yield, but submit yourself. Entertain this feeling towards all, as if all were
your masters. For thus shall you soon have all as your slaves, enslaved to you
with the most abject slavery. For you will then more surely make them yours,
when without receiving anything of theirs, thou of yourself renderest them of
your own. This is "subjecting yourselves one to another in the fear of Christ," in
order that we may subdue all the passions, be servants of God, and preserve the
love we owe to one another. And then shall we be able also to be counted worthy
of the lovingkindness which comes of God, through the grace and mercies of His
only-begotten Son, with whom to the Father, together with the Holy Ghost, be
glory, might, honor, now and forever and ever. Amen.