term it, which is the cause of all life, and that above this again is that
which they call being itself, which is the cause of all being. Avicenna,
however, and certain others, have maintained that the forms of
corporeal things do not subsist "per se" in matter, but in the intellect
only. Thus they say that from forms existing in the intellect of
spiritual creatures (called "intelligences" by them, but "angels" by
us) proceed all the forms of corporeal matter, as the form of his
handiwork proceeds from the forms in the mind of the craftsman.
This theory seems to be the same as that of certain heretics of
modern times, who say that God indeed created all things, but that
the devil formed corporeal matter, and differentiated it into species.
But all these opinions seem to have a common origin; they all, in
fact, sought for a cause of forms as though the form were of itself
brought into being. Whereas, as Aristotle (Metaph. vii, text. 26,27,28),
proves, what is, properly speaking, made, is the "composite." Now,
such are the forms of corruptible things that at one time they exist
and at another exist not, without being themselves generated or
corrupted, but by reason of the generation or corruption of the
"composite"; since even forms have not being, but composites have
being through forms: for, according to a thing's mode of being, is the
mode in which it is brought into being. Since, then, like is produced
from like, we must not look for the cause of corporeal forms in any
immaterial form, but in something that is composite, as this fire is
generated by that fire. Corporeal forms, therefore, are caused, not as
emanations from some immaterial form, but by matter being brought
from potentiality into act by some composite agent. But since the
composite agent, which is a body, is moved by a created spiritual
substance, as Augustine says (De Trin. iii, 4,5), it follows further that
even corporeal forms are derived from spiritual substances, not
emanating from them, but as the term of their movement. And,
further still, the species of the angelic intellect, which are, as it were,
the seminal types of corporeal forms, must be referred to God as the
first cause. But in the first production of corporeal creatures no
transmutation from potentiality to act can have taken place, and
accordingly, the corporeal forms that bodies had when first
produced came immediately form God, whose bidding alone matter
obeys, as its own proper cause. To signify this, Moses prefaces each
work with the words, "God said, Let this thing be," or "that," to
denote the formation of all things by the Word of God, from Whom,
according to Augustine [Tract. i. in Joan. and Gen. ad lit. i. 4], is "all
form and fitness and concord of parts."

Reply to Objection 1: By immaterial forms Boethius understands the
types of things in the mind of God. Thus the Apostle says (Heb.
11:3): "By faith we understand that the world was framed by the
Word of God; that from invisible things visible things might be
made." But if by immaterial forms he understands the angels, we say
that from them come material forms, not by emanation, but by
motion.
Reply to Objection 2: Forms received into matter are to be referred,
not to self-subsisting forms of the same type, as the Platonists held,
but either to intelligible forms of the angelic intellect, from which
they proceed by movement, or, still higher, to the types in the Divine
intellect, by which the seeds of forms are implanted in created
things, that they may be able to be brought by movement into act.
Reply to Objection 3: The heavenly bodies inform earthly ones by
movement, not by emanation.