gained, there follows the satisfaction of the inclination: thus the satisfaction of the
inclination is not the end, but a concomitant of the end.
9. If any exterior thing is to be any one's end, we must assign the title of last end to that
activity whereby the thing is first gained: thus to people who make money their end, the
getting of the money is the end, not the love or desire of it. But the last end of a
subsistent intelligence is God. That activity then in man makes the substance of his
happiness, whereby he first attains to God. But that is the activity of understanding: for
we cannot will what we do not understand. The final happiness of man then
substantially consists in knowing God by the understanding, and not in any act of the
will.
From what has been said we may solve the objections to the contrary. The fact of the
sovereign good being the object of the will does not necessitate sovereign good being
substantially the act of the will itself, as was the tenor of the argument first proposed:
nay, from the fact of its being the first object, it follows that it is not the act.
Arg. 2. The last perfection of activity is delight, which perfects activity as beauty does
youth. If then any perfect activity is the last end, it seems that the last end is rather
in the activity of the will than of the intellect.
Reply. There are two ways of being a perfection to a thing. In one way there is a
perfection to a thing already complete in its species: in another way there is a perfection
going to make up the species. Thus the perfection of a house, considered as complete
in its species, is that use for which the house is intended, namely, being inhabited:
hence this should be put in the definition of a house, if the definition is to be adequate. A
perfection going to make up the species of a house may be one of the constituents and
substantial principles of the species: or it may be something that goes to the
preservation of the species, as the buttresses made to prop the house up: lastly, under
this head we must count whatever makes the house more comely for use, as its beauty.
That therefore which is the perfection of a thing, considered as already complete in its
species, is the end of a thing, as being inhabited is the end of a house. And in like
manner the proper activity of each thing, which is a sort of use of it, is the end of the
thing. But the perfections which go to make up the species are not the end of the thing:
rather the thing is their end. Thus matter and form are for the species. In like manner
the perfections that preserve a thing in its species, as health and nutrition, though they
perfect the animal, are not the end of its existence, but rather the other way about.
Those perfections also whereby a thing is fitted to discharge the proper activities of its
species and gain its due end more becomingly, are not the end of the thing, but rather
the other way about, e.g., a man's beauty and bodily strength, and other
accomplishments, of which the philosopher says that they minister to happiness
instrumentally. Now when we say that delight is the perfection of activity, we do
not mean that activity specifically considered is directed to the purpose of delight, -- the
fact is, it is ordained to other ends, as eating is ordained to the preservation of the
individual, -- we mean that delight ranks among the perfections which go to make up the