Moral. But if he exhorts servants to render such implicit obedience,
consider what ought to be our disposition towards our Master, who brought us
into existence out of nothing, and who feeds and clothes us. If in no other way
then, let us render Him service at least as our servants render it to us. Do not
they order their whole lives to afford rest to their masters, and is it not their work
and their life to take care of their concerns? Are they not all day long engaged in
their masters' work, and only a small portion of the evening in their own? But
we, on the contrary, are ever engaged in our own affairs, in our Master's hardly
at all, and that too, though He needs not our services, as masters need those of
their servants, but those very acts redound to our own benefit. In their case the
master is benefited by the ministry of the servant, but in ours the ministry of the
servant profits not the Master, but is beneficial on the other hand to the servant.
As the Psalmist says, "My goods are nothing unto You." [Psalm 16:2] For say,
what advantage is it to God, that I am just, or what injury, that I am unjust? Is not
His nature incorruptible, incapable of injury, superior to all suffering? Servants
having nothing of their own, all is their masters', however rich they may be. But
we have many things of our own.
And it is not merely so great honor, that we enjoy from the King of the
universe. What master ever gave his own son for his servant? No one, but all
would rather choose to give their servants for their sons. Here on the contrary,
"He spared not His own Son, but gave Him up for us all," for His enemies who
hated Him. Servants, though very hard service is exacted of them, are not
impatient; at least, not the well-disposed. But how many times do we utter
discontent? The master promises to his servants nothing like what God promises
to us; but what? Freedom here, which is often worse than bondage; for it is often
embittered by famine beyond slavery itself. Yet this is their greatest boon. But
with God there is nothing temporal, nothing mortal; but what? Would you learn?
Listen then, He says, "Henceforth I call you not servants. You are my friends."
[John 15:13-14]
Beloved, let us be ashamed, let us fear. Let us only serve our Master, as our

servants serve us. Rather not even the smallest portion of service do we render!
Necessity makes them philosophers. They have only food and lodging; but we,
possessing much and expecting more, insult our Benefactor with our luxury. If
from nothing else, from them at least let us learn the rules of philosophy. The
Scripture is wont to send men not even to servants, but to irrational creatures, as
when it bids us imitate the bee and the ant. But I advise you but to imitate
servants: only so much as they do from fear of their masters, let us do from the
fear of God; for I cannot find that you do even this. They receive many insults
from fear of us, and endure them in silence with the patience of philosophers.
Justly or unjustly they are exposed to our violence, and they do not resist, but
entreat us, though often they have done nothing wrong. They are contented to
receive no more and often less than they need; with straw for their bed, and only
bread for their food, they do not complain or murmur at their hard living, but
through fear of us are restrained from impatience. When they are entrusted with
money, they restore it all. For I am not speaking of the worthless, but of the
moderately good. If we threaten them, they are at once awed.
Is not this philosophy? For say not they are under necessity, when you too
are under a necessity in the fear of hell. And yet do you not learn wisdom, nor
render to God as much honor, as you receive from your servants. Of your
servants each has the apartment assigned to him by your rules, and he does not
invade that of his neighbor, nor do any injury from a desire of more than he has.
This forbearance the fear of their master enforces among domestics, and seldom
will you see a servant robbing or injuring a fellow-servant. But among free men
it is quite the reverse. We bite and devour one another. We fear not our Master:
we rob and plunder our fellow-servants, we strike them in His very sight. This
the servant will not do; if he strikes, it is not when his master sees him; if he
reviles, it is not when his master hears him. But we dare do anything, though
God sees and hears it all.
The fear of their master is ever before their eyes, the fear of our Master
never before ours. Hence the subversion of all order, hence all is confusion and