FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.101, C.2.

ceremonies and the manner of worshipping."
I answer that, As stated above (99, 4), the ceremonial precepts are
determinations of the moral precepts whereby man is directed to
God, just as the judicial precepts are determinations of the moral
precepts whereby he is directed to his neighbor. Now man is
directed to God by the worship due to Him. Wherefore those
precepts are properly called ceremonial, which pertain to the Divine
worship. The reason for their being so called was given above (99,
3), when we established the distinction between the ceremonial and
the other precepts.
Reply to Objection 1. The Divine worship includes not only sacrifices
and the like, which seem to be directed to God immediately, but also
those things whereby His worshippers are duly prepared to worship
Him: thus too in other matters, whatever is preparatory to the end
comes under the science whose object is the end. Accordingly those
precepts of the Law which regard the clothing and food of God's
worshippers, and other such matters, pertain to a certain preparation
of the ministers, with the view of fitting them for the Divine worship:
just as those who administer to a king make use of certain special
observances. Consequently such are contained under the
ceremonial precepts.
Reply to Objection 2. The alleged explanation of the name does not
seem very probable: especially as the Law does not contain many
instances of the lighting of candles in solemnities; since, even the
lamps of the Candlestick were furnished with "oil of olives," as
stated in Lev. 24:2. Nevertheless we may say that all things
pertaining to the Divine worship were more carefully observed on
solemn festivals: so that all ceremonial precepts may be included
under the observance of solemnities.
Reply to Objection 3. Neither does this explanation of the name
appear to be very much to the point, since the word "ceremony" is
not Greek but Latin. We may say, however, that, since man's
salvation is from God, those precepts above all seem to be rules of
salvation, which direct man to God: and accordingly those which
refer to Divine worship are called ceremonial precepts.
Reply to Objection 4. This explanation of the ceremonial precepts
has a certain amount of probability: not that they are called

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.101, C.2.

ceremonial precisely because there is no evident reason for them;
this is a kind of consequence. For, since the precepts referring to the
Divine worship must needs be figurative, as we shall state further on
(2), the consequence is that the reason for them is not so very
evident.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.101, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the ceremonial precepts are figurative?

Objection 1. It would seem that the ceremonial precepts are not
figurative. For it is the duty of every teacher to express himself in
such a way as to be easily understood, as Augustine states (De
Doctr. Christ. iv, 4,10) and this seems very necessary in the framing
of a law: because precepts of law are proposed to the populace; for
which reason a law should be manifest, as Isidore declares (Etym. v,
21). If therefore the precepts of the Law were given as figures of
something, it seems unbecoming that Moses should have delivered
these precepts without explaining what they signified.
Objection 2. Further, whatever is done for the worship of God,
should be entirely free from unfittingness. But the performance of
actions in representation of others, seems to savor of the theatre or
of the drama: because formerly the actions performed in theatres
were done to represent the actions of others. Therefore it seems that
such things should not be done for the worship of God. But the
ceremonial precepts are ordained to the Divine worship, as stated
above (1). Therefore they should not be figurative.
Objection 3. Further, Augustine says (Enchiridion iii, iv) that "God is
worshipped chiefly by faith, hope, and charity." But the precepts of
faith, hope, and charity are not figurative. Therefore the ceremonial
precepts should not be figurative.
Objection 4. Further, Our Lord said (Jn. 4:24): "God is a spirit, and
they that adore Him, must adore Him in spirit and in truth." But a
figure is not the very truth: in fact one is condivided with the other.
Therefore the ceremonial precepts, which refer to the Divine
worship, should not be figurative.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (Col. 2:16,17): "Let no man . . .
judge you in meat or in drink, or in respect of a festival day, or of the
new moon, or of the sabbaths, which are a shadow of things to
come."
I answer that, As stated above (1; 99, A3,4), the ceremonial precepts
are those which refer to the worship of God. Now the Divine worship
is twofold: internal, and external. For since man is composed of soul
and body, each of these should be applied to the worship of God; the