## Homily 9 on First Corinthians

1 Corinthians 3:12-15
If any man build upon this foundation gold, silver, costly stones, wood, hay,
stubble; each man's work shall be made manifest: for the day shall declare it,
because it is revealed in fire; and the fire shall prove each man's work of what
sort it is. If any man's work abide which he built thereon, he shall receive a
reward. If any man's work shall be burned, he shall suffer loss: but he himself
shall be saved; yet so as through fire.
This is no small subject of enquiry which we propose, but rather about
things which are of the first necessity and which all men enquire about; namely,
whether hell fire have any end. For that it has no end Christ indeed declared
when he said, "Their fire shall not be quenched, and their worm shall not die."
[Mark 8:44, 46, 48.]
Well: I know that a chill comes over you ([ναρκᾶτε]) on hearing these
things; but what am I to do? For this is God's own command, continually to
sound these things in your ears, where He says, Charge this people; [Fors.
Exodus 19:10, 20. διαμαρτύραι], Septuagint. here [διάστειλαι] and ordained as
we have been unto the ministry of the word, we must give pain to our hearers,
not willingly but on compulsion. Nay rather, if you will, we shall avoid giving
you pain. For says He, [Romans 13:3, in substance] "if you do that which is
good, fear not:" so that it is possible for you to hear me not only without ill-will,
but even with pleasure.
As I said then; that it has no end, Christ has declared. Paul also says, in
pointing out the eternity of the punishment, that the sinners "shall pay the
penalty of destruction, and that for ever" [2 Thessalonians 1:9] And again, [1
Corinthians 6:9] "Be not deceived; neither fornicators. nor adulterers, nor

effeminate, shall inherit the kingdom of God." And also unto the Hebrews he
says, [Hebrews 12:14] "Follow peace with all men, and the sanctification
without which no man shall see the Lord." And Christ also, to those who said,
"In your Name we have done many wonderful works," says, "Depart from Me, I
know you not, you workers of iniquity" [Matthew 7:22] And the virgins too who
were shut out, entered in no more. And also about those who gave Him no food,
He says, [Matthew 25:46] "They shall go away into everlasting punishment."
2. And say not unto me, "where is the rule of justice preserved entire, if the
punishment has no end?" Rather, when God does any thing, obey His decisions
and submit not what is said to human reasonings. But moreover, how can it be
any thing else than just for one who has experienced innumerable blessings from
the beginning, and then committed deeds worthy of punishment, and neither by
threat nor benefit improved at all, to suffer punishment? For if you enquire what
is absolute justice; it was meet that we should have perished immediately from
the beginning, according to the definition of strict justice. Rather not even then
according to the rule of justice only; for the result would have had in it kindness
too, if we had suffered this also. For when any one insults him that has done him
no wrong, according to the rule of justice he suffers punishment: but when it is
his benefactor, who, bound by no previous favor, bestowed innumerable
kindnesses, who alone is the Author of his being, who is God, who breathed his
soul into him, who gave ten thousand gifts of grace, whose will is to take him up
into heaven;— when, I say, such an one, after so great blessings, is met by insult,
daily insult, in the conduct of the other party; how can that other be thought
worthy of pardon? Do you not see how He punished Adam for one single sin?
"Yes," you will say; "but He had given him Paradise and caused him to
enjoy much favor." Nay, surely it is not all as one, for a man to sin in the
enjoyment of security and ease, and in a state of great affliction. In fact, this is
the dreadful circumstance that your sins are the sins of one not in any Paradise
but amid the innumerable evils of this life; that you are not sobered even by
affliction, as though one in prison should still practise his crime. However, unto