word demanded of them, and let us keep it in order that we may then return this
deposit safe. But Satan's pomps are theatres, and the circus, and all sin, and
observance of days, and incantations and omens.
"And what are omens?" says one. Often when going forth from his own
house he has seen a one-eyed or lame man, and has shunned him as an omen.
This is a pomp of Satan. For meeting the man does not make the day turn out ill,
but to live in sin. When you go forth, then, beware of one thing— that sin does
not meet you. For this it is which trips us up. And without this the devil will be
able to do us no harm. What do you say? You see a man, and shunnest him as an
omen, and dost not see the snare of the devil, how he sets you at war with him
who has done you no wrong, how he makes you the enemy of your brother on no
just pretext; but God has bidden us love our enemies; but you are turned away
from him who did you no wrong, having nothing to charge him with, and do you
not consider how great is the absurdity, how great the shame, rather how great is
the danger? Can I speak of anything more absurd? I am ashamed, indeed, and I
blush: But for your salvation's sake, I am, I am compelled to speak of it. If a
virgin meet him he says the day becomes unsuccessful; but if a harlot meet him,
it is propitious, and profitable, and full of much business; are you ashamed? And
do you smite your foreheads, and bend to the ground? But do not this on account
of the words which I have spoken, but of the deeds which have been done. See
then, in this case, how the devil hid his snare, in order that we might turn away
from the modest, but salute and be friendly to the unchaste. For since he has
heard Christ saying that "He who looks on a woman to desire her, has already
committed adultery with her," [Matthew 5:28] and has seen many get the better
of unchastity, wishing by another wrong to cast them again into sin, by this
superstitious observance he gladly persuades them to pay attention to whorish
women.
And what is one to say about them who use charms and amulets, and
encircle their heads and feet with golden coins of Alexander of Macedon. Are
these our hopes, tell me, that after the cross and death of our Master, we should

place our hopes of salvation on an image of a Greek king? Do you not know
what great result the cross has achieved? It has abolished death, has extinguished
sin, has made Hades useless, has undone the power of the devil, and is it not
worth trusting for the health of the body? It has raised up the whole world, and
do you not take courage in it? And what would you be worthy to suffer, tell me?
Thou dost not only have amulets always with you, but incantations bringing
drunken and half-witted old women into your house, and are you not ashamed,
and do you not blush, after so great philosophy, to be terrified at such things?
And there is a graver thing than this error. For when we deliver these
exhortations, and lead them away, thinking that they defend themselves, they
say, that the woman is a Christian who makes these incantations, and utters
nothing else than the name of God. On this account I especially hate and turn
away from her, because she makes use of the name of God, with a view to
ribaldry. For even the demons uttered the name of God, but still they were
demons, and thus they used to say to Christ, "We know you who you are, the
Holy One of God," [Mark 1:24] and notwithstanding, he rebuked them, and
drove them away. On this account, then, I beseech you to cleanse yourselves
from this error, and to keep hold of this word as a staff; and just as without
sandals, and cloak, no one of you would choose to go down to the market-place,
so without this word never enter the market-place, but when you are about to
pass over the threshold of the gateway, say this word first: I leave your ranks,
Satan, and your pomp, and your service, and I join the ranks of Christ. And
never go forth without this word. This shall be a staff to you, this your armor,
this an impregnable fortress, and accompany this word with the sign of the cross
on your forehead. For thus not only a man who meets you, but even the devil
himself, will be unable to hurt you at all, when he sees you everywhere
appearing with these weapons; and discipline yourself by these means
henceforth, in order that when you receive the seal you may be a well-equipped
soldier, and planting your trophy against the devil, may receive the crown of
righteousness, which may it be the lot of us all to obtain, through the grace and