SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.148, C.4.

altogether from wine, but that he abstain from its immoderate use.
Secondly, a man may have wisdom in some degree of perfection:
and in this way, in order to receive wisdom perfectly, it is requisite
for certain persons that they abstain altogether from wine, and this
depends on circumstances of certain persons and places.
Reply to Objection 2: The Apostle does not declare simply that it is
good to abstain from wine, but that it is good in the case where this
would give scandal to certain people.
Reply to Objection 3: Christ withdraws us from some things as being
altogether unlawful, and from others as being obstacles to
perfection. It is in the latter way that he withdraws some from the use
of wine, that they may aim at perfection, even as from riches and the
like.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.148, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether sobriety is more requisite in persons of

greater standing?
Objection 1: It would seem that sobriety is more requisite in persons
of greater standing. For old age gives a man a certain standing;
wherefore honor and reverence are due to the old, according to Lev.
19:32, "Rise up before the hoary head, and honor the person of the
aged man." Now the Apostle declares that old men especially should
be exhorted to sobriety, according to Titus 2:2, "That the aged man
be sober." Therefore sobriety is most requisite in persons of
standing.
Objection 2: Further, a bishop has the highest degree in the Church:
and the Apostle commands him to be sober, according to 1 Tim. 3:2,
"It behooveth . . . a bishop to be blameless, the husband of one wife,
sober, prudent," etc. Therefore sobriety is chiefly required in
persons of high standing.
Objection 3: Further, sobriety denotes abstinence from wine. Now
wine is forbidden to kings, who hold the highest place in human
affairs: while it is allowed to those who are in a state of affliction,
according to Prov. 31:4, "Give not wine to kings," and further on
(Prov. 31:6), "Give strong drink to them that are sad, and wine to
them that are grieved in mind." Therefore sobriety is more requisite
in persons of standing.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (1 Tim. 3:11): "The women in like
manner, chaste . . . sober," etc., and (Titus 2:6) "Young men in like
manner exhort that they be sober."
I answer that, Virtue includes relationship to two things, to the
contrary vices which it removes, and to the end to which it leads.
Accordingly a particular virtue is more requisite in certain persons
for two reasons. First, because they are more prone to the
concupiscences which need to be restrained by virtue, and to the
vices which are removed by virtue. In this respect, sobriety is most
requisite in the young and in women, because concupiscence of
pleasure thrives in the young on account of the heat of youth, while
in women there is not sufficient strength of mind to resist
concupiscence. Hence, according to Valerius Maximus [Dict. Fact.
Memor. ii, 1] among the ancient Romans women drank no wine.