faith only, but a virtuous life also is required, and the consciousness to ourselves
of nothing evil. Since the holy of holies does not receive "with full assurance"
those who are not thus disposed. For they are holy, and the holy of holies; but
here no profane person enters. They were sprinkled as to the body, we as to the
conscience, so that we may even now be sprinkled over with virtue itself. "And
having our body washed with pure water." Here he speaks of the Washing, which
no longer cleanses the bodies, but the soul.
"For He is faithful that promised." "That promised" what? That we are to
depart there and enter into the kingdom. Be then in nothing over-curious, nor
demand reasonings. Our [religion] needs faith.

Hebrews 10:24-25
3. "And" (he says) "let us consider one another to provoke unto love and to
good works. Not forsaking the assembling of ourselves together, as the manner
of some is, but exhorting one another and so much the more as you see the day
approaching." And again in other places, "The Lord is at hand; be careful for
nothing." [Philippians 4:5-6] "For now is our salvation nearer: Henceforth the
time is short." [Romans 13:11]
What is, "not forsaking the assembling of ourselves together"? [1
Corinthians 7:29] He knew that much strength arises from being together and
assembling together. "For where two or three" (it is said) "are gathered together
in My name, there am I in the midst of them" [Matthew 18:20]; and again, "That
they may be One, as we" also are [John 17:11]; and, "They had all one heart and
[one] soul." [Acts 4:32] And not this only, but also because love is increased by
the gathering [of ourselves] together; and love being increased, of necessity the
things of God must follow also. "And earnest prayer" (it is said) was "made by"
the people. [Acts 12:5] "As the manner of some is." Here he not only exhorted,
but also blamed [them].
"And let us consider one another," he says, "to provoke unto love and to
good works." He knew that this also arises from "gathering together." For as
"iron sharpens iron" [Proverbs 17:17], so also association increases love. For if a
stone rubbed against a stone sends forth fire, how much more soul mingled with
soul! But not unto emulation (he says) but "unto the sharpening of love." What is
"unto the sharpening of love"? Unto the loving and being loved more. "And of
good works"; that so they might acquire zeal. For if doing has greater force for
instruction than speaking, you also have in your number many teachers, who
effect this by their deeds.
What is "let us draw near with a true heart"? That is, without hypocrisy;

for "woe be to a fearful heart, and faint hands" [Sirach 2:12]: let there be (he
means) no falsehood among us; let us not say one thing and think another; for
this is falsehood; neither let us be fainthearted, for this is not [a mark] of a "true
heart." Faintheartedness comes from not believing. But how shall this be? If we
fully assure ourselves through faith.
"Having our hearts sprinkled": why did he not say "having been purified"?
[Because] he wished to point out the difference of the sprinklings: the one he
says is of God, the other our own. For the washing and sprinkling the conscience
is of God; but "the drawing near with" truth and "in full assurance of faith" is
our own. Then he also gives strength to their faith from the truth of Him that
promised.
What is "and having our bodies washed with pure water"? With water
which makes pure; or which has no blood.
Then he adds the perfect thing, love. "Not forsaking the assembling of
ourselves together," which some (he says) do, and divide the assemblies. For "a
brother helped by a brother is as a strong city." [Proverbs 18:19, Septuagint]
"But let us consider one another to provoke unto love." What is, "let us
consider one another"? For instance if any be virtuous, let us imitate him, let us
look on him so as to love and to be loved. For from Love good works proceed.
For the assembling is a great good: since it makes love more warm; and out of
love all good things arise. For nothing is good which is not done through love.
4. This then let us "confirm" towards each other. "For love is the fulfilling
of the law." [Romans 13:10] We have no need of labors or of sweatings if we
love one another. It is a pathway leading of itself towards virtue. For as on the
highway, if any man find the beginning, he is guided by it, and has no need of
one to take him by the hand; so is it also in regard to Love: only lay hold on the
beginning, and at once you are guided and directed by it. "Love works no ill to
his neighbor" [Romans 13:10]; "thinks no evil." [1 Corinthians 13:5] Let each
man consider with himself, how he is disposed toward himself. He does not envy
himself; he wishes all good things for himself; he prefers himself before all; he is