extol the doctrine, by their examining and questioning. O exceeding boldness—
"Whom you crucified! Whom God raised up"— this is bolder still! Think not that
we hide what there is to be ashamed of. He says this all but tauntingly: and not
merely says it, but dwells upon the matter. "This," says he, "is the Stone which
was set at naught by you builders;" and then he goes on to teach them, saying in
addition, "Which is made the head of the corner" [Acts 4:11]; that is to say, that
the Stone is indeed approved! Great was the boldness they now had, in
consequence of the miracle. And when there was need to teach, observe how
they speak and allege many prophecies; but when the point was to use boldness
of speech, then they only speak peremptorily. Thus "Neither," says he, "is there
any other name under heaven given among men whereby we must be saved."
[Acts 4:12] It is manifest to all, he says, because not to us alone was that Name
given; he cites even themselves as witnesses. For, since they asked, "In what
name did ye it?" "In Christ's," says he: there is none other name. How is it that
you ask? On all hands this is palpable. "For there exists not another name under
heaven, whereby we must be saved." This is the language of a soul which has
renounced ([κατεγνωκυίας]) this present life. His exceeding out-spokenness
proves here, that when he speaks in lowly terms of Christ, he does it not of fear,
but of wise forbearance ([συγκαταβαίνων]): but now that it was the fitting time,
he speaks not in lowly terms: by this very thing intending to strike dismay into
them. Behold another miracle not less than the former. "And beholding the
boldness of Peter and John," etc. "And they took knowledge of them that they
had been with Jesus." [Acts 4:13] Not without a meaning has the Evangelist set
down this passage; but in saying, "they recognized them that they had been with
Jesus," he means, in His Passion: for only these were [with Him] at that time,
and then indeed they had seen them humble, dejected: and this it was that most
surprised them: the greatness of the change. For in fact Annas and Caiaphas with
their company were there, and these then also had stood by Him, and their
boldness now amazed them. "And beholding the boldness." For not only their
words; their very bearing showed it; that they should stand there so intrepidly to

be tried in a cause like this, and with uttermost peril impending over them! Not
only by their words, but by their gesture also, and their look and voice, and, in
short, by everything about them, they manifested the boldness with which they
confronted the people. From the things they uttered, they marvelled, perhaps:
"that they were unlearned and common men:" for one may be unlearned, yet not
a common or private man, and a common man, yet not unlearned. "Having
perceived," it says. Whence? From what they said? Peter does not draw out long
speeches, but then by his very manner and method ([τἥς ἀπαγγελίας καὶ τἥς
συνθήκης]) he declares his confidence. "And they recognized them that they had
been with Jesus." Which circumstance made them believe that it was from Him
they had learned these things, and that they did all in the character of His
disciples. But not less than the voice of these, the miracle uttered a voice of its
own: and that sign itself stopped their mouths. ["And beholding the man," etc.]
So that they would have been peremptory ([ἐ] [πέσκηψαν]) with them, if the man
had not been with them. "We cannot deny it." So that they would have denied it,
if the thing had not been so: if the testimony had not been that of the people in
general. "But that it spread no further among the people." [Acts 4:17] And yet it
was palpable to all men! But such is the nature of wickedness: everywhere it is
shamed. "Let us strictly threaten them." What do you say? Threaten? And expect
ye to stop the preaching? And yet all beginnings are hard and trying. You slew
the Master, and did not stop it: and now, if you threaten, do ye expect to turn us
back? The imprisonment did not prevail with us to speak submissively, and shall
you prevail? "And they called them, and commanded them," etc. (v. 18, 19.) It
had been much better for them to let them go. "And Peter and John answered
and said unto them, Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto you
more than unto God, judge ye." When the terror was abated (for that command
was tantamount to their being dismissed), then also the Apostles speak more
mildly: so far were they from mere bravery: "Whether it be right," says he: and
"We cannot [but speak]. Whether it be right in the sight of God to obey you
rather than God." [Acts 4:20] Here [by "God"] they mean Christ, for he it was