Ver. 33 . "Little children, yet a little while I am with you— and as I said
unto the Jews, Whither I go ye cannot come, so now I say to you."
He now begins words of sorrow after the supper. For when Judas went forth
it was no longer evening, but night. But since they were about to come shortly, it
was necessary to set all things before the disciples, that they might have them in
remembrance; or rather, the Spirit recalled all to their minds. For it is likely that
they would forget many things, as hearing for the first time, and being about to
undergo such temptations. Men who were weighed down to sleep, (as another
Evangelist says, [Luke 22:45]) who were possessed by despondency, as Christ
says Himself, "Because I have said these things unto you, sorrow has filled your
hearts" [John 16:6], how could they retain all these things exactly? Why then
were they spoken? It became no little gain to them with respect to their opinion
of Christ, that in after times when reminded they certainly knew that they had
long ago heard these things from Christ. But wherefore does He first cast down
their souls, saying, "Yet a little while I am with you"? "To the Jews indeed it was
said with reason, but why do You place us in just the same class with those
obstinate ones?" He by no means did so. "Why then said He, 'As I said to the
Jews'?" He reminded them that He did not now, because troubles were upon
them, warn them of these things, but that He had foreknown them from the first,
and that they were witnesses who had heard that He had said these things to the
Jews. Wherefore He added also the word, "little children," that when they heard,
"As I said to the Jews," they might not deem that the expression was used in like
sense towards themselves. It was not then to depress but to comfort them that He
thus spoke, that their dangers might not, by coming upon them suddenly, trouble
them to excess.
"Whither I go, you cannot come." He shows that His death is a removal, and
a change for the better to a place which admits not corruptible bodies. This He
says, both to excite their love towards Him, and to make it more fervent. You
know that when we see any of our dearest friends departing from us, our
affection is warmest, and the more so, when we see them going to a place to

which it is not even possible for us to go. These things then He said, terrifying
the Jews, but kindling longing in the disciples. "Such is the place, that not only
not they, but not even you, My best beloved, can come there." Here He shows
also His Own dignity.
"So now I say to you." Why "now"? "In one way to them, to you in another
way"; that is, "not with them." But when did the Jews seek Him, when the
disciples? The disciples, when they fled the Jews, when they suffered miseries
unendurable and surpassing all description at the capture of their city, when the
wrath of God was borne down upon them from every side. To the Jews therefore
He spoke then, because of their unbelief, "but to you now, that troubles might not
come upon you unexpected."
Ver. 34 . "A new commandment I give unto you."
For since it was likely that they would be troubled when they heard these
things, as though they were about to be deserted, He comforts them, investing
them with that which was the root of all blessings and a safeguard, love. As
though He had said, "Grieve ye at My departure? Nay, if you love one another,
you shall be the stronger." Why then said He not this? Because He said what
profited them more than this.
Ver. 35 . "By this shall all men know that you are My disciples."
5. By this He at the same time showed that the company should never be
extinguished, when He gave them a distinguishing token. This He said when the
traitor was cut off from them. But how calls He that a new commandment which
is contained also in the Old (covenant)? He made it new Himself by the manner;
therefore He added, "As I have loved you." "I have not paid back to you a debt of
good deeds first done by you, but Myself have begun," He says. "And so ought
you to benefit your dearest ones, though you owe them nothing"; and omitting to
speak of the miracles which they should do, He makes their characteristic, love.
And why? Because it is this which chiefly shows men holy; it is the foundation
of all virtue; by this mostly we are all even saved. For "this," He says, "is to be a
disciple; so shall all men praise you, when they see you imitating My Love."