a sacrament is a sign of the effect it produces. Hence when one
action suffices for a perfect signification, the unity of the sacrament
consists in that action only, as may be seen in Confirmation. When,
however, the signification of the sacrament can be both in one and in
several actions, then the sacrament can be complete both in one and
in several actions, even as Baptism in one immersion and in three,
since washing which is signified in Baptism, can be completed by
one immersion and by several. But when the perfect signification
cannot be expressed except by means of several actions, then these
several actions are essential for the perfection of the sacrament, as
is exemplified in the Eucharist, for the refreshment of the body which
signifies that of the soul, can only be attained by means of meat and
drink. It is the same in this sacrament, because the healing of the
internal wounds cannot be perfectly signified save by the application
of the remedy to the various sources of the wounds. Hence several
actions are essential to the perfection of this sacrament.
Reply to Objection 1: The unity of a complete whole is not destroyed
by reason of a diversity of matter or form in the parts of that whole.
Thus it is evident that there is neither the same matter nor the same
form in the flesh and in the bones of which one man is composed. In
like manner too, in the sacrament of the Eucharist, and in this
sacrament, the diversity of matter and form does not destroy the
unity of the sacrament.
Reply to Objection 2: Although those actions are several simply, yet
they are united together in one complete action, viz. the anointing of
all the external senses, whence arises the infernal malady.
Reply to Objection 3: Although, in the Eucharist, if the priest die after
the consecration of the bread, another priest can go on with the
consecration of the wine, beginning where the other left off, or can
begin over again with fresh matter, in Extreme Unction he cannot
begin over again, but should always go on, because to anoint the
same part a second time would produce as much effect as if one
were to consecrate a host a second time, which ought by no means
to be done. Nor does the plurality of ministers destroy the unity of
this sacrament, because they only act as instruments, and the unity
of a smith's work is not destroyed by his using several hammers.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether this sacrament was instituted by Christ?

Objection 1: It would seem that this sacrament was not instituted by
Christ. For mention is made in the Gospel of the institution of those
sacraments which Christ instituted, for instance the Eucharist and
Baptism. But no mention is made of Extreme Unction. Therefore it
was not instituted by Christ.
Objection 2: Further, the Master says explicitly (Sent. iv, D, 23) that it
was instituted by the apostles. Therefore Christ did not institute it
Himself.
Objection 3: Further, Christ showed forth the sacraments which He
instituted, as in the case of the Eucharist and Baptism. But He did
not bestow this sacrament on anyone. Therefore He did not institute
it Himself.
On the contrary, The sacraments of the New Law are more excellent
than those of the Old Law. But all the sacraments of the Old Law
were instituted by God. Therefore much more do all the sacraments
of the New Law owe their institution to Christ Himself.
Further, to make an institution and to remove it belongs to the same
authority. Now the Church, who enjoys the same authority in the
successors of the apostles, as the apostles themselves possessed,
cannot do away with the sacrament of Extreme Unction. Therefore
the apostles did not institute it, but Christ Himself.
I answer that, There are two opinions on this point. For some hold
that this sacrament and Confirmation were not instituted by Christ
Himself, but were left by Him to be instituted by the apostles; for the
reason that these two sacraments, on account of the plenitude of
grace conferred in them, could not be instituted before the mission
of the Holy Ghost in perfect plenitude. Hence they are sacraments of
the New Law in such a way as not to be foreshadowed in the Old
Law. But this argument is not very cogent, since, just as Christ,
before His Passion, promised the mission of the Holy Ghost in His
plenitude, so could He institute these sacraments.
Wherefore others hold that Christ Himself instituted all the
sacraments, but that He Himself published some, which present