done in charity produce both these effects for the same reason, viz.
because they are pleasing to God: wherefore just as charity by its
advent cannot make works done without charity to be pleasing in
one respect, so neither can it make them pleasing in the other
respect.
Reply to Objection 1: This means that the fruits are reckoned, not
from the time when he was first in sin, but from the time when he
ceased to sin, when, to wit, he was last in sin; unless he was contrite
as soon as he had sinned, and did many good actions before he
confessed. Or we may say that the greater the contrition the more it
alleviates the punishment, and the more good actions a man does
while in sin, the more he disposes himself to the grace of contrition,
so that it is probable that he owes a smaller debt of punishment. For
this reason the priest should use discretion in taking them into
account, so as to give him a lighter penance, according as he finds
him better disposed.
Reply to Objection 2: Baptism imprints a character on the soul,
whereas satisfaction does not. Hence on the advent of charity, which
removes both insincerity and sin, it causes Baptism to have its
effect, whereas it does not do this for satisfaction. Moreover Baptism
confers justification in virtue of the deed [ex opere operato] which is
not man's deed but God's, wherefore it does not become a lifeless
deed as satisfaction does, which is a deed of man.
Reply to Objection 3: Sometimes satisfaction is such as to leave an
effect in the person who makes satisfaction, even after the act of
satisfaction has been done; thus fasting leaves the body weak, and
almsdeeds result in a diminution of a person's substance, and so on.
In such cases there is no need to repeat the works of satisfaction if
they have been done while in a state of sin, because through
penance they are acceptable to God in the result they leave behind.
But when a work of satisfaction leaves behind no effect in the person
that does satisfaction, it needs to be repeated, as in the case of
prayer and so forth. Interior works, since they pass away altogether,
are nowise quickened, and must be repeated.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether works done without charity merit any, at

least temporal, good?
Objection 1: It would seem that works done without charity merit
some, at least a temporal, good. For as punishment is to the evil act,
so is reward to a good act. Now no evil deed is unpunished by God
the just judge. Therefore no good deed is unrewarded, and so every
good deed merits some good.
Objection 2: Further, reward is not given except for merit. Now some
reward is given for works done without charity, wherefore it is
written (Mt. 6:2,5,16) of those who do good actions for the sake of
human glory, that "they have received their reward." Therefore those
works merit some good.
Objection 3: Further, if there be two men both in sin, one of whom
does many deeds that are good in themselves and in their
circumstances, while the other does none, they are not equally near
to the reception of good things from Gods else the latter need not be
advised to do any good deeds. Now he that is nearer to God receives
more of His good things. Therefore the former, on account of his
good works, merits some good from God.
On the contrary, Augustine says that "the sinner is not worthy of the
bread he eats." Therefore he cannot merit anything from God.
Further, he that is nothing, can merit nothing. But a sinner, through
not having charity, is nothing in respect of spiritual being, according
to 1 Cor. 13:2. Therefore he can merit nothing.
I answer that, Properly speaking a merit is an action on account of
which it is just that the agent should be given something. Now
justice is twofold: first, there is justice properly so called, which
regards something due on the part of the recipient. Secondly, there
is metaphorical justice, so to speak, which regards something due
on the part of the giver, for it may be right for the giver to give
something to which the receiver has no claim. In this sense the
"fitness of the Divine goodness" is justice; thus Anselm says
(Proslog. x) that "God is just when He spares the sinner, because
this is befitting." And in this way merit is also twofold. The first is an
act in respect of which the agent himself has a claim to receive