John 11:18
"Now Bethany was about fifteen furlongs off."
Not without cause does he mention this, but desires to inform us that it was
near, and that it was probable on this account that many would be there. He
therefore declaring this adds,

John 11:19
"Many of the Jews came to comfort them."
But how should they comfort women beloved of Christ, when they had
agreed, that if any should confess Christ, he should be put out of the synagogue?
It was either because of the grievous nature of the calamity, or that they
respected them as of superior birth, or else these who came were not the wicked
sort, many at least even of them believed. The Evangelist mentions these
circumstances, to prove that Lazarus was really dead.
3. But why did not [Martha,] when she went to meet Christ, take her sister
with her? She desired to meet with Him apart, and to tell Him what had taken
place. But when He had brought her to good hopes, she went and called Mary,
who met Him while her grief was yet at its height. Do you see how fervent her
love was? This is the Mary of whom He said, "Mary has chosen that good part."
[Luke 10:42] "How then," says one, "does Martha appear more zealous?" She
was not more zealous, but it was because the other had not yet been informed,
since Martha was the weaker. For even when she had heard such things from
Christ, she yet speaks in a groveling manner, "By this time he stinks, for he has
been dead four days." [John 11:39] But Mary, though she had heard nothing,
uttered nothing of the kind, but at once believing, says,

John 11:21
"Lord, if You had been here, my brother had not died."
See how great is the heavenly wisdom of the women, although their
understanding be weak. For when they saw Christ, they did not break out into
mourning and wailing and loud crying, as we do when we see any of those we
know coming in upon our grief; but straightway they reverence their Teacher. So
then both these sisters believed in Christ, but not in a right way; for they did not
yet certainly know either that He was God, or that He did these things by His
own power and authority; on both which points He taught them. For they
showed their ignorance of the former, by saying, "If you had been here, our
brother had not died"; and of the latter, by saying,

John 11:22
"Whatsoever you will ask of God, He will give it you."
As though they spoke of some virtuous and approved mortal. But see what
Christ says;

John 11:23
"Your brother shall rise again."
He thus far refutes the former saying, "Whatsoever you will ask"; for He
said not, "I ask," but what? "Your brother shall rise again." To have said,
"Woman, thou still lookest below, I need not the help of another, but do all of
Myself," would have been grievous, and a stumblingblock in her way, but to say,
"He shall rise again," was the act of one who chose a middle mode of speech.
And by means of that which follows, He alluded to the points I have mentioned;
for when Martha says,