him? Be sad-visaged. The pain he has from your brother's victory, you soothe by
your sadness; you stand with him, severed from your brother, you work greater
mischief than he. For it is not the same for one that is an enemy to do the deeds
of an enemy, and for a friend to stand with an enemy; such an one is more
detestable than an enemy. If your brother has gained good reputation either by
speaking, or by brilliant or successful achievement, become a sharer in his
reputation, show that he is a member of yours.
"And how?" says one, "for the reputation is not mine." Never speak so.
Compress your lips. If you had been near me, you that speakest on that wise, I
would have even put my hand over your lips: lest the enemy should hear you.
Oftentimes we have enmities with one another, and we discover them not to our
enemies; do you then discover yours to the devil? Say not so, think not so; but
the very reverse: "he is one of my members, the glory passes on to the body."
"How then is it," says one, "that those without are not so minded?" Because of
your fault: when they see you counting his pleasure not your own, they too count
it not yours: were they to see you appropriating it, they dared not do so, but you
would become equally illustrious with him. You have not gained reputation by
speaking; but by sharing in his joy you have gained more renown than he. For if
love be a great thing, and the sum of all, you have received the crown this gives;
he, that for oratory, you, that for exceeding love; he displayed force of words,
but thou by deeds hast cast down envy, hast trodden under foot the evil eye. So
that in reason you ought rather to be crowned than he, your contest is the more
brilliant; you have not only trodden under foot envy, but you have even done
somewhat else. He has one crown only, but thou two, and those both brighter
than his one. What are these? One, that which you won against envy, another,
which you are encircled with by love. For the sharing in his joy is a proof not
only of your being free from envy, but also of being rooted in love. Him ofttimes
some human passion sorely disquiets, vainglory for instance; but you are free
from every passion, for it is not of vainglory that you rejoice at another's good.
Hath he righted up the Church, tell me? Has he increased the congregation?

Praise him; again you have a twofold crown; you have struck down envy; you
have enwreathed you with love. Yea, I implore and beseech you. Will you hear
of a third crown even? Him, men below applaud, you, the Angels above. For it is
not the same thing, to make a display of eloquence, and to rule the passions. This
praise is for a season, that for ever; this, of men, that, of God; this man is
crowned openly; but you are crowned in secret, where your Father sees. If it
were possible to have peeled off the body and seen the soul of each, I would
have shown you that this is more dignified than the other, more resplendent.
Tread we under foot the goads of envy, we advantage ourselves, beloved,
ourselves shall we enwreath with the crown. He that envies another fights with
God, not with him; for when he sees him to have grace, and is grieved, and
wishes the Church pulled down, he fights not with him, but with God. For tell
me, if one should adorn a king's daughter, and by his adorning and gracing her,
gain for himself renown; and another person should wish her to be ill attired, and
him to be unable to adorn her; against whom would he have been plotting
mischief? Against the other? Or against her and her father? So too now, you that
enviest, fightest with the Church, you war with God. For, since with the good
repute of your brother is interwoven also the Church's profit, need is, that if the
one be undone, the other shall be undone also. So that, in this regard also, you do
a deed of Satan, seeing you plot mischief against the body of Christ. Are you
pained at this man? Wrongly, when he has in nothing wronged you; yea, much
rather, you are pained at Christ. Wherein has He wronged you, that you will not
suffer His body to be decked with beauty? That you will not suffer His bride to
be adorned? Consider, I pray you, the punishment, how sore. Thou gladdenest
your enemies; and him too himself, the man in good esteem, whom through your
envy you wish to grieve, thou dost the rather gladden; thou dost by your envy the
rather show that he is in good esteem, for otherwise you would not have envied
him. Thou showest the rather that you are in punishment.
I am ashamed indeed to exhort you from such motives, but seeing our
weakness is so great, let us be instructed even from these, and free ourselves