John 12:46
"I have come a light into the world."
For since the Father is called by this name everywhere both in the Old
(Testament) and in the New, Christ uses the same name also; therefore Paul also
calls Him, "Brightness" [Hebrews 1:3], having learned to do so from this source.
And He shows here His close relationship with the Father, and that there is no
separation between them, if so be that He says that faith on Him is not on Him,
but passes on to the Father. And He called Himself "light," because He delivers
from error, and dissolves mental darkness.

John 12:47
"If any man hear not Me, and believe not, I judge him not, for I came not to
judge the world, but to save the world."
2. For lest they should think, that for want of power He passed by the
despisers, therefore spoke He the, "I came not to judge the world." Then, in
order that they might not in this way be made more negligent, when they had
learned that "he that believes is saved, and he that disbelieves is punished," see
how He has also set before them a fearful court of judgment, by going on to say,

John 12:48
"He that rejects Me, and receives not My words, has One to judge him."
"If the Father judges no man, and you are not come to judge the world, who
judges him?" "The word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him." For since
they said, "He is not from God," He says this, that, "they shall not then be able to
say these things, but the words which I have spoken now, shall be in place of an
accuser, convicting them, and cutting off all excuse." "And the word which I have
spoken." What manner of word?

John 12:49
"For I have not spoken of Myself, but the Father which sent Me, He gave Me a
commandment what I should say, and what I should speak?"
Surely these things were said for their sakes, that they might have no
pretense of excuse. Since if this were not the case, what shall He have more than
Isaiah? For he too says the very same thing, "The Lord God gives me the tongue
of the learned, that I should know when I ought to speak a word." [Isaiah 50:4,
Septuagint] What more than Jeremiah? For he too when he was sent was
inspired. [Jeremiah 1:9] What then Ezekiel? For he too, after eating the roll, so
spoke. [Ezekiel 3:1] Otherwise also, they who were about to hear what He said
shall be found to be causes of His knowledge. For if when He was sent, He then
received commandment what He should say, you will then argue that before He
was sent He knew not. And what more impious than these assertions? If (that is)
one take the words of Christ in this sense, and understand not the cause of their
lowliness? Yet Paul says, that both he and those who were made disciples knew
"what was that good and acceptable and perfect will of God" [Romans 12:2],
and did the Son not know until He had received commandment? How can this be
reasonable? Do you see not that He brings His expressions to an excess of
humility, that He may both draw those men over, and silence those who should
come after. This is why He utters words befitting a mere man, that even so He
may force us to fly the meanness of the sayings, as being conscious that the
words belong not to His Nature, but are suited to the infirmity of the hearers.