THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.35, C.3.

Felician, and is solved thus by Augustine (Contra Felic. xii). "Let us
suppose," says he, "as many maintain, that in the world there is a
universal soul, which, by its ineffable movement, so gives life to all
seed, that it is not compounded with things begotten, but bestows
life that they may be begotten. Without doubt, when this soul
reaches the womb, being intent on fashioning the passible matter to
its own purpose, it unites itself to the personality thereof, though
manifestly it is not of the same substance; and thus of the active
soul and passive matter, one man is made out of two substances.
And so we confess that the soul is born from out the womb; but not
as though, before birth, it was nothing at all in itself. Thus, then, but
in a way much more sublime, the Son of God was born as man, just
as the soul is held to be born together with the body: not as though
they both made one substance, but that from both, one person
results. Yet we do not say that the Son of God began thus to exist:
lest it be thought that His Divinity is temporal. Nor do we
acknowledge the flesh of the Son of God to have been from eternity:
lest it be thought that He took, not a true human body, but some
resemblance thereof."
Reply to Objection 2: This was an argument of Nestorius, and it is
thus solved by Cyril in an epistle [Acta Concil. Ephes., p. 1, cap. viii]:
"We do not say that the Son of God had need, for His own sake, of a
second nativity, after that which is from the Father: for it is foolish
and a mark of ignorance to say that He who is from all eternity, and
co-eternal with the Father, needs to begin again to exist. But
because for us and for our salvation, uniting the human nature to His
Person, He became the child of a woman, for this reason do we say
that He was born in the flesh."
Reply to Objection 3: Nativity regards the person as its subject, the
nature as its terminus. Now, it is possible for several transformations
to be in the same subject: yet must they be diversified in respect of
their termini. But we do not say this as though the eternal nativity
were a transformation or a movement, but because it is designated
by way of a transformation or movement.
Reply to Objection 4: Christ can be said to have been born twice in
respect of His two nativities. For just as he is said to run twice who
runs at two different times, so can He be said to be born twice who is
born once from eternity and once in time: because eternity and time
differ much more than two different times, although each signifies a
measure of duration.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.35, C.3.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.35, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the Blessed Virgin can be called Christ's

Mother in respect of His temporal nativity?
Objection 1: It would seem that the Blessed Virgin cannot be called
Christ's Mother in respect of His temporal nativity. For, as stated
above (Question 32, Article 4), the Blessed Virgin Mary did not
cooperate actively in begetting Christ, but merely supplied the
matter. But this does not seem sufficient to make her His Mother:
otherwise wood might be called the mother of the bed or bench.
Therefore it seems that the Blessed Virgin cannot be called the
Mother of Christ.
Objection 2: Further, Christ was born miraculously of the Blessed
Virgin. But a miraculous begetting does not suffice for motherhood
or sonship: for we do not speak of Eve as being the daughter of
Adam. Therefore neither should Christ be called the Son of the
Blessed Virgin.
Objection 3: Further, motherhood seems to imply partial separation
of the semen. But, as Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii), "Christ's
body was formed, not by a seminal process, but by the operation of
the Holy Ghost." Therefore it seems that the Blessed Virgin should
not be called the Mother of Christ.
On the contrary, It is written (Mt. 1:18): "The generation of Christ was
in this wise. When His Mother Mary was espoused to Joseph," etc.
I answer that, The Blessed Virgin Mary is in truth and by nature the
Mother of Christ. For, as we have said above (Question 5, Article 2;
Question 31, Article 5), Christ's body was not brought down from
heaven, as the heretic Valentine maintained, but was taken from the
Virgin Mother, and formed from her purest blood. And this is all that
is required for motherhood, as has been made clear above (Question
31, Article 5; Question 32, Article 4). Therefore the Blessed Virgin is
truly Christ's Mother.
Reply to Objection 1: As stated above (Question 32, Article 3), not
every generation implies fatherhood or motherhood and sonship, but
only the generation of living things. Consequently when inanimate
things are made from some matter, the relationship of motherhood
and sonship does not follow from this, but only in the generation of