the things of this life, for there is no conflict, none, in spiritual things, but
whatever you see, either conflicts or envy, or whatever a man can mention, all
these spring from the things of this life. Every conflict has its beginning either in
covetousness, or envy, or vainglory. If therefore we are at peace, we shall learn
to despise the things of the earth. Hath a man stolen our money? He has not
injured us, only let him not steal our treasure which is above. Hath he hindered
your glory? Yet not that which is from God, but that which is of no account. For
this is no glory, but a mere name of glory, or rather a shame. Hath he stolen your
honor? Rather not yours but his own. For as he who commits injustice does not
so much inflict as receive injustice, thus too he who plots against his neighbor,
first destroys himself.
For "he who digs a pit for his neighbor, falls into it." [Proverbs 26:27] Let
us then not plot against others, lest we injure ourselves. When we supplant the
reputation of others, let us consider that we injure ourselves, it is against
ourselves we plot. For perchance with men we do him harm, if we have power,
but we injure ourselves in the sight of God, by provoking Him against us. Let us
not then harm ourselves. For as we injure ourselves when we injure our
neighbors, so by benefiting them we benefit ourselves. If then your enemy harm
you, he has benefited you if you are wise, and so requite him not with the same
things, but even do him good. But the blow, you say, remains severe. Consider
then that thou dost not benefit, but punishest him, and benefitest yourself, and
quickly you will come to do him good. What then? Shall we act from this
motive? We ought not to act on this motive, but if your heart will not hear other
reason, induce it, says he, even by this, and you will quickly persuade it to
dismiss its enmity, and wilt for the future do good to your enemy as to a friend,
and wilt obtain the good things which are to come, to which God grant that we
may all attain in Christ Jesus. Amen.

## Homily 15 on Philippians

[Philippians 4:10-14]
"But I rejoice in the Lord greatly, that now at length you have revived your
thought for me; wherein ye did indeed take thought, but you lacked opportunity.
Not that I speak in respect of want: for I have learned, in whatsoever state I am,
therein to be content. I know how to be abused, and I know also how to abound:
in everything and in all things have I learned the secret both to be filled and to
be hungry, both to abound and to be in want. I can do all things in him that
strengthens me. Howbeit, you did well, that you had fellowship with my
affliction."
I have ofttimes said, that almsgiving has been introduced not for the sake of
the receivers, but of the givers, for the latter are they which make the greatest
gain. And this Paul shows here also. In what way? The Philippians had sent him
somewhat, after a long time, and had committed the same to Epaphroditus. See
then, how when he is about to send Epaphroditus as the bearer of this Epistle, he
praises them, and shows that this action was for the need, not of the receiver, but
of the givers. This he does, both that they who benefited him may not be lifted
up with arrogance, and that they may become more zealous in well-doing, since
they rather benefit themselves; and that they who receive may not fearlessly rush
forward to receive, lest they meet with condemnation. For "it is more blessed,"
He says, "to give than to receive." [Acts 20:35] Why then does he say, "I rejoice
in the Lord greatly"? Not with worldly rejoicing, says he, nor with the joy of this
life, but in the Lord. Not because I had refreshment, but because ye advanced;
for this is my refreshment. Wherefore he also says "greatly"; since this joy was
not corporeal, nor on account of his own refreshment, but because of their
advancement.
And see how, when he had gently rebuked them on account of the times