SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.187, C.2.

differentiated in two ways. First, according to the different things to
which they may be directed: thus one may be directed to the lodging
of pilgrims, another to visiting or ransoming captives. Secondly,
there may be various religious orders according to the diversity of
practices; thus in one religious order the body is chastised by
abstinence in food, in another by the practice of manual labor,
scantiness of clothes, or the like.
Since, however, the end imports most in every matter, [Arist., Topic.
vi 8] religious orders differ more especially according to their
various ends than according to their various practices.
Reply to Objection 1: The obligation to devote oneself wholly to
God's service is common to every religious order; hence religious do
not differ in this respect, as though in one religious order a person
retained some one thing of his own, and in another order some other
thing. But the difference is in respect of the different things wherein
one may serve God, and whereby a man may dispose himself to the
service of God.
Reply to Objection 2: The three essential vows of religion pertain to
the practice of religion as principles to which all other matters are
reduced, as stated above (Question 186, Article 7). But there are
various ways of disposing oneself to the observance of each of
them. For instance one disposes oneself to observe the vow of
continence, by solitude of place, by abstinence, by mutual
fellowship, and by many like means. Accordingly it is evident that
the community of the essential vows is compatible with diversity of
religious life, both on account of the different dispositions and on
account of the different ends, as explained above.
Reply to Objection 3: In matters relating to perfection, the bishop
stands in the position of agent, and the religious as passive, as
stated above (Question 184, Article 7). Now the agent, even in natural
things, the higher it is, is so much the more one, whereas the things
that are passive are various. Hence with reason the episcopal state
is one, while religious orders are many.
Reply to Objection 4: Confusion is opposed to distinction and order.
Accordingly the multitude of religious orders would lead to
confusion, if different religious orders were directed to the same end
and in the same way, without necessity or utility. Wherefore to

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.187, C.2.

prevent this happening it has been wholesomely forbidden to
establish a new religious order without the authority of the
Sovereign Pontiff.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.187, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether a religious order should be established

for the works of the active life?
Objection 1: It would seem that no religious order should be
established for the works of the active life. For every religious order
belongs to the state of perfection, as stated above (Question 184,
Article 5; Question 186, Article 1). Now the perfection of the religious
state consists in the contemplation of divine things. For Dionysius
says (Eccl. Hier. vi) that they are "called servants of God by reason
of their rendering pure service and subjection to God, and on
account of the indivisible and singular life which unites them by holy
reflections," i.e. contemplations, "on invisible things, to the Godlike
unity and the perfection beloved of God." Therefore seemingly no
religious order should be established for the works of the active life.
Objection 2: Further, seemingly the same judgment applies to
canons regular as to monks, according to Extra, De Postul., cap. Ex
parte; and De Statu Monach., cap. Quod Dei timorem: for it is stated
that "they are not considered to be separated from the fellowship of
monks": and the same would seem to apply to all other religious.
Now the monastic rule was established for the purpose of the
contemplative life; wherefore Jerome says (Ep. lviii ad Paulin.): "If
you wish to be what you are called, a monk," i.e. a solitary, "what
business have you in a city?" The same is found stated in Extra, De
Renuntiatione, cap. Nisi cum pridem; and De Regular., cap. Licet
quibusdam. Therefore it would seem that every religious order is
directed to the contemplative life, and none to the active life.
Objection 3: Further, the active life is concerned with the present
world. Now all religious are said to renounce the world; wherefore
Gregory says (Hom. xx in Ezech.): "He who renounces this world,
and does all the good he can, is like one who has gone out of Egypt
and offers sacrifice in the wilderness." Therefore it would seem that
no religious order can be directed to the active life.
On the contrary, It is written (James 1:27): "Religion clean and
undefiled before God and the Father, is this: to visit the fatherless
and widows in their tribulation." Now this belongs to the active life.
Therefore religious life can be fittingly directed to the active life.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), the religious state is