assuredly affirm, for of course, if he had not so decided, he would not have come
to (enquire about) our matters: let us ask the grounds on which he has decided,
for to be sure he has not settled the matter out of hand. Clearly he will say,
"Because (their gods) are creatures, and are not the uncreated God." Good. If
then he find this in the other parties ([αἰρέσεις]), but among us the contrary, what
argument need we? We all confess that Christ is God. But let us see who fight
(against this truth), and who not. Now we, affirming Him to be God speak of
Him things worthy of God, that He has power, that He is not a slave, that He is
free, that He does of Himself: whereas the other says the reverse. Again I ask: if
you would learn (to be) a physician, * * *? And yet among them are many
(different) doctrines. For if you accept without more ado just what you are told,
this is not acting like a man: but if you have judgment and sense, you shall
assuredly know what is good. We affirm the Son to be God, we verify ([ἐ]
[παληθεύομεν]) what we affirm: but they affirm indeed, but (in fact) confess not.
— But to mention (something) even plainer: those have certain persons from
whom they are called, openly showing the name of the heresiarch himself, and
each heresy in like manner: with us, no man has given us a name, but the faith
itself. However, this (talk of yours) is mere pretence and subterfuge. For answer
me: how is it that if you would buy a cloak, though ignorant of the art of
weaving, you do not speak such words as these— "I do not know how to buy;
they cheat me"— but do all you can to learn, and so whatever else it be that you
would buy: but here you speak these words? For at this rate, you will accept
nothing at all. For let there be one that has no (religious) doctrine whatever: if he
should say what you say about the Christians— "There is such a multitude of
men, and they have different doctrines; this a heathen, that a Jew, the other a
Christian: no need to accept any doctrine whatever, for they are at variance one
with another; but I am a learner, and do not wish to be a judge" — but if you
have yielded (so far as) to pronounce against ([καταγινώσκειν]) one doctrine,
this pretext no longer has place for you. For just as you were able to reject the
spurious, so here also, having come, you shall be able to prove what is

profitable. For he that has not pronounced against any doctrine at all, may easily
say this: but he that has pronounced against any, though he have chosen none, by
going on in the same way, will be able to see what he ought to do. Then let us
not make pretexts and excuses, and all will be easy. For, to show you that all this
is mere excuse, answer me this: Do you know what you ought to do, and what to
leave undone? Then why do you not what you ought? Do that, and by right
reason seek of God, and He will assuredly reveal it to you. "God," it says, "is no
respecter of persons, but in every nation he that fears Him, and works
righteousness, is accepted with Him." [ch. 10:34-35] It cannot be that he who
hears without prejudice should not be persuaded. For just as, if there were a rule,
by which everything behooved to be put straight, it would not need much
consideration, but it would be easy to detect the person who measures falsely
([τὸν παραμετροὕντα λαβἕιν]), so is it here. "Then how is it they do not see it at
a glance?" Many things are the cause of this: both preconceived opinion, and
human causes ([αἰτίαι]). The others, say you, say the same thing about us. How?
For are we separated from the Church? Have we our heresiarchs? Are we called
after men— as one of them has Marcion, another Manichæus, a third Arius, for
the author and leader (of his sect)? Whereas if we likewise do receive an
appellation from any man, we do not take them that have been the authors of
some heresy, but men that presided over us, and governed the Church. We have
no "masters upon the earth"— God forbid— we have "One Master that is in
heaven." [Matthew 23:9-10] "And those also," says he, "say the same." But there
stands the name set over them, accusing them, and stopping their mouths.—
How is it, there have been many heathen, and none of them asked these
questions: and among the philosophers there were these (differences), and yet
none of those holding the right party ([αἵρεσιν]) was hindered (thereby)?— Why
did not (those believers) say, when (the others) raised these questions, "Both
these and those are Jews: which must we believe?" But they believed as they
ought. Then let us also obey the laws of God, and do all things according to His
good pleasure, that having virtuously passed this life present, we may be enabled