Him: if even they, after so great virtue and self-denial, had not strength to bear it
all, before the supply of the Spirit; how could the people of the Jews, being both
void of understanding, and far behind such excellency, and only by hazard
present when He did or said anything, how could they have been persuaded but
that He was alien from the God of all, unless he had practised such great
condescension throughout?
For on this account we see that even when He was abrogating the sabbath,
He did not as of set purpose bring in such His legislation, but He puts together
many and various pleas of defense. Now if, when He was about to cause one
commandment to cease, He used so much reserve in His language, that He might
not startle the hearers; much more, when adding to the law, entire as it was,
another entire code of laws, did He require much management and attention, not
to alarm those who were then hearing Him.
For this same cause, neither do we find Him teaching everywhere clearly
concerning His own Godhead. For if His adding to the law was sure to perplex
them so greatly, much more His declaring Himself God.
3. Wherefore many things are uttered by Him, far below His proper dignity,
and here when He is about to proceed upon His addition to the law, He has used
abundance for correction beforehand. For neither was it once only that He said,
"I do not abrogate the law," but He both repeated it again, and added another and
a greater thing; in that, to the words, "Think not that I have come to destroy," He
subjoined, "I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill."
Now this not only obstructs the obstinacy of the Jews, but stops also the
mouths of those heretics, who say that the old covenant is of the devil. For if
Christ came to destroy his tyranny, how is this covenant not only not destroyed,
but even fulfilled by Him? For He said not only, "I do not destroy it;" though this
had been enough; but "I even fulfill it:" which are the words of one so far from
opposing himself, as to be even establishing it.
And how, one may ask, did He not destroy it? In what way did He rather
fulfill either the law or the prophets? The prophets He fulfilled, inasmuch as He

confirmed by His actions all that had been said concerning Him; wherefore also
the evangelist used to say in each case, "That it might be fulfilled which was
spoken by the prophet." Both when He was born, [Matthew 1:22-23] and when
the children sung that wondrous hymn to Him, and when He sat on the ass,
[Matthew 21:5-16] and in very many more instances He worked this same
fulfillment: all which things must have been unfulfilled, if He had not come.
But the law He fulfilled, not in one way only, but in a second and third also.
In one way, by transgressing none of the precepts of the law. For that He did
fulfill it all, hear what He says to John, "For thus it becomes us to fulfill all
righteousness." [Matthew 3:15] And to the Jews also He said, "Which of you
convinces me of sin." [John 8:46] And to His disciples again, "The prince of this
world comes, and finds nothing in me." [John 14:30] And the prophet too from
the first had said that "He did no sin." [Isaiah 53:9]
This then was one sense in which He fulfilled it. Another, that He did the
same through us also; for this is the marvel, that He not only Himself fulfilled it,
but He granted this to us likewise. Which thing Paul also declaring said, "Christ
is the end of the law for righteousness to every one that believes." [Romans 10:4]
And he said also, that "He judged sin in the flesh, that the righteousness of the
law might be fulfilled in us who walk not after the flesh." [Romans 8:3-4] And
again, "Do we then make void the law through faith? God forbid! Yea, we
establish the law." [Romans 3:31] For since the law was laboring at this, to make
man righteous, but had not power, He came and brought in the way of
righteousness by faith, and so established that which the law desired: and what
the law could not by letters, this He accomplished by faith. On this account He
says, "I am not come to destroy the law."
4. But if any one will inquire accurately, he will find also another, a third
sense, in which this has been done. Of what sort is it then? In the sense of that
future code of laws, which He was about to deliver to them.
For His sayings were no repeal of the former, but a drawing out, and filling
up of them. Thus, "not to kill," is not annulled by the saying, Be not angry, but