to those who are burdened with none but original sin. But lighter still
is the punishment due to those who are debarred from the reception
of glory by no personal defect but only by a defect of nature, so that
this very delay of glory is called a kind of punishment.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether so many abodes should be

distinguished?
Objection 1: It would seem that we should not distinguish so many
abodes. For after death, just as abodes are due to souls on account
of sin, so are they due on account of merit. Now there is only one
abode due on account of merit, namely paradise. Therefore neither
should there be more than one abode due on account of sin, namely
hell.
Objection 2: Further, abodes are appointed to souls after death on
account of merits or demerits. Now there is one place where they
merit or demerit. Therefore only one abode should be assigned to
them after death.
Objection 3: Further, the places of punishment should correspond to
the sins. Now there are only three kinds of sin, namely original,
venial, and mortal. Therefore there should only be three penal
abodes.
Objection 4: On the other hand, it would seem that there should be
many more than those assigned. For this darksome air is the prison
house of the demons (2 Pt. 2:17), and yet it is not reckoned among
the five abodes which are mentioned by certain authors. Therefore
there are more than five abodes.
Objection 5: Further, the earthly paradise is distinct from the
heavenly paradise. Now some were borne away to the earthly
paradise after this state of life, as is related of Enoch and Elias.
Since then the earthly paradise is not counted among the five
abodes, it would seem that there are more than five.
Objection 6: Further, some penal place should correspond to each
state of sinners. Now if we suppose a person to die in original sin
who has committed only venial sins, none of the assigned abodes
will be befitting to him. For it is clear that he would not be in heaven,
since he would be without grace, and for the same reason neither
would he be in the limbo of the Fathers; nor again, would he be in
the limbo of children, since there is no sensible punishment there,
which is due to such a person by reason of venial sin: nor would he
be in purgatory, where there is none but temporal punishment,

whereas everlasting punishment is due to him: nor would he be in
the hell of the damned, since he is not guilty of actual mortal sin.
Therefore a sixth abode should be assigned.
Objection 7: Further, rewards and punishments vary in quantity
according to the differences of sins and merits. Now the degrees of
merit and sin are infinite. Therefore we should distinguish an infinite
number of abodes, in which souls are punished or rewarded after
death.
Objection 8: Further, souls are sometimes punished in the places
where they sinned, as Gregory states (Dial. iv, 55). But they sinned in
the place which we inhabit. Therefore this place should be reckoned
among the abodes, especially since some are punished for their sins
in this world, as the Master said above (Sent. iv, D, 21).
Objection 9: Further, just as some die in a state of grace and have
some venial sins for which they deserve punishment, so some die in
mortal sin and have some good for which they would deserve a
reward. Now to those who die in grace with venial sins an abode is
assigned where they are punished ere they receive their reward,
which abode is purgatory. Therefore, on the other hand, there should
be equally an abode for those who die in mortal sin together with
some good works.
Objection 1:: Further, just as the Fathers were delayed from
obtaining full glory of the soul before Christ's coming, so are they
now detained from receiving the glory of the body. Therefore as we
distinguish an abode of the saints before the coming of Christ from
the one where they are received now, so ought we to distinguish the
one in which they are received now from the one where they will be
received after the resurrection.
I answer that, The abodes of souls are distinguished according to
the souls' various states. Now the soul united to a mortal body is in
the state of meriting, while the soul separated from the body is in the
state of receiving good or evil for its merits; so that after death it is
either in the state of receiving its final reward, or in the state of being
hindered from receiving it. If it is in the state of receiving its final
retribution, this happens in two ways: either in the respect of good,
and then it is paradise; or in respect of evil, and thus as regards
actual sin it is hell, and as regards original sin it is the limbo of