FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.75, C.3.

voluntary sinful act appertains to the will, so that the act of the will,
given the conditions we have just mentioned, is already a sin.
Reply to Objection 1: That which is within a thing as its natural
power, is always in it: but that which is within it, as the internal act of
the appetitive or apprehensive power, is not always in it. Now the
power of the will is the potential cause of sin, but is made actual by
the preceding movements, both of the sensitive part, in the first
place, and afterwards, of the reason. For it is because a thing is
proposed as appetible to the senses, and because the appetite is
inclined, that the reason sometimes fails to consider the due rule, so
that the will produces the act of sin. Since therefore the movements
that precede it are not always actual, neither is man always actually
sinning.
Reply to Objection 2: It is not true that all the internal acts belong to
the substance of sin, for this consists principally in the act of the
will; but some precede and some follow the sin itself.
Reply to Objection 3: That which causes sin, as a power produces its
act, is natural; and again, the movement of the sensitive part, from
which sin follows, is natural sometimes, as, for instance, when
anyone sins through appetite for food. Yet sin results in being
unnatural from the very fact that the natural rule fails, which man, in
accord with his nature, ought to observe.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.75, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether sin has an external cause?

Objection 1: It would seem that sin has no external cause. For sin is
a voluntary act. Now voluntary acts belong to principles that are
within us, so that they have no external cause. Therefore sin has no
external cause.
Objection 2: Further, as nature is an internal principle, so is the will.
Now in natural things sin can be due to no other than an internal
cause; for instance, the birth of a monster is due to the corruption of
some internal principle. Therefore in the moral order, sin can arise
from no other than an internal cause. Therefore it has no external
cause.
Objection 3: Further, if the cause is multiplied, the effect is
multiplied. Now the more numerous and weighty the external
inducements to sin are, the less is a man's inordinate act imputed to
him as a sin. Therefore nothing external is a cause of sin.
On the contrary, It is written (Num. 21:16): "Are not these they, that
deceived the children of Israel by the counsel of Balaam, and made
you transgress against the Lord by the sin of Phogor?" Therefore
something external can be a cause of sin.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 2), the internal cause of sin is
both the will, as completing the sinful act, and the reason, as lacking
the due rule, and the appetite, as inclining to sin. Accordingly
something external might be a cause of sin in three ways, either by
moving the will itself immediately, or by moving the reason, or by
moving the sensitive appetite. Now, as stated above (Question 9,
Article 6; Question 10, Article 4), none can move the will inwardly
save God alone, who cannot be a cause of sin, as we shall prove
further on (Question 79, Article 1). Hence it follows that nothing
external can be a cause of sin, except by moving the reason, as a
man or devil by enticing to sin; or by moving the sensitive appetite,
as certain external sensibles move it. Yet neither does external
enticement move the reason, of necessity, in matters of action, nor
do things proposed externally, of necessity move the sensitive
appetite, except perhaps it be disposed thereto in a certain way; and
even the sensitive appetite does not, of necessity, move the reason
and will. Therefore something external can be a cause moving to sin,