shown (Doc. Perp. iii, 49) intercourse with a woman outside wedlock
is an action improportionate to the good of the offspring which is the
principal end of marriage: and consequently it is against the first
precepts of the natural law which admit of no dispensation. Hence
wherever in the Old Testament we read of concubines being taken by
such men as we ought to excuse from mortal sin, we must needs
understand them to have been taken in marriage, and yet to have
been called concubines, because they had something of the
character of a wife and something of the character of a concubine. In
so far as marriage is directed to its principal end, which is the good
of the offspring, the union of wife and husband is indissoluble or at
least of a lasting nature, as shown above (Article 1), and in regard to
this there is no dispensation. But in regard to the secondary end,
which is the management of the household and community of works,
the wife is united to the husband as his mate: and this was lacking in
those who were known as concubines. For in this respect a
dispensation was possible, since it is the secondary end of marriage.
And from this point of view they bore some resemblance to
concubines, and for this reason they were known as such.
Reply to Objection 1: As stated above (Article 1, ad 7,8) to have
several wives is not against the first precepts of the natural law, as it
is to have a concubine; wherefore the argument does not prove.
Reply to Objection 2: The patriarchs of old by virtue of the
dispensation which allowed them several wives, approached their
bondswomen with the disposition of a husband towards his wife. For
these women were wives as to the principal and first end of
marriage, but not as to the other union which regards the secondary
end, to which bondage is opposed since a woman cannot be at once
mate and slave.
Reply to Objection 3: As in the Mosaic law it was allowable by
dispensation to grant a bill of divorce in order to avoid wife-murder
(as we shall state further on, Question 67, Article 6), so by the same
dispensation Abraham was allowed to send Agar away, in order to
signify the mystery which the Apostle explains (Gal. 4:22, seqq.).
Again, that this son did not inherit belongs to the mystery, as
explained in the same place. Even so Esau, the son of a free woman,
did not inherit (Rm. 9:13, seqq.). In like manner on account of the
mystery it came about that the sons of Jacob born of bond and free
women inherited, as Augustine says (Tract. xi in Joan.) because
"sons and heirs are born to Christ both of good ministers denoted by

the free woman and of evil ministers denoted by the bondswoman."

## QUESTION 66 — OF BIGAMY AND OF THE IRREGULARITY

CONTRACTED THEREBY

Prologue
In the next place we must consider bigamy and the irregularity
contracted thereby. Under this head there are five points of inquiry:
(1) Whether irregularity attaches to the bigamy that consists in
having two successive wives?
(2) Whether irregularity is contracted by one who has two wives at
once?
(3) Whether irregularity is contracted by marrying one who is not a
virgin?
(4) Whether bigamy is removed by Baptism?
(5) Whether a dispensation can be granted to a bigamous person?