And what great thing does He promise them, it may be said, if what the
Ninevites have and the Queen of the South, this these are to have also? In the
first place He had promised them many other things before this, and after this
does promise them, and this alone is not their reward.
And besides even in this He intimated by the way something more than
these things. For of those He simply said, The men of Nineveh shall rise up and
condemn this gen eration, [Matthew 12:41] and, "The Queen of the South shall
condemn it;" but concerning these, not merely thus, but how? "When the Son of
Man shall sit upon the throne of His glory, then shall you also sit upon twelve
thrones," says He, declaring, that they also shall reign with Him, and partake of
that glory. "For if we suffer," it is said, "we shall also reign with Him."
[2 Timothy 2:12] For neither do the thrones signify a sitting (in judgment), for
He alone is the one that shall sit and judge, but honor and glory unspeakable did
He intimate by the thrones.
To these then He spoke of these things, but to all the rest of eternal life and
an hundredfold here. But if to the rest, much more to these too, both these things,
and the things in this life.
And this surely came to pass; for when they had left a fishing rod and a net,
they possessed with authority the substances of all, the prices of the houses and
the lands, and the very bodies of the believers. For often did they choose even to
be slain for their sake, as Paul also bears witness to many, when he says, "If it
had been possible ye would have plucked out your eyes, and given them to me."
[Galatians 4:51] But when He says, "Every one who has forsaken wife," He says
not this, for marriages to be broken asunder for nought, but as He says
concerning one's life, "He that loses his life for my sake shall find it,"
[Matthew 10:39] not that we should destroy ourselves, neither that while yet
here we should part it from the body, but that we should prefer godliness to all
things; this too He says also with respect to wife and brethren.
But He seems to me here to intimate also the persecutions. For since there
were many instances both of fathers urging their sons to ungodliness, and wives

their husbands; when they command these things, says He, let them be neither
wives nor parents, even as Paul likewise said, "But if the unbelieving depart, let
him depart." [1 Corinthians 7:15]
When He had then raised the spirit of all, and had persuaded them to feel
confidence both with respect to themselves and to all the world, He added, that
"Many that were first shall be last, and last first." But this although it be spoken
also without distinction concerning many others likewise, it is spoken also
concerning these men and concerning the Pharisees, who did not believe, even as
before also He had said, "Many shall come from east and west and shall sit down
with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob; but the children of the kingdom shall be
cast out." [Matthew 8:11-12]
Then He adds also a parable, as training those who had fallen short to a
great forwardness.
"For the kingdom of Heaven," He said, "is like to a man that is an
householder, which went out early in the morning to hire laborers into his
vineyard. And when he had agreed with them for a penny a day, he sent them
into his vineyard."
"And at the third hour he saw others standing idle, and to them too he said,
Go ye also into the vineyard, and whatsoever is right I will give you. And about
the sixth and ninth hours he did likewise. And about the eleventh hour, he saw
others standing idle, and says unto them, Why stand ye here all the day idle? But
they say unto him, No man has hired us. He says unto them, Go ye also into my
vineyard, and whatsoever is right, you shall receive."
"So when even had come, the lord of the vineyard says unto his steward,
Call the laborers, and give them their hire, beginning from the last unto the first.
And when they came that were hired about the eleventh hour, they received every
man a penny. And the first supposed that they should receive more, and they
received likewise every man a penny. And when they had received it, they
murmured against the good man of the house, saying, These last have wrought
but one hour, and you have made them equal unto us that have borne the burden