"on the right hand"), they hold that, inasmuch as it is a mean between the spiritual and the material,
it passes to the side to which inclination draws it. Spiritual substance, again, they describe as having
been sent forth for this end, that, being here united with that which is animal, it might assume shape,
the two elements being simultaneously subjected to the same discipline. And this they declare to
be "the salt" and "the light of the world." For the animal substance had need of training by means
of the outward senses; and on this account they affirm that the world was created, as well as that
the Saviour came to the animal substance (which was possessed of free-will), that He might secure
for it salvation. For they affirm that He received the first-fruits of those whom He was to save [as
follows], from Achamoth that which was spiritual, while He was invested by the Demiurge with
the animal Christ, but was begirt by a [special] dispensation with a body endowed with an animal
nature, yet constructed with unspeakable skill, so that it might be visible and tangible, and capable
of enduring suffering. At the same time, they deny that He assumed anything material [into His
nature], since indeed matter is incapable of salvation. They further hold that the consummation of
all things will take place when all that is spiritual has been formed and perfected by Gnosis
(knowledge); and by this they mean spiritual men who have attained to the perfect knowledge of
God, and been initiated into these mysteries by Achamoth. And they represent themselves to be
these persons.
2. Animal men, again, are instructed in animal things; such men, namely, as are established by
their works, and by a mere faith, while they have not perfect knowledge. We of the Church, they
say, are these persons. Wherefore also they maintain that good works are necessary to us, for
that otherwise it is impossible we should be saved. But as to themselves, they hold that they shall
be entirely and undoubtedly saved, not by means of conduct, but because they are spiritual by
nature. For, just as it is impossible that material substance should partake of salvation (since,
indeed, they maintain that it is incapable of receiving it), so again it is impossible that spiritual
substance (by which they mean themselves) should ever come under the power of corruption,
whatever the sort of actions in which they indulged. For even as gold, when submersed in filth,
loses not on that account its beauty, but retains its own native qualities, the filth having no power
to injure the gold, so they affirm that they cannot in any measure suffer hurt, or lose their spiritual
substance, whatever the material actions in which they may be involved.
3. Wherefore also it comes to pass, that the "most perfect" among them addict themselves
without fear to all those kinds of forbidden deeds of which the Scriptures assure us that "they who
-./0#1 #,2&3."