perplexity: especially too when Christ appears to adjudge His great rewards to
both these, I mean to the giving up our possessions, and to the perils of
martyrdom. For both to the rich man He says, as I before observed, "If you will
be perfect, sell your goods, and give to the poor, and come, follow me:" and
discoursing with the disciples, of martyrdom He says, "Whosoever shall lose his
life for My sake, shall find it;" and, "Whosoever shall confess Me before men,
him will I also confess before My Father which is in heaven." For great indeed is
the labor of this achievement, and well near surpassing nature itself, and this is
well known to such as have had these crowns vouchsafed to them. For no
language can set it before us: so noble a soul does the deed belong to and so
exceedingly wonderful is it.
9. But nevertheless, this so wonderful thing Paul said was of no great profit
without love, even though it have the giving up of one's goods joined with it.
Wherefore then has he thus spoken? This will I now endeavor to explain, first
having enquired of this, How is it possible that one who gives all his goods to
feed the poor can be wanting in love? I grant, indeed, he that is ready to be
burned and has the gifts, may perhaps possibly not have love: but he who not
only gives his goods, but even distributes them in morsels; how has not he love?
What then are we to say? Either that he supposed an unreal case as real; which
kind of thing he is ever wont to do, when he intends to set before us something
in excess; as when writing to the Galatians he says, "If we or an angel from
heaven preach any other gospel unto you than that you receive let him be
accursed." [Galatians 1:8] And yet neither was himself nor an angel about to do
so; but to signify that he meant to carry the matter as far as possible, he set down
even that which could never by any means happen. And again, when he writes to
the Romans, and says, "Neither angels, nor principalities, nor powers, shall be
able to separate us from the love of God;" for neither was this about to be done
by any angels: but here too he supposes a thing which was not; as indeed also in
what comes next, saying, "nor any other creature," whereas there is no other
creature, for he had comprehended the whole creation, having spoken of all

things both above and below. Nevertheless here also he mentions that which was
not, by way of hypothesis, so as to show his exceeding desire. Now the same
thing he does here also, saying, "If a man give all, and have not love, it profits
him nothing."
Either then we may say this, or that his meaning is for those who give to be
also joined closely to those who retire, and not merely to give without sympathy,
but in pity and condescension, bowing down and grieving with the needy. For
therefore also has almsgiving been enacted by God: since God might have
nourished the poor as well without this, but that he might bind us together unto
charity and that we might be thoroughly fervent toward each other, he
commanded them to be nourished by us. Therefore one says in another place
also; "a good word is better than a gift;" [Sirach 18:16-17] and, "behold, a word
is beyond a good gift." [Sirach 18:16-17] And He Himself says, "I will have
mercy, and not sacrifice." [Matthew 9:30; Hosea 6:6] For since it is usual, both
for men to love those who are benefited by them, and for those who receive
benefits to be more kindly affected towards their benefactors; he made this law,
constituting it a bond of friendship.
10. But the point proposed for enquiry above is, How, after Christ had said
that both these belong to perfection, Paul affirms, that these without charity are
imperfect? Not contradicting Him, God forbid: but harmonizing with Him, and
that exactly. For so in the case of the rich man, He said, not merely, "sell your
goods, and give to the poor," but He added, "and come, follow Me." Now not
even the following Him proves any man a disciple of Christ so completely as the
loving one another. For, "by this shall all men know," says He, "that you are My
disciples, if you have love one to another." [John 13:35] And also when He says,
"Whosoever loses his life for My sake, shall find it;" [Matthew 10:39] and,
"whosoever shall confess Me before men, him will I also confess before My
Father which is in heaven;" He means not this, that it is not necessary to have
love, but He declares the reward which is laid up for these labors. Since that
along with martyrdom He requires also this, is what He elsewhere strongly