1 Corinthians 16:24
"My love be with you all in Christ Jesus, Amen."
Thus to hinder them from thinking that in flattery to them he so ended, he
says, "In Christ Jesus." It having nothing in it human or carnal, but being of a
sort of spiritual nature. Wherefore it is thoroughly genuine. For indeed the
expression was that of one who loves deeply. As thus; because he was separated
from them as regards place, as it were by the stretching out of a right hand he
incloses them with the arms of his love, saying, "My love be with you all;" just
as if he said, "With all of you I am." Whereby he intimates that the things written
came not of wrath or anger, but of provident care, seeing that after so heavy an
accusation he does not turn himself away, but rather loves them, and embraces
them when they are afar off, by these epistles and writings throwing himself into
their arms.
5. For so ought he that corrects to do: since he at least, who acts merely
from anger is but satisfying his own feeling; but he who after correcting the
sinner renders also the offices of love, shows that those words also, whatsoever
he spoke in reproof, were words of fond affection. Just so let us too chasten one
another; and let neither the corrector be angry, (for this belongs not to correction,
but to passion,) nor let him that is corrected take it ill. For what is done is
healing, not despite. Now if physicians use cautery and are not found fault with,
and that too, frequently, though they quite miss their object; but even in their
pain the subjects of the cautery and amputation esteem as benefactors those who
excite this pain; much more ought he who receives reproof to be so disposed,
and as to a physician so to give heed to the corrector, and not as to an enemy.
And let us also who rebuke approach with great gentleness, with great prudence.
And if you see a brother committing sin, as Christ commanded, make not your
rebuke public, but "between you and him alone:" [Matthew 18:15] not

reproaching nor insulting over him when down, but in pain and with a melting
heart. And show yourself ready also to receive reproof, if you commit error in
any thing.
Now that what I say may be plainer, let us put an imaginary case and so try
our rule. For God forbid that in very deed we should be provided with such an
illustration of it. Suppose any brother dwelling in the same house with a virgin,
in honor and chastity, and yet not even so quite escaping evil report. If then you
should hear talk of this their dwelling together, be not contemptuous, nor say,
"Why, has he no understanding? Does he not himself know what is for his good?
Get love for nothing, but do not for nothing get hatred. Why, what have I to do
with taking up a gratuitous enmity?" These are the doting words of wild beasts,
or rather of demons: for it is not so that he is hated for nothing who does this for
his brother's correction, rather it is for great blessings and crowns unutterable.
But if you say, "What? Has he no understanding?" you shall hear from me
that he has not: drunken as he is with his passion. For if in the heathen courts of
justice, those who are injured must not speak for themselves while glowing with
wrath; (although there be no fault in that kind of sympathy;) how much more
those whom evil habit holds in subjection. Wherefore I say that manifold as his
wisdom may be, he has not his mind awake. For what can be wiser than David,
the man who said, "The dark and the hidden things of Your wisdom You have
made known unto me?" [267 li. 6. ap, Septuagint. l. 6] But when he looked on
the wife of the soldier with unjust eyes, then according to what he himself said
[Psalm 107:27] of those who sail on the raging sea, "all his wisdom was
swallowed up;" and he stood in need of others to correct him, and did not even
perceive amidst what evils he was. Wherefore also, bewailing his offenses, he
said, "As a heavy burden they weighed grievously upon me: my wounds stank
and were corrupt because of my folly." [Psalm 38:5] He therefore that commits
sin has no understanding. For he is drunken and is in darkness. Do not then say
these things, neither add that other remark, "I care not at all about it. 'For each
man shall bear his own burden.'" [Galatians 6:5] Nay, against yourself also it