new earth." Now the heaven will be renewed by an increase of
brightness. Therefore the earth and likewise the other elements will
also.
Further, the lower bodies, like the higher, are for man's use. Now the
corporeal creature will be rewarded for its services to man, as a
gloss of Ambrose seems to say on Rm. 8:22, "Every creature
groaneth," and a gloss of Jerome on Is. 30:26, "And the light of the
moon shall be," etc. Therefore the elements will be glorified as well
as the heavenly bodies.
Further, man's body is composed of the elements. Therefore the
elemental particles that are in man's body will be glorified by the
addition of brightness when man is glorified. Now it is fitting that
whole and part should have the same disposition. Therefore it is
fitting that the elements themselves should be endowed with
brightness.
I answer that, Just as there is a certain order between the heavenly
spirits and the earthly or human spirits, so is there an order between
heavenly bodies and earthly bodies. Since then the corporeal
creature was made for the sake of the spiritual and is ruled thereby,
it follows that corporeal things are dealt with similarly to spiritual
things. Now in this final consummation of things the lower spirits
will receive the properties of the higher spirits, because men will be
as the angels in heaven (Mt. 22:30): and this will be accomplished by
conferring the highest degree of perfection on that in which the
human spirit agrees with the angelic. Wherefore, in like manner,
since the lower bodies do not agree with the heavenly bodies except
in the nature of light and transparency (De Anima ii), it follows that
the lower bodies are to be perfected chiefly as regards brightness.
Hence all the elements will be clothed with a certain brightness, not
equally, however, but according to their mode: for it is said that the
earth on its outward surface will be as transparent as glass, water as
crystal, the air as heaven, fire as the lights of heaven.
Reply to Objection 1: As stated above (Article 1), the renewal of the
world is directed to the effect that man even by his senses may as it
were see the Godhead by manifest signs. Now the most spiritual and
subtle of our senses is the sight. Consequently all the lower bodies
need to be bettered, chiefly as regards the visible qualities the
principle of which is light. On the other hand, the elemental qualities
regard the touch, which is the most material of the senses, and the

excess of their contrariety is more displeasing than pleasant;
whereas excess of light will be pleasant, since it has no contrariety,
except on account of a weakness in the organ, such as will not be
then.
Reply to Objection 2: The air will be bright, not as casting forth rays,
but as an enlightened transparency; while the earth, although it is
opaque through lack of light, yet by the Divine power its surface will
be clothed with the glory of brightness, without prejudice to its
density.
Reply to Objection 3: The earth will not be glorified with brightness
in the infernal regions; but instead of this glory, that part of the earth
will have the rational spirits of men and demons who though weak
by reason of sin are nevertheless superior to any corporeal quality
by the dignity of their nature. or we may say that, though the whole
earth be glorified, the wicked will nevertheless be in exterior
darkness, since even the fire of hell, while shining for them in one
respect, will be unable to enlighten them in another.
Reply to Objection 4: This brightness will be in these bodies even as
it is in the heavenly bodies, in which it causes no heat, because
these bodies will then be unalterable, as the heavenly bodies are
now.
Reply to Objection 5: The order of the universe will not be done away
by the betterment of the elements, because all the other parts will
also be bettered, and so the same harmony will remain.