Because in that case he would have grieved them more, but by speaking thus he
comforted them. For by the expression, "You have no need," as if it were both
superfluous, and inexpedient, he suffers them not to enquire.
For tell me, what would be the advantage? Let us suppose that the end
would be after twenty or thirty or a hundred years, what is this to us? Is not the
end of his own life the consummation to every individual? Why are you curious,
and travailest about the general end? But the case is the same with us in this, as
in other things. For as in other things, leaving our own private concerns, we are
anxious about things in general, saying, Such an one is a fornicator, such an one
an adulterer, that man has robbed, another has been injurious; but no one takes
account of what is his own, but each thinks of anything rather than his own
private concerns; so here also, each omitting to take thought about his own end,
we are anxious to hear about the general dissolution. Now what concern is that
of yours? For if you make your own a good end, you will suffer no harm from
the other; be it far off, or be it near. This is nothing to us.
For this reason Christ did not tell it, because it was not expedient. How, you
say, was it not expedient? He who also concealed it knows wherefore it was not
expedient. For hear Him saying to His Apostles, "It is not for you to know times,
or seasons, which the Father has set within His own authority." [Acts 1:7] Why
are you curious? Peter, the chief of the Apostles, and his fellows, heard this said,
as if they were seeking things too great for them to know. True, you say; but it
were possible to stop the mouths of the Greeks in this way. How? Tell me.
Because they say, that this world is a god; if we knew the period of its
dissolution, we should have stopped their mouths. Why, is this what will stop
their mouths, to know when it will be destroyed, or to know that it will be
destroyed? Tell them this, that it will have an end. If they do not believe this,
neither will they believe the other.
Hear Paul saying, "For yourselves know perfectly that the day of the Lord
so comes as a thief in the night." Not the general day only, but that of every
individual. For the one resembles the other, is also akin to it. For what the one

does collectively, that the other does partially. For the period of consummation
took its beginning from Adam, and then is the end of the consummation; since
even now one would not err in calling it a consummation. For when ten thousand
die every day, and all await That Day, and no one is raised before it, is it not the
work of That Day? And if you would know on what account it is concealed, and
why it so comes as a thief in the night, I will tell you how I think I can well
account for it. No one would have ever cultivated virtue during his whole life;
but knowing his last day, and, after having committed numberless sins, then
having come to the Laver, he would so have departed. For if now, when the fear
arising from its uncertainty shakes the souls of all, still all, having spent their
whole former life in wickedness, at their last breath give themselves up to
Baptism,— if they had fully persuaded themselves concerning this matter, who
would ever have cultivated virtue? If many have departed without Illumination,
and not even this fear has taught them, while living, to cultivate the things that
are pleasing to God; if this fear also had been removed, who would ever have
been sober, or who gentle? There is not one! And another thing again. The fear
of death and the love of life restrain many. But if each one knew that tomorrow
he would certainly die, there is nothing he would refuse to attempt before that
day, but he would murder whomsoever he wished, and would retrieve himself by
taking vengeance on his enemies, and would perpetrate ten thousand crimes.
For a wicked man, who despairs of his life here, pays no regard even to him
who is invested with the purple. He therefore who was persuaded that he must at
all events die would both be revenged upon his enemy, and after having first
satisfied his own soul, so would meet his end. Let me mention also a third thing.
Those who are fond of life, and vehemently attached to the things of this world,
would be ruined by despair and grief. For if any of the young knew that before
he reached old age, he should meet his end, as the most sluggish of wild beasts,
when they are taken, become still more sluggish from expecting their end, so
would he also be affected. Besides, not even the men that are courageous would
have had their reward. For if they knew that after three years they must certainly