Eph. iv. 6, differing somewhat from Text. Rec. of New Testament.

were we to forsake the utterances of the prophets, of the Lord, and of the apostles, that we might
give heed to these persons, who speak not a word of sense?

### Chapter III.—The Bythus and Pleroma of the Valentinians, as well as the God of Marcion,
shown to be absurd; the world was actually created by the same Being who had conceived
the idea of it, and was not the fruit of defect or ignorance.
1. The Bythus, therefore, whom they conceive of with his Pleroma, and the God of Marcion,
are inconsistent. If indeed, as they affirm, he has something subjacent and beyond himself, which
they style vacuity and shadow, this vacuum is then proved to be greater than their Pleroma. But it
is inconsistent even to make this statement, that while he contains all things within himself, the
creation was formed by some other. For it is absolutely necessary that they acknowledge a certain
void and chaotic kind of existence (below the spiritual Pleroma) in which this universe was formed,
and that the Propator purposely left this chaos as it was, either knowing beforehand what things
were to happen in it, or being ignorant of them. If he was really ignorant, then God will not be
prescient of all things. But they will not even [in that case] be able to assign a reason on what
account He thus left this place void during so long a period of time. If, again, He is prescient, and
contemplated mentally that creation which was about to have a being in that place, then He Himself
created it who also formed it beforehand [ideally] in Himself.
2. Let them cease, therefore, to affirm that the world was made by any other; for as soon as
God formed a conception in His mind, that was also done which He had thus mentally conceived.
For it was not possible that one Being should mentally form the conception, and another actually
produce the things which had been conceived by Him in His mind. But God, according to these
heretics, mentally conceived either an eternal world or a temporal one, both of which suppositions
cannot be true. Yet if He had mentally conceived of it as eternal, spiritual, and visible, it would
also have been formed such. But if it was formed such as it really is, then He made it such who had
mentally conceived of it as such; or He willed it to exist in the ideality of the Father, according
to the conception of His mind, such as it now is, compound, mutable, and transient. Since, then, it
is just such as the Father had [ideally] formed in counsel with Himself, it must be worthy of the
there are three suppositions advanced by the author: that the world, as some heretics asserted, was eternal; that it was created in
time, with no previous idea of it in the divine mind; or that it existed as a portion of the divine counsels from all eternity, though
with no temporal subsistence until the time of its creation,—and of this the author now speaks." The whole passage is most
obscurely expressed.