that he may give. But the apostle not so: as a physician rather, as a teacher, as a
father, the one to the sick, the other to the disciple, the third to the son,
condescends for his correction, not for his hurt; so likewise did he.
To show that the things which have been stated were not pretence; in a case
where he is not compelled to do or say any such thing but means to express his
affection and his confidence; hear him saying, [Romans 8:39] "neither life, nor
death, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things
to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate
us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord." Do you see a love
more ardent than fire? So let us also love Christ. For indeed it is easy, if we will.
For neither was the Apostle such by nature. On this account, you see, his former
life was recorded, so contrary to this, that we may learn that the work is one of
choice, and that to the willing all things are easy.
Let us not then despair, but even though thou be a reviler, or covetous, or
whatsoever you are, consider that Paul was [1 Timothy 13-16] "a blasphemer,
and persecutor, and injurious, and the chief of sinners," and suddenly rose to the
very summit of virtue, and his former life proved no hindrance to him. And yet
none with so great frenzy clings to vice as he did to the war against the Church.
For at that time he put his very life into it; and because he had not ten thousand
hands that he might stone Stephen with all of them, he was vexed.
Notwithstanding, even thus he found how he might stone him with more hands,
to wit, those of the false witnesses whose clothes he kept. And again, when he
entered into houses like a wild beast and no otherwise did he rush in, haling,
tearing men and women, filling all things with tumult and confusion and
innumerable conflicts. For instance, so terrible was he that the Apostles, [Acts
9:26] even after his most glorious change, did not yet venture to join themselves
to him. Nevertheless, after all those things he became such as he was: for I need
not say more.
7. Where now are they who build up the necessity of fate against the
freedom of the will? Let them hear these things, and let their mouths be stopped.

For there is nothing to hinder him that wills to become good, even though before
he should be one of the vilest. And in fact we are more aptly disposed that way,
inasmuch as virtue is agreeable to our nature, and vice contrary to it, even as
sickness and health. For God has given us eyes, not that we may look wantonly,
but that, admiring his handi-work, we may worship the Creator. And that this is
the use of our eyes is evident from the things which are seen. For the lustre of
the sun and of the sky we see from an immeasurable distance, but a woman's
beauty one cannot discern so far off. Do you see that for this end our eye was
chiefly given? Again, he made the ear that we should entertain not blasphemous
words, but saving doctrines. Wherefore you see, when it receives any thing
dissonant, both our soul shudders and our very body also. "For," says one,
[Sirach 27:5] "the talk of him that swears much makes the hair stand upright."
And if we hear any thing cruel or merciless, again our flesh creeps; but if any
thing decorous and kind, we even exult and rejoice. Again, if our mouth utter
base words, it causes us to be ashamed and hide ourselves, but if grave words, it
utters them with ease and all freedom. Now for those things which are according
to nature no one would blush, but for those which are against nature. And the
hands when they steal hide themselves, and seek excuses; but if they give alms,
they even glory. So that if we will, we have from every side a great inclination
towards virtue. But if you talk to me of the pleasure which arises from vice,
consider that this also is a thing which we reap more of from virtue. For to have
a good conscience and to be looked up to by all and to entertain good hopes, is
of all things most pleasant to him that has seen into the nature of pleasure, even
as the reverse is of all things the most grievous to him that knows the nature of
pain; such as to be reproached by all, to be accused by our own conscience, to
tremble and fear both at the future and the present.
And that what I say may become more evident, let us suppose for
argument's sake one man having a wife, yet defiling the marriage-bed of his
neighbor and taking pleasure in this wicked robbery, enjoying his paramour.
Then let us again oppose to him another who loves his own spouse. And that the