SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.52, C.3.

prudence, for just as we distinguish the prudence that guides the
individual, from other kinds that govern communities, as stated
above (Question 48; Question 50, Article 7), so also we distinguish
various kinds of imprudence. Secondly, in respect of the quasipotential parts of prudence, which are virtues connected with it, and
correspond to the several acts of reason. Thus, by defect of
"counsel" to which euboulia (deliberating well) corresponds,
"precipitation" or "temerity" is a species of imprudence; by defect of
"judgment," to which synesis (judging well according to common
law) and gnome (judging well according to general law) refer, there is
"thoughtlessness"; while "inconstancy" and "negligence"
correspond to the "command" which is the proper act of prudence.
Thirdly, this may be taken by opposition to those things which are
requisite for prudence, which are the quasi-integral parts of
prudence. Since however all these things are intended for the
direction of the aforesaid three acts of reason, it follows that all the
opposite defects are reducible to the four parts mentioned above.
Thus incautiousness and incircumspection are included in
"thoughtlessness"; lack of docility, memory, or reason is referable to
"precipitation"; improvidence, lack of intelligence and of
shrewdness, belong to "negligence" and "inconstancy."
Reply to Objection 1: This argument considers generality by
participation.
Reply to Objection 2: Since knowledge is further removed from
morality than prudence is, according to their respective proper
natures, it follows that ignorance has the nature of mortal sin, not of
itself, but on account either of a preceding negligence, or of the
consequent result, and for this reason it is reckoned one of the
general causes of sin. On the other hand imprudence, by its very
nature, denotes a moral vice; and for this reason it can be called a
special sin.
Reply to Objection 3: When various circumstances are corrupted for
the same motive, the species of sin is not multiplied: thus it is the
same species of sin to take what is not one's own, where one ought
not, and when one ought not. If, however, there be various motives,
there are various species: for instance, if one man were to take
another's property from where he ought not, so as to wrong a sacred
place, this would constitute the species called sacrilege, while if
another were to take another's property when he ought not, merely
through the lust of possession, this would be a case of simple

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.52, C.3.

avarice. Hence the lack of those things which are requisite for
prudence, does not constitute a diversity of species, except in so far
as they are directed to different acts of reason, as stated above.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.52, C.4.