FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.114, C.3.

hence it is that no created nature is a sufficient principle of an act
meritorious of eternal life, unless there is added a supernatural gift,
which we call grace. But if we speak of man as existing in sin, a
second reason is added to this, viz. the impediment of sin. For since
sin is an offense against God, excluding us from eternal life, as is
clear from what has been said above (Question 71, Article 6;
Question 113, Article 2), no one existing in a state of mortal sin can
merit eternal life unless first he be reconciled to God, through his sin
being forgiven, which is brought about by grace. For the sinner
deserves not life, but death, according to Rm. 6:23: "The wages of
sin is death."
Reply to Objection 1: God ordained human nature to attain the end of
eternal life, not by its own strength, but by the help of grace; and in
this way its act can be meritorious of eternal life.
Reply to Objection 2: Without grace a man cannot have a work equal
to a work proceeding from grace, since the more perfect the
principle, the more perfect the action. But the objection would hold
good, if we supposed the operations equal in both cases.
Reply to Objection 3: With regard to the first reason adduced, the
case is different in God and in man. For a man receives all his power
of well-doing from God, and not from man. Hence a man can merit
nothing from God except by His gift, which the Apostle expresses
aptly saying (Rm. 11:35): "Who hath first given to Him, and
recompense shall be made to him?" But man may merit from man,
before he has received anything from him, by what he has received
from God.
But as regards the second proof taken from the impediment of sin,
the case is similar with man and God, since one man cannot merit
from another whom he has offended, unless he makes satisfaction to
him and is reconciled.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.114, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether a man in grace can merit eternal life

condignly?
Objection 1: It would seem that a man in grace cannot merit eternal
life condignly, for the Apostle says (Rm. 8:18): "The sufferings of this
time are not worthy [condignae] to be compared with the glory to
come, that shall be revealed in us." But of all meritorious works, the
sufferings of the saints would seem the most meritorious. Therefore
no works of men are meritorious of eternal life condignly.
Objection 2: Further, on Rm. 6:23, "The grace of God, life
everlasting," a gloss says: "He might have truly said: 'The wages of
justice, life everlasting'; but He preferred to say 'The grace of God,
life everlasting,' that we may know that God leads us to life
everlasting of His own mercy and not by our merits." Now when
anyone merits something condignly he receives it not from mercy,
but from merit. Hence it would seem that a man with grace cannot
merit life everlasting condignly.
Objection 3: Further, merit that equals the reward, would seem to be
condign. Now no act of the present life can equal everlasting life,
which surpasses our knowledge and our desire, and moreover,
surpasses the charity or love of the wayfarer, even as it exceeds
nature. Therefore with grace a man cannot merit eternal life
condignly.
On the contrary, What is granted in accordance with a fair judgment,
would seem a condign reward. But life everlasting is granted by God,
in accordance with the judgment of justice, according to 2 Tim. 4:8:
"As to the rest, there is laid up for me a crown of justice, which the
Lord, the just judge, will render to me in that day." Therefore man
merits everlasting life condignly.
I answer that, Man's meritorious work may be considered in two
ways: first, as it proceeds from free-will; secondly, as it proceeds
from the grace of the Holy Ghost. If it is considered as regards the
substance of the work, and inasmuch as it springs from the free-will,
there can be no condignity because of the very great inequality. But
there is congruity, on account of an equality of proportion: for it
would seem congruous that, if a man does what he can, God should
reward him according to the excellence of his power.