instance of perversion certainly, but not in Paul, (God forbid,) but in them who
use him. For he was not parti-colored , but uniform and clear, but they perverted
his words to their own notions. 'And wherefore,' says one, 'were they so spoken
as to give handles to those that wished for them?' He did not give handles, but
their frenzy used his words not rightly; since this whole world also is both
wonderful and great, and a sure proof of the wisdom of God, and "the heavens
declare the glory of God, and day unto day utters speech, and night unto night
declares knowledge;" [Psalm 19:1-2] but nevertheless, many have stumbled at it
and in contrary directions to one another. And some have admired it so much
above its worth as to think it God; while others have been so insensible of its
beauty as to assert it to be unworthy of God's creating hand , and to ascribe the
greater share in it to a certain evil matter. And yet God provided for both points
by making it beautiful and great that it might not be deemed alien from his
wisdom; yet defective and not sufficient unto itself that it might not be suspected
to be God. But nevertheless those who were blinded by their own reasonings fell
away into contradictory notions, refuting one another, and becoming each the
other's accuser, and vindicating the wisdom of God even by the very reasonings
which led them astray. And why do I speak of the sun and the heaven? The Jews
saw so many marvels happen before their eyes, yet straightway worshipped a
calf. Again they saw Christ casting out demons, yet called him one that had a
demon. But this was no imputation against him that cast them out, but an
accusation of their understanding who were so blinded. Condemn not then Paul
on account of their judgment who have used him amiss; but understand well the
treasures in him, and develop his riches, so shall you make noble stand against
all, fenced by his armor. So shall you be able to stop the mouths both of Greeks
and Jews. 'And how,' says one, 'seeing they believe him not?' By the things
wrought through him, by the reformation effected in the world. For it was not of
human power that so great things could be done, but the Might of the Crucified,
breathing on him, made him such as he was, and showed him more powerful
than orators and philosophers and tyrants and kings and all men. He was not

only able to arm himself and to strike down his adversaries, but to make others
also such as himself. Therefore in order that we may become useful both to
ourselves and to others, let us continually have him in our hands, using his
writings for a meadow and garden of delight. For so shall we be able both to be
delivered from vice and to choose virtue, and to obtain the promised good
things, whereunto may we all attain, through the grace and love towards men of
our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father with the Holy Spirit, be glory,
might, honor, now and for ever, and world without end. Amen.