understood, the aspect of the true must needs pass from the intellect
to the object understood, so that also the thing understood is said to
be true in so far as it has some relation to the intellect. Now a thing
understood may be in relation to an intellect either essentially or
accidentally. It is related essentially to an intellect on which it
depends as regards its essence; but accidentally to an intellect by
which it is knowable; even as we may say that a house is related
essentially to the intellect of the architect, but accidentally to the
intellect upon which it does not depend.
Now we do not judge of a thing by what is in it accidentally, but by
what is in it essentially. Hence, everything is said to be true
absolutely, in so far as it is related to the intellect from which it
depends; and thus it is that artificial things are said to be true a
being related to our intellect. For a house is said to be true that
expresses the likeness of the form in the architect's mind; and words
are said to be true so far as they are the signs of truth in the intellect.
In the same way natural things are said to be true in so far as they
express the likeness of the species that are in the divine mind. For a
stone is called true, which possesses the nature proper to a stone,
according to the preconception in the divine intellect. Thus, then,
truth resides primarily in the intellect, and secondarily in things
according as they are related to the intellect as their principle.
Consequently there are various definitions of truth. Augustine says
(De Vera Relig. xxxvi), "Truth is that whereby is made manifest that
which is;" and Hilary says (De Trin. v) that "Truth makes being clear
and evident" and this pertains to truth according as it is in the
intellect. As to the truth of things in so far as they are related to the
intellect, we have Augustine's definition (De Vera Relig. xxxvi),
"Truth is a supreme likeness without any unlikeness to a principle":
also Anselm's definition (De Verit. xii), "Truth is rightness,
perceptible by the mind alone"; for that is right which is in
accordance with the principle; also Avicenna's definition (Metaph.
viii, 6), "The truth of each thing is a property of the essence which is
immutably attached to it." The definition that "Truth is the equation
of thought and thing" is applicable to it under either aspect.
Reply to Objection 1: Augustine is speaking about the truth of
things, and excludes from the notion of this truth, relation to our
intellect; for what is accidental is excluded from every definition.
Reply to Objection 2: The ancient philosophers held that the species
of natural things did not proceed from any intellect, but were

produced by chance. But as they saw that truth implies relation to
intellect, they were compelled to base the truth of things on their
relation to our intellect. From this, conclusions result that are
inadmissible, and which the Philosopher refutes (Metaph. iv). Such,
however, do not follow, if we say that the truth of things consists in
their relation to the divine intellect.
Reply to Objection 3: Although the truth of our intellect is caused by
the thing, yet it is not necessary that truth should be there primarily,
any more than that health should be primarily in medicine, rather
than in the animal: for the virtue of medicine, and not its health, is
the cause of health, for here the agent is not univocal. In the same
way, the being of the thing, not its truth, is the cause of truth in the
intellect. Hence the Philosopher says that a thought or a word is true
"from the fact that a thing is, not because a thing is true."