FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.17, C.4.

when one commands another; sometimes the will of the one that
commands, when he commands himself to do something.
Reply to Objection 2: Just as act ranks before power, so does the
object rank before the act. Now the object of use is that which is
directed to the end. Consequently, from the fact that command
precedes, rather than that it follows use.
Reply to Objection 3: Just as the act of the will in using the reason
for the purpose of command, precedes the command; so also we
may say that this act whereby the will uses the reason, is preceded
by a command of reason; since the acts of these powers react on
one another.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.17, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether command and the commanded act are

one act, or distinct?
Objection 1: It would seem that the commanded act is not one with
the command itself. For the acts of different powers are themselves
distinct. But the commanded act belongs to one power, and the
command to another; since one is the power that commands, and
the other is the power that receives the command. Therefore the
commanded act is not one with the command.
Objection 2: Further, whatever things can be separate from one
another, are distinct: for nothing is severed from itself. But
sometimes the commanded act is separate from the command: for
sometimes the command is given, and the commanded act follows
not. Therefore command is a distinct act from the act commanded.
Objection 3: Further, whatever things are related to one another as
precedent and consequent, are distinct. But command naturally
precedes the commanded act. Therefore they are distinct.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Topic. iii, 2) that "where one
thing is by reason of another, there is but one." But there is no
commanded act unless by reason of the command. Therefore they
are one.
I answer that, Nothing prevents certain things being distinct in one
respect, and one in another respect. Indeed, every multitude is one
in some respect, as Dionysius says (Div. Nom. xiii). But a difference
is to be observed in this, that some are simply many, and one in a
particular aspect: while with others it is the reverse. Now "one" is
predicated in the same way as "being." And substance is being
simply, whereas accident or being "of reason" is a being only in a
certain respect. Wherefore those things that are one in substance
are one simply, though many in a certain respect. Thus, in the genus
substance, the whole composed of its integral or essential parts, is
one simply: because the whole is being and substance simply, and
the parts are being and substances in the whole. But those things
which are distinct in substance, and one according to an accident,
are distinct simply, and one in a certain respect: thus many men are
one people, and many stones are one heap; which is unity of
composition or order. In like manner also many individuals that are