that he might be near Him. We haste, that we may be far off.
Are not these things then worthy of lamentation? Are they not worthy of
tears? Whither do you fly, wretched and miserable man? Whither do you fly
from your Life and your Salvation? If you fly from God, with whom will you
take refuge? If you fly from the Light, whither will you cast your eyes? If you
fly from your Life, whence will you henceforth live? Let us fly from the enemy
of our Salvation! Whenever we sin we fly from God, we are as runaways, we
depart to a foreign land, as he who consumed his paternal goods and departed
into a foreign land, who wasted all his father's substance, and lived in want. We
too have substance from our Father; and what is this? He has freed us from our
sins; He has freely given to us power, strength for works of virtue; He has freely
given to us readiness, patience; He has freely given to us the Holy Ghost in our
baptism; if we waste these things we shall henceforth be in want. For as the sick,
as long as they are troubled with fevers, and badness of their juices, are unable to
arise or work, or do anything, but if any one sets them free, and brings them to
health, if they then work not, this comes from their own sloth; thus too is it with
us. For the disease was heavy and the fever excessive. And we lay not upon a
bed, but upon wickedness itself, cast away in crime, as on a dunghill, full of
sores, and evil odors, squalid, wasting away, more like ghosts than men. Evil
spirits encompassed us about, the Prince of this world deriding and assaulting us;
the Only-Begotten Son of God came, sent forth the rays of His Presence, and
straightway dispelled the darkness. The King, who is on His Father's throne,
came to us, having left His Father's throne. And when I say having left, think not
of any removal, for He fills the heavens and the earth, but I speak of the
economy; He came to an enemy, who hated Him, who turned himself away, who
could not endure to behold Him, who blasphemed Him every day. He saw him
lying on a dunghill, eaten with worms, afflicted with fever and hunger, having
every sort of disease; for both fever vexed him, which is evil desire; and
inflammation lay heavy on him, this is pride; and gnawing hunger had hold of
him, which is covetousness; and putrefying sores on every side, for this is

fornication; and blindness of eyes, which is idolatry; and dumbness, and
madness, which is to worship stocks and stones, and address them; and great
deformity, for wickedness is this, foul to behold, and a most heavy disease. And
he saw us speaking more foolishly than the mad, and calling stocks our God, and
stones likewise; He saw us in such great guilt, he did not reject us; was not
angry, turned not away, hated us not, for He was a Master, and could not hate His
own creation. But what does he do? As a most excellent physician, He prepares
medicines of great price, and Himself tastes them first. For He Himself first
followed after virtue, and thus gave it to us. And He first gave us the washing,
like some antidote, and thus we vomited up all our guilt, and all things took their
flight at once, and our inflammation ceased, and our fever was quenched, and
our sores were dried up. For all the evils which are from covetousness, and
anger, and all the rest, were dissipated by the Spirit. Our eyes were opened, our
ears were opened, our tongue spoke holy words: our soul received strength, our
body received such beauty and bloom, as it is like that he who is born a son of
God should have from the grace of the Spirit; such glory as it is like that the
new-born son of a king should have, nurtured in purple. Alas! How great
nobility did He confer on us!
We were born, we were nurtured, why do we again fly from our
Benefactor? He then, who has done all these things, gives us strength too, for it
was not possible, for a soul bowed down by the disease to endure it, did not He
Himself give us the strength. He gave us remission of our sins. We devoured all
things. He gave us strength, we wasted it. He gave us grace, we quenched it; and
how? We consumed it upon nought that was fitting, we used it for no useful end.
These things have destroyed us, and what is more dreadful than all, when we are
in a foreign country, and feeding on husks, we say not, Let us return to our
Father, and say, "We have sinned against Heaven, and against You." [Luke
15:18] And that too, when we have so loving a Father, who eagerly desires our
return. If we will only return to Him, He does not even bear to call in question
our former deeds, only let us quit them. It is sufficient apology with Him, that