we shall be amiable one to another: for it is necessary, of course, not only to
love, but also to be loved. Let us first achieve this point, that we may be loved,
and the other will be easy. How to act that we may be loved? Let us become
beautiful, and let us do this, that we may always have lovers. Let none make it
his study to get money, to get slaves, to get houses, (so much) as to be loved, as
to have a good name. Better is a name than much wealth. For the one remains,
the other perishes: and the one it is possible to acquire, the other impossible. For
he that has got an evil character, will with difficulty lay it aside: but by means of
his (good) name the poor man may quickly be rich. Let there be a man having
ten thousand talents, and another a hundred friends; the latter is more rich in
resources than the former. Then let us not merely do this, but let us work it as a
kind of trade. "And how can we?" say you. "A sweet mouth multiplies its friends,
and a gracious tongue." Let us get a well-spoken mouth, and pure manners. It is
not possible for a man to be such, and not to be known.
(a) We have one world that we all inhabit, with the same fruits we all are
fed. But these are small matters: by the same Sacraments we partake of the same
spiritual food. These surely are justifications of loving! (c) Mark how many
(inducements and pleas) for friendship they that are without have excogitated;
community of art or trade, neighborhood, relationships: but mightier than all
these are the impulses and ties which are among us: this Table is calculated more
(than all else) to shame us into friendliness. But many of us who come thereto do
not even know one another. The reason, it may be said, is that there are so many
of them. By no means; it is only our own sluggish indifference. (Once) there
were three thousand [Acts 2:41]— there were five thousand [Acts 4:4]— and yet
they had all one soul: but now each knows not his brother, and is not ashamed to
lay the blame on the number, because it is so great! Yet he that has many friends
is invincible against all men: stronger he than any tyrant. Not such the safety the
tyrant has with his body-guards, as this man has with his friends. Moreover, this
man is more glorious than he: for the tyrant is guarded by his own slaves, but
this man by his peers: the tyrant, by men unwilling and afraid of him; this man

by willing men and without fear. And here too is a wonderful thing to be seen—
many in one, and one in many. (a) Just as in an harp, the sounds are diverse, not
the harmony, and they all together give out one harmony and symphony, (c) I
could wish to bring you into such a city, were it possible, wherein (all) should be
one soul: then should you see surpassing all harmony of harp and flute, the more
harmonious symphony. (b) But the musician is the Might of Love: it is this that
strikes out the sweet melody, (d) singing, (withal) a strain in which no note is out
of tune. This strain rejoices both Angels, and God the Lord of Angels; this strain
rouses (to hear it) the whole audience that is in heaven; this even lulls (evil)
passions— it does not even suffer them to be raised, but deep is the stillness. For
as in a theatre, when the band of musicians plays, all listen with a hush, and
there is no noise there; so among friends, while Love strikes the chords, all the
passions are still and laid to sleep, like wild beasts charmed and unnerved: just
as, where hate is, there is all the contrary to this. But let us say nothing just now
about enmity; let us speak of friendship. Though thou let fall some casual hasty
word, there is none to catch you up, but all forgive you; though thou do (some
hasty thing), none puts upon it the worse construction, but all allowance is made:
every one prompt to stretch out the hand to him that is falling, every one wishing
him to stand. A wall it is indeed impregnable, this friendship; a wall, which not
the devil himself, much less men, can overpower. It is not possible for that man
to fall into danger who has gotten many friends. (Where love is) no room is there
to get matter of anger, but only for pleasantness of feeling: no room is there to
get matter of envying; none, to get occasion of resentment. Mark him, how in all
things both spiritual and temporal, he accomplishes all with ease. What then, I
pray you, can be equal to this man? Like a city walled on every side is this man,
the other as a city unwalled.— Great wisdom, to be able to be a creator of
friendship! Take away friendship, and you have taken away all, you have
confounded all. But if the likeness of friendship have so great power, what must
the reality itself be? Then let us, I beseech you, make to ourselves friends, and
let each make this his art. But, lo! You will say, I do study this, but the other does