planned according to the (as it were) more familiar consideration of our
own mind, according to which man is made after the image of God, in
order to relieve our overstrained attention; and thereupon we dwelt from
the ninth to the fourteenth book upon the consideration of the creature,
which we are, that we might be able to understand and behold the
invisible things of God by those things which are made. And now that we
have exercised the understanding, as far as was needful, or perhaps more
than was needful, in lower things, lo! we wish, but have not strength, to
raise ourselves to behold that highest Trinity which is God. For in such
manner as we see most undoubted trinities, whether those which are
wrought from without by corporeal things, or when these same things are
thought of which were perceived from without; or when those things
which take their rise in the mind, and do not pertain to the senses of the
body, as faith, or as the virtues which comprise the art of living, are
discerned by manifest reason, and, held fast by knowledge; or when the
mind itself, by which we know whatever we truly say that we know, is
known to itself, or thinks of itself; or when that mind beholds anything
eternal and unchangeable, which itself is not;—in such way, then, I say, as
we see in all these instances most undoubted trinities, because they are
wrought in ourselves, or are in ourselves, when we remember, look at, or
desire these things;—do we, I say, in such manner also see the Trinity
that is God; because there also, by the understanding, we behold both
Him as it were speaking, and His Word, i.e. the Father and the Son; and
then, proceeding thence, the love common to both, namely, the Holy
Spirit? These trinities that pertain to our senses or to our mind, do we
rather see than believe them, but rather believe than see that God is a
trinity? But if this is so, then doubtless we either do not at all understand
and behold the invisible things of God by those things that are made, or if
we behold them at all, we do not behold the Trinity in them; and there is
therein somewhat to behold, and somewhat also which we ought to
believe, even though not beheld. And as the eighth book showed that we
behold the unchangeable good which we are not, so the fourteenth
reminded us thereof, when we spoke of the wisdom that man has from
God. Why, then, do we not recognize the Trinity therein? Does that
wisdom which God is said to be, not perceive itself, and not love itself?
Who would say this? Or who is there that does not see, that where there is
no knowledge, there in no way is there wisdom? Or are we, in truth, to

think that the Wisdom which is God knows other things, and does not
know itself; or loves other things, and does not love itself? But if this is a
foolish and impious thing to say or believe, then behold we have a trinity,
—to wit, wisdom, and the knowledge wisdom has of itself, and its love of
itself. For so, too, we find a trinity in man also, i.e. mind, and the
knowledge wherewith mind knows itself, and the love wherewith it loves
itself.