I take these very rich and evocative words from the Constitution Lumen Gentium, which
in its concluding part offers a clear summary of the Church's doctrine on the Mother of
Christ, whom she venerates as her beloved Mother and as her model in faith hope and
charity.

Shortly after the Council, my great predecessor Paul VI decided to speak further of the
Blessed Virgin. In the Encyclical Epistle Christi Matri and subsequently in the Apostolic
Exhortations Signum Magnum and Marialis Cultus he expounded the foundations and
criteria of the special veneration which the Mother of Christ receives in the Church, as
well as the various forms of Marian devotion- liturgical, popular and private-which
respond to the spirit of faith.

3. The circumstance which now moves me to take up this subject once more is the
prospect of the year 2000, now drawing near, in which the Bimillennial Jubilee of the
birth of Jesus Christ at the same time directs our gaze towards his Mother. In recent
years, various opinions have been voiced suggesting that it would be fitting to precede
that anniversary by a similar Jubilee in celebration of the birth of Mary.

In fact, even though it is not possible to establish an exact chronological point for
identifying the date of Mary's birth, the Church has constantly been aware that Mary
appeared on the horizon of salvation history before Christ. It is a fact that when "the
fullness of time" was definitively drawing near-the saving advent of Emmanuel- he who
was from eternity destined to be his Mother already existed on earth. The fact that she
"preceded" the coming of Christ is reflected every year in the liturgy of Advent.
Therefore, if to that ancient historical expectation of the Savior we compare these years
which are bringing us closer to the end of the second Millennium after Christ and to the
beginning of the third, it becomes fully comprehensible that in this present period we
wish to turn in a special way to her, the one who in the "night" of the Advent expectation
began to shine like a true "Morning Star" (Stella Matutina). For just as this star, together
with the "dawn," precedes the rising of the sun, so Mary from the time of her Immaculate

Conception preceded the coming of the Savior, the rising of the "Sun of Justice" in the
history of the human race.

Her presence in the midst of Israel-a presence so discreet as to pass almost unnoticed by
the eyes of her contemporaries-shone very clearly before the Eternal One, who had
associated this hidden "daughter of Sion" (cf. Zeph. 3:14; Zeph. 2:10) with the plan of
salvation embracing the whole history of humanity. With good reason, then, at the end of
this Millennium, we Christians who know that the providential plan of the Most Holy
Trinity is the central reality of Revelation and of faith feel the need to emphasize the
unique presence of the Mother of Christ in history, especially during these last years
leading up to the year 2000.