1 Corinthians 10:31
3. "Whether therefore you eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the
glory of God."
Perceivest thou how from the subject before him, he carried out the
exhortation to what was general, giving us one, the most excellent of all aims,
that God in all things should be glorified?

1 Corinthians 10:32
"Give no occasion of stumbling, either to Jews, or to Greeks, or to the
Church of God:" i.e., give no handle to anyone: since in the case supposed, both
your brother is offended, and the Jew will the more hate and condemn you, and
the Gentile in like manner deride you even as a gluttonous man and a hypocrite.
Not only, however, should the brethren receive no hurt from us, but to the
utmost of our power not even those that are without. For if we are "light," and
"leaven," and "luminaries," and "salt," we ought to enlighten, not to darken; to
bind, not to loosen; to draw to ourselves the unbelievers, not to drive them away.
Why then do you put to flight those whom you ought to draw to you? Since even
Gentiles are hurt, when they see us reverting to such things: for they know not
our mind nor that our soul has come to be above all pollution of sense. And the
Jews too, and the weaker brethren, will suffer the same.
Do you see how many reasons he has assigned for which we ought to
abstain from the idol-sacrifices? Because of their unprofitableness, because of
their needlessness, because of the injury to our brother, because of the evilspeaking of the Jew, because of the reviling of the Gentile, because we ought not
to be partakers with demons, because the thing is a kind of idolatry.
Further, because he had said, "give no occasion of stumbling," and he made
them responsible for the injury done, both to the Gentiles and to the Jews; and
the saying was grievous; see how he renders it acceptable and light, putting
himself forward, and saying,

1 Corinthians 10:33
"Even as I also please all men in all things, not seeking my own profit, but
the profit of the many, that they may be saved."

1 Corinthians 11:1
"Be imitators of me, even as I also am of Christ."
This is a rule of the most perfect Christianity, this is a landmark exactly laid
down, this is the point that stands highest of all; viz. the seeking those things
which are for the common profit: which also Paul himself declared, by adding,
"even as I also am of Christ." For nothing can so make a man an imitator of
Christ as caring for his neighbors. Nay, though you should fast, though you
should lie upon the ground, and even strangle yourself, but take no thought for
your neighbor; you have wrought nothing great, but still standest far from this
Image, while so doing. However, in the case before us, even the very thing itself
is naturally useful, viz; the abstaining from idol-sacrifices. But "I," says he, have
done many of those things which were unprofitable also: e.g., when I used
circumcision, when I offered sacrifice; for these, were any one to examine them
in themselves, rather destroy those that follow after them and cause them to fall
from salvation: nevertheless, I submitted even to these on account of the
advantage therefrom: but here is no such thing. For in that case, except there
accrue a certain benefit and except they be done for others' sake, then the thing
becomes injurious: but in this, though there be none made to stumble, even so
ought one to abstain from the things forbidden.
But not only to things hurtful have I submitted, but also to things toilsome.
For, "I robbed other Churches," says he, "taking wages of them; [2 Corinthians
11:8] and when it was lawful to eat and not to work, I sought not this, but chose
to perish of hunger rather than offend another." This is why he says, "I please
all men in all things." "Though it be against the law, though it be laborious and
hazardous, which is to be done, I endure all for the profit of others. So then,
being above all in perfection, he became beneath all in condescension."
4. For no virtuous action can be very exalted, when it does not distribute its