concerning Antichrist, when He said, "I have come in My Father's name, and
you receive Me not: if another shall come in His own name, Him you will
receive." [John 5:43] And He said that those unspeakable calamities one after
another were a sign of it, and that Elias must come.
The Thessalonians indeed were then perplexed, but their perplexity has
been profitable to us. For not to them only, but to us also are these things useful,
that we may be delivered from childish fables and from old women's fooleries.
And have you not often heard, when you were children, persons talking much
even about the name of Antichrist, and about his bending the knee? For the devil
scatters these things in our minds, while yet tender, that the doctrine may grow
up with us, and that he may be able to deceive us. Paul therefore, in speaking of
Antichrist, would not have passed over these things if they had been profitable.
Let us not therefore enquire into these things. For he will not come so bending
his knees, but "exalting himself against all that is called God, or that is
worshipped; so that he sits in the temple of God, setting himself forth as God." [2
Thessalonians 2:4] For as the devil fell by pride, so he who is wrought upon by
him is anointed unto pride.
Wherefore, I beseech you, let us all be earnest to be far removed from this
affection, that we may not fall into his condemnation, that we may not subject
ourselves to the same punishment, that we may not partake of the vengeance.
"Not a novice," he says, "lest being puffed up he fall into the condemnation of
the devil." [1 Timothy 3:6] He who is puffed up therefore, suffers the same
punishment with the devil. "For the beginning of pride is not to know the Lord."
[Sirach 10:12-13] Pride is the beginning of sin, the first impulse and movement
toward evil. Perhaps indeed it is both the root and the foundation. For "the
beginning" means either the first impulse towards evil, or the grounding. As if
one should say, the beginning of chastity is to abstain from the sight of an
improper object, that is the first impulse. But if we should say, the beginning of
chastity is fasting, that is the foundation and establishment. So also pride is the
beginning of sin. For every sin begins from it, and is maintained by it. For that,

whatever good things we do, this vice suffers them not to remain and not fall
away, but is as a certain root not letting them abide unshaken, is manifest from
hence: see what things the Pharisee did, but they profited him nothing. For he
did not extirpate the root, but it corrupted all his performances, because the root
remained. From pride springs contempt of the poor, desire of riches, the love of
power, the longing for much glory. Such an one is prompt to revenge an insult.
For he who is proud cannot bear to be insulted even by his superiors, much less
by his inferiors. But he who cannot bear to be insulted cannot bear either to
suffer any ill. See how pride is the beginning of sin.
But how is it the beginning of pride, not to know the Lord? Justly. For he
who knows God as he ought to know Him, he who knows that the Son of God
humbled Himself so much, is not lifted up. But he who knows not these things,
is lifted up. For pride anoints him unto arrogance. For tell me, whence is it that
they who make war upon the Church say that they know God? Is it not from
arrogance? See into what a precipice it plunges them, not to know the Lord! For
if God loves a contrite spirit [Psalm 51:17, etc], He on the other hand "resists the
proud, and gives grace to the humble." [1 Peter 5:5] There is therefore no evil
like pride. It renders a man a demon, insolent, blasphemous, perjured, and makes
him desirous of deaths and murders. The proud man always lives in troubles, is
always angry, always unhappy. There is nothing which can satiate his passion. If
he should see the king stooping down to him, and prostrating himself, he is not
satisfied, but is the more inflamed. For as the lovers of money, the more they
receive, want so much the more, so also the proud, the more honor they enjoy,
the more they desire. For their passion is increased; for a passion it is, and a
passion knows not limit, but then stops when it has slain its possessor. Do you
not see that drunkards are always thirsty? For it is a passion, not the desire of
nature, but some perverted disease. Do you not see how those who are affected
with bulimy, as it is called, are always hungry? For it is a passion, as the children
of the physicians say, already exceeding the bounds of nature. The busy-bodies,
and the over-curious, whatever they have learned, do not stop. For it is a passion,