John xvii. 5.

much does man stand in need of fellowship with God. For this is the glory of man, to continue and
remain permanently in God's service. Wherefore also did the Lord say to His disciples, "Ye have
not chosen Me, but I have chosen you;" indicating that they did not glorify Him when they
followed Him; but that, in following the Son of God, they were glorified by Him. And again, "I
will, that where I am, there they also may be, that they may behold My glory;" not vainly boasting
because of this, but desiring that His disciples should share in His glory: of whom Esaias also says,
"I will bring thy seed from the east, and will gather thee from the west; and I will say to the north,
Give up; and to the south, Keep not back: bring My sons from far, and My daughters from the ends
of the earth; all, as many as have been called in My name: for in My glory I have prepared, and
formed, and made him." Inasmuch as then, "wheresoever the carcase is, there shall also the
eagles be gathered together," we do participate in the glory of the Lord, who has both formed
us, and prepared us for this, that, when we are with Him, we may partake of His glory.
2. Thus it was, too, that God formed man at the first, because of His munificence; but chose
the patriarchs for the sake of their salvation; and prepared a people beforehand, teaching the
headstrong to follow God; and raised up prophets upon earth, accustoming man to bear His Spirit
[within him], and to hold communion with God: He Himself, indeed, having need of nothing, but
granting communion with Himself to those who stood in need of it, and sketching out, like an
architect, the plan of salvation to those that pleased Him. And He did Himself furnish guidance to
those who beheld Him not in Egypt, while to those who became unruly in the desert He promulgated
a law very suitable [to their condition]. Then, on the people who entered into the good land He
bestowed a noble inheritance; and He killed the fatted calf for those converted to the Father, and
presented them with the finest robe. Thus, in a variety of ways, He adjusted the human race to
an agreement with salvation. On this account also does John declare in the Apocalypse, "And His
voice as the sound of many waters." For the Spirit [of God] is truly [like] many waters, since
the Father is both rich and great. And the Word, passing through all those [men], did liberally confer
benefits upon His subjects, by drawing up in writing a law adapted and applicable to every class
[among them].
3. Thus, too, He imposed upon the [Jewish] people the construction of the tabernacle, the
building of the temple, the election of the Levites, sacrifices also, and oblations, legal monitions,
and all the other service of the law. He does Himself truly want none of these things, for He is
always full of all good, and had in Himself all the odour of kindness, and every perfume of
sweet-smelling savours, even before Moses existed. Moreover, He instructed the people, who were