God more perfectly than an angel. Therefore the souls seeing God
will not necessarily see all things.
Further, Christ alone has the spirit not "by measure" (Jn. 3:34). Now
it becomes Christ, as having the spirit without measure, to know all
things in the Word: wherefore it is stated in the same place (Jn. 3:35)
that "the Father . . . hath given all things into His hand." Therefore
none but Christ is competent to know all things in the Word.
Further, the more perfectly a principle is known, the more of its
effects are known thereby. Now some of those who see God in His
essence will know God more perfectly than others. Therefore some
will know more things than others, and consequently every one will
not know all.
I answer that, God by seeing his essence knows all things
whatsoever that are, shall be, or have been: and He is said to know
these things by His "knowledge of vision," because He knows them
as though they were present in likeness to corporeal vision.
Moreover by seeing this essence He knows all that He can do,
although He never did them, nor ever will: else He would not know
His power perfectly; since a power cannot be known unless its
objects be known: and this is called His "science" or "knowledge of
simple intelligence." Now it is impossible for a created intellect, by
seeing the Divine essence, to know all that God can do, because the
more perfectly a principle is known, the more things are known in it;
thus in one principle of demonstration one who is quick of
intelligence sees more conclusions than one who is slow of
intelligence. Since then the extent of the Divine power is measured
according to what it can do, if an intellect were to see in the Divine
essence all that God can do, its perfection in understanding would
equal in extent the Divine power in producing its effects, and thus it
would comprehend the Divine power, which is impossible for any
created intellect to do. Yet there is a created intellect, namely the
soul of Christ [TP, Question 16, Article 2], which knows in the Word
all that God knows by the knowledge of vision. But regarding others
who see the Divine essence there are two opinions. For some say
that all who see God in His essence see all that God sees by His
knowledge of vision. This, however, is contrary to the sayings of
holy men, who hold that angels are ignorant of some things; and yet
it is clear that according to faith all the angels see God in His
essence. Wherefore others say that others than Christ, although they
see God in His essence, do not see all that God sees because they

do not comprehend the Divine essence. For it is not necessary that
he who knows a cause should know all its effects, unless he
comprehend the cause: and this is not in the competency of a
created intellect. Consequently of those who see God in His
essence, each one sees in His essence so much the more things
according as he sees the Divine essence the more clearly: and hence
it is that one is able to instruct another concerning these things.
Thus the knowledge of the angels and of the souls of the saints can
go on increasing until the day of judgment, even as other things
pertaining to the accidental reward. But afterwards it will increase no
more, because then will be the final state of things, and in that state
it is possible that all will know everything that God knows by the
knowledge of vision.
Reply to Objection 1: The saying of Isidore, that "the angels know in
the Word all things before they happen," cannot refer to those things
which God knows only by the knowledge of simple intelligence,
because those things will never happen; but it must refer to those
things which God knows only by the knowledge of vision. Even of
these he does not say that all the angels know them all, but that
perhaps some do; and that even those who know do not know all
perfectly. For in one and the same thing there are many intelligible
aspects to be considered, such as its various properties and
relations to other things: and it is possible that while one thing is
known in common by two persons, one of them perceives more
aspects, and that the one learns these aspects from the other. Hence
Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iv) that "the lower angels learn from the
higher angels the intelligible aspects of things." Wherefore it does
not follow that even the angels who know all creatures are able to
see all that can be understood in them.
Reply to Objection 2: It follows from this saying of Gregory that this
blessed vision suffices for the seeing of all things on the part of the
Divine essence, which is the medium by which one sees, and
whereby God sees all things. That all things, however, are not seen
is owing to the deficiency of the created intellect which does not
comprehend the Divine essence.
Reply to Objection 3: The created intellect sees the Divine essence
not according to the mode of that same essence, but according to its
own mode which is finite. Hence its efficacy in knowing would need
to be infinitely increased by reason of that vision in order for it to
know all things.