with us: but [they departed], that they might be made manifest that they are not of us. Know ye
therefore, that every lie is from without, and is not of the truth. Who is a liar, but he that denieth
that Jesus is the Christ? This is Antichrist."
6. But inasmuch as all those before mentioned, although they certainly do with their tongue
confess one Jesus Christ, make fools of themselves, thinking one thing and saying another; for
their hypotheses vary, as I have already shown, alleging, [as they do,] that one Being suffered and
was born, and that this was Jesus; but that there was another who descended upon Him, and that
this was Christ, who also ascended again; and they argue, that he who proceeded from the Demiurge,
or he who was dispensational, or he who sprang from Joseph, was the Being subject to suffering;
but upon the latter there descended from the invisible and ineffable [places] the former, whom they
assert to be incomprehensible, invisible, and impassible: they thus wander from the truth, because
their doctrine departs from Him who is truly God, being ignorant that His only-begotten Word,
who is always present with the human race, united to and mingled with His own creation, according
to the Father's pleasure, and who became flesh, is Himself Jesus Christ our Lord, who did also
suffer for us, and rose again on our behalf, and who will come again in the glory of His Father, to
raise up all flesh, and for the manifestation of salvation, and to apply the rule of just judgment to
all who were made by Him. There is therefore, as I have pointed out, one God the Father, and one
Christ Jesus, who came by means of the whole dispensational arrangements [connected with Him],
and gathered together all things in Himself. But in every respect, too, He is man, the formation
of God; and thus He took up man into Himself, the invisible becoming visible, the incomprehensible
being made comprehensible, the impassible becoming capable of suffering, and the Word being
made man, thus summing up all things in Himself: so that as in super-celestial, spiritual, and invisible
things, the Word of God is supreme, so also in things visible and corporeal He might possess the
supremacy, and, taking to Himself the pre-eminence, as well as constituting Himself Head of the
Church, He might draw all things to Himself at the proper time.
7. With Him is nothing incomplete or out of due season, just as with the Father there is nothing
incongruous. For all these things were foreknown by the Father; but the Son works them out at the
proper time in perfect order and sequence. This was the reason why, when Mary was urging [Him]
on to [perform] the wonderful miracle of the wine, and was desirous before the time to partake
of the cup of emblematic significance, the Lord, checking her untimely haste, said, "Woman, what
merely a contraction for "aut eum."