they said nothing. But for the future provide them." [Luke 22:35] But tell me,
what could he do? Could he have but one coat? How then? If need was that this
be washed, should he, because without it, stay at home? Should he without it go
abroad in an unbecoming manner, when need called? Consider what a thing it
would have been that Paul, who made the circuit of the world with such great
success, should remain at home for want of raiment, and thus hinder his noble
work. And what if violent cold had set in, or rain had drenched it, or perhaps
frozen in, how could he dry his raiment? Must he again remain without it? And
what if cold had deprived his body of strength? Must he waste away with
disease, and be unable to speak? For hear what he says to Timothy, to prove that
they were not furnished with adamantine bodies, "Use a little wine for your
stomach's sake, and your frequent infirmities." [1 Timothy 5:23] And again,
when he speaks of another, "I counted it necessary to send to you your
messenger, and minister to my needs." [Philippians 2:25] "For indeed he was
sick, near unto death; but God had mercy on him, and not on him only, but on
me also." [Philippians 2:27] So that they were subject to every sort of sickness.
What then? Must they die? By no means. For what cause then did Christ at that
time give them that command? To show His own power, and to prove that in
after times He was able to do it, though He did it not. But wherefore did He not
do it? They were much more admirable than the Israelites, whose shoes did not
wax old, neither their garments, and that too while they were journeying through
that desert where the glowing rays of the sun strike so hot, that they are capable
of consuming even stones. [cf. Deuteronomy 29:5] Why then did he do this? For
your sake. For since you would not remain in health, but be full of wounds, He
gave you that which might serve for medicine. And this is hence manifest; could
He not Himself have fed them? He that gave to you, who wast an enemy with
Him, would He not much more have given to Paul? He who gave to the
Israelites, those murmurers, those fornicators, those idolaters, would He not
much more have given to Peter, who spent all for His sake? He who suffered
wicked men to possess anything, would He not much more have freely given to

John, who for Him forsook even his father? Yet he would not: through your
hands he feeds them, that you may be sanctified. And see the excess of His
lovingkindness. He chose that His disciples should be in want, that you might be
a little refreshed.
For if He had freed them from all want, they would have been much more
admirable, far more glorious. But then that which is to you salvation would have
been cut off. God willed not then that they should be admirable, that you might
be saved, but that they should rather be lowered. He has suffered them to be less
accounted of, that you might be able to be saved. The Teacher who receives is
not equally reverenced, but he who receives not is chiefly honored. But then in
the latter case the disciple is not benefited, he is hindered of his fruit. Do you see
the wisdom of God who thus loves man? For as He Himself sought not His own
glory, nor had respect to Himself, but when He was in glory, chose to be
dishonored for your sake, thus too is it in the case of your Teachers. When they
might have been highly reverenced, He preferred that they should be subject to
contempt for your sake, that you might be able to profit, that you might be able
to be rich. For he is in want of the things of this life, that you may abound in
things spiritual. If then He might have made them above all want, He showed
that for your sake He suffers them to be in want. Knowing then these things, let
us turn ourselves to well doing, not to accusations. Let us not be overcurious
about the failings of others, but take account of our own; let us reckon up the
excellences of other men, while we bear in mind our faults; and thus shall we be
well pleasing to God. For he who looks at the faults of others, and at his own
excellences, is injured in two ways; by the latter he is carried up to arrogance,
through the former he falls into listlessness. For when he perceives that such an
one has sinned, very easily will he sin himself; when he perceives that he has in
anything excelled, very easily becomes he arrogant. He who consigns to oblivion
his own excellences, and looks at his failings only, while he is a curious enquirer
of the excellences, not the sins, of others, is profited in many ways. And how?
When he sees that such an one has done excellently, he is raised to emulate the