servant of the faithful. [2 Corinthians 4:5] Bring we down all of us our pride,
tread we under foot our boastfulness. Paul names himself a slave, he that is
worth the world, and ten thousands of heavens; and do you entertain high
thoughts? He that seizes all things for spoil as he will, he that has the first place
in the kingdom of heaven, he that was crowned, he that ascended into the third
heaven, calls servants, "brethren," and "fellow-servants." Where is your
madness? Where is your arrogance?
So trustworthy was Onesimus become, as to be entrusted even with such
things as these.
Ver. 10. "And Mark," he says, "the cousin of Barnabas, touching whom you
received commandments, receive him." Perhaps they had received
commandments from Barnabas.
Ver. 11. "Who are of the circumcision." He represses the swelling pride of
the Jews, and inspires the souls of these, [the Colossians,] because few of them
were of the circumcision, the greater number of the Gentiles.
"Men that have been," he says, "a comfort unto me." He shows himself to
be set in the midst of great trials. So that neither is this a small thing. When we
comfort the Saints by presence, by words, by assiduous attendance, when we
suffer adversity together with them, (for he says, "as bound with those in bonds";
Hebrews 13:3) when we make their sufferings ours, we shall also be partakers in
their crowns. Have you not been dragged to the stadium? Have you not entered
into the lists? It is another that strips himself, another that wrestles; but if you be
so minded, you too shall be a sharer. Anoint him, become his favorer and
partisan, from without the lists shout loudly for him, stir up his strength, refresh
his spirit. It follows that the same things should be done in all other cases. For
Paul stood not in need, but in order to stimulate them he said these things. Thou
therefore in the case of all others, stop the mouths of those who would abuse
such an one, procure favorers for him, receive him as he comes forth with great
attention, so shall you be a sharer in his crowns, so, in his glory; and if you do no
other thing, but only hast pleasure in what is done, even thus you share in no

common degree, for you have contributed love, the sum of all good things.
For if they that weep seem to share in the grief of those in sorrow, and
gratify them mightily, and remove the excess of their woe, much more do they
also that rejoice with others, make their pleasure greater. For how great an evil it
is not to have companions in sorrow, hear the Prophet saying, "And I looked for
one to lament with me, but there was none." Wherefore Paul also says, "Rejoice
with them that rejoice; and weep with them that weep." [Romans 12:15] Increase
their pleasure. If you see your brother in good esteem, say not, "the esteem is his,
why should I rejoice." These words are not those of a brother, but of an enemy. If
you be so minded, it is not his, but yours. You have the power of making it
greater, if you be not downcast, but pleased, if you be cheerful, if joyous. And
that it is so, is evident from this; the envious envy not those only who are in
good esteem, but those as well who rejoice at their good esteem, so conscious
are they that these also are interested in that good esteem; and these are they who
do glory most in it. For the other even blushes when praised exceedingly; but
these with great pleasure pride themselves upon it. See ye not in the case of
athletes, how the one is crowned, the other is not crowned; but the grief and the
joy is among the favorers and disfavorers, these are they that leap, they that
caper?
See how great a thing is the not envying. The toil is another's, the pleasure
is yours; another wears the crown, and you caper, you are gay. For tell me,
seeing it is another that has conquered, why do you leap? But they also know
well, that what has been done is common. Therefore they do not accuse this man
indeed, but they try to beat down the victory; and you hear them saying such
words as these, "(There) I expunged you," and, "I beat you down." Although the
deed was another's, still the praise is yours. But if in things without, not to envy,
but to make another's good one's own, is so great a good, much more in the
victory of the devil over us he breathes the more furiously, evidently because we
are more pleased. Wicked though he is, and bitter, he well knows that this
pleasure is great. Would you pain him? Be glad and rejoice. Would you gladden