hand to plot against us; and we know not what is the hour, what the occasion for
him to set upon us. How then, he means, shall we be sufficient for the keeping of
them? "By the Holy Ghost"; that is if we have the Spirit with us, if we do not
expel grace, He will stand by us. For, "Except the Lord build the house, they
labor in vain that build it. Except the Lord keep the city, the watchman wakes but
in vain." [Psalm 127:1] This is our wall, this our castle, this our refuge. If
therefore It dwells in us, and is Itself our guard, what need of the
commandment? That we may hold It fast, may keep It, and not banish It by our
evil deeds.
Then he describes his trials and temptations, not to depress his disciple, but
to elevate him, that if he should ever fall into the same, he may not think it
strange, when he looks back and remembers what things happened to his
Teacher. What then says he? Since it was probable that Timothy might be
apprehended, and be deserted, and be relieved by no friendly attention, or
influence, or assistance, but be abandoned even by his friends and the faithful
themselves, hear what he says, "This you know, that all they which are in Asia be
turned away from me." It seems that there were then in Rome many persons
from the regions of Asia. "But no one stood by me," he says, no one
acknowledged me, all were alienated. And observe the philosophy of his soul.
He only mentions their conduct, he does not curse them, but he praises him that
showed kindness to him, and invokes a thousand blessings upon him, without
any curse on them. "Of whom is Phygellus and Hermogenes. The Lord give
mercy to the house of Onesiphorus, for he oft refreshed me, and was not
ashamed of my chain. But, when he was in Rome, he sought me out diligently
and found me." Observe how he everywhere speaks of the shame, and not of the
danger, lest Timothy should be alarmed. And yet it was a thing that was full of
peril. For he gave offense to Nero by making friends with one of his prisoners.
But when he was in Rome, he says, he not only did not shun intercourse with
me, but "sought me out very diligently, and found me."
"The Lord grant unto him that he may find mercy of the Lord in that day:

and in how many things he ministered unto me at Ephesus, you know very well."
Such ought the faithful to be. Neither fear, nor threats, nor disgrace, should
deter them from assisting one another, standing by them and succoring them as
in war. For they do not so much benefit those who are in danger, as themselves,
by the service they render to them, making themselves partakers of the crowns
due to them. For example, is any one of those who are devoted to God visited
with affliction and distress, and maintaining the conflict with great fortitude;
while you are not yet brought to this conflict? It is in your power if you will,
without entering into the course, to be a sharer of the crowns reserved for him,
by standing by him, preparing his mind, and animating and exciting him. Hence
it is that Paul elsewhere says, "You have done well that you did communicate
with my affliction. For even in Thessalonica you sent once and again unto my
necessity." [Philippians 4:14-16] And how could they that were far off share in
the affliction of him that was not with them? How? He says, "you sent once and
again unto my necessities." Again he says, speaking of Epaphroditus, "Because
he was near unto death, not regarding his life, that he might supply your lack of
service toward me." [Philippians 2:30] For as in the service of kings, not only
those who fight the battle, but those who guard the baggage, share in the honor;
and not merely so, but frequently even have an equal portion of the spoils,
though they have not imbrued their hands in blood, nor stood in array, nor even
seen the ranks of the enemy; so it is in these conflicts. For he who relieves the
combatant, when wasted with hunger, who stands by him, encouraging him by
words, and rendering him every service, he is not inferior to the combatant.
For do not suppose Paul the combatant, that irresistible and invincible one,
but some one of the many, who, if he had not received much consolation and
encouragement, would not perhaps have stood, would not have contended. So
those who are out of the contest may perchance be the cause of victory to him,
who is engaged in it, and may be partakers of the crowns reserved for the victor.
And what wonder, if he who communicates to the living is thought worthy of the
same rewards with those who contend, since it is possible to communicate after