SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.87, C.5.

vow something to God, does not conduce to His profit, nor does He
need to be assured by us, but it conduces to our profit, in so far as
by vowing we fix our wills immovably on that which it is expedient to
do. Hence it is expedient to take vows.
Reply to Objection 1: Even as one's liberty is not lessened by one
being unable to sin, so, too, the necessity resulting from a will firmly
fixed to good does not lessen the liberty, as instanced in God and
the blessed. Such is the necessity implied by a vow, bearing a
certain resemblance to the confirmation of the blessed. Hence,
Augustine says (Ep. cxxvii, ad Arment. et Paulin.) that "happy is the
necessity that compels us to do the better things."
Reply to Objection 2: When danger arises from the deed itself, this
deed is not expedient, for instance that one cross a river by a
tottering bridge: but if the danger arise through man's failure in the
deed, the latter does not cease to be expedient: thus it is expedient
to mount on horseback, though there be the danger of a fall from the
horse: else it would behoove one to desist from all good things, that
may become dangerous accidentally. Wherefore it is written (Eccles.
11:4): "He that observeth the wind shall not sow, and he that
considereth the clouds shall never reap." Now a man incurs danger,
not from the vow itself, but from his fault, when he changes his mind
by breaking his vow. Hence, Augustine says (Ep. cxxvii, ad Arment.
et Paulin.): "Repent not of thy vow: thou shouldst rather rejoice that
thou canst no longer do what thou mightest lawfully have done to
thy detriment."
Reply to Objection 3: It was incompetent for Christ, by His very
nature, to take a vow, both because He was God, and because, as
man, His will was firmly fixed on the good, since He was a
"comprehensor." By a kind of similitude, however, He is represented
as saying (Ps. 21:26): "I will pay my vows in the sight of them that
fear Him," when He is speaking of His body, which is the Church.
The apostles are understood to have vowed things pertaining to the
state of perfection when "they left all things and followed Christ."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.87, C.5.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.87, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether a vow is an act of latria or religion?

Objection 1: It would seem that a vow is not an act of latria or
religion. Every act of virtue is matter for a vow. Now it would seem to
pertain to the same virtue to promise a thing and to do it. Therefore a
vow pertains to any virtue and not to religion especially.
Objection 2: Further, according to Tully (De Invent. ii, 53) it belongs
to religion to offer God worship and ceremonial rites. But he who
takes a vow does not yet offer something to God, but only promises
it. Therefore, a vow is not an act of religion.
Objection 3: Further, religious worship should be offered to none but
God. But a vow is made not only to God, but also to the saints and to
one's superiors, to whom religious vow obedience when they make
their profession. Therefore, a vow is not an act of religion.
On the contrary, It is written (Is. 19:21): "(The Egyptians) shall
worship Him with sacrifices and offerings and they shall make vows
to the Lord, and perform them." Now, the worship of God is properly
the act of religion or latria. Therefore, a vow is an act of latria or
religion.
I answer that, As stated above (Question 81, Article 1, ad 1), every
act of virtue belongs to religion or latria by way of command, in so
far as it is directed to the reverence of God which is the proper end
of latria. Now the direction of other actions to their end belongs to
the commanding virtue, not to those which are commanded.
Therefore the direction of the acts of any virtue to the service of God
is the proper act of latria.
Now, it is evident from what has been said above (Articles 1,2) that a
vow is a promise made to God, and that a promise is nothing else
than a directing of the thing promised to the person to whom the
promise is made. Hence a vow is a directing of the thing vowed to
the worship or service of God. And thus it is clear that to take a vow
is properly an act of latria or religion.
Reply to Objection 1: The matter of a vow is sometimes the act of
another virtue, as, for instance, keeping the fast or observing
continency; while sometimes it is an act of religion, as offering a