gods, thus likewise He did with respect to the creation, a thing nearly parallel to
this. For He fashioned it beautiful and vast; but on the other hand corruptible.
8. And both of these points the Scriptures teach, for one in treating of the
beauty of the heavens thus speaks; "The heavens declare the glory of God." And
again, "Who has placed the sky as a vault, and spread it out as a tent over the
earth." [Isaiah 40:22] And again, "Who holds the circle of heaven." But another
writer, showing that although the world be great and fair, it is yet corruptible,
thus speaks; "You, Lord, in the beginning hast laid the foundation of the earth,
and the heavens are the works of Your hands. They shall perish, but You remain,
and they all shall wax old as does a garment, and as a vesture shall Thou fold
them up, and they shall be changed." And again, David says of the sun, that "he
is as a bridegroom coming out of his chamber, and rejoices as a giant to run his
course." Do you see how he places before you the beauty of this star, and its
greatness? For even as a bridegroom when he appears from some stately
chamber, so the sun sends forth his rays under the East; and adorning the heaven
as it were with a saffron-coloured veil, and making the clouds like roses, and
running unimpeded all the day; he meets no obstacle to interrupt his course.
Beholdest thou, then, his beauty? Beholdest thou his greatness? Look also at the
proof of his weakness! For a certain wise man, to make this plain, said, "What is
brighter than the sun, yet the light thereof suffers eclipse." [Sirach 17:31] Nor is
it only from this circumstance that his infirmity is to be perceived, but also in the
concourse of the clouds. Often, at least, when a cloud passes underneath him,
though emitting his beams, and endeavouring to pierce through it, he has not
strength to do so; the cloud being too dense, and not suffering him to penetrate
through it. "He nourishes the seeds, however," replies some one— Yes— still he
does not nourish them by himself, but requires the assistance of the earth, and of
the dew, and of the rains, and of the winds, and the right distribution of the
seasons. And unless all these things concur, the sun's aid is but superfluous. But
this would not seem to be like a deity, to stand in need of the assistance of others,
for that which he wishes to do; for it is a special attribute of God to want

nothing; He Himself at least did not in this manner bring forth the seeds from the
ground; He only commanded, and they all shot forth. And again, that you may
learn that it is not the nature of the elements, but His command which effects all
things; He both brought into being these very elements which before were not;
and without the need of any aid, He brought down the manna for the Jews. For it
is said, "He gave them bread from heaven." But why do I say, that in order to the
perfection of fruits, the sun requires the aid of other elements for their
sustenance; when he himself requires the assistance of many things for his
sustenance, and would not himself be sufficient for himself. For in order that he
may proceed on his way, he needs the heaven as a kind of pavement spread out
underneath him; and that he may shine, he needs the clearness and rarity of the
air; since if even this become unusually dense, he is not able to show his light;
and, on the other hand, he requires coolness and moisture, lest his rays should be
intolerable to all, and burn up everything. When, therefore, other elements
overrule him, and correct his weakness (overrule as for example, clouds, and
walls, and certain other bodies that intercept his light:— or correct his excess, as
the dews, and fountains, and cool air), how can such a one be a Deity? For God
must be independent, and not stand in need of assistance, be the source of all
good things to all, and be hindered by nothing; even as Paul, as well as the
prophet Isaiah, says of God; the latter thus making Him speak in His own
Person, "I fill heaven and earth, says the Lord." [Jeremiah 23:24] And again,
"Am I a God near at hand, and not a God afar off?" [Jeremiah 23:23] And again,
David says, "I have said unto the Lord, You are my Lord, for You have no need of
my good things." But Paul, demonstrating this independence of help, and
showing that both these things especially belong to God; to stand in need of
nothing, and of Himself to supply all things to all; speaks on this wise, "God that
made the heaven, and the earth, and the sea, Himself needs not any thing, giving
to all life and all things."
9. It would indeed be easy for us to take a survey of the other elements, the
heaven, the air, the earth, the sea, and to show the imbecility of these, and how