John 1:22
"Then said they unto him, Who are you? That we may give an answer to them
that sent us. What do you say of yourself?"
Observe them pressing him more vehemently, urging him, repeating their
questions, and not desisting; while he first kindly removes false opinions
concerning himself, and then sets before them one which is true. For, says he,

John 1:23
"I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness, Make straight the way of the
Lord, as said the prophet Esaias."
When he had spoken some high and lofty words concerning Christ, as if
(replying) to their opinion, he immediately betook himself to the Prophet to draw
from thence confirmation of his assertion.

John 1:24-25
"And [says the Evangelist] they who were sent were of the Pharisees. And they
asked him, and said unto him, Why do you baptize then, if you be not that Christ,
neither Elias, neither that Prophet?"
Do you see not without reason I said that they wished to bring him to this?
And the reason why they did not at first say so was, lest they should be detected
by all men. And then when he said, "I am not the Christ," they, being desirous to
conceal what they were plotting within, go on to "Elias," and "that Prophet." But
when he said that he was not one of these either, after that, in their perplexity,
they cast aside the mask, and without any disguise show clearly their treacherous
intention, saying, "Why do you baptize then, if you be not that Christ?" And then
again, wishing to throw some obscurity over the thing, they add the others also,
"Elias," and "that Prophet." For when they were not able to trip him by their
flattery, they thought that by an accusation they could compel him to say the
thing that was not.
What folly, what insolence, what ill-timed officiousness! You were sent to
learn who and whence he might be, not to lay down laws for him also. This too
was the conduct of men who would compel him to confess himself to be the
Christ. Still not even now is he angry, nor does he, as might have been expected,
say to them anything of this sort, "Do you give orders and make laws for me?"
but again shows great gentleness towards them.

John 1:26-27
"I baptize with water: but there stands one among you, whom you know not; He
it is, who coming after me is preferred before me, whose shoe's latchet I am not
worthy to unloose."
3. What could the Jews have left to say to this? For even from this the
accusation against them cannot be evaded, the decision against them admits not
of pardon, they have given sentence against themselves. How? In what way?
They deemed John worthy of credit, and so truthful, that they might believe him
not only when he testified of others, but also when he spoke concerning himself.
For had they not been so disposed, they would not have sent to learn from him
what related to himself. Because you know that the only persons whom we
believe, especially when speaking of themselves, are those whom we suppose to
be more veracious than any others. And it is not this alone which closes their
mouths, but also the disposition with which they had approached him; for they
came forth to him at first with great eagerness, even though afterwards they
altered. Both which things Christ declared, when He said, "He was a burning
(and a shining) light, and you were willing for a season to rejoice in his light."
Moreover, his answer made him yet more worthy of credit. For (Christ) says,
"He that seeks not his own glory, the same is true, and no unrighteousness is in
him." Now this man sought it not, but refers the Jews to another. And those who
were sent were of the most trustworthy among them, and of the highest rank, so
that they could have in no way any refuge or excuse, for the unbelief which they
exhibited towards Christ. Wherefore did you not receive the things spoken
concerning Him by John? You sent men who held the first rank among you, you
enquired by them, you heard what the Baptist answered, they manifested all
possible officiousness, sought into every point, named all the persons you
suspected him to be; and yet most publicly and plainly he confessed that he was
neither "Christ," nor "Elias" nor "that Prophet." Nor did he stop even there, but