soul, and defiles it. Other uncleanness is human prejudice.
"But unto them that are defiled and unbelieving is nothing pure; but even
their mind and conscience is defiled."
For how can there be anything unclean among the pure? But he that has a
weak soul makes everything unclean, and if there be set abroad a scrupulous
enquiry into what is clean or unclean, he will touch nothing. For even these
things are not clean, I speak of fish, and other things, according to their notions;
(for "their mind and conscience," he says, "is defiled,") but all are impure. Yet
Paul says not so; he turns the whole matter upon themselves. For nothing is
unclean, he says, but themselves, their mind and their conscience; and nothing is
more unclean than these; but an evil will is unclean.
"They profess that they know God, but in works they deny Him, being
abominable and disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate."
Chap. ii. ver. 1. "But speak thou the things that become sound doctrine."
This then is uncleanness. They are themselves unclean. But be not thou
silent on that account. Do your part, although they may not receive you. Advise
and counsel them, though they may not be persuaded. Here he censures them
more severely. For they who are mad imagine that nothing stands still, yet this
arises not from the objects that are seen, but from the eyes that see. Because they
are unsteady and giddy, they think that the earth turns round with them, which
yet turns not, but stands firm. The derangement is of their own state, not from
any affection of the element. So it is here, when the soul is unclean, it thinks all
things unclean. Therefore scrupulous observances are no mark of purity, but it is
the part of purity to be bold in all things. For he that is pure by nature ventures
upon all things, they that are defiled, upon nothing. This we may say against
Marcion. Do you see that it is a mark of purity to be superior to all defilement, to
touch nothing implies impurity. This holds even with respect to God. That He
assumed flesh is a proof of purity; if through fear He had not taken it, there
would have been defilement. He who eats not things that seem unclean, is
himself unclean and weak, he who eats, is neither. Let us not call such pure, they

are the unclean. He is pure, who dares to feed upon all things. All this caution
we ought to exercise towards the things that defile the soul. For that is
uncleanness, that is defilement. None of these things is so. Those who have a
vitiated palate think what is set before them is unclean, but this is the effect of
their disorder. It becomes us therefore to understand the nature of things pure,
and things unclean.
Moral . What then is unclean? Sin, malice, covetousness, wickedness. As it
is written: "Wash you, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings." [Isaiah
1:16] "Create in me a clean heart, O God." [Psalm 51:10] "Depart, depart, go
out from thence, touch no unclean thing." [Isaiah 52:52] These observances were
emblems of purifications. "Touch not a dead body," it is said. For sin is such, it is
dead and offensive. "The leper is unclean." For sin is a leprosy, various and
multiform. And that they had this meaning, appears from what follows. For if the
leprosy is general, and overspreads the whole body, he is clean; if it is partial, he
is unclean. Thus you see that what is various and changeable is the unclean
thing. He again whose seed passes from him is unclean, consider one that is so in
soul, casting away his seed. He who is uncircumcised is unclean. These things
are not allegorical but typical, for he who does not cut off the wickedness of his
heart is the unclean person. He who works on the Sabbath is to be stoned, that is,
he who is not at all times devoted to God, shall perish. You see how many
varieties of uncleanness there are. The woman in child-bed is unclean. Yet God
made child-birth, and the seed of copulation. Why then is the woman unclean,
unless something further was intimated? And what was this? He intended to
produce piety in the soul, and to deter it from fornication. For if she is unclean
who has borne a child, much more she who has committed fornication. If to
approach his own wife is not altogether pure, much less to have intercourse with
the wife of another. He who attends a funeral is unclean, much more he who has
mixed in war and slaughter. And many kinds of uncleanness would be found, if
it were necessary to recount them all. But these things are not now required of
us. But all is transferred to the soul.