eternal and one, then human knowledge is eternal and one: whence it follows that,
when the individual seems to be learning by the experience of his senses, he is really
only recognising what is in his mind already.

of Elizabeth, can impress into his service phantasms of the Queen and her Court. Given
the knowledge, the phantasms will come when called for.

## CHAPTER LXXIV--Of the Opinion of Avicenna, who supposed Intellectual Forms not to
be preserved in the Potential Intellect

active intellect, to be the source when knowledge flows in upon our souls. Now it makes
no matter for the acquirement of knowledge whether our knowledge is caused by one
separate substance or by several. Either way it will follow that our knowledge is not
caused by sensible things: the contrary of which conclusion appears from the fact that
any one wanting in any one sense is wanting in acquaintance with the sensible objects
of which that sense takes cognisance.
1. It is a novelty to say that the potential intellect, viewing the impressions made by
singular things in the phantasy, is lit up by the light of the active intellect to know the
universal; and that the action of the lower faculties, phantasy, memory, and cogitative
faculty, fit and prepare the soul to receive the emanation of the active intellect. This, I
say, is novel and strange doctrine: for we see that our soul is better disposed to receive
impressions from intelligences subsisting apart, the further it is removed from bodily and
sensible things: the higher is attained by receding from the lower. It is not therefore
likely that any regarding of bodily phantasms should dispose our soul to receive the
influence of an intelligence subsisting apart. Plato made a better study of the basis of
his position: for he supposed that sensible appearances do not dispose the soul to
receive the influence of separately subsisting forms, but merely rouse the intellect to
consider knowledge that has been already caused in it by an external principle: for he
supposed that from the beginning knowledge of all things intellectually knowable was
caused in our souls by separately existing forms, or ideas: hence learning, he said, was
nothing else than recollecting.
3. Intellectual knowledge is more perfect than sensory. If therefore in sensory
knowledge there is some power of preserving apprehensions, much more will this be
the case in intellectual knowledge.
6. This opinion is contrary to the mind of Aristotle, who says that the potential intellect is
"the place of ideas": which is tantamount to saying that it is a "storehouse" of intellectual
impressions, to use Avicenna's own phrase.
The arguments to the contrary are easily solved. For the potential intellect is perfectly
actuated about intellectual impressions when it is actually considering them: when it is
not actually considering them, it is not perfectly actuated about them, but is in a
condition intermediate between potentiality and actuality. As for memory, that is
located in the sentient part of the soul, because the objects of memory fall under a
definite time for there is no memory but of the past; and therefore, since there is no
abstraction of its object from individualising conditions, memory does not belong to the
intellectual side of our nature, which deals with universals This however does not bar
the potential intellect's preservation of intellectual impressions, which are abstracted
from all particular conditions.