that is to say, incorporeal, yet God (the Father) is not absolutely meant wherever
"Spirit" is mentioned. And why do you wonder if we say this of the Father? We
could not even say of the Comforter, that wherever "Spirit" (is mentioned), the
Comforter is absolutely meant, and yet this is His most distinctive name; still not
always where Spirit (is mentioned is) the Comforter (meant). Thus Christ is
called "the power of God" [1 Corinthians 1:24], and "the wisdom of God"; yet
not always where "the power" and "the wisdom of God" are mentioned is Christ
meant; so in this passage, although the Spirit does give "Light," yet the
Evangelist is not now speaking of the Spirit.
When we have shut them out from these strange opinions, they who take all
manner of pains to withstand the truth, say, (still clinging to the same reading,)
"Whatever came into existence by him was life, because," says one, "whatever
came into existence was life." What then do you say of the punishment of the
men of Sodom, and the flood, and hell fire, and ten thousand like things? "But,"
says one, "we are speaking of the material creation." Well, these too belong
entirely to the material creation. But that we may out of our abundance refute
their argument, we will ask them, "Is wood, life," tell me? "Is stone, life?" these
things that are lifeless and motionless? Nay, is man absolutely life? Who would
say so? He is not pure life, but is capable of receiving life.
2. See here again, an absurdity; by the same succession of consequences we
will bring the argument to such a point, that even hence you may learn their
folly. In this way they assert things by no means befitting of the Spirit. Being
driven from their other ground, they apply those things to men, which they
before thought to be spoken worthily of the Spirit. However, let us examine the
reading itself this way also. The creature is now called "life," therefore, the same
is "light," and John came to witness concerning it. Why then is not he also
"light"? He says that "he was not that light" [John 1:8], and yet he belonged to
created things? How then is he not "light"? How was he "in the world, and the
world was made by him"? [John 1:10] Was the creature in the creature, and was
the creature made by the creature? But how did "the world know him not"? How

did the creature not know the creature? "But as many as received him, to them
gave he power to become the sons of God." [John 1:12] But enough of laughter.
For the rest I leave it to you to attack these monstrous reasonings, that we may
not seem to have chosen to raise a laugh for its own sake, and waste the time
without cause. For if these things are neither said of the Spirit, (and it has been
shown that they are not,) nor of anything created, and yet they still hold to the
same reading, that stranger conclusion than any which we before mentioned, will
follow, that the Son was made by Himself. For if the Son is the true Light, and
this Light was Life, and this Life was made in Him, this must needs be the result
according to their own reading. Let us then relinquish this reading, and come to
the recognized reading and explanation.
And what is that? It is to make the sentence end at "was made," and to
begin the next sentence with, "In Him was Life." What (the Evangelist) says is
this, "Without Him was not anything made that was made"; whatever created
thing was made, says he, was not made without Him. See you how by this short
addition he has rectified all the besetting difficulties; for the saying, that "without
Him was not anything made," and then the adding, "which was made," includes
things cognizable by the intellect, but excludes the Spirit. For after he had said
that "all things were made by Him," and "without Him was not anything made,"
he needed this addition, lest some one should say, "If all things were made by
Him, then the Spirit also was made." "I," he replies, "asserted that whatever was
made was made by Him, even though it be invisible, or incorporeal, or in the
heavens. For this reason, I did not say absolutely, 'all things,' but 'whatever was
made,' that is, 'created things,' but the Spirit is uncreated."
Do you see the precision of his teaching? He has alluded to the creation of
material things, (for concerning these Moses had taught before him,) and after
bringing us to advance from thence to higher things, I mean the immaterial and
the invisible, he excepts the Holy Spirit from all creation. And so Paul, inspired
by the same grace, said, "For by Him were all things created." [Colossians 1:16]
Observe too here again the same exactness. For the same Spirit moved this soul