righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, you shall in no case enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven." [Matthew 5:20] But this he says more clearly in the
sequel. But at present he alludes here briefly to it, to show that unless we stoop
down very low to it, sin will not get the better of us. For it is not the Law only
that exhorts us, but grace too which also remitted our former sins, and secures us
against future ones. For it promised them crowns after toils, but this (i.e. grace)
crowned them first, and then led them to the contest. Now it seems to me that he
is not signifying here the whole life of a believer, but instituting a comparison
between the Baptism and the Law. And this he says in another passage also;
"The letter kills, but the Spirit gives life." [2 Corinthians 3:6] For the Law
convinces of transgression, but grace undoes transgression. As then the former
by convincing establishes sin so the latter by forgiving suffers us not to be under
sin. And so you are in two ways set free from this thraldom; both in your not
being under the Law, and in your enjoying grace. After then he had by these
words given the hearer a breathing time, he again furnishes him a safeguard, by
introducing an exhortation in reply to an objection, and by saying as follows.
Ver. 15. "What then? Shall we sin, because we are not under the Law, but
under grace? God forbid."
So he first adopted a form of adjuration, because it was an absurd thing he
had named. And then he makes his discourse pass on to exhortation, and shows
the great facility of the struggle, in the following words.
Ver. 16. Do you not know, that to whom you yield yourselves servants to
obey, his servants you are to whom you obey; whether of sin unto death, or of
obedience unto righteousness?
I do not, he would say, mention hell as yet, nor that great (manuscript Bodl.
long) punishment, but the shame it is in this world, when you become slaves,
and slaves of your own accord too, and sin's slaves, and when the wages are such
as a second death. For if before baptism, it wrought death of the body, and the
wound required so great attendance, that the Lord of all came down to die, and
so put a stop to the evil; if after so great a gift, and so great liberty, it seize you

again, while you bend down under it willingly, what is there that it may not do?
Do not then run into such a pit, or willingly give yourself up. For in the case of
wars, soldiers are often given up even against their will. But in this case, unless
you desert of yourself, there is no one who will get the better of you. Having
then tried to shame them by a sense of duty, he alarms them also by the rewards,
and lays before them the wages of both; righteousness, and death, and that a
death not like the former, but far worse. For if Christ is to die no more, who is to
do away with death? No one! We must then be punished, and have vengeance
taken upon us forever. For a death preceptible to the senses is not still to come in
this case, as in the former, which gives the body rest, and separates it from the
soul. "For the last enemy, death, is destroyed" [1 Corinthians 15:26], whence the
punishment will be deathless. But not to them that obey, for righteousness, and
the blessings springing from it, will be their rewards.
Ver. 17. "But God be thanked, that you were the servants of sin, but you
have obeyed from the heart that form of doctrine which was delivered unto you."
(Lit. "into which you were delivered.")
After shaming them by the slavery, after alarming them by the rewards, and
so exhorting them, he again rights them by calling the benefits to mind. For by
these he shows that they were great evils from which they were freed, and that
not by any labors of their own, and that things henceforth would be more
manageable. Just as any one who has rescued a captive from a cruel tyrant, and
advises him not to run away back to him, reminds him of his grievous thraldom;
so does Paul set the evils passed away most emphatically before us, by giving
thanks to God. For it was no human power that could set us free from all those
evils, but, "thanks be to God," who was willing and able to do such great things.
And he well says, "You have obeyed from the heart." You were neither forced
nor pressed, but you came over of your own accord, with willing mind. Now this
is like one that praises and rebukes at once. For after having willingly come, and
not having had any necessity to undergo, what allowance can you claim, or what
excuse can you make, if you run away back to your former estate? Next that you