souls and bodies blameless, holding fast the faith of God, that is, that faith which is [directed]
towards God, and maintaining righteous dealings with respect to their neighbours.
2. Whence also he says, that this handiwork is "the temple of God," thus declaring: "Know ye
not that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you? If any man, therefore,
will defile the temple of God, him will God destroy: for the temple of God is holy, which [temple]
ye are." Here he manifestly declares the body to be the temple in which the Spirit dwells. As
also the Lord speaks in reference to Himself, "Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it
up. He spake this, however," it is said, "of the temple of His body." And not only does he (the
apostle) acknowledge our bodies to be a temple, but even the temple of Christ, saying thus to the
Corinthians, "Know ye not that your bodies are members of Christ? Shall I then take the members
of Christ, and make them the members of an harlot?" He speaks these things, not in reference
to some other spiritual man; for a being of such a nature could have nothing to do with an harlot:
but he declares "our body," that is, the flesh which continues in sanctity and purity, to be "the
members of Christ;" but that when it becomes one with an harlot, it becomes the members of an
harlot. And for this reason he said, "If any man defile the temple of God, him will God destroy."
How then is it not the utmost blasphemy to allege, that the temple of God, in which the Spirit of
the Father dwells, and the members of Christ, do not partake of salvation, but are reduced to
perdition? Also, that our bodies are raised not from their own substance, but by the power of God,
he says to the Corinthians, "Now the body is not for fornication, but for the Lord, and the Lord for
the body. But God hath both raised up the Lord, and shall raise us up by His own power."

### Chapter VII.—Inasmuch as Christ did rise in our flesh, it follows that we shall be also raised
in the same; since the resurrection promised to us should not be referred to spirits naturally
immortal, but to bodies in themselves mortal.
1. In the same manner, therefore, as Christ did rise in the substance of flesh, and pointed out to
His disciples the mark of the nails and the opening in His side (now these are the tokens of that
flesh which rose from the dead), so "shall He also," it is said, "raise us up by His own power."
And again to the Romans he says, "But if the Spirit of Him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell

in you, He that raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies." What,
then, are mortal bodies? Can they be souls? Nay, for souls are incorporeal when put in comparison
with mortal bodies; for God "breathed into the face of man the breath of life, and man became a
living soul." Now the breath of life is an incorporeal thing. And certainly they cannot maintain
that the very breath of life is mortal. Therefore David says, "My soul also shall live to Him,"
just as if its substance were immortal. Neither, on the other hand, can they say that the spirit is the
mortal body. What therefore is there left to which we may apply the term "mortal body," unless it
be the thing that was moulded, that is, the flesh, of which it is also said that God will vivify it? For
this it is which dies and is decomposed, but not the soul or the spirit. For to die is to lose vital power,
and to become henceforth breathless, inanimate, and devoid of motion, and to melt away into those
[component parts] from which also it derived the commencement of [its] substance. But this event
happens neither to the soul, for it is the breath of life; nor to the spirit, for the spirit is simple and
not composite, so that it cannot be decomposed, and is itself the life of those who receive it. We
must therefore conclude that it is in reference to the flesh that death is mentioned; which [flesh],
after the soul's departure, becomes breathless and inanimate, and is decomposed gradually into the
earth from which it was taken. This, then, is what is mortal. And it is this of which he also says,
"He shall also quicken your mortal bodies." And therefore in reference to it he says, in the first
[Epistle] to the Corinthians: "So also is the resurrection of the dead: it is sown in corruption, it rises
in incorruption." For he declares, "That which thou sowest cannot be quickened, unless first it
die."
2. But what is that which, like a grain of wheat, is sown in the earth and decays, unless it be
the bodies which are laid in the earth, into which seeds are also cast? And for this reason he said,
"It is sown in dishonour, it rises in glory." For what is more ignoble than dead flesh? Or, on the
other hand, what is more glorious than the same when it arises and partakes of incorruption? "It is
sown in weakness, it is raised in power:" in its own weakness certainly, because since it is earth
it goes to earth; but [it is quickened] by the power of God, who raises it from the dead. "It is sown
an animal body, it rises a spiritual body." He has taught, beyond all doubt, that such language
was not used by him, either with reference to the soul or to the spirit, but to bodies that have become
corpses. For these are animal bodies, that is, [bodies] which partake of life, which when they have
lost, they succumb to death; then, rising through the Spirit's instrumentality, they become spiritual