THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.73, C.4.

sacraments preparation is made for receiving or consecrating the
Eucharist. Consequently, the reception of Baptism is necessary for
starting the spiritual life, while the receiving of the Eucharist is
requisite for its consummation; by partaking not indeed actually, but
in desire, as an end is possessed in desire and intention. Another
difference is because by Baptism a man is ordained to the Eucharist,
and therefore from the fact of children being baptized, they are
destined by the Church to the Eucharist; and just as they believe
through the Church's faith, so they desire the Eucharist through the
Church's intention, and, as a result, receive its reality. But they are
not disposed for Baptism by any previous sacrament, and
consequently before receiving Baptism, in no way have they Baptism
in desire; but adults alone have: consequently, they cannot have the
reality of the sacrament without receiving the sacrament itself.
Therefore this sacrament is not necessary for salvation in the same
way as Baptism is.
Reply to Objection 1: As Augustine says, explaining Jn. 6:54, "This
food and this drink," namely, of His flesh and blood: "He would have
us understand the fellowship of His body and members, which is the
Church in His predestinated, and called, and justified, and glorified,
His holy and believing ones." Hence, as he says in his Epistle to
Boniface (Pseudo-Beda, in 1 Cor. 10:17): "No one should entertain
the slightest doubt, that then every one of the faithful becomes a
partaker of the body and blood of Christ, when in Baptism he is
made a member of Christ's body; nor is he deprived of his share in
that body and chalice even though he depart from this world in the
unity of Christ's body, before he eats that bread and drinks of that
chalice."
Reply to Objection 2: The difference between corporeal and spiritual
food lies in this, that the former is changed into the substance of the
person nourished, and consequently it cannot avail for supporting
life except it be partaken of; but spiritual food changes man into
itself, according to that saying of Augustine (Confess. vii), that he
heard the voice of Christ as it were saying to him: "Nor shalt thou
change Me into thyself, as food of thy flesh, but thou shalt be
changed into Me." But one can be changed into Christ, and be
incorporated in Him by mental desire, even without receiving this
sacrament. And consequently the comparison does not hold.
Reply to Objection 3: Baptism is the sacrament of Christ's death and
Passion, according as a man is born anew in Christ in virtue of His

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.73, C.4.

Passion; but the Eucharist is the sacrament of Christ's Passion
according as a man is made perfect in union with Christ Who
suffered. Hence, as Baptism is called the sacrament of Faith, which
is the foundation of the spiritual life, so the Eucharist is termed the
sacrament of Charity, which is "the bond of perfection" (Col. 3:14).