destroy them all; so He sent forth a man for His herald, that those who heard
might at the hearing of a kindred voice approach more readily. For (to prove)
that He had no need of that (herald's) testimony, it would have sufficed that He
should only have shown Himself who He was in His unveiled Essence, and have
confounded them all. But this He did not for the reason I have before mentioned.
He would have annihilated all, since none could have endured the encounter of
that unapproachable light. Wherefore, as I said, He put on flesh, and entrusted
the witness (of Himself) to one of our fellow-servants, since He arranged all for
the salvation of men, looking not only to His own honor, but also to what might
be readily received by, and be profitable to, His hearers. Which He glanced at
when He said, "These things I say" for your sake, "that you might be saved."
[John 5:34] And the Evangelist using the same language as his Master, after
saying, "to bear witness of that Light," adds,
"That all men through Him might believe." All but saying, Think not that
the reason why John the Baptist came to bear witness, was that he might add
anything to the trustworthiness of his Master. No; (He came,) that by his means
beings of his own class might believe. For it is clear from what follows, that he
used this expression in his anxiety to remove this suspicion beforehand, since he
adds,

John 1:8
"He was not that Light."
Now if he did not introduce this as setting himself against this suspicion,
then the expression is absolutely superfluous, and tautology rather than
elucidation of his teaching. For why, after having said that he "was sent to bear
witness of that Light," does he again say, "He was not that Light"? (He says it,)
not loosely or without reason; but, because, for the most part, among ourselves,
the person witnessing is held to be greater, and generally more trustworthy than
the person witnessed of; therefore, that none might suspect this in the case of
John, at once from the very beginning he removes this evil suspicion, and having
torn it up by the roots, shows who this is that bears witness, and who is He who
is witnessed of, and what an interval there is between the witnessed of, and the
bearer of witness. And after having done this, and shown His incomparable
superiority, he afterwards proceeds fearlessly to the narrative which remains; and
after carefully removing whatever strange (ideas) might secretly harbor in the
minds of the simpler sort, so instills into all easily and without impediment the
word of doctrine in its proper order.
Let us pray then, that henceforth with the revelation of these thoughts and
rightness of doctrine, we may have also a pure life and bright conversation, since
these things profit nothing unless good works be present with us. For though we
have all faith and all knowledge of the Scriptures, yet if we be naked and
destitute of the protection derived from (holy) living, there is nothing to hinder
us from being hurried into the fire of hell, and burning for ever in the
unquenchable flame. For as they who have done good shall rise to life
everlasting, so they who have dared the contrary shall rise to everlasting
punishment, which never has an end. Let us then manifest all eagerness not to
mar the gain which accrues to us from a right faith by the vileness of our actions,
but becoming well-pleasing to Him by these also, boldly to look on Christ. No