FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.16, C.2.

the will which applies them to act, as the instruments are compared
to the principal agent. Now action is properly ascribed, not to the
instrument, but to the principal agent, as building is ascribed to the
builder, not to his tools. Hence it is evident that use is, properly
speaking, an act of the will.
Reply to Objection 1: Reason does indeed refer one thing to another;
but the will tends to that which is referred by the reason to
something else. And in this sense to use is to refer one thing to
another.
Reply to Objection 2: Damascene is speaking of use in so far as it
belongs to the executive powers.
Reply to Objection 3: Even the speculative reason is applied by the
will to the act of understanding or judging. Consequently the
speculative reason is said to use, in so far as it is moved by the will,
in the same way as the other powers.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.16, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether use is to be found in irrational animals?

Objection 1: It would seem that use is to be found in irrational
animals. For it is better to enjoy than to use, because, as Augustine
says (De Trin. x, 10): "We use things by referring them to something
else which we are to enjoy." But enjoyment is to be found in
irrational animals, as stated above (Question 11, Article 2). Much
more, therefore, is it possible for them to use.
Objection 2: Further, to apply the members to action is to use them.
But irrational animals apply their members to action; for instance,
their feet, to walk; their horns, to strike. Therefore it is possible for
irrational animals to use.
On the contrary, Augustine says (Questions. 83, qu. 30): "None but a
rational animal can make use of a thing."
I answer that, as stated above (Article 1), to use is to apply an active
principle to action: thus to consent is to apply the appetitive
movement to the desire of something, as stated above (Question 15,
Articles 1,2,3). Now he alone who has the disposal of a thing, can
apply it to something else; and this belongs to him alone who knows
how to refer it to something else, which is an act of the reason. And
therefore none but a rational animal consents and uses.
Reply to Objection 1: To enjoy implies the absolute movement of the
appetite to the appetible: whereas to use implies a movement of the
appetite to something as directed to something else. If therefore we
compare use and enjoyment in respect of their objects, enjoyment is
better than use; because that which is appetible absolutely is better
than that which is appetible only as directed to something else. But if
we compare them in respect of the apprehensive power that
precedes them, greater excellence is required on the part of use:
because to direct one thing to another is an act of reason; whereas
to apprehend something absolutely is within the competency even of
sense.
Reply to Objection 2: Animals by means of their members do
something from natural instinct; not through knowing the relation of
their members to these operations. Wherefore, properly speaking,
they do not apply their members to action, nor do they use them.