Secondly, from what has been already proved, God is existence
itself, of itself subsistent (Question 3, Article 4). Consequently, He
must contain within Himself the whole perfection of being. For it is
clear that if some hot thing has not the whole perfection of heat, this
is because heat is not participated in its full perfection; but if this
heat were self-subsisting, nothing of the virtue of heat would be
wanting to it. Since therefore God is subsisting being itself, nothing
of the perfection of being can be wanting to Him. Now all created
perfections are included in the perfection of being; for things are
perfect, precisely so far as they have being after some fashion. It
follows therefore that the perfection of no one thing is wanting to
God. This line of argument, too, is implied by Dionysius (Div. Nom.
v), when he says that, "God exists not in any single mode, but
embraces all being within Himself, absolutely, without limitation,
uniformly;" and afterwards he adds that, "He is the very existence to
subsisting things."
Reply to Objection 1: Even as the sun (as Dionysius remarks, (Div.
Nom. v)), while remaining one and shining uniformly, contains within
itself first and uniformly the substances of sensible things, and
many and diverse qualities; "a fortiori" should all things in a kind of
natural unity pre-exist in the cause of all things; and thus things
diverse and in themselves opposed to each other, pre-exist in God
as one, without injury to His simplicity. This suffices for the Reply to
the Second Objection.
Reply to Objection 3: The same Dionysius says (Div. Nom. v) that,
although existence is more perfect than life, and life than wisdom, if
they are considered as distinguished in idea; nevertheless, a living
thing is more perfect than what merely exists, because living things
also exist and intelligent things both exist and live. Although
therefore existence does not include life and wisdom, because that
which participates in existence need not participate in every mode of
existence; nevertheless God's existence includes in itself life and
wisdom, because nothing of the perfection of being can be wanting
to Him who is subsisting being itself.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether any creature can be like God?

Objection 1: It seems that no creature can be like God. For it is
written (Ps. 85:8): "There is none among the gods like unto Thee, O
Lord." But of all creatures the most excellent are those which are
called participation gods. Therefore still less can other creatures be
said to be like God.
Objection 2: Further, likeness implies comparison. But there can be
no comparison between things in a different "genus." Therefore
neither can there be any likeness. Thus we do not say that
sweetness is like whiteness. But no creature is in the same "genus"
as God: since God is no "genus," as shown above (Question 3,
Article 5). Therefore no creature is like God.
Objection 3: Further, we speak of those things as like which agree in
form. But nothing can agree with God in form; for, save in God alone,
essence and existence differ. Therefore no creature can be like to
God.
Objection 4: Further, among like things there is mutual likeness; for
like is like to like. If therefore any creature is like God, God will be
like some creature, which is against what is said by Isaias: "To
whom have you likened God?" (Is. 40:18).
On the contrary, It is written: "Let us make man to our image and
likeness" (Gn. 1:26), and: "When He shall appear we shall be like to
Him" (1 Jn. 3:2).
I answer that, Since likeness is based upon agreement or
communication in form, it varies according to the many modes of
communication in form. Some things are said to be like, which
communicate in the same form according to the same formality, and
according to the same mode; and these are said to be not merely
like, but equal in their likeness; as two things equally white are said
to be alike in whiteness; and this is the most perfect likeness. In
another way, we speak of things as alike which communicate in form
according to the same formality, though not according to the same
measure, but according to more or less, as something less white is
said to be like another thing more white; and this is imperfect
likeness. In a third way some things are said to be alike which