THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.64, C.9.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.64, C.10.

### ARTICLE 9. Whether faith is required of necessity in the

minister of a sacrament?
Objection 1: It seems that faith is required of necessity in the
minister of a sacrament. For, as stated above (Article 8), the intention
of the minister is necessary for the validity of a sacrament. But "faith
directs in intention" as Augustine says against Julian (In Psalm xxxi,
cf. Contra Julian iv). Therefore, if the minister is without the true
faith, the sacrament is invalid.
Objection 2: Further, if a minister of the Church has not the true faith,
it seems that he is a heretic. But heretics, seemingly, cannot confer
sacraments. For Cyprian says in an epistle against heretics (lxxiii):
"Everything whatsoever heretics do, is carnal, void and counterfeit,
so that nothing that they do should receive our approval." And Pope
Leo says in his epistle to Leo Augustus (clvi): "It is a matter of
notoriety that the light of all the heavenly sacraments is extinguished
in the see of Alexandria, by an act of dire and senseless cruelty. The
sacrifice is no longer offered, the chrism is no longer consecrated,
all the mysteries of religion have fled at the touch of the parricide
hands of ungodly men." Therefore a sacrament requires of necessity
that the minister should have the true faith.
Objection 3: Further, those who have not the true faith seem to be
separated from the Church by excommunication: for it is written in
the second canonical epistle of John (10): "If any man come to you,
and bring not this doctrine, receive him not into the house, nor say
to him; God speed you": and (Titus 3:10): "A man that is a heretic,
after the first and second admonition avoid." But it seems that an
excommunicate cannot confer a sacrament of the Church: since he
is separated from the Church, to whose ministry the dispensation of
the sacraments belongs. Therefore a sacrament requires of
necessity that the minister should have the true faith.
On the contrary, Augustine says against the Donatist Petilian:
"Remember that the evil lives of wicked men are not prejudicial to
God's sacraments, by rendering them either invalid or less holy."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 5), since the minister works
instrumentally in the sacraments, he acts not by his own but by
Christ's power. Now just as charity belongs to a man's own power so

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.64, C.10.

also does faith. Wherefore, just as the validity of a sacrament does
not require that the minister should have charity, and even sinners
can confer sacraments, as stated above (Article 5); so neither is it
necessary that he should have faith, and even an unbeliever can
confer a true sacrament, provided that the other essentials be there.
Reply to Objection 1: It may happen that a man's faith is defective in
regard to something else, and not in regard to the reality of the
sacrament which he confers: for instance, he may believe that it is
unlawful to swear in any case whatever, and yet he may believe that
baptism is an efficient cause of salvation. And thus such unbelief
does not hinder the intention of conferring the sacrament. But if his
faith be defective in regard to the very sacrament that he confers,
although he believe that no inward effect is caused by the thing done
outwardly, yet he does know that the Catholic Church intends to
confer a sacrament by that which is outwardly done. Wherefore, his
unbelief notwithstanding, he can intend to do what the Church does,
albeit he esteem it to be nothing. And such an intention suffices for a
sacrament: because as stated above (Article 8, ad 2) the minister of a
sacrament acts in the person of the Church by whose faith any
defect in the minister's faith is made good.
Reply to Objection 2: Some heretics in conferring sacraments do not
observe the form prescribed by the Church: and these confer neither
the sacrament nor the reality of the sacrament. But some do observe
the form prescribed by the Church: and these confer indeed the
sacrament but not the reality. I say this in the supposition that they
are outwardly cut off from the Church; because from the very fact
that anyone receives the sacraments from them, he sins; and
consequently is hindered from receiving the effect of the sacrament.
Wherefore Augustine (Fulgentius, De Fide ad Pet.) says: "Be well
assured and have no doubt whatever that those who are baptized
outside the Church, unless they come back to the Church, will reap
disaster from their Baptism." In this sense Pope Leo says that "the
light of the sacraments was extinguished in the Church of
Alexandria"; viz. in regard to the reality of the sacrament, not as to
the sacrament itself.
Cyprian, however, thought that heretics do not confer even the
sacrament: but in this respect we do not follow his opinion. Hence
Augustine says (De unico Baptismo xiii): "Though the martyr
Cyprian refused to recognize Baptism conferred by heretics or
schismatics, yet so great are his merits, culminating in the crown of