FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.89, C.2.

soul. If, however, we find it stated anywhere that it does induce a
stain, this is in a restricted sense, in so far as it hinders the
comeliness that results from acts of virtue.
Reply to Objection 1: Augustine is speaking of the case in which
many venial sins lead to mortal sin dispositively: because otherwise
they would not sever the soul from its heavenly spouse.
Reply to Objection 2: In mortal sin the inordinateness of the act
destroys the habit of virtue, but not in venial sin.
Reply to Objection 3: In mortal sin the soul comes into contact with a
temporal thing as its end, so that the shedding of the light of grace,
which accrues to those who, by charity, cleave to God as their last
end, is entirely cut off. On the contrary, in venial sin, man does not
cleave to a creature as his last end: hence there is no comparison.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.89, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether venial sins are suitably designated as

"wood, hay, and stubble"?
Objection 1: It would seem that venial sins are unsuitably designated
as "wood," "hay," and "stubble." Because wood hay and stubble are
said (1 Cor. 3:12) to be built on a spiritual foundation. Now venial
sins are something outside a spiritual foundation, even as false
opinions are outside the pale of science. Therefore, venial sins are
not suitably designated as wood, hay and stubble.
Objection 2: Further, he who builds wood, hay and stubble, "shall be
saved yet so as by fire" (1 Cor. 3:15). But sometimes the man who
commits a venial sin, will not be saved, even by fire, e.g. when a man
dies in mortal sin to which venial sins are attached. Therefore, venial
sins are unsuitably designated by wood, hay, and stubble.
Objection 3: Further, according to the Apostle (1 Cor. 3:12) those
who build "gold, silver, precious stones," i.e. love of God and our
neighbor, and good works, are others from those who build wood,
hay, and stubble. But those even who love God and their neighbor,
and do good works, commit venial sins: for it is written (1 Jn. 1:8): "If
we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves." Therefore venial
sins are not suitably designated by these three.
Objection 4: Further, there are many more than three differences and
degrees of venial sins. Therefore they are unsuitably comprised
under these three.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (1 Cor. 3:15) that the man who
builds up wood, hay and stubble, "shall be saved yet so as by fire,"
so that he will suffer punishment, but not everlasting. Now the debt
of temporal punishment belongs properly to venial sin, as stated
above (Question 87, Article 5). Therefore these three signify venial
sins.
I answer that, Some have understood the "foundation" to be dead
faith, upon which some build good works, signified by gold, silver,
and precious stones, while others build mortal sins, which according
to them are designated by wood, hay and stubble. But Augustine
disapproves of this explanation (De Fide et Oper. xv), because, as
the Apostle says (Gal. 5:21), he who does the works of the flesh,