repent of their sins; not that they should be punished, but that they might more
easily receive the subsequent remission. For had they not condemned
themselves, they could not have sought after His grace; and not seeking, they
could not have obtained remission.
Thus that baptism led the way for this; wherefore also he said, that "they
should believe in Him which should come after him;" [Acts 19:4] together with
that which has been mentioned setting forth this other cause of His baptism. For
neither would it have been as much for him to have gone about to their houses,
and to have led Christ around, taking Him by the hand, and to have said,
"Believe in This Man;" as for that blessed voice to be uttered, and all those other
things performed in the presence and sight of all.
On account of this He comes to the baptism. Since in fact both the credit of
him that was baptizing, and the purport of the thing itself, was attracting the
whole city, and calling it unto Jordan; and it became a great spectacle.
Therefore he humbles them also when they have come, and persuades them
to have no high fancies about themselves; showing them liable to the utmost
evils, unless they would repent, and leaving their forefathers, and all vaunting in
them, would receive Him that was coming.
Because in fact the things concerning Christ had been up to that time veiled,
and many thought He was dead, owing to the massacre which took place at
Bethlehem. For though at twelve years old He discovered Himself, yet did He
also quickly veil Himself again. And for this cause there was need of that
splendid exordium and of a loftier beginning. Wherefore also then for the first
time he with clear voice proclaims things which the Jews had never heard,
neither from prophets, nor from any besides; making mention of Heaven, and of
the kingdom there, and no longer saying anything touching the earth.
But by the kingdom in this place he means His former and His last advent.
3. "But what is this to the Jews?" one may say, "for they know not even
what you say." "Why, for this cause," says he, "do I so speak, in order that being
roused by the obscurity of my words, they may proceed to seek Him, whom I

preach." In point of fact, he so excited them with good hopes when they came
near, that even many publicans and soldiers inquired what they should do, and
how they should direct their own life; which was a sign of being thenceforth set
free from all worldly things, and of looking to other greater objects, and of
foreboding things to come. Yea, for all, both the sights and the words of that
time, led them unto lofty thoughts.
Conceive, for example, how great a thing it was to see a man after thirty
years coming down from the wilderness, being the son of a chief priest, who had
never known the common wants of men, and was on every account venerable,
and had Isaiah with him. For he too was present proclaiming him, and saying,
"This is he who I said should come crying, and preaching throughout the whole
wilderness with a clear voice." For so great was the earnestness of the prophets
touching these things, that not their own Lord only, but him also who was to
minister unto Him, they proclaimed a long time beforehand, and they not only
mentioned him, but the place too in which he was to abide, and the manner of
the doctrine which he had to teach when he came, and the good effect that was
produced by him.
See, at least, how both the prophet and the Baptist go upon the same ideas,
although not upon the same words.
Thus the prophet says that he shall come saying, "Prepare ye the way of the
Lord, make his paths straight." [Isaiah 40:3] And he himself when he had come
said, "Bring forth fruits meet for repentance," [Matthew 3:8] which corresponds
with, "Prepare ye the way of the Lord." Do you see that both by the words of the
prophet, and by his own preaching, this one thing is manifested alone; that he
had come, making a way and preparing beforehand, not bestowing the gift,
which was the remission, but ordering in good time the souls of such as should
receive the God of all?
But Luke expresses somewhat further: not repeating the exordium, and so
passing on, but setting down likewise all the prophecy. "For every valley," says
he, "shall be filled; and every mountain and hill shall be brought low; and the