words of the law, and pointing out that it was lawful for the priests to act freely. For David had
been appointed a priest by God, although Saul persecuted him. For all the righteous possess the
sacerdotal rank. And all the apostles of the Lord are priests, who do inherit here neither lands
nor houses, but serve God and the altar continually. Of whom Moses also says in Deuteronomy,
when blessing Levi, "Who said unto his father and to his mother, I have not known thee; neither
did he acknowledge his brethren, and he disinherited his own sons: he kept Thy commandments,
and observed Thy covenant." But who are they that have left father and mother, and have said
adieu to all their neighbours, on account of the word of God and His covenant, unless the disciples
of the Lord? Of whom again Moses says, "They shall have no inheritance, for the Lord Himself is
their inheritance." And again, "The priests the Levites shall have no part in the whole tribe of
Levi, nor substance with Israel; their substance is the offerings (fructifications) of the Lord: these
shall they eat." Wherefore also Paul says, "I do not seek after a gift, but I seek after fruit." To
His disciples He said, who had a priesthood of the Lord, to whom it was lawful when hungry to
eat the ears of corn, "For the workman is worthy of his meat." And the priests in the temple
profaned the Sabbath, and were blameless. Wherefore, then, were they blameless? Because when
in the temple they were not engaged in secular affairs, but in the service of the Lord, fulfilling the
law, but not going beyond it, as that man did, who of his own accord carried dry wood into the
camp of God, and was justly stoned to death. "For every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit
shall be hewn down, and cast into the fire;" and "whosoever shall defile the temple of God, him
shall God defile."
167'3, i.e., Every righteous king possesses a priestly order. Comp. 1 Pet. ii. 5, 9. [And with St. Peter's testimony to the priesthood
of the laity, compare the same under the law. Ex. xix. 6. The Western Church has recognised the "Episcopate ab extra" of
sovereigns; while, in the East, it has grown into Cæsaropapism.]

Phil. iv. 17.

Literally, "to take food from seeds."

### Chapter IX.—There is but one author, and one end to both covenants.
1. All things therefore are of one and the same substance, that is, from one and the same God;
as also the Lord says to the disciples "Therefore every scribe, which is instructed unto the kingdom
of heaven, is like unto a man that is an householder, which bringeth forth out of his treasure things
new and old." He did not teach that he who brought forth the old was one, and he that brought
forth the new, another; but that they were one and the same. For the Lord is the good man of the
house, who rules the entire house of His Father; and who delivers a law suited both for slaves and
those who are as yet undisciplined; and gives fitting precepts to those that are free, and have been
justified by faith, as well as throws His own inheritance open to those that are sons. And He called
His disciples "scribes" and "teachers of the kingdom of heaven;" of whom also He elsewhere says
to the Jews: "Behold, I send unto you wise men, and scribes, and teachers; and some of them ye
shall kill, and persecute from city to city." Now, without contradiction, He means by those things
which are brought forth from the treasure new and old, the two covenants; the old, that giving of
the law which took place formerly; and He points out as the new, that manner of life required by
the Gospel, of which David says, "Sing unto the Lord a new song;" and Esaias, "Sing unto the
Lord a new hymn. His beginning (initium), His name is glorified from the height of the earth: they
declare His powers in the isles." And Jeremiah says: "Behold, I will make a new covenant, not
as I made with your fathers" in Mount Horeb. But one and the same householder produced both
covenants, the Word of God, our Lord Jesus Christ, who spake with both Abraham and Moses, and
who has restored us anew to liberty, and has multiplied that grace which is from Himself.
2. He declares: "For in this place is One greater than the temple." But [the words] greater
and less are not applied to those things which have nothing in common between themselves, and
are of an opposite nature, and mutually repugnant; but are used in the case of those of the same
substance, and which possess properties in common, but merely differ in number and size; such as
water from water, and light from light, and grace from grace. Greater, therefore, is that legislation
which has been given in order to liberty than that given in order to bondage; and therefore it has
also been diffused, not throughout one nation [only], but over the whole world. For one and the
same Lord, who is greater than the temple, greater than Solomon, and greater than Jonah, confers
gifts upon men, that is, His own presence, and the resurrection from the dead; but He does not
change God, nor proclaim another Father, but that very same one, who always has more to measure
out to those of His household. And as their love towards God increases, He bestows more and