Church Militant. By this key a man goes to heaven, since, by its
means, a man is shut out from or admitted to the fellowship of the
Church Militant, by excommunication or absolution. This is called
the key of "jurisdiction" in the external court, wherefore even those
who are not priests can have this key, e.g. archdeacons, bishops
elect, and others who can excommunicate. But it is not properly
called a key of heaven, but a disposition thereto.
Reply to Objection 1: The doorkeepers have the key for taking care
of those things which are contained in a material temple, and they
have to judge whether a person should be excluded from or admitted
to that temple; which judgment they pronounce, not by their own
authority, but in pursuance to the priest's judgment, so that they
appear to be the administrators of the priestly power.
Reply to Objection 2: Kings have no power in spiritual matters, so
that they do not receive the key of the heavenly kingdom. Their
power is confined to temporal matters, and this too can only come to
them from God, as appears from Rm. 13:1. Nor are they consecrated
by the unction of a sacred order: their anointing is merely a sign that
the excellence of their power comes down to them from Christ, and
that, under Christ, they reign over the Christian people.
Reply to Objection 3: Just as in civil matters the whole power is
sometimes vested in a judge, as in a kingdom, whereas sometimes it
is vested in many exercising various offices but acting together with
equal rights (Ethic. viii, 10,11), so too, spiritual jurisdiction may be
exercised both by one alone, e.g. a bishop, and by many together, e.
g. by a Chapter, and thus they have the key of jurisdiction, but they
have not all together the key of order.
Reply to Objection 4: According to the Apostle (1 Tim. 2:11; Titus
2:5), woman is in a state of subjection: wherefore she can have no
spiritual jurisdiction, since the Philosopher also says (Ethic. viii) that
it is a corruption of public life when the government comes into the
hands of a woman. Consequently a woman has neither the key of
order nor the key of jurisdiction. Nevertheless a certain use of the
keys is allowed to women, such as the right to correct other women
who are under them, on account of the danger that might threaten if
men were to dwell under the same roof.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether holy men who are not priests have the

keys?
Objection 1: It would seem that holy men, even those who are not
priests, have the use of the keys. For loosing and binding, which are
the effects of the keys, derive their efficacy from the merit of Christ's
Passion. Now those are most conformed to Christ's Passion, who
follow Christ, suffering by patience and other virtues. Therefore it
seems that even if they have not the priestly order, they can bind and
loose.
Objection 2: Further, it is written (Heb. 7:7): "Without all
contradiction, that which is less is blessed by the greater ." Now "in
spiritual matters," according to Augustine (De Trin. vi, 8), "to be
better is to be greater." Therefore those who are better, i.e. who have
more charity, can bless others by absolving them. Hence the same
conclusion follows.
On the contrary, "Action belongs to that which has the power," as
the Philosopher says (De Somno et Vigil. i). But the key which is a
spiritual power belongs to priests alone. Therefore priests alone are
competent to have the use of the keys.
I answer that, There is this difference between a principal and an
instrumental agent, that the latter does not produce, in the effect, its
own likeness, but the likeness of the principal agent, whereas the
principal agent produces its own likeness. Consequently a thing
becomes a principal agent through having a form, which it can
reproduce in another, whereas an instrumental agent is not
constituted thus, but through being applied by the principal agent in
order to produce a certain effect. Since therefore in the act of the
keys the principal agent by authority is Christ as God, and by merit
is Christ as man, it follows that on account of the very fulness of
Divine goodness in Him, and of the perfection of His grace, He is
competent to exercise the act of the keys. But another man is not
competent to exercise this act as principal agent, since neither can
he give another man grace whereby sins are remitted, nor can he
merit sufficiently, so that he is nothing more than an instrumental
agent. Consequently the recipient of the effect of the keys, is likened,
not to the one who uses the keys, but to Christ. Therefore, no matter
how much grace a man may have, he cannot produce the effect of