John 13:4
"And having risen from supper, and laid aside His garments."
2. Observe how not by the washing only, but in another way also He
exhibits humility. For it was not before reclining, but after they had all sat down,
then He arose. In the next place, He does not merely wash them, but does so,
putting off His garments. And He did not even stop here, but girded Himself
with a towel. Nor was He satisfied with this, but Himself filled (the basin), and
did not bid another fill it; He did all these things Himself, showing by all that we
must do such things, when we are engaged in well doing, not merely for form's
sake, but with all zeal. Now He seems to me to have washed the feet of the
traitor first from its saying,

John 13:5
"He began to wash the disciples' feet," and adding,

John 13:6
"Then comes He to Simon Peter and Peter says unto Him, Lord, do You wash my
feet?"
"With those hands," he says, "with which You have opened eyes, and
cleansed lepers, and raised the dead?" For this (question) is very emphatic;
wherefore He needed not to have said any more than the, "Thou"; for even of
itself this would have sufficed to convey the whole. Some one might reasonably
enquire, how none of the others forbade Him, but Peter only, which was a mark
of no slight love and reverence. What then is the cause? He seems to me to have
washed the traitor first, then to have come to Peter, and that the others were
afterwards instructed from his case. That He washed some one other before him
is clear from its saying, "But when He came to Peter." Yet the Evangelist is not a
vehement accuser, for the "began," is the expression of one implying this. And
even if Peter were the first, yet it is probable that the traitor, being a forward
person, had reclined even before the chief. For by another circumstance also his
forwardness is shown, when He dips with his Master in the dish, and being
convicted, feels no compunction; while Peter being rebuked but once on a
former occasion, and for words which he spoke from loving affection, was so
abashed, that being even distressed and trembling, he begged another to ask a
question. But Judas, though continually convicted, felt not. [John 13:24] When
therefore He came to Peter, he says unto Him, "Lord, dost Thou wash my feet?"

John 13:7
"He says unto him, What I do you know not now, but you shall know here after."
That is "you shall know how great is the gain from this, the profit of the
lesson, and how it is able to guide us into all humblemindedness." What then
does Peter? He still hinders Him, and says,

John 13:8
"You shall never wash my feet." "What doest thou, Peter? Rememberest thou not
those former words? Did you not say, 'Be merciful to Yourself,' and heardest thou
not in return, 'Get behind Me, Satan'?[ Matthew 16:22] Are you not even so
sobered, but are you yet vehement?" "Yea," he says, "for what is being done is a
great matter, and full of amazement." Since then he did this from exceeding love,
Christ in turn subdues him by the same; and as there He effected this by sharply
rebuking him, and saying, "You are an offense unto Me," so here also by saying,
"If I wash you not, you have no part with Me." What then says that hot and
burning one?