FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.78, C.2.

loss of some spiritual good, so that it may obtain possession of
some temporal good. Now evil is merely the privation of some good;
and so a man wishes knowingly a spiritual evil, which is evil simply,
whereby he is deprived of a spiritual good, in order to possess a
temporal good: wherefore he is said to sin through certain malice or
on purpose, because he chooses evil knowingly.
Reply to Objection 1: Ignorance sometimes excludes the simple
knowledge that a particular action is evil, and then man is said to sin
through ignorance: sometimes it excludes the knowledge that a
particular action is evil at this particular moment, as when he sins
through passion: and sometimes it excludes the knowledge that a
particular evil is not to be suffered for the sake of possessing a
particular good, but not the simple knowledge that it is an evil: it is
thus that a man is ignorant, when he sins through certain malice.
Reply to Objection 2: Evil cannot be intended by anyone for its own
sake; but it can be intended for the sake of avoiding another evil, or
obtaining another good, as stated above: and in this case anyone
would choose to obtain a good intended for its own sake, without
suffering loss of the other good; even as a lustful man would wish to
enjoy a pleasure without offending God; but with the two set before
him to choose from, he prefers sinning and thereby incurring God's
anger, to being deprived of the pleasure.
Reply to Objection 3: The malice through which anyone sins, may be
taken to denote habitual malice, in the sense in which the
Philosopher (Ethic. v, 1) calls an evil habit by the name of malice,
just as a good habit is called virtue: and in this way anyone is said to
sin through malice when he sins through the inclination of a habit. It
may also denote actual malice, whether by malice we mean the
choice itself of evil (and thus anyone is said to sin through malice, in
so far as he sins through making a choice of evil), or whether by
malice we mean some previous fault that gives rise to a subsequent
fault, as when anyone impugns the grace of his brother through
envy. Nor does this imply that a thing is its own cause: for the
interior act is the cause of the exterior act, and one sin is the cause
of another; not indefinitely, however, since we can trace it back to
some previous sin, which is not caused by any previous sin, as was
explained above (Question 75, Article 4, ad 3).

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.78, C.2.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.78, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether everyone that sins through habit, sins

through certain malice?
Objection 1: It would seem that not every one who sins through
habit, sins through certain malice. Because sin committed through
certain malice, seems to be most grievous. Now it happens
sometimes that a man commits a slight sin through habit, as when
he utters an idle word. Therefore sin committed from habit is not
always committed through certain malice.
Objection 2: Further, "Acts proceeding from habits are like the acts
by which those habits were formed" (Ethic. ii, 1,2). But the acts
which precede a vicious habit are not committed through certain
malice. Therefore the sins that arise from habit are not committed
through certain malice.
Objection 3: Further, when a man commits a sin through certain
malice, he is glad after having done it, according to Prov. 2:14: "Who
are glad when they have done evil, and rejoice in most wicked
things": and this, because it is pleasant to obtain what we desire,
and to do those actions which are connatural to us by reason of
habit. But those who sin through habit, are sorrowful after
committing a sin: because "bad men," i.e. those who have a vicious
habit, "are full of remorse" (Ethic. ix, 4). Therefore sins that arise
from habit are not committed through certain malice.
On the contrary, A sin committed through certain malice is one that
is done through choice of evil. Now we make choice of those things
to which we are inclined by habit, as stated in Ethic. vi, 2 with regard
to virtuous habits. Therefore a sin that arises from habit is
committed through certain malice.
I answer that, There is a difference between a sin committed by one
who has the habit, and a sin committed by habit: for it is not
necessary to use a habit, since it is subject to the will of the person
who has that habit. Hence habit is defined as being "something we
use when we will," as stated above (Question 50, Article 1). And thus,
even as it may happen that one who has a vicious habit may break
forth into a virtuous act, because a bad habit does not corrupt
reason altogether, something of which remains unimpaired, the
result being that a sinner does some works which are generically