but the contrary choice, of sense and manliness. And so it is with us: were we
not children in mind, we should not be like the child aforesaid, forsaken
([ὀρφάνῳ]) as he is and thoughtless, but like him that has a father. We must cast
out then our own childish mind, and not find fault with the things themselves;
and we must set a charioteer over our conscience, who will not allow us to
indulge our appetite, but make us run and strive mightily. For what else but
absurdity is it to inure our children with pains at first unto pursuits which have
laborious beginnings, but their end good and pleasant; while we ourselves in
spiritual things take just the contrary turn?
And yet even in those earthly things it is not quite plain that the end will be
good and pleasant: since before now untimely death, or poverty, or false
accusation, or reverse of fortune, or other such things, of which there are many,
have caused men after their long toil to be deprived of all its fruits. What is
more, those who have such pursuits, though they succeed, it is no great gain
which they will reap. For with the present life all those things are dissolved. But
here, not for such fruitless and perishable things is our race, neither have we
fears about the end; but greater and more secure is our hope after our departure
hence. What pardon then can there be, what excuse for those who will not strip
themselves for the evils to be endured for virtue's sake?
And do they yet ask, "Wherefore is the way narrow?" Why, thou dost not
deem it right that any fornicator or lewd or drunken ([και τῶν μεθυόντων]
inserted from the King's ms.) person should enter into the courts of earthly kings;
and do you claim for men to be let into heaven itself with licentiousness, and
luxury, and drunkenness, and covetousness, and all manner of iniquity? And how
can these things be pardonable?
7. "Nay," you reply, I say not that, but why has not virtue a "broad way?" In
good truth if we be willing, its way is very easy. For whether is easier, tell me; to
dig through a wall and take other men's goods and so be cast into prison; or to be
content with what you have and freed from all fear? I have not however said all.
For whether is easier, tell me; to steal all men's goods and revel in few of them

for a short time, and then to be racked and scourged eternally; or having lived in
righteous poverty for a short time, to live ever after in delights? (For let us not
enquire as yet which is the more profitable, but for the present, which is the
more easy.) Whether again is it pleasanter, to see a good dream and to be
punished in reality; or after having had a disagreeable dream to be really in
enjoyment? Of course the latter. Tell me then, In what sense do you call virtue
harsh? I grant, it is harsh, tried by comparison with our carelessness. However,
that it is really easy and smooth, hear what Christ says, [Matthew 11:30] "My
yoke is easy, and My burden is light." But if you perceive not the lightness,
plainly it is for want of courageous zeal; since where that is, even heavy things
are light; and by the same rule where it is not, even light things are heavy. For
tell me, what could be sweeter and more easily obtained than the banquet of
manna? Yet the Jews were discontented, though enjoying such delightful fare.
What more bitter than hunger and all the other hardships which Paul endured?
Yet he leaped up, and rejoiced, and said, [Colossians 1:24] "Now I rejoice in my
sufferings." What then is the cause? The difference of the mind. If then you
frame this as it ought to be, you will see the easiness of virtue.
"What then," say you, "does she only become such through the mind of
those who pursue her?" She is such, not from their mind alone, but by nature as
well. Which I thus prove: If the one had been throughout a thing painful, the
other throughout of the contrary sort, then with some plausibility might some
fallen persons have said that the latter was easier than the former. But if they
have their beginnings, the one in hardship, the other in pleasure, but their
respective ends again just opposite to these; and if those ends be both infinite, in
the one the pleasure, in the other the burden; tell me, which is the more easy to
choose?
"Why then do many not choose that which is easy?" Because some
disbelieve; and others, who believe, have their judgment corrupt, and would
prefer pleasure for a season to that which is everlasting. "Is not this then easy?"
Not so: but this comes of a sick soul. And as the reason why persons in a fever