SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.171, C.5.

says (De Trin. xv, 18): "A man is not transferred from the left side to
the right, unless he receive the Holy Ghost, by Whom he is made a
lover of God and of his neighbor." Hence whatever can be without
charity can be without sanctifying grace, and consequently without
goodness of life. Now prophecy can be without charity; and this is
clear on two counts. First, on account of their respective acts: for
prophecy pertains to the intellect, whose act precedes the act of the
will, which power is perfected by charity. For this reason the Apostle
(1 Cor. 13) reckons prophecy with other things pertinent to the
intellect, that can be had without charity. Secondly, on account of
their respective ends. For prophecy like other gratuitous graces is
given for the good of the Church, according to 1 Cor. 12:7, "The
manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man unto profit"; and is
not directly intended to unite man's affections to God, which is the
purpose of charity. Therefore prophecy can be without a good life, as
regards the first root of this goodness.
If, however, we consider a good life, with regard to the passions of
the soul, and external actions, from this point of view an evil life is
an obstacle to prophecy. For prophecy requires the mind to be
raised very high in order to contemplate spiritual things, and this is
hindered by strong passions, and the inordinate pursuit of external
things. Hence we read of the sons of the prophets (4 Kgs. 4:38) that
they "dwelt together with " Eliseus, leading a solitary life, as it were,
lest worldly employment should be a hindrance to the gift of
prophecy.
Reply to Objection 1: Sometimes the gift of prophecy is given to a
man both for the good of others, and in order to enlighten his own
mind; and such are those whom Divine wisdom, "conveying itself"
by sanctifying grace to their minds, "maketh the friends of God, and
prophets." Others, however, receive the gift of prophecy merely for
the good of others. Hence Jerome commenting on Mt. 7:22, says:
"Sometimes prophesying, the working of miracles, and the casting
out of demons are accorded not to the merit of those who do these
things, but either to the invoking the name of Christ, or to the
condemnation of those who invoke, and for the good of those who
see and hear."
Reply to Objection 2: Gregory [Hom. xxvii in Ev.] expounding this
passage [Jn. 15:15] says: "Since we love the lofty things of heaven
as soon as we hear them, we know them as soon as we love them,
for to love is to know. Accordingly He had made all things known to

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.171, C.5.

them, because having renounced earthly desires they were kindled
by the torches of perfect love." In this way the Divine secrets are not
always revealed to prophets.
Reply to Objection 3: Not all wicked men are ravening wolves, but
only those whose purpose is to injure others. For Chrysostom says
[Opus Imperf. in Matth., Hom. xix] that "Catholic teachers, though
they be sinners, are called slaves of the flesh, but never ravening
wolves, because they do not purpose the destruction of Christians."
And since prophecy is directed to the good of others, it is manifest
that such are false prophets, because they are not sent for this
purpose by God.
Reply to Objection 4: God's gifts are not always bestowed on those
who are simply the best, but sometimes are vouchsafed to those
who are best as regards the receiving of this or that gift. Accordingly
God grants the gift of prophecy to those whom He judges best to
give it to.