FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.29, C.3.

really. Wherefore nothing hinders love from being the cause of
hatred.
Reply to Objection 2: Love and hatred are contraries if considered in
respect of the same thing. But if taken in respect of contraries, they
are not themselves contrary, but consequent to one another: for it
amounts to the same that one love a certain thing, or that one hate
its contrary. Thus love of one thing is the cause of one's hating its
contrary.
Reply to Objection 3: In the order of execution, the turning away
from one term precedes the turning towards the other. But the
reverse is the case in the order of intention: since approach to one
term is the reason for turning away from the other. Now the
appetitive movement belongs rather to the order of intention than to
that of execution. Wherefore love precedes hatred: because each is
an appetitive movement.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.29, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether hatred is stronger than love?

Objection 1: It would seem that hatred is stronger than love. For
Augustine says (Questions. 83, qu. 36): "There is no one who does
not flee from pain, more than he desires pleasure." But flight from
pain pertains to hatred; while desire for pleasure belongs to love.
Therefore hatred is stronger than love.
Objection 2: Further, the weaker is overcome by the stronger. But
love is overcome by hatred: when, that is to say, love is turned into
hatred. Therefore hatred is stronger than love.
Objection 3: Further, the emotions of the soul are shown by their
effects. But man insists more on repelling what is hateful, than on
seeking what is pleasant: thus also irrational animals refrain from
pleasure for fear of the whip, as Augustine instances (Questions. 83,
qu. 36). Therefore hatred is stronger than love.
On the contrary, Good is stronger than evil; because "evil does
nothing except in virtue of good," as Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iv).
But hatred and love differ according to the difference of good and
evil. Therefore love is stronger than hatred.
I answer that, It is impossible for an effect to be stronger than its
cause. Now every hatred arises from some love as its cause, as
above stated (Article 2). Therefore it is impossible for hatred to be
stronger than love absolutely.
But furthermore, love must needs be, absolutely speaking, stronger
than hatred. Because a thing is moved to the end more strongly than
to the means. Now turning away from evil is directed as a means to
the gaining of good. Wherefore, absolutely speaking, the soul's
movement in respect of good is stronger than its movement in
respect of evil.
Nevertheless hatred sometimes seems to be stronger than love, for
two reasons. First, because hatred is more keenly felt than love. For,
since the sensitive perception is accompanied by a certain
impression; when once the impression has been received it is not
felt so keenly as in the moment of receiving it. Hence the heat of a
hectic fever, though greater, is nevertheless not felt so much as the