Homily 6 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts II. 22
"You men of Israel, hear these my words."
["He men of Israel"]: it is not for flattery that he uses this term; but, as he
has borne hard upon them, he relaxes a little, and puts them in mind of their
great ancestor [Israel]. Here again he begins with an introduction, that they may
not become excited, now that he is going to make express mention to them of
Jesus: for in what preceded, there was no reason why they should be excited,
while the Prophet was the subject of discourse: but the name of Jesus would
have given offense at the very outset.— And he does not say, "Do as I bid you,"
but, Hear; as being not at all exacting. And observe how he forbears to speak of
the high matters, and begins with the very low: "Jesus," he says: and then
straightway mentions the place He belonged to, being one which was held in
mean estimation: "Jesus of Nazareth": and does not say anything great about
Him, nor even such as one would say about a Prophet, so far: "Jesus," he says,
"of Nazareth, a man proved (to be) from God among you." Observe; what great
matter was this, to say that He was sent from God? For this was the point which
on all occasions both He and John and the Apostles were studious to show. Thus
hear John saying: "The same said unto me On whom you shall see the Spirit
descending, and abiding on him, this is He." [John 1:33] But Christ Himself
does this to an extreme; Of Myself I am not come, He sent Me. [John 7:28] And
everywhere in the Scriptures this seems the point most studiously insisted upon.
Therefore also this holy leader of the blessed company, the lover of Christ, the
good shepherd, the man put in trust with the keys of heaven, the man who
received the Spiritual Wisdom, when he has first subdued the Jews by fear; and
has shown what great things have been vouchsafed to the disciples, and what a
right they have to be believed, then first proceeds to speak concerning Him.

Only think what boldness it was to say it, in the midst of the murderers— that
He is risen! And yet he does not all at once say, He is risen; but what?— "He
came," says he, "from God: this is manifest by the signs which"— he does not
yet say, Jesus Himself wrought: but what?— "which God wrought by Him in the
midst of you." He calls themselves as witnesses. "A man proved (to be sent) from
God among you, by miracles and wonders and signs, which God wrought by him
in the midst of you, as also ye yourselves know." Then, having fallen upon the
mention of that their sacrilegious outrage, observe how he endeavors to quit
them of the crime: "Him," he says, "being by the determinate counsel and
foreknowledge of God delivered up": [Acts 2:23] [adding however,] "you have
taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and slain:" for though it was
predetermined, still they were murderers. ["By the determinate counsel and
foreknowledge of God:"] all but using the same words as Joseph did; just as he
said to his brethren; "Be not angry one with another by the way: God sent me
hither." [Genesis 45:5, 24] It is God's doing. "What of us, then?" (it might be
said,) "it was even well done on our part." That they may not say this, therefore
it is that he adds, "By wicked hands you have crucified and slain." Here then he
hints at Judas; while at the same time he shows them that it was not from any
strength of theirs, and would not have been, if He had not Himself permitted it: it
was God that delivered Him up. He has transferred the evil entire upon the head
of Judas, now already parted from them; for he it was that delivered Him over to
them by the kiss. Or, "By wicked hands," refers to the soldiers: for neither is it
simply, "You have slain," but, By wicked men you have done this. And observe
how everywhere they make it of great importance that the Passion should first be
confessed. Whom God Raised Up [Acts 2:24], says he. This was the great thing;
and observe how he sets it in the middle of his discourse: for the former matters
had been confessed; both the miracles and the signs and the slaying— "Whom
God," says he, "raised up, having loosed the pains of death, because it was not
possible that He should be kept in its power." It is something great and sublime
that he has hinted at here. For the expression, "It was not possible," even itself is