He choses out of Galilee; everywhere cutting off the pretexts of them who are
disposed to be remiss, and giving tokens that we have no need of outward things,
if we practise virtue. For this cause He does not choose for Himself so much as a
house; for "the Son of Man," says He, "has not where to lay His head;"
[Matthew 8:20] and when Herod is plotting against Him, He flees, and at His
birth is laid in a manger, and abides in an inn, and takes a mother of low estate;
teaching us to think no such thing a disgrace, and from the first outset trampling
under foot the haughtiness of man, and bidding us give ourselves up to virtue
only.
7. For why do you pride yourself on your country, when I am commanding
you to be a stranger to the whole world? (so He speaks); when you have leave to
become such as that all the universe shall not be worthy of you? For these things
are so utterly contemptible, that they are not thought worthy of any consideration
even among the philosophers of the Greeks, but are called Externals, and occupy
the lowest place.
"But yet Paul," one may say, "allows them, saying on this wise, 'As touching
the election, they are beloved for the fathers' sake.'" But tell me, when, and of
what things was he discoursing, and to whom? Why, to those of Gentile origin,
who were puffing themselves up on their faith, and exalting themselves against
the Jews, and so breaking them off the more: to quell the swelling pride of the
one, and to win over the others, and thoroughly excite them to the same
emulation. For when he is speaking of those noble and great men, hear how he
says, "They that say these things, show plainly that they seek a country; and
truly if they had been mindful of that from whence they came out, they might
have had opportunity to have returned: but now they desire another, a better
country." [Hebrews 11:14-15] And again, "These all died in faith, not having
obtained the promises, but having seen them afar off, and embraced them." And
John too said unto those that were coming to him, "Think not to say, We have
Abraham to our father." [Matthew 3:9] And Paul again, "For they are not all
Israel, which are of Israel; neither they, which are the children of the flesh, are

they the children of God." [Romans 9:6-8] For what were the sons of Samuel
advantaged, tell me, by their father's nobleness, when they were not heirs of their
father's virtue? And what profit had Moses' sons, not having emulated his
perfection? Therefore neither did they inherit the dominion; but while they
enrolled him as their father, the rule of the people passed away to another, to him
who had become his son in the way of virtue. And what harm was it to Timothy,
that he was of a Greek father? Or what on the other hand again was Noah's son
profited by the virtue of his father, when he became a slave instead of free? Do
you see, how little the nobleness of a father avails his children in the way of
advocacy? For the wickedness of Ham's disposition overcame the laws of nature,
and cast him not only out of the nobility which he had in respect of his father,
but also out of his free estate. And what of Esau? Was he not son of Isaac, and
had he not his father to stand his friend? Yea, his father too endeavored and
desired that he should partake of the blessings, and he himself for the sake of this
did all that was commanded him. Nevertheless, because he was untoward, none
of these things profited him; but although he was by birth first, and had his father
on his side doing everything for this object, yet not having God with him, he lost
all.
But why do I speak of men? The Jews were sons of God, and gained
nothing by this their high birth. Now if a man, having become a son of God, but
failing to show forth an excellency meet for this noble birth, is even punished the
more abundantly; why do you bring me forward the nobleness of ancestors
remote or near? For not under the old covenant only, but even under the new, one
may find this rule to have held. For "as many as received Him," it is said "to
them gave He power to become the sons of God." [John 1:12] And yet many of
these children Paul has affirmed to be nothing profited by their father; "For if
you be circumcised," says he, "Christ shall profit you nothing." [Galatians 5:2]
And if Christ be no help to those who will not take heed to themselves, how
shall a man stand up in their behalf?
8. Let us not therefore pride ourselves either on high birth, or on wealth, but