grievous to be pleasurable, and the pleasurable grievous. For by the term, "we
are willing" he means, 'we are desirous.' Of what are we desirous? Of being
"absent from the body, and at home with the Lord." And thus he does
perpetually, (as I showed also before) turning round the objection of his
opponents unto the very contrary.

2 Corinthians 5:9
"Wherefore also we make it our aim whether at home or absent, to be well
pleasing unto him."
'For what we seek for is this,' says he, 'whether we be there or here, to live
according to His will; for this is the principal thing. So that by this you have the
kingdom already in possession without a probation.' For lest when they had
arrived at so great a desire of being there, they should again be disquieted at its
being so long first, in this he gives them already the chief of those good things.
And what is this? To be well "pleasing." For as to depart is not absolutely good,
but to do so in [God's] favor, which is what makes departing also become a
good; so to remain here is not absolutely grievous, but to remain offending Him.
Deem not then that departure from the body is enough; for virtue is always
necessary. For as when he spoke of a Resurrection, he allowed [them] not by it
alone to be of good courage, saying, "If so be that being clothed we shall not be
found naked;" so also having showed a departure, lest you should think that this
is enough to save you, he added that it is needful that we be well pleasing.
5. Seeing then he has persuaded them by many good things, henceforth he
alarms them also by those of gloomier aspect. For our interest consists both in
the attainment of the good things and the avoidance of the evil things, in other
words, hell and the kingdom. But since this, the avoiding of punishment, is the
more forcible motive; for where penalty reaches only to the not receiving good
things, the most will bear this contentedly; but if it also extend to the suffering of
evil, do so no longer: (for they ought, indeed, to consider the former intolerable,
but from the weakness and grovelling nature of the many, the latter appears to
them more hard to bear:) since then (I say) the giving of the good things does not
so arouse the general hearer as the threat of the punishments, he is obliged to
conclude with this, saying,

2 Corinthians 5:10
"For we must all be made manifest before the judgment-seat."
Then having alarmed and shaken the hearer by the mention of that
judgment-seat, he has not even here set down the woeful without the good
things, but has mingled something of pleasure, saying,
"That each one may receive the things done in the body," as many as "he
has done, whether" it be "good or bad."
By saying these words, he both revives those who have done virtuously and
are persecuted with those hopes, and makes those who have fallen back more
earnest by that fear. And he thus confirmed his words touching the resurrection
of the body. 'For surely,' says he, 'that which has ministered to the one and to the
other shall not stand excluded from the recompenses: but along with the soul
shall in the one case be punished, in the other crowned.' But some of the heretics
say, that it is another body that is raised. How so? Tell me. Did one sin, and is
another punished? Did one do virtuously, and is another crowned? And what will
you answer to Paul, saying, "We would not be unclothed, but clothed upon?"
And how is that which is mortal "swallowed up of life?" For he said not, that the
mortal or corruptible body should be swallowed up of the incorruptible body; but
that corruption [should be swallowed up] "of life." For then this happens when
the same body is raised; but if, giving up that body, He should prepare another,
no longer is corruption swallowed up but continues dominant. Therefore this is
not so; but "this corruptible," that is to say the body, "must put on incorruption."
For the body is in a middle state , being at present in this and hereafter to be in
that; and for this reason in this first, because it is impossible for the incorruption
to be dissolved. "For neither does corruption inherit incorruption," says he, (for,
how is it [then] incorruption?) but on the contrary, "corruption is swallowed up
of life:" for this indeed survives the other, but not the other this. For as wax is