But alas! Wherewith am I forced to affright you! With men's estimation! When I
ought to use the fear of God, and His condemnation. For what, pray, is to
become of us then when bound, and gnashing our teeth, we are led away to the
outer darkness? Or, rather, what shall we do (and this is the most fearful thought
of all) when we offend ([προσκρούσωμεν]) God? For if any one have sense and
reason, he has already endured a hell when he is out of sight of God. But since
this does not pain, fire is therefore threatened. For we ought to smart not when
we are punished, but when we sin. Thus listen to Paul wailing and lamenting
over sins, for which he was not to be punished. For "I am not meet," he says, "to
be called an Apostle, because I persecuted the Church." [1 Corinthians 15:9]
Hear also David, when he is set free from the punishment, yet, as thinking that
he had offended God, calling vengeance down upon himself, and saying, "Let
your hand be upon me and upon my father's house." [2 Samuel 24:17] For to
have offended God is more distressing than to be punished. But now we are so
wretchedly disposed, that, were there no fear of hell, we should not even choose
readily to do any good thing. Wherefore were it for nothing else, yet for this at
least, we should deserve hell, because we fear hell more than Christ (several
manuscripts. God). But not so the blessed Paul, but contrariwise. But since we
feel otherwise, for this reason are we condemned to hell: since, did we but love
Christ as we should love Him, we should have known that to offend Him we
love were more painful than hell. But since we love Him not, we know not the
greatness of His punishment. And this is what I bewail and grieve over the most!
And yet what has God not done, to be beloved of us? What has He not devised?
What has He omitted? We insulted Him, when He had not wronged us in
anything, but had even benefited us with blessings countless and unspeakable.
We have turned aside from Him when calling and drawing us to Him by all
ways, yet has He not even upon this punished us, but has run Himself unto us,
and held us back, when fleeing, and we have shaken Him off and leaped away to
the Devil. And not even on this has He stood aloof, but has sent numberless
messengers to call us to Him again, Prophets, Angels, Patriarchs: and we have

not only not received the embassy, but have even insulted those that came. But
not even for this did He spew us out of His mouth, but like those slighted lovers
that be very earnest, He went round beseeching all, the heaven, the earth,
Jeremiah, Micah, and that not that He might weigh us down, but that He might
speak in behalf of His own ways [Micah 6:1]: and along with the prophets He
went also Himself to those that turned aside from Him, being ready to submit to
examination, and deigning to condescend to a conference, and drawing them that
were deaf to every appeal into a disputation with Himself. For He says, "O my
people, what have I done unto you, and wherein have I wearied you? Answer
me." [Micah 6:3] After all this we killed the Prophets, we stoned them, we did
them other cruel wrongs without number. What then? In their place He sent no
longer Prophets, no longer Angels, no longer Patriarchs, but the Son Himself. He
too was killed when He had come, and yet not even then did He quench His
love, but kindled it even more, and keeps on beseeching us, after even His own
Son was killed, and entreating us, and doing all things to turn us unto Himself.
And Paul cries aloud, saying, "Now then we are ambassadors for Christ, as
though God did beseech you by us: be ye reconciled to God." [2 Corinthians
5:20] None of these things however reconciled us. Yet not even then did He
leave us, but keeps on both threatening hell, and promising a kingdom, that even
so He may draw us unto Himself. But we be still in an insensible mood. What
can be worse than this brutishness? For had a man done these things, should we
not many times over have let ourselves become slaves to him? But God when
doing so we turn us away from! O what listlessness! O what unfeelingness! We
that live continually in sins and wickednesses, if we happen to do any little good,
like unfeeling domestics, with what a niggardly spirit do we exact it, and how
particular are we about the recompense made, if what we have done has any
recompense to come of it. And yet the recompense is the greater if you do it
without any hope of reward. Why saying all this, and making exact reckoning, is
language fitter for an hireling than a domestic of willing mind. For we ought to
do everything for Christ's sake, not for the reward, but for Him. For this also was