THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.52, C.3.

who says of himself (Job 17:16): "All that I have shall go down into
the deepest pit." Therefore Christ descended into the deepest pit.
On the contrary, Regarding the hell of the lost it is written (Job
10:21): "Before I go, and return no more, to a land that is dark and
covered with the mist of death." Now there is no "fellowship of light
with darkness," according to 2 Cor. 6:14. Therefore Christ, who is
"the light," did not descend into the hell of the lost.
I answer that, A thing is said to be in a place in two ways. First of all,
through its effect, and in this way Christ descended into each of the
hells, but in different manner. For going down into the hell of the lost
He wrought this effect, that by descending thither He put them to
shame for their unbelief and wickedness: but to them who were
detained in Purgatory He gave hope of attaining to glory: while upon
the holy Fathers detained in hell solely on account of original sin, He
shed the light of glory everlasting.
In another way a thing is said to be in a place through its essence:
and in this way Christ's soul descended only into that part of hell
wherein the just were detained. so that He visited them "in place,"
according to His soul, whom He visited "interiorly by grace,"
according to His Godhead. Accordingly, while remaining in one part
of hell, He wrought this effect in a measure in every part of hell, just
as while suffering in one part of the earth He delivered the whole
world by His Passion.
Reply to Objection 1: Christ, who is the Wisdom of God, penetrated
to all the lower parts of the earth, not passing through them locally
with His soul, but by spreading the effects of His power in a measure
to them all: yet so that He enlightened only the just: because the text
quoted continues: "And I will enlighten all that hope in the Lord."
Reply to Objection 2: Sorrow is twofold: one is the suffering of pain
which men endure for actual sin, according to Ps. 17:6: "The sorrows
of hell encompassed me." Another sorrow comes of hoped-for glory
being deferred, according to Prov. 13:12: "Hope that is deferred
afflicteth the soul": and such was the sorrow which the holy Fathers
suffered in hell, and Augustine refers to it in a sermon on the
Passion, saying that "they besought Christ with tearful entreaty."
Now by descending into hell Christ took away both sorrows, yet in
different ways: for He did away with the sorrows of pains by

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.52, C.3.

preserving souls from them, just as a physician is said to free a man
from sickness by warding it off by means of physic. Likewise He
removed the sorrows caused by glory deferred, by bestowing glory.
Reply to Objection 3: These words of Peter are referred by some to
Christ's descent into hell: and they explain it in this sense: "Christ
preached to them who formerly were unbelievers, and who were shut
up in prison"---that is, in hell---"in spirit"---that is, by His soul. Hence
Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii): "As He evangelized them who
are upon the earth, so did He those who were in hell"; not in order to
convert unbelievers unto belief, but to put them to shame for their
unbelief, since preaching cannot be understood otherwise than as
the open manifesting of His Godhead. which was laid bare before
them in the lower regions by His descending in power into hell.
Augustine, however, furnishes a better exposition of the text in his
Epistle to Evodius quoted above, namely, that the preaching is not to
be referred to Christ's descent into hell, but to the operation of His
Godhead, to which He gave effect from the beginning of the world.
Consequently, the sense is, that "to those (spirits) that were in
prison"---that is, living in the mortal body, which is, as it were, the
soul's prison-house---"by the spirit" of His Godhead "He came and
preached" by internal inspirations, and from without by the
admonitions spoken by the righteous: to those, I say, He preached
"which had been some time incredulous," i.e. not believing in the
preaching of Noe, "when they waited for the patience of God,"
whereby the chastisement of the Deluge was put off: accordingly
(Peter) adds: "In the days of Noe, when the Ark was being built."
Reply to Objection 4: The expression "Abraham's bosom" may be
taken in two senses. First of all, as implying that restfulness, existing
there, from sensible pain; so that in this sense it cannot be called
hell, nor are there any sorrows there. In another way it can be taken
as implying the privation of longed-for glory: in this sense it has the
character of hell and sorrow. Consequently, that rest of the blessed
is now called Abraham's bosom, yet it is not styled hell, nor are
sorrows said to be now in Abraham's bosom.
Reply to Objection 5: As Gregory says (Moral. xiii): "Even the higher
regions of hell he calls the deepest hell . . . For if relatively to the
height of heaven this darksome air is infernal, then relatively to the
height of this same air the earth lying beneath can be considered as
infernal and deep. And again in comparison with the height of the