THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.84, C.10.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.84, C.11.

### ARTICLE 10. Whether the sacrament of Penance may be

repeated?
Objection 1: It would seem that the sacrament of Penance should not
be repeated. For the Apostle says (Heb. 6:4, seqq.): "It is impossible
for those, who were once illuminated, have tasted also the heavenly
gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost . . . and are fallen
away, to be renewed again to penance." Now whosoever have done
penance, have been illuminated, and have received the gift of the
Holy Ghost. Therefore whosoever sin after doing penance, cannot do
penance again.
Objection 2: Further, Ambrose says (De Poenit. ii): "Some are to be
found who think they ought often to do penance, who take liberties
with Christ: for if they were truly penitent, they would not think of
doing penance over again, since there is but one Penance even as
there is but one Baptism." Now Baptism is not repeated. Neither,
therefore, is Penance to be repeated.
Objection 3: Further, the miracles whereby our Lord healed bodily
diseases, signify the healing of spiritual diseases, whereby men are
delivered from sins. Now we do not read that our Lord restored the
sight to any blind man twice, or that He cleansed any leper twice, or
twice raised any dead man to life. Therefore it seems that He does
not twice grant pardon to any sinner.
Objection 4: Further, Gregory says (Hom. xxxiv in Evang.): "Penance
consists in deploring past sins, and in not committing again those
we have deplored": and Isidore says (De Summo Bono ii): "He is a
mocker and no penitent who still does what he has repented of." If,
therefore, a man is truly penitent, he will not sin again. Therefore
Penance cannot be repeated.
Objection 5: Further, just as Baptism derives its efficacy from the
Passion of Christ, so does Penance. Now Baptism is not repeated,
on account of the unity of Christ's Passion and death. Therefore in
like manner Penance is not repeated.
Objection 6: Further, Ambrose says on Ps. 118:58, "I entreated Thy
face," etc., that "facility of obtaining pardon is an incentive to sin." If,
therefore, God frequently grants pardon through Penance, it seems

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.84, C.11.

that He affords man an incentive to sin, and thus He seems to take
pleasure in sin, which is contrary to His goodness. Therefore
Penance cannot be repeated.
On the contrary, Man is induced to be merciful by the example of
Divine mercy, according to Lk. 6:36: "Be ye . . . merciful, as your
Father also is merciful." Now our Lord commanded His disciples to
be merciful by frequently pardoning their brethren who had sinned
against them; wherefore, as related in Mt. 18:21, when Peter asked:
"How often shall my brother off end against me, and I forgive him?
till seven times?" Jesus answered: "I say not to thee, till seven
times, but till seventy times seven times." Therefore also God over
and over again, through Penance, grants pardon to sinners,
especially as He teaches us to pray (Mt. 6:12): "Forgive us our
trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us."
I answer that, As regards Penance, some have erred, saying that a
man cannot obtain pardon of his sins through Penance a second
time. Some of these, viz. the Novatians, went so far as to say that he
who sins after the first Penance which is done in Baptism, cannot be
restored again through Penance. There were also other heretics who,
as Augustine relates in De Poenitentia [De vera et falsa Poenitentia,
the authorship of which is unknown], said that, after Baptism,
Penance is useful, not many times, but only once.
These errors seem to have arisen from a twofold source: first from
not knowing the nature of true Penance. For since true Penance
requires charity, without which sins are not taken away, they thought
that charity once possessed could not be lost, and that,
consequently, Penance, if true, could never be removed by sin, so
that it should be necessary to repeat it. But this was refuted in the
SS, Question 24, Article 11, where it was shown that on account of
free-will charity, once possessed, can be lost, and that,
consequently, after true Penance, a man can sin mortally. Secondly,
they erred in their estimation of the gravity of sin. For they deemed a
sin committed by a man after he had received pardon, to be so grave
that it could not be forgiven. In this they erred not only with regard to
sin which, even after a sin has been forgiven, can be either more or
less grievous than the first, which was forgiven, but much more did
they err against the infinity of Divine mercy, which surpasses any
number and magnitude of sins, according to Ps. 50:1,2: "Have mercy
on me, O God, according to Thy great mercy: and according to the
multitude of Thy tender mercies, blot out my iniquity." Wherefore the