overturned altars, destroyed vice, established virtue, made angels of men.
14. All these things we were. But "the earnest" filled the whole world. And
when I say the whole I mean all which the sun shines upon, sea, islands,
mountains, valleys, and hills. Paul went hither and there, like some winged
creature, with one mouth only contending against the enemy, he the tentmaker,
who handled the workman's knife and sewed skins together: and yet this his craft
was no hindrance to his virtue, but the tentmaker was stronger than demons, the
uneloquent man was wiser than the wise. Whence was this? He received the
earnest, he bore the signet ring and carried it about. All men saw that the King
had espoused our nature: the demon saw it and retreated, he saw the earnest, and
trembled and withdrew: he saw but the Apostle's garments [Acts 19:11] and fled.
O the power of the Holy Spirit. He bestowed authority not on the soul, nor on the
body, but even on raiment; nor on raiment only but even on a shadow. Peter went
about and his shadow put diseases to flight, [Acts 5:15] and expelled demons,
and raised the dead to life. Paul went about the world, cutting away the thorns of
ungodliness, sowing broadcast the seeds of godliness, like an excellent
ploughman handling the ploughshare of doctrine. And to whom did he go? To
Thracians, to Scythians, to Indians, to Maurians, to Sardinians, to Goths, to wild
savages, and he changed them all. By what means? By means of "the earnest."
How was he sufficient for these things? By the grace of the Spirit. Unskilled, illclothed, ill-shod he was upheld by Him "who also has given the earnest of the
Spirit." Therefore he says "and who is sufficient for these things?
[2 Corinthians 2:16] But our sufficiency is of God, who has made us sufficient
as ministers of the new Testament, not of the letter but of the Spirit."
[2 Corinthians 3:5-6] Behold what the Spirit has wrought: He found the earth
filled with demons and He has made it heaven. For meditate not on present
things but review the past in your thought. Formerly there was lamentation, there
were altars everywhere, everywhere the smoke and fumes of sacrifice,
everywhere unclean rites and mysteries, and sacrifices, everywhere demons
holding their orgies, everywhere a citadel of the devil, everywhere fornication

decked with wreaths of honour; and Paul stood alone. How did he escape being
overwhelmed, or torn in pieces? How could he open his mouth? He entered the
Thebaid, and made captives of men, He entered the royal palace, and made a
disciple of the king. He entered the hall of judgment, and the judge says to him
"almost you persuade me to become a Christian," and the judge became a
disciple. He entered the prison, and took the jailor captive. He visited an island
of barbarians, and made a viper the instrument of his teaching. He visited the
Romans, and attracted the senate to his doctrine. He visited rivers, and desert
places in all parts of the world. There is no land or sea which has not shared in
the benefits of his labours; for God has given human nature the earnest of His
signet, and when He gives it He says: some things I give you now, and others I
promise. Therefore the prophet says concerning her "The queen stood upon your
right hand in a vesture woven with gold." He does not mean a real vesture, but
virtue. Therefore the Scripture elsewhere says "How camest thou in hither not
having a wedding garment?" so that here he does not mean a garment, but
fornication, and foul and unclean living. As then foul raiment signifies sin, so
does golden raiment signify virtue. But this raiment belonged to the king. He
Himself bestowed the raiment upon her: for she was naked, naked and
disfigured. "The queen stood on your right hand in a vesture woven with gold."
He is speaking not of raiment but of virtue. Observe: the expression itself has
great nobility of meaning. He does not say "in a vesture of gold" but "in a
vesture woven with gold." Listen intelligently. A vesture of gold is one which is
gold throughout: but a vesture woven with gold is one which is partly of gold,
partly of silk. Why then did he say that the bride wore not a vesture of gold, but
one woven with gold? Attend carefully. He means the constitution of the Church
in its varied manifestations. For since we do not all belong to one condition of
life, but one is a virgin, another a widow, a third lives a life of devotion— so the
robe of the Church signifies the constitution of the Church.
15. Inasmuch then as our Master knew that if He carved out only one road
for us, many must shrink from it, He carved out various roads. You can not enter