Chapter XI—Proofs in continuation, extracted from St. John's Gospel. The Gospels are four
in number, neither more nor less. Mystic reasons for this.
1. John, the disciple of the Lord, preaches this faith, and seeks, by the proclamation of the
Gospel, to remove that error which by Cerinthus had been disseminated among men, and a long
time previously by those termed Nicolaitans, who are an offset of that "knowledge" falsely so
called, that he might confound them, and persuade them that there is but one God, who made all
things by His Word; and not, as they allege, that the Creator was one, but the Father of the Lord
another; and that the Son of the Creator was, forsooth, one, but the Christ from above another, who
also continued impassible, descending upon Jesus, the Son of the Creator, and flew back again into
His Pleroma; and that Monogenes was the beginning, but Logos was the true son of Monogenes;
and that this creation to which we belong was not made by the primary God, but by some power
lying far below Him, and shut off from communion with the things invisible and ineffable. The
disciple of the Lord therefore desiring to put an end to all such doctrines, and to establish the rule
of truth in the Church, that there is one Almighty God, who made all things by His Word, both
visible and invisible; showing at the same time, that by the Word, through whom God made the
creation, He also bestowed salvation on the men included in the creation; thus commenced His
teaching in the Gospel: "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word
was God. The same was in the beginning with God. All things were made by Him, and without
Him was nothing made. What was made was life in Him, and the life was the light of men. And
the light shineth in darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not." "All things," he says, "were
made by Him;" therefore in "all things" this creation of ours is [included], for we cannot concede
to these men that [the words] "all things" are spoken in reference to those within their Pleroma.
For if their Pleroma do indeed contain these, this creation, as being such, is not outside, as I have
demonstrated in the preceding book; but if they are outside the Pleroma, which indeed appeared
impossible, it follows, in that case, that their Pleroma cannot be "all things:" therefore this vast
creation is not outside [the Pleroma].

See ii. 1, etc.

2. John, however, does himself put this matter beyond all controversy on our part, when he
says, "He was in this world, and the world was made by Him, and the world knew Him not. He
came unto His own [things], and His own [people] received Him not." But according to Marcion,
and those like him, neither was the world made by Him; nor did He come to His own things, but
to those of another. And, according to certain of the Gnostics, this world was made by angels, and
not by the Word of God. But according to the followers of Valentinus, the world was not made by
Him, but by the Demiurge. For he (Soter) caused such similitudes to be made, after the pattern of
things above, as they allege; but the Demiurge accomplished the work of creation. For they say
that he, the Lord and Creator of the plan of creation, by whom they hold that this world was made,
was produced from the Mother; while the Gospel affirms plainly, that by the Word, which was in
the beginning with God, all things were made, which Word, he says, "was made flesh, and dwelt
among us."
3. But, according to these men, neither was the Word made flesh, nor Christ, nor the Saviour
(Soter), who was produced from [the joint contributions of] all [the Æons]. For they will have it,
that the Word and Christ never came into this world; that the Saviour, too, never became incarnate,
nor suffered, but that He descended like a dove upon the dispensational Jesus; and that, as soon as
He had declared the unknown Father, He did again ascend into the Pleroma. Some, however, make
the assertion, that this dispensational Jesus did become incarnate, and suffered, whom they represent
as having passed through Mary just as water through a tube; but others allege him to be the Son of
the Demiurge, upon whom the dispensational Jesus descended; while others, again, say that Jesus
was born from Joseph and Mary, and that the Christ from above descended upon him, being without
flesh, and impassible. But according to the opinion of no one of the heretics was the Word of God
made flesh. For if anyone carefully examines the systems of them all, he will find that the Word
of God is brought in by all of them as not having become incarnate (sine carne) and impassible, as
is also the Christ from above. Others consider Him to have been manifested as a transfigured man;
but they maintain Him to have been neither born nor to have become incarnate; whilst others [hold]
that He did not assume a human form at all, but that, as a dove, He did descend upon that Jesus
who was born from Mary. Therefore the Lord's disciple, pointing them all out as false witnesses,
says, "And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us."
4. And that we may not have to ask, Of what God was the Word made flesh? he does himself
previously teach us, saying, "There was a man sent from God, whose name was John. The same
came as a witness, that he might bear witness of that Light. He was not that Light, but [came] that
he might testify of the Light." By what God, then, was John, the forerunner, who testifies of the
Light, sent [into the world]? Truly it was by Him, of whom Gabriel is the angel, who also announced