impression caused by the sensible does not suffice, but something
more noble is required, for "the agent is more noble than the
patient," as he says (De Gener. i, 5). Not, indeed, in the sense that the
intellectual operation is effected in us by the mere intellectual
operation is effected in us by the mere impression of some superior
beings, as Plato held; but that the higher and more noble agent
which he calls the active intellect, of which we have spoken above
(Question 79, Articles 3,4) causes the phantasms received from the
senses to be actually intelligible, by a process of abstraction.
According to this opinion, then, on the part of the phantasms,
intellectual knowledge is caused by the senses. But since the
phantasms cannot of themselves affect the passive intellect, and
require to be made actually intelligible by the active intellect, it
cannot be said that sensible knowledge is the total and perfect cause
of intellectual knowledge, but rather that it is in a way the material
cause.
Reply to Objection 1: Those words of Augustine mean that we must
not expect the entire truth from the senses. For the light of the active
intellect is needed, through which we achieve the unchangeable
truth of changeable things, and discern things themselves from their
likeness.
Reply to Objection 2: In this passage Augustine speaks not of
intellectual but of imaginary knowledge. And since, according to the
opinion of Plato, the imagination has an operation which belongs to
the soul only, Augustine, in order to show that corporeal images are
impressed on the imagination, not by bodies but by the soul, uses
the same argument as Aristotle does in proving that the active
intellect must be separate, namely, because "the agent is more noble
than the patient." And without doubt, according to the above
opinion, in the imagination there must needs be not only a passive
but also an active power. But if we hold, according to the opinion of
Aristotle, that the action of the imagination, is an action of the
"composite," there is no difficulty; because the sensible body is
more noble than the organ of the animal, in so far as it is compared
to it as a being in act to a being in potentiality; even as the object
actually colored is compared to the pupil which is potentially
colored. It may, however, be said, although the first impression of
the imagination is through the agency of the sensible, since "fancy is
movement produced in accordance with sensation" (De Anima iii, 3),
that nevertheless there is in man an operation which by synthesis

and analysis forms images of various things, even of things not
perceived by the senses. And Augustine's words may be taken in
this sense.
Reply to Objection 3: Sensitive knowledge is not the entire cause of
intellectual knowledge. And therefore it is not strange that
intellectual knowledge should extend further than sensitive
knowledge.