"If I have given you an example from earthly things, and you did not even so
believe, how shall you be able to learn sublimer things?" And wonder not if He
here call Baptism an "earthly" thing, for He calls it so, either from its being
performed on earth, or so naming it in comparison with that His own most awful
Generation. For though this Generation of ours is heavenly, yet compared with
that true Generation which is from the Substance of the Father, it is earthly.
He does not say, "You have not understood," but, "You have not believed";
for when a man is ill disposed towards those things which it is possible to
apprehend by the intellect, and will not readily receive them, he may justly be
charged with want of understanding; but when he receives not things which
cannot be apprehended by reasoning, but only by faith, the charge against him is
no longer want of understanding, but unbelief. Leading him therefore away from
enquiring by reasonings into what had been said, He touches him more severely
by charging him with want of faith. If now we must receive our own Generation
by faith, what do they deserve who are busy with their reasonings about that of
the Only-Begotten?
But perhaps some may ask, "And if the hearers were not to believe these
sayings, wherefore were they uttered?" Because though "they" believed not,
those who came after would believe and profit by them. Touching him therefore
very severely, Christ goes on to show that He knows not these things only, but
others also, far more and greater than these. And this He declared by what
follows, when He said, "And no man has ascended up to heaven, but He that
came down from heaven, even the Son of Man which is in heaven."
"And what manner of sequel is this?" asks one. The very closest, and
entirely in unison with what has gone before. For since Nicodemus had said, "We
know that You are a teacher come from God," on this very point He sets him
right, all but saying, "Think Me not a teacher in such manner as were the many
of the prophets who were of earth, for I have come from heaven (but) now. None
of the prophets has ascended up there, but I dwell there." Do you see how even
that which appears very exalted is utterly unworthy of his greatness? For not in

heaven only is He, but everywhere, and He fills all things; but yet He speaks
according to the infirmity of His hearer, desiring to lead him up little by little.
And in this place He called not the flesh "Son of Man," but He now named, so to
speak, His entire Self from the inferior substance; indeed this is His wont, to call
His whole Person often from His Divinity, and often from His humanity.

John 3:14
"And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of
Man be lifted up."
This again seems to depend upon what has gone before, and this too has a
very close connection with it. For after having spoken of the very great
benefaction that had come to man by Baptism, He proceeds to mention another
benefaction, which was the cause of this, and not inferior to it; namely, that by
the Cross. As also Paul arguing with the Corinthians sets down these benefits
together, when he says, "Was Paul crucified for you? Or were you baptized into
the name of Paul?" for these two things most of all declare His unspeakable
love, that He both suffered for His enemies, and that having died for His
enemies, He freely gave to them by Baptism entire remission of their sins.
2. But wherefore did He not say plainly, "I am about to be crucified,"
instead of referring His hearers to the ancient type? First, that you may learn that
old things are akin to new, and that the one are not alien to the other; next, that
you may know that He came not unwillingly to His Passion; and again, besides
these reasons, that you may learn that no harm arises to Him from the Fact, and
that to many there springs from it salvation. For, that none may say, "And how is
it possible that they who believe in one crucified should be saved, when he
himself is holden of death?" He leads us to the ancient story. Now if the Jews, by
looking to the brazen image of a serpent, escaped death, much rather will they
who believe in the Crucified, with good reason enjoy a far greater benefit. For
this takes place, not through the weakness of the Crucified, or because the Jews
are stronger than He, but because "God loved the world," therefore is His living
Temple fastened to the Cross.