no servant who is now come, as those before Him were, but the very Lord of all,
bringing on them His fierce and most effectual vengeance.
Yet, although he has terrified them again, he suffers them not to fall into
despair; but as before he said not "He has raised up," but "He is able to raise up
children to Abraham" (at once both alarming and comforting them); even so here
also he did not say that "it has touched the root," but "it is laid to the root, and is
now hard by it, and shows signs of no delay." However, even though He has
brought it so near, He makes its cutting depend upon you. For if you change and
become better men, this axe will depart without doing anything; but if you
continue in the same ways, He will tear up the tree by the roots. And therefore,
observe, it is neither removed from the root, nor applied as it is does it cut at all:
the one, that you may not grow supine, the other to let you know that it is
possible even in a short time to be changed and saved. Wherefore he does also
from all topics heighten their fear, thoroughly awakening and pressing them on
to repentance. Thus first their falling away from their forefathers; next, others
being introduced instead; lastly, those terrors being at their doors, the certainty of
suffering incurable evils (both which he declared by the root and the axe), was
sufficient to rouse thoroughly those even that were very supine, and to make
them full of anxiety. I may add, that Paul too was setting forth the same, when he
said, "A short word will the Lord make upon the whole world." [Romans 9:28]
But be not afraid; or rather, be afraid, but despair not. For you have yet a
hope of change; the sentence is not quite absolute, neither did the axe come to
cut (else what hindered it from cutting, close as it was to the root?); but on
purpose by this fear to make you a better man, and to prepare you to bring forth
fruit. For this cause he added, "Therefore every tree, which brings not forth good
fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the fire." [Matthew 3:10] Now by the word
"every," he rejects again the privilege which they had from their noble descent;
"Why, if you be Abraham's own descendant," says he, "if you have thousands of
patriarchs to enumerate, you will but undergo a double punishment, abiding
unfruitful."

By these words he alarmed even publicans, the soldiers' mind was startled
by him, not casting them into despair, yet ridding them of all security. For along
with the terror, there is also much encouragement in what he says; since by the
expression, "which brings not forth good fruit," he signified that what bears fruit
is delivered from all vengeance.
5. "And how," says one, "shall we be able to bring forth fruit, when the edge
is being applied, and the time so strait, and the appointed season cut short."
"You will be able," says he, "for this fruit is not of the same kind as that of
common trees, waiting a long time, and in bondage to the necessities of seasons,
and requiring much other management; but it is enough to be willing, and the
tree at once has put forth its fruit. For not the nature of the root only, but also the
skill of the husbandman contributes the most to that kind of fruit-bearing."
For (let me add) on account of this—lest they should say, "You are alarming
and pressing, and constraining us, applying an axe, and threatening us with
being cut down, yet requiring produce in time of punishment,"— he has added, to
signify the ease of bearing that fruit, "I indeed baptize you with water, but He
that comes after me is mightier than I, the latchet of whose shoe I am not worthy
to unloose; He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire:" implying
hereby that consideration only is needed and faith, not labors and toils; and as it
is easy to be baptized, so is it easy to be converted, and to become better men. So
having stirred their mind by the fear of God's judgment, and the expectation of
His punishment, and by the mention of the axe, and by the loss of their
ancestors, and by the bringing in of those other children, and by the double
vengeance of cutting off and burning, and having by all means softened their
hardness, and brought them to desire deliverance from so great evils; then he
brings in what he has to say touching Christ; and not simply, but with a
declaration of His great superiority. Then in setting forth the difference between
himself and Him, lest he should seem to say this out of favor, he establishes the
fact by comparison of the gifts bestowed by each of them. For he did not at once
say, "I am not worthy to unloose the latchet of His shoe;" but when he had first