away from them, and teaching to whom it is right to attend, and discoursing at
length on moral points, and bringing them to order, and recalling them to
themselves, by saying, "The Lord is at hand" [Philippians 4:5], he makes
mention also, with his usual wisdom, of what had been sent, and then offers
them abundant consolation. But he appears in writing to be doing them special
honor, and never in any place writes any thing of reproof, which is a proof of
their virtue, in that they gave no occasion to their teacher, and that he has written
to them not in the way of rebuke, but throughout in the way of encouragement.
And as I said also at first, this city showed great readiness for the faith; inasmuch
as the very jailor, (and you know it is a business full of all wickedness,) at once,
upon one miracle, both ran to them, and was baptized with all his house. For the
miracle that took place he saw alone, but the gain he reaped not alone, but jointly
with his wife and all his house. Nay, even the magistrates who scourged him
seem to have done this rather of sudden impulse than out of wickedness, both
from their sending at once to let him go, and from their being afterwards afraid.
And he bears testimony to them not only in faith, or in perils, but also in welldoing, where he says, "That even in the beginning of the Gospel, you sent once
and again unto my need" [Philippians 4:15-16], when no one else did so; for he
says, "no Church had fellowship with me in the matter of giving and receiving";
and that their intermission had been rather from lack of opportunity than from
choice, saying, "Not that you took no thought for me, but you lacked
opportunity." [Philippians 4:10] Let us also, knowing these things, and having so
many patterns, and the love that he bore them— for that he loved them greatly
appears in his saying, "For I have no man like minded, who will care truly for
your state" [Philippians 2:20]; and again, "Because I have you in my heart, and
in my bonds,"—
4. let us also, knowing these things, show ourselves worthy of such
examples, by being ready to suffer for Christ. But now the persecution is no
more. So then, if there is nothing else, let us imitate their earnestness in well
doing, and not think, if we have given once or twice, that we have fulfilled all.

For we must do this through our whole life. For it is not once that we have to
please God, but constantly. The racer, if, after running even ten heats, he leave
the remaining one undone, has lost all; and we, if we begin with good works, and
afterward faint, have lost all, have spoiled all. Listen to that profitable
admonition that says, "Let not mercy and truth forsake you." [Proverbs 3:3] He
says not do so once, nor the second time, nor the third, nor the tenth, nor the
hundredth, but continually: "let them not forsake you." And he did not say, Do
not forsake them, but, "Let them not forsake you," showing that we are in need of
them, and not they of us; and teaching us that we ought to make every effort to
keep them with us. And "bind them," says he, "about your neck." For as the
children of the wealthy have an ornament of gold about their neck, and never put
it off, because it exhibits a token of their high birth, so should we too wear
mercy ever about us, showing that we are children of the compassionate one,
"who makes the sun to rise upon the evil and the good" [Matthew 5:45]. "But the
unbelievers," you say, "do not believe it." I say then, hereby shall they believe, if
we do these works. If they see that we take pity on all, and are enrolled under
Him for our Teacher, they will know that it is in imitation of Him that we so act.
For "mercy," it says, "and true faith." He well said "true." For He wills it not to
be of rapine or fraud. For this were not "faith"; this were not "truth." For he that
plunders must lie and forswear himself. So do not thou, says he, but have faith
with your mercy.
Let us put on this ornament. Let us make a golden chain for our soul, of
mercy I mean, while we are here. For if this age pass, we can use it no longer.
And why? There there are no poor, There there are no riches, no more want
There. While we are children, let us not rob ourselves of this ornament. For as
with children, if they become men, these are taken away, and they are advanced
to other adornment; so too is it with us. There will be no more alms by money,
but other and far nobler. Let us not then deprive ourselves of this! Let us make
our soul appear beautiful! Great is alms, beautiful, and honorable, great is that
gift, but greater is goodness. If we learn to despise riches, we shall learn other