down. But will you that are fallen along with him? And how shall you, that
couldest not support your own self, be able to lend a hand to another? Stand
therefore now nobly, and setting your shield before you, and draw him, now he
is dead, away from the battle by your long-suffering. Rage has wounded him, do
not thou also wound him, but cast out even that first shaft. For if we associate
with each other on such terms, we shall soon all of us become healthful. But if
we arm ourselves against one another, there will be no farther need even of the
devil to our ruin. For all war is an evil, and civil war especially. But this is a
sorer evil than even a civil one, as our mutual rights are greater than those of
citizenship, yea, than of kindred itself. Of old, Abel's brother slew him and shed
the blood of his kinsman. But this murder is more lawless than that, in that the
rights of kinsmanship are greater, and the death a sorer evil. For he wounded the
body, but you have whetted your sword against the soul. "But you first suffered
ill." Yes, but it is not suffering ill, but doing it, that is really suffering ill. Now
consider; Cain was the slayer, Abel was the slain. Who then was the dead? He
that after death cries, (for He says, "The voice of your brother's blood cries to
Me,") [Genesis 4:10], or he who while he lived was yet trembling and in fear?
He was, assuredly he was, more an object of pity than any dead man. Do you see
how to be wronged is better, though a man come even to be murdered? Learn
that to wrong is worse, though a man should be strong enough even to kill. He
smote and cast down his brother, yet the latter was crowned, the former was
punished. Abel was made away with and slain wrongfully, but he even when
dead accused [comp. John 5:45], and convicted and overcame: the other, though
alive, was speechless, and was ashamed, and was convicted, and effected the
opposite of what he intended. For he made away with him because he saw him
beloved, expecting to cast him out of the love also. Yet he did but make the love
more intense, and God sought him more when dead, saying, "Where is your
brother Abel?" [Genesis 4:9] For you have not extinguished the desire towards
him by your envy, but hast kindled it up the more. You have not lessened his
honor by slaying him, but hast made it the more ample. Yet before this God had

even made him subject to you, whereas since you have slain him, even when
dead, he will take vengeance upon you. So great was my love towards him. Who
then was the condemned person, the punisher or the punished? He that enjoyed
so great honor from God, or he that was given up to a certain novel and
unexpected punishment? You did not fear him (he would say) while alive, you
shall fear him therefore when dead. You did not tremble when on the point of
thrusting with the sword. You shall be seized, now the blood is shed, with a
continual trembling. While alive he was your servant, and you showed no
forbearance to him. For this reason, now he is dead, he has become a master you
shall be afraid of. Thinking then upon these things, beloved, let us flee from
envy, let us extinguish malice, let us recompense one another with charity, that
we may reap the blessings rising from it, both in the present life and the life
which is to come, by the grace and love toward man, etc. Amen.