privation of the knowledge of all truth?
Objection 1: It would seem that the demons' intellect is darkened by
being deprived of the knowledge of all truth. For it they knew any
truth at all, they would most of all know themselves; which is to
know separated substances. But this is not in keeping with their
unhappiness: for this seems to belong to great happiness, insomuch
as that some writers have assigned as man's last happiness the
knowledge of the separated substances. Therefore the demons are
deprived of all knowledge of truth.
Objection 2: Further, what is most manifest in its nature, seems to be
specially manifest to the angels, whether good or bad. That the same
is not manifest with regard to ourselves, comes from the weakness
of our intellect which draws its knowledge from phantasms; as it
comes from the weakness of its eye that the owl cannot behold the
light of the sun. But the demons cannot know God, Who is most
manifest of Himself, because He is the sovereign truth; and this is
because they are not clean of heart, whereby alone can God be seen.
Therefore neither can they know other things.
Objection 3: Further, according to Augustine (Gen. ad lit. iv, 22), the
proper knowledge of the angels is twofold; namely, morning and
evening. But the demons have no morning knowledge, because they
do not see things in the Word; nor have they the evening knowledge,
because this evening knowledge refers the things known to the
Creator's praise (hence, after "evening" comes "morning" [Gn. 1]).
Therefore the demons can have no knowledge of things.
Objection 4: Further, the angels at their creation knew the mystery of
the kingdom of God, as Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. v, 19; De Civ. Dei
xi). But the demons are deprived of such knowledge: "for if they had
known it, they would never have crucified the Lord of glory," as is
said 1 Cor. 2:8. Therefore, for the same reason, they are deprived of
all other knowledge of truth.
Objection 5: Further, whatever truth anyone knows is known either
naturally, as we know first principles; or by deriving it from someone
else, as we know by learning; or by long experience, as the things
we learn by discovery. Now, the demons cannot know the truth by

their own nature, because, as Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xi, 33), the
good angels are separated from them as light is from darkness; and
every manifestation is made through light, as is said Eph. 5:13. In
like manner they cannot learn by revelation, nor by learning from the
good angels: because "there is no fellowship of light with
darkness" (2 Cor. 6:14). Nor can they learn by long experience:
because experience comes of the senses. Consequently there is no
knowledge of truth in them.
On the contrary, Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iv) that, "certain gifts
were bestowed upon the demons which, we say, have not been
changed at all, but remain entire and most brilliant." Now, the
knowledge of truth stands among those natural gifts. Consequently
there is some knowledge of truth in them.
I answer that, The knowledge of truth is twofold: one which comes of
nature, and one which comes of grace. The knowledge which comes
of grace is likewise twofold: the first is purely speculative, as when
Divine secrets are imparted to an individual; the other is effective,
and produces love for God; which knowledge properly belongs to
the gift of wisdom.
Of these three kinds of knowledge the first was neither taken away
nor lessened in the demons. For it follows from the very nature of
the angel, who, according to his nature, is an intellect or mind: since
on account of the simplicity of his substance, nothing can be
withdrawn from his nature, so as to punish him by subtracting from
his natural powers, as a man is punished by being deprived of a
hand or a foot or of something else. Therefore Dionysius says (Div.
Nom. iv) that the natural gifts remain entire in them. Consequently
their natural knowledge was not diminished. The second kind of
knowledge, however, which comes of grace, and consists in
speculation, has not been utterly taken away from them, but
lessened; because, of these Divine secrets only so much is revealed
to them as is necessary; and that is done either by means of the
angels, or "through some temporal workings of Divine power," as
Augustine says (De Civ. Dei ix, 21); but not in the same degree as to
the holy angels, to whom many more things are revealed, and more
fully, in the Word Himself. But of the third knowledge, as likewise of
charity, they are utterly deprived.
Reply to Objection 1: Happiness consists in self-application to
something higher. The separated substances are above us in the