You have taken upon you a great contest, where wrestling, not ornament is
required; where the battle awaits you, not sloth and ease. Observe the
combatants and wrestlers in the games. Do they concern themselves about their
walk or their dress? No, but scorning all these, and throwing about them a
garment dripping with oil, they look only to one thing, to wound, and not be
wounded. The devil stands grinding his teeth, watching to destroy you every
way, and you remain unconcerned, or concerned only about this satanic
ornament. I say nothing about the voice, though much affectation is shown in
this also, nor about perfumes, and other such luxuries. It is for these things we
are ridiculed by the women of the world. The respect for virginity is lost. No one
honors a virgin as she ought to be honored. They have given occasion to their
own dishonor. Ought not they to be looked up to in the Church of God, as
women coming from heaven? But now they are despised, and deservedly, though
not those among them who are discreet. But when one who has a husband and
children, and presides over a household, sees you, who ought to be crucified to
the world, more devoted to the world than herself, will she not ridicule and
despise you? See what care! What pains! In your humble dress, you exceed her
who wears the costliest ornament, and art more studious of appearance than she
who is arrayed in gold. What is becoming to you you seek not; that which
misbecomes you you pursue, when you ought to be occupied in good works. On
this account virgins are less honored than women of the world. For they do not
perform works worthy of their virgin profession. This is not said to all; or rather
it is said to all; to those who are in fault, that they may learn modesty; to those
who are free from blame, that they may teach modesty to others. But beware lest
this rebuke be verified in deed. For we have not said these things that we may
grieve, but that we may correct you, that we may glory in you. And may we all
do those things which are acceptable to God, and live to His glory, that we may
obtain the blessings promised by the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus
Christ, with whom, etc.

## Homily 9 on First Timothy

1 Timothy 2:11-15
"Let the women learn in silence with all subjection. But I suffer not a
woman to teach, nor to usurp authority over the man, but to be in silence. For
Adam was first formed, then Eve. And Adam was not deceived, but the woman
being deceived was in the transgression. Notwithstanding she shall be saved in
[through the] child-bearing, if they continue in faith and charity and holiness
with sobriety."
Great modesty and great propriety does the blessed Paul require of women,
and that not only with respect to their dress and appearance: he proceeds even to
regulate their speech. And what says he? "Let the woman learn in silence"; that
is, let her not speak at all in the church; which rule he has also given in his
Epistle to the Corinthians, where he says, "It is a shame for women to speak in
the church" [1 Corinthians 14:35]; and the reason is, that the law has made them
subject to men. And again elsewhere, "And if they will learn anything, let them
ask their husbands at home." [1 Corinthians 14:35] Then indeed the women,
from such teaching, kept silence; but now there is apt to be great noise among
them, much clamor and talking, and nowhere so much as in this place. They may
all be seen here talking more than in the market, or at the bath. For, as if they
came hither for recreation, they are all engaged in conversing upon unprofitable
subjects. Thus all is confusion, and they seem not to understand, that unless they
are quiet, they cannot learn anything that is useful. For when our discourse
strains against the talking, and no one minds what is said, what good can it do to
them? To such a degree should women be silent, that they are not allowed to
speak not only about worldly matters, but not even about spiritual things, in the
church. This is order, this is modesty, this will adorn her more than any
garments. Thus clothed, she will be able to offer her prayers in the manner most