[Deuteronomy 21:23; Galatians 3:13] For this cause the Jews also eagerly
desired to slay Him in this manner, to make Him a reproach, that if no one fell
away from Him by reason of His death, yet they might from the manner of His
death. For this cause two robbers were crucified with Him, and He in the midst,
that He might share their ill repute, and that the Scripture might be fulfilled,
"And he was numbered with the transgressors." [Isaiah 53:12] Yet so much the
more does truth shine forth, so much the more does it become bright; for when
His enemies plot such things against His glory, and it yet shines forth, so much
the greater does the matter seem. Not by slaying Him, but by slaying Him in
such sort did they think to make Him abominable, to prove Him more
abominable than all men, but they availed nothing. And both the robbers also
were such impious ones, (for it was afterward that the one repented,) that, even
when on the cross, they reviled Him; neither the consciousness of their own sins,
nor their present punishment, nor their suffering the same things themselves,
restrained their madness. Wherefore the one spoke to the other, and silenced him
by saying, "Do you not even fear God, seeing you are in the same
condemnation?" [Luke 23:40] So great was their wickedness. Wherefore it is
written, "God also highly exalted Him, and gave Him the Name which is above
every name." When the blessed Paul has made mention of the flesh, he fearlessly
speaks of all His humiliation. For until he had mentioned that He took the form
of a servant, and while he was speaking of His Divinity, behold how loftily he
does it, (loftily, I say, according to his power; for he speaks not according to His
own worthiness, seeing that he is not able). "Being in the form of God, He
counted it not a prize to be equal with God." But when he had said, that He
became Man, henceforth he fearlessly discourses of His low estate, being
confident that the mention of His low estate would not harm His Divinity, since
His flesh admitted this.
Ver. 9-11. "Wherefore also God highly exalted Him, and gave Him the
Name which is above every name: that in the Name of Jesus every knee should
bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth; and

that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God
the Father." Let us say against the heretics, If this is spoken of one who was not
incarnate, if of God the Word, how did He highly exalt Him? Was it as if He
gave Him something more than He had before? He would then have been
imperfect in this point, and would have been made perfect for our sakes. For if
He had not done good deeds to us, He would not have obtained that honor! "And
gave Him the Name." See, He had not even a name, as you say! But how, if He
received it as His due, is He found here to have received it by grace, and as a
gift? And that "the Name which is above every name": and of what kind, let us
see, is the Name? "That at the Name of Jesus," says He, "every knee should
bow." They (the heretics) explain name by glory. This glory then is above all
glory, and this glory is in short that all worship Him! But ye hold yourselves far
off from the greatness of God, who think that you know God, as He knows
Himself, and from this it is plain, how far off you are from right thoughts of
God. And this is plain from hence. Is this, tell me, glory? Therefore before men
were created, before the angels or the archangels, He was not in glory. If this be
the glory which is above every glory, (for this is the name that is "above every
name,") though He were in glory before, yet was He in glory inferior to this. It
was for this then that He made the things that are, that He might be raised to
glory, not from His own goodness, but because He required glory from us! See
ye not their folly? See ye not their impiety?
Now if they had said this of Him that was incarnate, there had been reason,
for God the Word allows that this be said of His flesh. It touches not His divine
nature, but has to do altogether with the dispensation. What means "of things in
heaven, and things in the earth, and things under the earth"? It means the whole
world, and angels, and men, and demons; or that both the just and the living and
sinners,
"And every tongue," should "confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory
of God the Father." That is, that all should say so; and this is glory to the Father.
Do you see how wherever the Son is glorified, the Father is also glorified? Thus