It is manifest then on all sides, that he here calls punishment evil; and himself
brings these upon us, affording us the greatest view of his providence. For the
physician is not only to be commended when he leads forth the patient into
gardens and meadows, nor even into baths and pools of water, nor yet when he
sets before him a well furnished table, but when he orders him to remain without
food, when he oppresses him with hunger and lays him low with thirst, confines
him to his bed, both making his house a prison, and depriving him of the very
light, and shadowing his room on all sides with curtains, and when he cuts, and
when he cauterizes, and when he brings his bitter medicines, he is equally a
physician. How is it not then preposterous to call him a physician who does so
many evil things, but to blaspheme God, if at any time He does one of these
things, if He bring on either famine or death, and to reject his providence over
all? And yet He is the only true physician both of souls and bodies. On this
account He often seizes this nature of ours wantoning in prosperity, and
travailing with a fever of sins, and by want, and hunger, and death and other
calamities and the rest of the medicines of which He knows, frees us from
diseases. But the poor alone feel hunger, says one. But He does not chasten with
hunger alone, but with countless other things. Him who is in poverty He has
often corrected with hunger, but the rich and him who enjoys prosperity, with
dangers, diseases, untimely deaths. For He is full of resources, and the medicines
which He has for our salvation are manifold.
Thus too the judges do. They do not honour, or crown those only who dwell
in cities, nor do they provide gifts alone, but they also often correct. On this
account both the sword is sharpened by them, and tortures are prepared; both the
wheel and the stocks, and the executioners, and countless other forms of
chastisement. That which the executioner is to the judges, famine is to God—as
an executioner correcting us and leading us away from vice. This too, it is
possible to see in the case of the husbandmen: They do not then, only protect the
root of the vine, nor hedge it round but prune it, and lop off many of the
branches; on this account not only have they a hoe, but a sickle too, suitable for

cutting: yet notwithstanding we do not find fault with them, but then above all
we admire them, when we see them cutting off much that is unserviceable, so as
through the rejection of what is superfluous to afford great security to that which
remains. How is it not then preposterous, that we should thus approve of a father
indeed and a physician and a judge, and a husbandman, and should neither
blame nor censure him who casts his son out of his house nor the physician who
puts his patient to torture nor the judge who corrects, nor the husbandman who
prunes: but that we should blame and smite with countless accusations God, if he
would at any time raise us up, when we are as it were, besotted through the great
drunkenness which comes of wickedness? How great madness would it not be,
not even to allow God a share of the same self-justification, of which we allow
our fellow servants a share?
6. Fearing these things for them who reproach God, I speak now, in order
that they may not kick against the pricks, and cover their own feet with blood,
that they may not throw stones to heaven, and receive wounds on their own
head. But I have somewhat else far beyond this to say. For omitting to ask (I say
this by way of concession) if God took from us to our profit, I only say this; that
if He took what had been given, not even thus, could anyone be able to reproach
Him. For He was Lord of his own. Among men indeed, when they entrust us
with money, and lend us silver, we give them our thanks for the time during
which they lent it, we are not indignant at the time at which they take back their
own. And shall we reproach God who wishes to take back his own? Indeed now
is this not the extreme of folly? Yea the great and noble Job did not act thus. For
not only when he received, but even when he was deprived, he gives the greatest
thanks to God saying, "The Lord gave, the Lord has taken away; may the name
of the Lord be blessed for ever." But if it is right to give thanks for both these
even separately, and deprivation is not the less serviceable than bestowal; what
excusableness should we have, tell me, in recompensing in a contrary spirit, and
being impatient with Him when we ought to worship, who is so gentle, and
loving and careful, who is wiser than every Physician, and more full of affection