THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.3, C.5.

stated above (Articles 1,2), and not as it is common to the three
Persons. Now "the whole Divine Nature is" said to be "incarnate";
not that It is incarnate in all the Persons, but inasmuch as nothing is
wanting to the perfection of the Divine Nature of the Person
incarnate, as Damascene explains there.
Reply to Objection 3: The assumption which takes place by the grace
of adoption is terminated in a certain participation of the Divine
Nature, by an assimilation to Its goodness, according to 2 Pt. 1:4:
"That you may be made partakers of the Divine Nature"; and hence
this assumption is common to the three Persons, in regard to the
principle and the term. But the assumption which is by the grace of
union is common on the part of the principle, but not on the part of
the term, as was said above.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.3, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether each of the Divine Persons could have

assumed human nature?
Objection 1: It would seem that no other Divine Person could have
assumed human nature except the Person of the Son. For by this
assumption it has been brought about that God is the Son of Man.
But it was not becoming that either the Father or the Holy Ghost
should be said to be a Son; for this would tend to the confusion of
the Divine Persons. Therefore the Father and Holy Ghost could not
have assumed flesh.
Objection 2: Further, by the Divine Incarnation men have come into
possession of the adoption of sons, according to Rm. 8:15: "For you
have not received the spirit of bondage again in fear, but the spirit of
adoption of sons." But sonship by adoption is a participated likeness
of natural sonship which does not belong to the Father nor the Holy
Ghost; hence it is said (Rm. 8:29): "For whom He foreknew He also
predestinated to be made conformable to the image of His Son."
Therefore it seems that no other Person except the Person of the
Son could have become incarnate.
Objection 3: Further, the Son is said to be sent and to be begotten by
the temporal nativity, inasmuch as He became incarnate. But it does
not belong to the Father to be sent, for He is innascible, as was said
above (FP, Question 32, Article 3; FP, Question 43, Article 4).
Therefore at least the Person of the Father cannot become incarnate.
On the contrary, Whatever the Son can do, so can the Father and the
Holy Ghost, otherwise the power of the three Persons would not be
one. But the Son was able to become incarnate. Therefore the Father
and the Holy Ghost were able to become incarnate.
I answer that, As was said above (Articles 1,2,4), assumption implies
two things, viz. the act of the one assuming and the term of the
assumption. Now the principle of the act is the Divine power, and the
term is a Person. But the Divine power is indifferently and commonly
in all the Persons. Moreover, the nature of Personality is common to
all the Persons, although the personal properties are different. Now
whenever a power regards several things indifferently, it can
terminate its action in any of them indifferently, as is plain in rational
powers, which regard opposites, and can do either of them.