the counsellor is the wiser. In God, however, it means only
procession of origin, which is according to equality, as explained
above (Question 42, Articles 4,6).
Reply to Objection 2: What is so sent as to begin to exist where
previously it did not exist, is locally moved by being sent; hence it is
necessarily separated locally from the sender. This, however, has no
place in the mission of a divine person; for the divine person sent
neither begins to exist where he did not previously exist, nor ceases
to exist where He was. Hence such a mission takes place without a
separation, having only distinction of origin.
Reply to Objection 3: This objection rests on the idea of mission
according to local motion, which is not in God.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether mission is eternal, or only temporal?

Objection 1: It would seem that mission can be eternal. For Gregory
says (Hom. xxvi, in Ev.), "The Son is sent as He is begotten." But the
Son's generation is eternal. Therefore mission is eternal.
Objection 2: Further, a thing is changed if it becomes something
temporally. But a divine person is not changed. Therefore the
mission of a divine person is not temporal, but eternal.
Objection 3: Further, mission implies procession. But the procession
of the divine persons is eternal. Therefore mission is also eternal.
On the contrary, It is said (Gal. 4:4): "When the fullness of the time
was come, God sent His Son."
I answer that, A certain difference is to be observed in all the words
that express the origin of the divine persons. For some express only
relation to the principle, as "procession" and "going forth." Others
express the term of procession together with the relation to the
principle. Of these some express the eternal term, as "generation"
and "spiration"; for generation is the procession of the divine person
into the divine nature, and passive spiration is the procession of the
subsisting love. Others express the temporal term with the relation
to the principle, as "mission" and "giving." For a thing is sent that it
may be in something else, and is given that it may be possessed; but
that a divine person be possessed by any creature, or exist in it in a
new mode, is temporal.
Hence "mission" and "giving" have only a temporal significance in
God; but "generation" and "spiration" are exclusively eternal;
whereas "procession" and "giving," in God, have both an eternal and
a temporal signification: for the Son may proceed eternally as God;
but temporally, by becoming man, according to His visible mission,
or likewise by dwelling in man according to His invisible mission.
Reply to Objection 1: Gregory speaks of the temporal generation of
the Son, not from the Father, but from His mother; or it may be taken
to mean that He could be sent because eternally begotten.
Reply to Objection 2: That a divine person may newly exist in