THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.39, C.5.

to the heavenly kingdom: and this is the principal effect of baptism,
and accomplished through Christ alone. And therefore it was fitting
that Christ should be baptized in the Jordan rather than in the sea.
Reply to Objection 2: In baptism we "go up" by advancing in grace:
for which we need to "go down" by humility, according to James 4:6:
"He giveth grace to the humble." And to this "going down" must the
name of the Jordan be referred.
Reply to Objection 3: As Augustine says in a sermon for the
Epiphany (x): "As of yore the waters of the Jordan were held back,
so now, when Christ was baptized, the torrent of sin was held back."
Or else this may signify that against the downward flow of the waters
the river of blessings flowed upwards.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.39, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether the heavens should have been opened

unto Christ at His baptism?
Objection 1: It would seem that the heavens should not have been
opened unto Christ at His baptism. For the heavens should be
opened unto one who needs to enter heaven, by reason of his being
out of heaven. But Christ was always in heaven, according to Jn.
3:13: "The Son of Man who is in heaven." Therefore it seems that the
heavens should not have been opened unto Him.
Objection 2: Further, the opening of the heavens is understood
either in a corporal or in a spiritual sense. But it cannot be
understood in a corporal sense: because the heavenly bodies are
impassible and indissoluble, according to Job 37:18: "Thou perhaps
hast made the heavens with Him, which are most strong, as if they
were of molten brass." In like manner neither can it be understood in
a spiritual sense, because the heavens were not previously closed to
the eyes of the Son of God. Therefore it seems unbecoming to say
that when Christ was baptized "the heavens were opened."
Objection 3: Further, heaven was opened to the faithful through
Christ's Passion, according to Heb. 10:19: "We have a confidence in
the entering into the holies by the blood of Christ." Wherefore not
even those who were baptized with Christ's baptism, and died before
His Passion, could enter heaven. Therefore the heavens should have
been opened when Christ was suffering rather than when He was
baptized.
On the contrary, It is written (Lk. 3:21): "Jesus being baptized and
praying, heaven was opened."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1; Question 38, Article 1),
Christ wished to be baptized in order to consecrate the baptism
wherewith we were to be baptized. And therefore it behooved those
things to be shown forth which belong to the efficacy of our baptism:
concerning which efficacy three points are to be considered. First,
the principal power from which it is derived; and this, indeed, is a
heavenly power. For which reason, when Christ was baptized,
heaven was opened, to show that in future the heavenly power would
sanctify baptism.