made this impossibility possible for he remitted our sins, He restored us from
enmity to the condition of friends, He freely bestowed on us numberless other
blessings.
Ver. 4. "That He might deliver us out of this present evil world."
Another class of heretics seize upon these words of Paul, and pervert his
testimony to an accusation of the present life. Lo, say they, he has called this
present world evil, and pray tell me what does "world" [age] [αἴων] mean but
time measured by days and seasons? Is then the distinction of days and the
course of the sun evil? No one would assert this even if he be carried away to the
extreme of unreasonableness. "But" they say, "it is not the 'time,' but the present
'life,' which he has called evil." Now the words themselves do not in fact say
this; but the heretics do not rest in the words, and frame their charge from them,
but propose to themselves a new mode of interpretation. At least therefore they
must allow us to produce our interpretation, and the rather in that it is both pious
and rational. We assert then that evil cannot be the cause of good, yet that the
present life is productive of a thousand prizes and rewards. And so the blessed
Paul himself extols it abundantly in the words, "But if to live in the flesh, if this is
the fruit of my work, then what I shall choose I wont not;" [Philippians 1:22] and
then placing before himself the alternative of living upon earth, and departing
and being with Christ, he decides for the former. But were this life evil, he would
not have thus spoken of it, nor could any one, however strenuous his endeavor,
draw it aside into the service of virtue. For no one would ever use evil for good,
fornication for chastity, envy for benevolence. And so, when he says, that "the
mind of the flesh is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can it be,"
[Romans 8:7] he means that vice, as such, cannot become virtue; and the
expression, "evil world," must be understood to mean evil actions, and a
depraved moral principle. Again, Christ came not to put us to death and deliver
us from the present life in that sense, but to leave us in the world, and prepare us
for a worthy participation of our heavenly abode. Wherefore He says to the
Father, "And these are in the world, and I come to You; I pray not that You

should take them from the world, but that You should keep them from the evil,"
[John 17:11-15] i.e., from sin. Further, those who will not allow this, but insist
that the present life is evil, should not blame those who destroy themselves; for
as he who withdraws himself from evil is not blamed, but deemed worthy of a
crown, so he who by a violent death, by hanging or otherwise, puts an end to his
life, ought not to be condemned. Whereas God punishes such men more than
murderers, and we all regard them with horror, and justly; for if it is base to
destroy others, much more is it to destroy one's self. Moreover, if this life be
evil, murderers would deserve a crown, as rescuing us from evil. Besides this,
they are caught by their own words, for in that they place the sun in the first, and
the moon in the second rank of their deities, and worship them as the givers of
many goods, their statements are contradictory. For the use of these and the other
heavenly bodies, is none other than to contribute to our present life, which they
say is evil, by nourishing and giving light to the bodies of men and animals and
bringing plants to maturity. How is it then that the constitution of this "evil life"
is so ministered to by those, who according to you are gods? Gods indeed they
are not, far from it, but works of God created for our use; nor is this world evil.
And if you tell me of murderers, of adulterers, of tomb-robbers, these things
have nothing to do with the present life, for these offenses proceed not from that
life which we live in the flesh, but from a depraved will. For, if they were
necessarily connected with this life, as embraced in one lot with it, no man
would be free or pure from them, for no man can escape the characteristic
accidents of humanity, such as, to eat and drink, to sleep and grow, to hunger and
thirst, to be born and die, and the like; no man can ever become superior to
these, neither sinner nor just man, king nor peasant, We all are subject to the
necessity of nature. And so if vice were an essential element of this life, no one
could avoid it, any more than the things just mentioned. And let me not be told
that good men are rare, for natural necessity is insuperable by all, so that as long
as one virtuous man shall be found, my argument will in no way be invalidated.
Miserable, wretched man! What is it you say? Is this life evil, wherein we have