Rom. vi. 23.
Propter hoc enim Verbum Dei homo, et qui Filius Dei est, Filius Hominis factus est É commixtus Verbo Dei, et adoptionem
percipiens fiat filius Dei." [A specimen of the liberties taken by the Latin translators with the original of Irenæus. Others are
much less innocent.]

John i. 13.

and by the Spirit Himself, may be seen by all who have attained to even a small portion of the truth.
Now, the Scriptures would not have testified these things of Him, if, like others, He had been a
mere man. But that He had, beyond all others, in Himself that pre-eminent birth which is from the
Most High Father, and also experienced that pre-eminent generation which is from the Virgin,
the divine Scriptures do in both respects testify of Him: also, that He was a man without comeliness,
and liable to suffering; that He sat upon the foal of an ass; that He received for drink, vinegar
and gall; that He was despised among the people, and humbled Himself even to death and that
He is the holy Lord, the Wonderful, the Counsellor, the Beautiful in appearance, and the Mighty
God, coming on the clouds as the Judge of all men;—all these things did the Scriptures
prophesy of Him.
3. For as He became man in order to undergo temptation, so also was He the Word that He
might be glorified; the Word remaining quiescent, that He might be capable of being tempted,
dishonoured, crucified, and of suffering death, but the human nature being swallowed up in it (the
divine), when it conquered, and endured [without yielding], and performed acts of kindness, and
rose again, and was received up [into heaven]. He therefore, the Son of God, our Lord, being the
Word of the Father, and the Son of man, since He had a generation as to His human nature from
Mary—who was descended from mankind, and who was herself a human being—was made the
Son of man. Wherefore also the Lord Himself gave us a sign, in the depth below, and in the
height above, which man did not ask for, because he never expected that a virgin could conceive,
or that it was possible that one remaining a virgin could bring forth a son, and that what was thus
born should be "God with us," and descend to those things which are of the earth beneath, seeking
the sheep which had perished, which was indeed His own peculiar handiwork, and ascend to the
height above, offering and commending to His Father that human nature (hominem) which had
been found, making in His own person the first-fruits of the resurrection of man; that, as the Head
rose from the dead, so also the remaining part of the body—[namely, the body] of everyman who
is found in life—when the time is fulfilled of that condemnation which existed by reason of
disobedience, may arise, blended together and strengthened through means of joints and bands
by the increase of God, each of the members having its own proper and fit position in the body.