combat? Only do not willingly come by your fall. Do you count him a happy
man for departing this life? Much rather count yourself happy. Was he released
of his sins? But you, if you will, shall not only wash away your sins, but shall
also have achievements (of good works), which in his case is not possible. It is
in our power to recover ourselves. Great are the medicinal virtues ([φάρμακα])
of repentance: let none despair of himself. That man truly deserves to be
despaired of, who despairs of himself; that man has no more salvation, nor any
hopes. It is not the having fallen into a depth of evils, it is the lying there when
fallen, that is dreadful, it is not the having come into such a condition, it is the
making light of it that is impious. The very thing that ought to make you earnest,
say, is it this that makes you reckless? Having received so many wounds, have
you fallen back? Of the soul, there can be no incurable wound; for the body,
there are many such, but none for the soul: and yet for those we cease not in our
endeavors to cure them, while for these we are supine. Do you see not the thief
(on the cross), in how short a time he achieved (his salvation)? Do you see not
the Martyrs, in how short a time they accomplished the whole work? "But
martyrdom is not to be had nowadays." True, but there are contests to be had, as
I have often told you, if we had the mind. "For they that wish," says the Apostle,
"to live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution." [2 Timothy 3:12] They
that live godly are always undergoing persecution, if not from men, at any rate
from evil spirits, which is a more grievous persecution. Yes, and it is in
consequence, first and foremost, of ease and comfort, that those who are not
vigilant undergo this. Or do you think it is a trifling persecution to be living at
ease? This is more grievous than all, this is worse than persecution. For, like a
running flux, ease makes the soul languid ([χαυνοἵ]): and as summer and winter,
so persecution and ease. But to show you that this is the worse persecution,
listen: it induces sleep in the soul, an excessive yawning and drowsiness, it stirs
up the passions on every side, it arms pride, it arms pleasure, it arms anger, envy,
vainglory, jealousy. But in time of persecution none of these is able to make a
disturbance; but fear, entering in, and plying the lash vigorously, as one does to a

barking dog, will not let any of these passions so much as attempt to give
tongue. Who shall be able in time of persecution to indulge in vainglory? Who to
live in pleasure? Not one: but there is much trembling and fear, making a great
calm, composing the harbor into stillness, filling the soul with awe. I have heard
from our fathers (for in our own time God grant it may not happen, since we are
bidden not to ask for temptation), that in the persecution of old time one might
see men that were indeed Christian. None of them cared for money, none for
wife, none for children, nor home, nor country: the one great concern with all
was to save their lives (or, souls). There were they hiding, some in tombs and
sepulchres, some in deserts: yes tender and dainty women too, fighting all the
while with constant hunger.
Then think whether any longing for sumptuous and dainty living at all came
into the mind of a woman, while in hiding beside a coffin ([παρὰ λάρνακι]), and
waiting for her maid-servant to bring her meal, and trembling lest she should be
taken, and lying in her terror as in a furnace: was she even aware that there ever
was such a thing as dainty living, that such things as dress and ornaments exist at
all ([ὅ] [τι κόσμος ὅλως ἐστίν])? Do you see that now is the persecution, with
our passions, like wild beasts, setting upon us on every side? Now is the trying
persecution, both in this regard, and especially if it is not even thought to be
persecution at all. For this (persecution) has also this evil in it, that being war, it
is thought to be peace, so that we do not even arm ourselves against it, so that we
do not even rise: no one fears, no one trembles. But if you do not believe me, ask
the heathen, the persecutors, at what time was the conduct of the Christians more
strict, at what time were they all more proved? Few indeed had they then
become in number, but rich in virtue. For say, what profit is it, that there should
be hay in plenty, when there might be precious stones? The amount consists not
in the sum of numbers, but in the proved worth. Elias was one: yet the whole
world was not worth so much as he. And yet the world consists of myriads: but
they are no myriads, when they do not even come up to that one. "Better is one
that does the will of God, than ten thousand who are transgressors:" for the ten