things present? For far, indeed, will our concern be from ending with these; a yet
more grievous punishment will await all such persons: even a river of fire, and a
poisonous worm, and darkness interminable, and undying tortures. If with such
addresses we succeed in throwing a spell over them, we shall correct both
ourselves and them, and quickly get the better of our infirmity.
And on that day we shall have God to praise us: as also Paul says, "And
then shall each man have praise from God." For that which comes from men, is
both fleeting, and sometimes it proceeds from no good intentions. But that which
comes from God both abides continually, and shines out clearly. For when He
who knew all things before their creation, and who is free from all passion, gives
praise, then also the demonstration of our virtue is even unquestionable.
Knowing these things therefore, let us act so as to be praised of God, and to
acquire the greatest blessings; which God grant us all to obtain, through the
grace and loving-kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father
and the Holy Spirit be glory, power, honor, now and always, and unto all the
ages of eternity. Amen.

## Homily 12 on First Corinthians

1 Corinthians 4:6
Now these things, brethren, I have in a figure transferred to myself and
Apollos for your sakes; that in us you might learn not to think of men above that
which is written.
So long as there was need of expressions as harsh as these, he refrained
from drawing up the curtain, and went on arguing as if he were himself the
person to whom they were addressed; in order that the dignity of the persons
censured tending to counteract the censurers, no room might be left for flying
out in wrath at the charges. But when the time came for a gentler process, then
he strips it off, and removes the mask, and shows the persons concealed by the
appellation of Paul and Apollos. And on this account he said, "These things,
brethren, I have transferred in a figure unto myself and Apollos."
And as in the case of the sick, when the child being out of health kicks and
turns away from the food offered by the physicians, the attendants call the father
or the tutor, and bid them take the food from the physician's hands and bring it,
so that out of fear towards them he may take it and be quiet: so also Paul,
intending to censure them about certain other persons, of whom some, he
thought, were injured, others honored above measure, did not set down the
persons themselves, but conducted the argument in his own name and that of
Apollos, in order that reverencing these they might receive his mode of cure. But
that once received, he presently makes known in whose behalf he was so
expressing himself.
Now this was not hypocrisy, but condescension ([συγκατάβασις]) and tact
([οἰκονομία]). For if he had said openly, "As for you, the men whom you are
judging are saints, and worthy of all admiration;" they might have taken it ill