of them, but forasmuch as they called Him "Son of David," He to lead them up to
what is higher, and to teach them to entertain the imaginations they ought of
Himself, says, "Believe ye that I am able to do this?" He did not say, "Believe ye
that I am able to entreat my Father, that I am able to pray" but, "that I am able
to do this?"
What then is their word? "Yea, Lord." They call Him no more Son of David,
but soar higher, and acknowledge His dominion.
And then at last He for His part lays His hand upon them, saying,
"According to your faith be it unto you." And this He does to confirm their faith,
and to show that they are participators in the good work, and to witness that their
words were not words of flattery. For neither did He say, "Let your eyes be
opened," but, "According to your faith be it unto you;" which He says to many of
them that came unto Him; before the healing of their bodies, hastening to
proclaim the faith in their soul; so as both to make them more approved, and to
render others more serious.
Thus with respect to the sick of the palsy also; for there too before giving
nerve to the body, He raises up the fallen soul, saying, "Son, be of good cheer,
your sins be forgiven you." And the young damsel too, when He had raised her
up, He detained, and by the food taught her her Benefactor; and in the case of the
centurion also He did in like manner, leaving the whole to his faith; and as to His
disciples again, when delivering them from the storm on the sea, He delivered
them first from their want of faith. Just so likewise in this case: He knew indeed,
even before their cry, the secrets of their mind; but that He might lead on others
also to the same earnestness, He makes them known to the rest as well, by the
result of their cure proclaiming their hidden faith.
Then after their cure He commands them to tell no man; neither does He
merely command them, but with much strictness.
"For Jesus," it is said, "strictly charged them, saying, See that no man know
it. But they, when they were departed, spread abroad His fame in all that
country." [Matthew 9:30-31]

They however did not endure this, but became preachers, and evangelists;
and when bidden to hide what had been done, they endured it not.
And if in another place we find Him saying, "Go your way, and declare the
glory of God," that is not contrary to this, but even highly in agreement herewith.
For He instructs us to say nothing ourselves, concerning ourselves, but even to
forbid them that would eulogise us: but if the glory be referred to God, then not
only not to forbid, but to command men to do this.
2. "And as they went out," it is said, "behold, they brought unto Him a dumb
man possessed with a devil."
For the affliction was not natural, but the device of the evil spirit; wherefore
also he needs others to bring him. For he could neither make entreaty himself,
being speechless, nor supplicate others, when the evil spirit had bound his
tongue, and together with his tongue had fettered his soul.
For this cause neither does He require faith of him, but straightway heals
the disease.
"For when the devil was cast out," it says, "the dumb spoke: and the
multitudes marvelled, saying, It was never so seen in Israel." [Matthew 9:33]
Now this especially vexed the Pharisees, that they preferred Him to all, not
only that then were, but that had ever been. And they preferred Him, not for His
healing, but for His doing it easily and quickly, and to diseases innumerable and
incurable.
And thus the multitude; but the Pharisees quite contrariwise; not only
disparaging the works, but saying things contradictory to themselves, and not
ashamed. Such a thing is wickedness. For what say they?
"He casts out devils through the prince of the devils."
What can be more foolish than this? For in the first place, as He also says
further on, it is impossible that a devil should cast out a devil, for that being is
wont to repair what belongs to himself, not to pull it down. But He did not cast
out devils only, but also cleansed lepers, and raised the dead, and curbed the sea,
and remitted sins, and preached the kingdom, and brought men unto the Father;