SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.163, C.3.

befitting a nature bereft of the aforesaid favor: and this as regards
both the body and the soul. With regard to the body, to which
pertains the distinction of sex, one punishment was appointed to the
woman and another to the man. To the woman punishment was
appointed in respect of two things on account of which she is united
to the man; and these are the begetting of children, and community
of works pertaining to family life. As regards the begetting of
children, she was punished in two ways: first in the weariness to
which she is subject while carrying the child after conception, and
this is indicated in the words (Gn. 3:16), "I will multiply thy sorrows,
and thy conceptions"; secondly, in the pain which she suffers in
giving birth, and this is indicated by the words (Gn. 3:16), "In sorrow
shalt thou bring forth." As regards family life she was punished by
being subjected to her husband's authority, and this is conveyed in
the words (Gn. 3:16), "Thou shalt be under thy husband's power."
Now, just as it belongs to the woman to be subject to her husband in
matters relating to the family life, so it belongs to the husband to
provide the necessaries of that life. In this respect he was punished
in three ways. First, by the barrenness of the earth, in the words (Gn.
3:17), "Cursed is the earth in thy work." Secondly, by the cares of his
toil, without which he does not win the fruits of the earth; hence the
words (Gn. 3:17), "With labor and toil shalt thou eat thereof all the
days of thy life." Thirdly, by the obstacles encountered by the tillers
of the soil, wherefore it is written (Gn. 3:18), "Thorns and thistles
shall it bring forth to thee."
Likewise a triple punishment is ascribed to them on the part of the
soul. First, by reason of the confusion they experienced at the
rebellion of the flesh against the spirit; hence it is written (Gn. 3:7):
"The eyes of them both were opened; and . . . they perceived
themselves to be naked." Secondly, by the reproach for their sin,
indicated by the words (Gn. 3:22), "Behold Adam is become as one
of Us." Thirdly, by the reminder of their coming death, when it was
said to him (Gn. 3:19): "Dust thou art and into dust thou shalt
return." To this also pertains that God made them garments of skin,
as a sign of their mortality.
Reply to Objection 1: In the state of innocence child-bearing would
have been painless: for Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xiv, 26): "Just
as, in giving birth, the mother would then be relieved not by groans
of pain, but by the instigations of maturity, so in bearing and
conceiving the union of both sexes would be one not of lustful

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.163, C.3.

desire but of deliberate action" [FP, Question 98, Article 2].
The subjection of the woman to her husband is to be understood as
inflicted in punishment of the woman, not as to his headship (since
even before sin the man was the "head" and governor "of the
woman"), but as to her having now to obey her husband's will even
against her own.
If man had not sinned, the earth would have brought forth thorns and
thistles to be the food of animals, but not to punish man, because
their growth would bring no labor or punishment for the tiller of the
soil, as Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. iii, 18). Alcuin [Interrog. et Resp.
in Gen. lxxix], however, holds that, before sin, the earth brought forth
no thorns and thistles, whatever: but the former opinion is the better.
Reply to Objection 2: The multiplying of her conceptions was
appointed as a punishment to the woman, not on account of the
begetting of children, for this would have been the same even before
sin, but on account of the numerous sufferings to which the woman
is subject, through carrying her offspring after conception. Hence it
is expressly stated: "I will multiply thy sorrows, and thy
conceptions."
Reply to Objection 3: These punishments affect all somewhat. For
any woman who conceives must needs suffer sorrows and bring
forth her child with pain: except the Blessed Virgin, who "conceived
without corruption, and bore without pain" [St. Bernard, Serm. in
Dom. inf. oct. Assum. B. V. M.], because her conceiving was not
according to the law of nature, transmitted from our first parents.
And if a woman neither conceives nor bears, she suffers from the
defect of barrenness, which outweighs the aforesaid punishments.
Likewise whoever tills the soil must needs eat his bread in the sweat
of his brow: while those who do not themselves work on the land,
are busied with other labors, for "man is born to labor" (Job 5:7): and
thus they eat the bread for which others have labored in the sweat of
their brow.
Reply to Objection 4: Although the place of the earthly paradise
avails not man for his use, it avails him for a lesson; because he
knows himself deprived of that place on account of sin, and because
by the things that have a bodily existence in that paradise, he is
instructed in things pertaining to the heavenly paradise, the way to