Homily 80 on the Gospel of John
John 17:1
"These words spoke Jesus, and lifted up His eyes to heaven, and says, Father, the
hour has come; glorify Your Son, that Your Son also may glorify You."
1. " He that has done and taught," it says, "the same shall be called great in
the Kingdom of heaven." And with much reason; for to show true wisdom in
words, is easy, but the proof which is by works is the part of some noble and
great one. Wherefore also Christ, speaking of the endurance of evil, puts Himself
forth, bidding us take example from Him. On this account too, after this
admonition, He betakes Himself to prayer, teaching us in our temptations to
leave all things, and flee to God. For because He had said, "In the world you
shall have tribulation," and had shaken their souls, by the prayer He raises them
again. As yet they gave heed unto Him as to a man; and for their sake He acts
thus, just as He did in the case of Lazarus, and there tells the reason; "Because of
the people that stand by I said it, that they might believe that You have sent Me."
[John 11:42] "Yea," says some one, "this took place with good cause in the case
of the Jews; but wherefore in that of the disciples?" With good cause in the case
of the disciples also. For they who, after all that had been said and done, said,
"Now we know that You know" [John 16:30], most of all needed to be
established. Besides, the Evangelist does not even call the action prayer; but
what says he? "He lifted up His eyes to heaven," and says rather that it was a
discoursing with the Father. And if elsewhere he speaks of prayer, and at one
time shows Him kneeling on His knees, at another lifting His eyes to heaven, be
not thou troubled; for by these means we are taught the earnestness which should
be in our petitions, that standing we should look up, not with the eyes of the
flesh only, but of the mind, and that we should bend our knees, bruising our own

hearts. For Christ came not merely to manifest Himself, but also about to teach
virtue ineffable. But it behooves the teacher to teach, not by words only, but also
by actions. Let us hear then what He says in this place.
"Father, the hour has come; glorify Your Son, that Your Son also may
glorify You."
Again He shows us, that not unwilling He comes to the Cross. For how
could He be unwilling, who prayed that this might come to pass, and called the
action "glory," not only for Himself the Crucified, but also for the Father? Since
this was the case, for not the Son only, but the Father also was glorified. For
before the Crucifixion, not even the Jews knew Him; "Israel," it says, "has not
known Me" [Isaiah 1:3]; but after the Crucifixion, all the world ran to Him. Then
He speaks also of the manner of the glory, and how He will glorify Him.

John 17:2
"As You have given Him power over all flesh," "that nothing which You have
given Him should perish."
For to be always doing good, is glory to God. But what is, "As You have
given Him power over all flesh"? He now shows, that what belongs to the
preaching is not confined to the Jews alone, but is extended to all the world, and
lays down beforehand the first invitations to the Gentiles. And since He had said,
"Go not into the way of the Gentiles" [Matthew 10:5], and after this time is about
to say, "Go, and make disciples of all nations" [Matthew 28:19], He shows that
the Father also wills this. For this greatly offended the Jews, and the disciples
too; nor indeed after this did they easily endure to lay hold on the Gentiles, until
they received the teaching of the Spirit; because hence arose no small
stumblingblock for the Jews. Therefore, when Peter after such a manifestation of
the Spirit came to Jerusalem, he could scarcely, by relating the vision of the
sheet, escape the charges brought against him. But what is, "You have given Him
power over all flesh"? I will ask the heretics, "When did He receive this power?
Was it before He formed them, or after?" He himself says, that it was after that
He had been crucified, and had risen again; at least then He said, "All power is
given unto Me" [Matthew 28:18], and, "Go ye and make disciples of all nations."
What then, had He not authority over His own works? Did He make them, and
had He not authority over them after having made them? Yet He is seen doing all
in times of old, punishing some as sinners, (for, "Surely I will not hide," it says,
"from My servant Abraham, that which I am about to do" [Genesis 18:17,
Septuagint]) and honoring others as righteous. Had He then the power at that
time, and now had He lost it, and did He again receive it? What devil could
assert this? But if His power was the same both then and now, (for, says He, "as
the Father raises up the dead and quickens them, even so the Son quickens
whom He will" [John 5:21]) what is the meaning of the words? He was about to