FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.94, C.5.

only as regards the principles which are called common notions. But
in matters of action, truth or practical rectitude is not the same for
all, as to matters of detail, but only as to the general principles: and
where there is the same rectitude in matters of detail, it is not equally
known to all.
It is therefore evident that, as regards the general principles whether
of speculative or of practical reason, truth or rectitude is the same
for all, and is equally known by all. As to the proper conclusions of
the speculative reason, the truth is the same for all, but is not equally
known to all: thus it is true for all that the three angles of a triangle
are together equal to two right angles, although it is not known to all.
But as to the proper conclusions of the practical reason, neither is
the truth or rectitude the same for all, nor, where it is the same, is it
equally known by all. Thus it is right and true for all to act according
to reason: and from this principle it follows as a proper conclusion,
that goods entrusted to another should be restored to their owner.
Now this is true for the majority of cases: but it may happen in a
particular case that it would be injurious, and therefore
unreasonable, to restore goods held in trust; for instance, if they are
claimed for the purpose of fighting against one's country. And this
principle will be found to fail the more, according as we descend
further into detail, e.g. if one were to say that goods held in trust
should be restored with such and such a guarantee, or in such and
such a way; because the greater the number of conditions added,
the greater the number of ways in which the principle may fail, so
that it be not right to restore or not to restore.
Consequently we must say that the natural law, as to general
principles, is the same for all, both as to rectitude and as to
knowledge. But as to certain matters of detail, which are
conclusions, as it were, of those general principles, it is the same for
all in the majority of cases, both as to rectitude and as to knowledge;
and yet in some few cases it may fail, both as to rectitude, by reason
of certain obstacles (just as natures subject to generation and
corruption fail in some few cases on account of some obstacle), and
as to knowledge, since in some the reason is perverted by passion,
or evil habit, or an evil disposition of nature; thus formerly, theft,
although it is expressly contrary to the natural law, was not
considered wrong among the Germans, as Julius Caesar relates (De
Bello Gall. vi).
Reply to Objection 1: The meaning of the sentence quoted is not that

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.94, C.5.

whatever is contained in the Law and the Gospel belongs to the
natural law, since they contain many things that are above nature;
but that whatever belongs to the natural law is fully contained in
them. Wherefore Gratian, after saying that "the natural law is what is
contained in the Law and the Gospel," adds at once, by way of
example, "by which everyone is commanded to do to others as he
would be done by."
Reply to Objection 2: The saying of the Philosopher is to be
understood of things that are naturally just, not as general
principles, but as conclusions drawn from them, having rectitude in
the majority of cases, but failing in a few.
Reply to Objection 3: As, in man, reason rules and commands the
other powers, so all the natural inclinations belonging to the other
powers must needs be directed according to reason. Wherefore it is
universally right for all men, that all their inclinations should be
directed according to reason.