learned to know God, and meditate on things to come, and have become angels
instead of men, and take part in the choirs of the heavenly powers? What other
proof do we need of an evil and depraved mind?
"Why then," they say, "does Paul call the present life evil?" In calling the
present world [age] evil, he has accommodated himself to our usage, who are
wont to say, "I have had a bad day," thereby complaining not of the time itself,
but of actions or circumstances. And so Paul in complaining of evil principles of
action has used these customary forms of speech; and he shows that Christ has
both delivered us from our offenses, and secured us for the future. The first he
has declared in the words, "Who gave Himself for our sins;" and by adding, "that
He might deliver us out of this present evil world," he has pronounced our future
safety. For neither of these did the Law avail, but grace was sufficient for both.
Ver. 4. "According to the will of our God and Father."
Since they were terrified by their notion that by deserting that old Law and
adhering to the new, they should disobey God, who gave the Law, he corrects
their error, and says, that this seemed good to the Father also: and not simply
"the Father," but "our Father," which he does in order to affect them by showing
that Christ has made His Father our Father.
Ver. 5. "To whom be the glory for ever and ever. Amen."
This too is new and unusual, for we never find the word, "Amen" placed at
the beginning of an Epistle, but a good way on; here, however he has it in his
beginning, to show that what he had already said contained a sufficient charge
against the Galatians, and that his argument was complete, for a manifest offense
does not require an elaborate crimination. Having spoken of the Cross, and
Resurrection, of redemption from sin and security for the future, of the purpose
of the Father, and the will of the Son, of grace and peace and His whole gift, he
concludes with an ascription of praise.
Another reason for it is the exceeding astonishment into which he was
thrown by the magnitude of the gift, the superabundance of the grace, the
consideration who we were, and what God had wrought, and that at once and in

a single moment of time. Unable to express this in words, he breaks out into a
doxology, sending up for the whole world an eulogium, not indeed worthy of the
subject, but such as was possible to him. Hence too he proceeds to use more
vehement language; as if greatly kindled by a sense of the Divine benefits, for
having said, "To whom be the glory for ever and ever, Amen," he commences
with a more severe reproof.
Ver. 6. "I marvel that you are so quickly removing from Him that called you
in the grace of Christ, unto a different Gospel."
Like the Jews who persecuted Christ, they imagined their observance of the
Law was acceptable to the Father, and he therefore shows that in doing this they
displeased not only Christ, but the Father also, for that they fell away thereby not
from Christ only, but from the Father also. As the old covenant was given not by
the Father only, but also by the Son, so the covenant of grace proceeded from the
Father as well as the Son, and Their every act is common: "All things whatsoever
the Father has are Mine." [John 15:16] By saying that they had fallen off from
the Father, he brings a twofold charge against them, of an apostasy, and of an
immediate apostasy. The opposite extreme a late apostasy, is also blameworthy,
but he who falls away at the first onset, and in the very skirmishing, displays an
example of the most extreme cowardice, of which very thing he accuses them
also saying: "How is this that your seducers need not even time for their designs,
but the first approaches suffice for your overthrow and capture? And what
excuse can you have? If this is a crime among friends, and he who deserts old
and useful associates is to be condemned, consider what punishment he is
obnoxious to who revolts from God that called him." He says, "I marvel," not
only by way of reproof, that after such bounty, such a remission of their sins,
such overflowing kindness, they had deserted to the yoke of servitude, but also
in order to show, that the opinion he had had of them was a favorable and exalted
one. For, had he ranked them among ordinary and easily deceived persons, he
would not have felt surprise. "But since you," he says, "are of the noble sort and
have suffered, much, I do marvel." Surely this was enough to recover and lead