Homily 11 on the Gospel of John
John 1:14
"And the Word was made Flesh, and dwelt among us."
1. I desire to ask one favor of you all, before I touch on the words of the
Gospel; do not you refuse my request, for I ask nothing heavy or burdensome,
nor, if granted, will it be useful only to me who receive, but also to you who
grant it, and perhaps far more so to you. What then is it that I require of you?
That each of you take in hand that section of the Gospels which is to be read
among you on the first day of the week, or even on the Sabbath, and before the
day arrive, that he sit down at home and read it through, and often carefully
consider its contents, and examine all its parts well, what is clear, what obscure,
what seems to make for the adversaries, but does not really so; and when you
have tried, in a word every point, so go to hear it read. For from zeal like this
will be no small gain both to you and to us. We shall not need much labor to
render clear the meaning of what is said, because your minds will be already
made familiar with the sense of the words, and you will become keener and
more clear-sighted not for hearing only, nor for learning, but also for the
teaching of others. Since, in the way that now most of those who come hither
hear, compelled to take in the meaning of all at once, both the words, and the
remarks we make upon them, they will not, though we should go on doing this
for a whole year, reap any great gain. How can they, when they have leisure for
what is said as a bywork, and only in this place, and for this short time? If any
lay the fault on business, and cares, and constant occupation in public and
private matters, in the first place, this is no slight charge in itself, that they are
surrounded with such a multitude of business, are so continually nailed to the
things of this life, that they cannot find even a little leisure for what is more

needful than all. Besides, that this is a mere pretext and excuse, their meetings
with friends would prove against them, their loitering in the theaters, and the
parties they make to see horse races, at which they often spend whole days, yet
never in that case does one of them complain of the pressure of business. For
trifles then you can without making any excuses, always find abundant leisure;
but when you ought to attend to the things of God, do these seem to you so
utterly superfluous and mean, that you think you need not assign even a little
leisure to them? How do men of such disposition deserve to breathe or to look
upon this sun?
There is another most foolish excuse of these sluggards; that they have not
the books in their possession. Now as to the rich, it is ludicrous that we should
take our aim at this excuse; but because I imagine that many of the poorer sort
continually use it, I would gladly ask, if every one of them does not have all the
instruments of the trade which he works at, full and complete, though infinite
poverty stand in his way? Is it not then a strange thing, in that case to throw no
blame on poverty, but to use every means that there be no obstacle from any
quarter, but, when we might gain such great advantage, to lament our want of
leisure and our poverty?
Besides, even if any should be so poor, it is in their power, by means of the
continual reading of the holy Scriptures which takes place here, to be ignorant of
nothing contained in them. Or if this seems to you impossible, it seems so with
reason; for many do not come with fervent zeal to hearken to what is said, but
having done this one thing for form's sake on our account, immediately return
home. Or if any should stay, they are no better disposed than those who have
retired, since they are only present here with us in body. But that we may not
overload you with accusations, and spend all the time in finding fault, let us
proceed to the words of the Gospel, for it is time to direct the remainder of our
discourse to what is set before us. Rouse yourselves therefore, that nothing of
what is said escape you.
"And the Word was made Flesh," he says, "and dwelt among us."