The blessed Paul dreads the night, lest overtaking in solitude him that was
wronged, still burning with anger, it should again kindle up the fire. For as long
as there are many things in the daytime to banish it, you are free to indulge it;
but as soon as ever the evening comes on, be reconciled, extinguish the evil
while it is yet fresh; for should night overtake it, the morrow will not avail to
extinguish the further evil which will have been collected in the night. Nay, even
though you should cut off the greater portion, and yet not be able to cut off the
whole, it will again supply from what is left for the following night, to make the
blaze more violent. And just as, should the sun be unable by the heat of the day
to soften and disperse that part of the air which has been during the night
condensed into cloud, it affords material for a tempest, night overtaking the
remainder, and feeding it again with fresh vapors: so also is it in the case of
anger.
"Neither give place to the devil."
So then to be at war with one another, is "to give place to the devil"; for,
whereas we had need to be all in close array, and to make our stand against him,
we have relaxed our enmity against him, and are giving the signal for turning
against each other; for never has the devil such place as in our enmities.
Numberless are the evils thence produced. And as stones in a building, so long
as they are closely fitted together and leave no interstice, will stand firm, while if
there is but a single needle's passage through, or a crevice no broader than a hair,
this destroys and ruins all; so is it with the devil. So long indeed as we are
closely set and compacted together, he cannot introduce one of his wiles; but
when he causes us to relax a little, he rushes in like a torrent. In every case he
needs only a beginning, and this is the thing which it is difficult to accomplish;
but this done, he makes room on all sides for himself. For henceforth he opens
the ear to slanders, and they who speak lies are the more trusted: they have
enmity which plays the advocate, not truth which judges justly. And as, where
friendship is, even those evils which are true appear false, so where there is
enmity, even the false appear true. There is a different mind, a different tribunal,

which does not hear fairly, but with great bias and partiality. As, in a balance, if
lead is cast into the scale, it will drag down the whole; so is it also here, only that
the weight of enmity is far heavier than any lead. Wherefore, let us, I beseech
you, do all we can to extinguish our enmities before the going down of the sun.
For if you fail to master it on the very first day, both on the following, and
oftentimes even for a year, you will be protracting it, and the enmity will
thenceforward augment itself, and require nothing to aid it. For by causing us to
suspect that words spoken in one sense were meant in another, and gestures also,
and everything, it infuriates and exasperates us, and makes us more distempered
than madmen, not enduring either to utter a name, or to hear it, but saying
everything in invective and abuse. How then are we to allay this passion? How
shall we extinguish the flame? By reflecting on our own sins, and how much we
have to answer for to God; by reflecting that we are wreaking vengeance, not on
an enemy, but on ourselves; by reflecting that we are delighting the devil, that
we are strengthening our enemy, our real enemy, and that for him we are doing
wrong to our own members. Would you be revengeful and be at enmity? Be at
enmity, but be so with the devil, and not with a member of your own. For this
purpose it is that God has armed us with anger, not that we should thrust the
sword against our own bodies, but that we should baptize the whole blade in the
devil's breast. There bury the sword up to the hilt; yea, if you will, hilt and all,
and never draw it out again, but add yet another and another. And this actually
comes to pass when we are merciful to those of our own spiritual family and
peaceably disposed one towards another. Perish money, perish glory and
reputation; my own member is dearer to me than they all. Thus let us say to
ourselves; let us not do violence to our own nature to gain wealth, to obtain
glory.
Ver. 28. "Let him that stole," says he, "steal no more."
Do you see what are the members of the old man? Falsehood, revenge,
theft. Why said he not, "Let him that stole" be punished, be tortured, be racked;
but, "let him steal no more"? "But rather let him labor, working with his hands