essence.
Thus, to avoid the error of Arius we must shun the use of the terms
diversity and difference in God, lest we take away the unity of
essence: we may, however, use the term "distinction" on account of
the relative opposition. Hence whenever we find terms of "diversity"
or "difference" of Persons used in an authentic work, these terms of
"diversity" or "difference" are taken to mean "distinction." But lest
the simplicity and singleness of the divine essence be taken away,
the terms "separation" and "division," which belong to the parts of a
whole, are to be avoided: and lest quality be taken away, we avoid
the use of the term "disparity": and lest we remove similitude, we
avoid the terms "alien" and "discrepant." For Ambrose says (De Fide
i) that "in the Father and the Son there is no discrepancy, but one
Godhead": and according to Hilary, as quoted above, "in God there
is nothing alien, nothing separable."
To avoid the heresy of Sabellius, we must shun the term
"singularity," lest we take away the communicability of the divine
essence. Hence Hilary says (De Trin. vii): "It is sacrilege to assert
that the Father and the Son are separate in Godhead." We must
avoid the adjective "only" [unici] lest we take away the number of
persons. Hence Hilary says in the same book: "We exclude from God
the idea of singularity or uniqueness." Nevertheless, we say "the
only Son," for in God there is no plurality of Sons. Yet, we do not say
"the only God," for the Deity is common to several. We avoid the
word "confused," lest we take away from the Persons the order of
their nature. Hence Ambrose says (De Fide i): "What is one is not
confused; and there is no multiplicity where there is no difference."
The word "solitary" is also to be avoided, lest we take away the
society of the three persons; for, as Hilary says (De Trin. iv), "We
confess neither a solitary nor a diverse God."
This word "other" [alius], however, in the masculine sense, means
only a distinction of "suppositum"; and hence we can properly say
that "the Son is other than the Father," because He is another
"suppositum" of the divine nature, as He is another person and
another hypostasis.
Reply to Objection 1: "Other," being like the name of a particular
thing, refers to the "suppositum"; and so, there is sufficient reason
for using it, where there is a distinct substance in the sense of
hypostasis or person. But diversity requires a distinct substance in

the sense of essence. Thus we cannot say that the Son is diverse
from the Father, although He is another.
Reply to Objection 2: "Difference" implies distinction of form. There
is one form in God, as appears from the text, "Who, when He was in
the form of God" (Phil. 2:6). Therefore the term "difference" does not
properly apply to God, as appears from the authority quoted. Yet,
Damascene (De Fide Orth. i, 5) employs the term "difference" in the
divine persons, as meaning that the relative property is signified by
way of form. Hence he says that the hypostases do not differ from
each other in substance, but according to determinate properties.
But "difference" is taken for "distinction," as above stated.
Reply to Objection 3: The term "alien" means what is extraneous and
dissimilar; which is not expressed by the term "other" [alius]; and
therefore we say that the Son is "other" than the Father, but not that
He is anything "alien."
Reply to Objection 4: The neuter gender is formless; whereas the
masculine is formed and distinct; and so is the feminine. So the
common essence is properly and aptly expressed by the neuter
gender, but by the masculine and feminine is expressed the
determined subject in the common nature. Hence also in human
affairs, if we ask, Who is this man? we answer, Socrates, which is
the name of the "suppositum"; whereas, if we ask, What is he? we
reply, A rational and mortal animal. So, because in God distinction is
by the persons, and not by the essence, we say that the Father is
other than the Son, but not something else; while conversely we say
that they are one thing, but not one person.