THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.25, C.6.

Reply to Objection 2: The honor given to the Mother reflects on her
Son, because the Mother is to be honored for her Son's sake. But not
in the same way as honor given to an image reflects on its exemplar:
because the image itself, considered as a thing, is not to be
venerated in any way at all.
Reply to Objection 3: The cross, considered in itself, is not an object
of veneration, as stated above (Articles 4,5). But the Blessed Virgin
is in herself an object of veneration. Hence there is no comparison.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.25, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether any kind of worship is due to the relics of

the saints?
Objection 1: It would seem that the relics of the saints are not to be
worshiped at all. For we should avoid doing what may be the
occasion of error. But to worship the relics of the dead seems to
savor of the error of the Gentiles, who gave honor to dead men.
Therefore the relics of the saints are not to be honored.
Objection 2: Further, it seems absurd to venerate what is insensible.
But the relics of the saints are insensible. Therefore it is absurd to
venerate them.
Objection 3: Further, a dead body is not of the same species as a
living body: consequently it does not seem to be identical with it.
Therefore, after a saint's death, it seems that his body should not be
worshiped.
On the contrary, It is written (De Eccles. Dogm. xl): "We believe that
the bodies of the saints, above all the relics of the blessed martyrs,
as being the members of Christ, should be worshiped in all
sincerity": and further on: "If anyone holds a contrary opinion, he is
not accounted a Christian, but a follower of Eunomius and
Vigilantius."
I answer that, As Augustine says (De Civ. Dei i, 13): "If a father's coat
or ring, or anything else of that kind, is so much more cherished by
his children, as love for one's parents is greater, in no way are the
bodies themselves to be despised, which are much more intimately
and closely united to us than any garment; for they belong to man's
very nature." It is clear from this that he who has a certain affection
for anyone, venerates whatever of his is left after his death, not only
his body and the parts thereof, but even external things, such as his
clothes, and such like. Now it is manifest that we should show honor
to the saints of God, as being members of Christ, the children and
friends of God, and our intercessors. Wherefore in memory of them
we ought to honor any relics of theirs in a fitting manner: principally
their bodies, which were temples, and organs of the Holy Ghost
dwelling and operating in them, and are destined to be likened to the
body of Christ by the glory of the Resurrection. Hence God Himself
fittingly honors such relics by working miracles at their presence.