Reply 9. By sin there is not taken away from man the good of nature which belongs to
his natural species, but a good of nature which was superadded by grace.
10. The gift, not belonging to the essence of the species, was nevertheless bestowed by
God gratuitously on the first man, that from him it might pass to the entire species: in
like manner the sin, which is the privation of that gift, passes to the entire species.
11. Though by the sacraments of grace one is so cleansed from original sin that it is not
imputed to him as a fault, -- and this is what is meant by saying that he is personally
delivered from that sin, -- yet he is not altogether healed; and therefore by the act
of nature [i.e., of generation] original sin is transmitted to his posterity. Thus then in the
human procreant, considered as a person, there is no original sin; and there may very
well be no actual sin in the act of procreation: still, inasmuch as the procreant is a
natural principle of procreation, the infection of original sin, as regards the nature,
remains in him and in his procreative act.

the privation of sanctifying grace, under the explanations given in note. God's
sentence upon Adam has worked like an attainder upon a nobleman guilty of treason.
The title is taken away from the family. We are by nature and birth a family of
commoners, and worse than commoners, for we ought to be noble, and are not,
because of the brand of treason resting upon our race. So we are tekna phusei orges
(Eph. ii, 3): we are born in disgrace with God. Our nobility comes with our baptism, and
consists in the sanctifying grace given in that Sacrament; not in `original justice,' which
shall not be restored to our race till the day of the resurrection of the just. There is no
difficulty in the text of Ezechiel, which refers to the sins of the people to whom the
prophet was sent; and describes the providence of God, not over Adam, but over his
posterity.

## CHAPTER LVI--Of the Need of Sacraments
THE death of Christ is the universal cause of man's salvation: but a universal cause has
to be applied to particular effects. Thus it was found necessary for certain remedies to
be administered to men by way of bringing Christ's death into proximate connexion with
them. Such remedies are the Sacraments of the Church. And these remedies had to be
administered with certain visible signs: -- first, because God provides for man, as for
other beings, according to his condition; and it is the condition of man's nature to be led
through sensible things to things spiritual and intelligible: secondly, because instruments
must be proportioned to the prime cause; and the prime and universal cause of man's
salvation is the Word Incarnate: it was convenient therefore that the remedies, through
which that universal cause reaches men, should resemble the cause in this, that divine
power works invisibly through visible signs.
Hereby is excluded the error of certain heretics, who wish all visible sacramental signs
swept away; and no wonder, for they take all visible things to be of their own nature evil,
and the work of an evil author (B. III, Chap.XV).
These visible sacramental signs are the instruments of a God Incarnate and Crucified
(instrumenta Dei incarnati et passi).