shall turn to the Lord, the veil is taken away:" leading him up little by little, and
first setting him in Moses' rank, and then making him partake of the greater
things. For when you have seen Moses in glory, then afterwards you shall also
turn unto God and enjoy this greater glory.
5. See then from the beginning, how many things he has laid down, as
constituting the difference and showing the superiority, not the enmity or
contradiction, of the New Covenant in respect to the old. That, says he, is letter,
and stone, and a ministration of death, and is done away: and yet the Jews were
not even vouchsafed this glory. (Or, the glory of this.) This table is of the flesh,
and spirit, and righteousness, and remains; and unto all of us is it vouchsafed,
not to one only, as to Moses of the lesser then. [2 Corinthians 3:18] "For," says
he, "we all with unveiled face reflecting as a mirror the glory of the Lord," not
that of Moses. But since some maintain that the expression, "when one shall turn
to the Lord," is spoken of the Son, in contradiction to what is quite
acknowledged; let us examine the point more accurately, having first stated the
ground on which they think to establish this. What then is this? Like, says one,
as it is said, "God is a Spirit;" [John 4:24] so also here, 'The Lord is a Spirit.' But
he did not say, 'The Lord is a Spirit,' but, "The Spirit is the Lord." And there is a
great difference between this construction and that. For when he is desirous of
speaking so as you say, he does not join the article to the predicate. And besides,
let us review all his discourse from the first, of whom has he spoken? For
instance, when he said, "The letter kills, but the Spirit gives life:" [2 Corinthians
3:6] and again, "Written not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God;" [2
Corinthians 3:3] was he speaking of God, or of the Spirit? It is very plain that it
was of the Spirit; for unto It he was calling them from the letter. For lest any,
hearing of the Spirit, and then reflecting that Moses turned unto the Lord, but
himself unto the Spirit, should think himself to have the worse, to correct such a
suspicion as this, he says,

2 Corinthians 3:17
"Now the Spirit is the Lord." This too is Lord, he says. And that you may
know that he is speaking of the Paraclete, he added,
"And where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty."
For surely you will not assert, that he says, 'And where the Lord of the Lord
is.' "Liberty," he said, with reference to the former bondage. Then, that you may
not think that he is speaking of a time to come, he says,

2 Corinthians 3:18
"But we all, with unveiled face, reflecting as a mirror the glory of the Lord."
Not that which is brought to an end, but that which remains.
"Are transformed into the same image from glory to glory, even as from the
Lord the Spirit."
Do you see how again he places the Spirit in the rank of God, (vide infra)
and raises them up to the rank of the Apostles. For he said before, "You are the
Epistle of Christ;" and here, "But we all with open face." Yet they came, like
Moses, bringing a law. But like as we, he says, needed no veil, so neither ye who
received it. And yet, this glory is far greater, for this is not of our countenance,
but of the Spirit; but nevertheless you are able as well as we to look steadfastly
upon it. For they indeed could not even by a mediator, but you even without a
mediator can [look steadfastly on] a greater. They were not able to look upon
that of Moses, you even upon that of the Spirit. Now had the Spirit been at all
inferior, He would not have set down these things as greater than those. But what
is, "we reflecting as a mirror the glory of the Lord, are transformed into the
same image." This indeed was shown more clearly when the gifts of miracles
were in operation; howbeit it is not even now difficult to see it, for one who has
believing eyes. For as soon as we are baptized, the soul beams even more than
the sun, being cleansed by the Spirit; and not only do we behold the glory of
God, but from it also receive a sort of splendor. Just as if pure silver be turned
towards the sun's rays, it will itself also shoot forth rays, not from its own natural
property merely but also from the solar lustre; so also does the soul being
cleansed and made brighter than silver, receive a ray from the glory of the Spirit,
and send it back. Wherefore also he says, "Reflecting as a mirror we are
transformed into the same image from glory," that of the Spirit, "to glory," our
own, that which is generated in us; and that, of such sort, as one might expect