speciousness of words, the corruption of rulers, and multitudes of flatterers, is
often able to throw justice into the shade, but within, the conscience has nothing
of this sort, there are no flatterers there, no wealth to corrupt the judge. For the
faculty of judging is naturally implanted in us by God, and what comes from
God cannot be so corrupted. But uneasy slumbers, thick-coming fancies, and the
frequent recollections of guilt, destroy our repose. Has any one, for instance,
unjustly deprived another of his house? Not only is he that is robbed rendered
unhappy, but the man who robbed him. If he is persuaded of a future judgment,
(if indeed any one is so persuaded,) he groans exceedingly, and is in misery. But
if he believes not in futurity, yet he blushes for shame; or rather there is no man,
whether Greek, Jew, or heretic, who is not afraid of a judgment to come.
And although he is not a philosopher with respect to futurity; yet he fears
and trembles at what may befall him here, lest he may have some retribution in
his property, his children, his family, or his life. For many such visitations God
inflicts. For since the doctrine of the Resurrection is not sufficient to bring all
men to reason, He affords even here many proofs of His righteous judgment, and
exhibits them to the world. One who has gained wrongfully is without children,
another falls in war, another is maimed in his body, another loses his son. He
considers these things, on these his imagination dwells, and he lives in continual
fear.
Know you not what the unrighteous suffer? Is there no bitterness in these
things? And were there nothing of this sort, do not all condemn him, and hate
and abhor him, and think him less rational than a beast, even those who are
themselves unrighteous? For if they condemn themselves, much more do they
condemn another, calling him rapacious, fraudulent, a pestilent fellow. What
pleasure then can he enjoy? He has only the heavier care and anxiety to preserve
his gains, and the being more anxious and troubled. For the more wealth any one
gets about him, the more painful watchfulness does he store up for himself. Then
what are the curses of those whom he has wronged, their pleadings against him?
And what, if sickness should befall him? For it is impossible for one, who has

fallen into sickness, however atheistically he may be inclined, not to be anxious
about these things, not to be thoughtful, when he is unable to do anything. For as
long as we are here, the soul enjoying itself, does not tolerate painful thoughts:
but when it is about to take its flight from the body, then a greater fear constrains
it, as entering into the very portals of judgment. Even robbers, while they are in
prison, live without fear, but when they are brought to the very curtain of the
court, they sink with terror. For when the fear of death is urgent, like a fire
consuming all things besides, it obliges the soul to philosophize, and to take
thought for futurity. The desire of wealth, the love of gain, and of bodily
pleasures, no longer possesses it. These things passing away like clouds, leave
the judging faculty clear, and grief entering in softens the hard heart. For nothing
is so opposite to philosophy, as a life of pleasure; nor, on the other hand, is
anything so favorable to philosophy as affliction. Consider what the covetous
man will then be. For, "an hour of affliction," it is said, "makes a man forget
much pleasure." [Sirach 2:27] What will then be his state, when he considers
those whom he has robbed, and injured, and defrauded, when he sees others
reaping the fruits of his grasping, and himself going to pay the penalty? For it
cannot, indeed it cannot be, that when fallen into sickness he should not reflect
upon these things. For often the soul of itself is distracted with agony and terror.
What a bitterness is this, tell me! And with every sickness these things must be
endured. And what will he not suffer when he sees others punished or put to
death?
These things await him here. And as to what he must undergo hereafter, it is
not possible to say what punishment, what vengeance, what torments, what racks
are reserved for him There. These things we declare. "He that has ears to hear,
let him hear." [Luke 8:8] We are for ever discoursing of these things, not
willingly, but of necessity. For we could wish there were no obligation to
mention such things at all. But since it must be, we would at least, by a little
medicine, deliver you from your disease, and restore you to health. But while
you remain in this sickness, it would show a mean and weak spirit, not to say