SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.121, C.6.

Reply to Objection 2: The debt to one's parents precedes the debt to
one's kindred and country since it is because we are born of our
parents that our kindred and country belong to us. Hence, since the
precepts of the decalogue are the first precepts of the Law, they
direct man to his parents rather than to his country and other
kindred. Nevertheless this precept of honoring our parents is
understood to command whatever concerns the payment of debt to
any person, as secondary matter included in the principal matter.
Reply to Objection 3: Reverential honor is due to one's parents as
such, whereas support and so forth are due to them accidentally, for
instance, because they are in want, in slavery, or the like, as stated
above (Question 101, Article 2). And since that which belongs to a
thing by nature precedes that which is accidental, it follows that
among the first precepts of the Law, which are the precepts of the
decalogue, there is a special precept of honoring our parents: and
this honor, as a kind of principle, is understood to comprise support
and whatever else is due to our parents.
Reply to Objection 4: A long life is promised to those who honor
their parents not only as to the life to come, but also as to the
present life, according to the saying of the Apostle (1 Tim. 4:8):
"Piety is profitable to all things, having promise of the life that now is
and of that which is to come." And with reason. Because the man
who is grateful for a favor deserves, with a certain congruity, that the
favor should be continued to him, and he who is ungrateful for a
favor deserves to lose it. Now we owe the favor of bodily life to our
parents after God: wherefore he that honors his parents deserves
the prolongation of his life, because he is grateful for that favor:
while he that honors not his parents deserves to be deprived of life
because he is ungrateful for the favor. However, present goods or
evils are not the subject of merit or demerit except in so far as they
are directed to a future reward, as stated above (FS, Question 114,
Article 12). Wherefore sometimes in accordance with the hidden
design of the Divine judgments, which regard chiefly the future
reward, some, who are dutiful to their parents, are sooner deprived
of life, while others, who are undutiful to their parents, live longer.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.121, C.6.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.121, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether the other six precepts of the decalogue

are fittingly expressed?
Objection 1: It seems that the other six precepts of the decalogue are
unfittingly expressed. For it is not sufficient for salvation that one
refrain from injuring one's neighbor; but it is required that one pay
one's debts, according to Rm. 13:7, "Render . . . to all men their
dues." Now the last six precepts merely forbid one to injure one's
neighbor. Therefore these precepts are unfittingly expressed.
Objection 2: Further, these precepts forbid murder, adultery, stealing
and bearing false witness. But many other injuries can be inflicted
on one's neighbor, as appears from those which have been specified
above (Questions 72, seq.). Therefore it seems that the aforesaid
precepts are unfittingly expressed.
Objection 3: Further, concupiscence may be taken in two ways. First
as denoting an act of the will, as in Wis. 6:21, "The desire
[concupiscentia] of wisdom bringeth to the everlasting kingdom":
secondly, as denoting an act of the sensuality, as in James 4:1,
"From whence are wars and contentions among you? Are they
not . . . from your concupiscences which war in your members?"
Now the concupiscence of the sensuality is not forbidden by a
precept of the decalogue, otherwise first movements would be
mortal sins, as they would be against a precept of the decalogue.
Nor is the concupiscence of the will forbidden, since it is included in
every sin. Therefore it is unfitting for the precepts of the decalogue
to include some that forbid concupiscence.
Objection 4: Further, murder is a more grievous sin than adultery or
theft. But there is no precept forbidding the desire of murder.
Therefore neither was it fitting to have precepts forbidding the desire
of theft and of adultery.
On the contrary, stands the authority of Scripture.
I answer that, Just as by the parts of justice a man pays that which is
due to certain definite persons, to whom he is bound for some
special reason, so too by justice properly so called he pays that
which is due to all in general. Hence, after the three precepts
pertaining to religion, whereby man pays what is due God, and after