SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.99, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether it is lawful to give and receive money for

spiritual actions?
Objection 1: It seems that it is lawful to give and receive money for
spiritual actions. The use of prophecy is a spiritual action. But
something used to be given of old for the use of prophecy, as
appears from 1 Kgs. 9:7,8, and 3 Kgs. 14:3. Therefore it would seem
that it is lawful to give and receive money for a spiritual action.
Objection 2: Further, prayer, preaching, divine praise, are most
spiritual actions. Now money is given to holy persons in order to
obtain the assistance of their prayers, according to Lk. 16:9, "Make
unto you friends of the mammon of iniquity." To preachers also, who
sow spiritual things, temporal things are due according to the
Apostle (1 Cor. 9:14). Moreover, something is given to those who
celebrate the divine praises in the ecclesiastical office, and make
processions: and sometimes an annual income is assigned to them.
Therefore it is lawful to receive something for spiritual actions.
Objection 3: Further, science is no less spiritual than power. Now it
is lawful to receive money for the use of science: thus a lawyer may
sell his just advocacy, a physician his advice for health, and a
master the exercise of his teaching. Therefore in like manner it would
seem lawful for a prelate to receive something for the use of his
spiritual power, for instance, for correction, dispensation, and so
forth.
Objection 4: Further, religion is the state of spiritual perfection. Now
in certain monasteries something is demanded from those who are
received there. Therefore it is lawful to demand something for
spiritual things.
On the contrary, It is stated (I, qu. i [Can. Quidquid invisibilis]): "It is
absolutely forbidden to make a charge for what is acquired by the
consolation of invisible grace, whether by demanding a price or by
seeking any kind of return whatever." Now all these spiritual things
are acquired through an invisible grace. Therefore it is not lawful to
charge a price or return for them.
I answer that, Just as the sacraments are called spiritual, because
they confer a spiritual grace, so, too, certain other things are called

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.99, C.4.

spiritual, because they flow from spiritual grace and dispose thereto.
And yet these things are obtainable through the ministry of men,
according to 1 Cor. 9:7, "Who serveth as a soldier at any time at his
own charges? Who feedeth the flock, and eateth not of the milk of
the flock?" Hence it is simoniacal to sell or buy that which is spiritual
in such like actions; but to receive or give something for the support
of those who minister spiritual things in accordance with the
statutes of the Church and approved customs is lawful, yet in such
wise that there be no intention of buying or selling, and that no
pressure be brought to bear on those who are unwilling to give, by
withholding spiritual things that ought to be administered, for then
there would be an appearance of simony. But after the spiritual
things have been freely bestowed, then the statutory and customary
offerings and other dues may be exacted from those who are
unwilling but able to pay, if the superior authorize this to be done.
Reply to Objection 1: As Jerome says in his commentary on Micheas
3:9, certain gifts were freely offered to the good prophets, for their
livelihood, but not as a price for the exercise of their gift of
prophecy. Wicked prophets, however, abused this exercise by
demanding payment for it.
Reply to Objection 2: Those who give alms to the poor in order to
obtain from them the assistance of their prayers do not give with the
intent of buying their prayers; but by their gratuitous beneficence
inspire the poor with the mind to pray for them freely and out of
charity. Temporal things are due to the preacher as means for his
support, not as a price of the words he preaches. Hence a gloss on 1
Tim. 5:11, "Let the priests that rule well," says: "Their need allows
them to receive the wherewithal to live, charity demands that this
should be given to them: yet the Gospel is not for sale, nor is a
livelihood the object of preaching: for if they sell it for this purpose,
they sell a great thing for a contemptible price." In like manner
temporal things are given to those who praise God by celebrating
the divine office whether for the living or for the dead, not as a price
but as a means of livelihood; and the same purpose is fulfilled when
alms are received for making processions in funerals. Yet it is
simoniacal to do such things by contract, or with the intention of
buying or selling. Hence it would be an unlawful ordinance if it were
decreed in any church that no procession would take place at a
funeral unless a certain sum of money were paid, because such an
ordinance would preclude the free granting of pious offices to any
person. The ordinance would be more in keeping with the law, if it