oftener; and then these are asked regarding us, how it is, that when they hold doctrines similar
to ours, we, without cause, keep ourselves aloof from their company; and [how it is, that] when
they say the same things, and hold the same doctrine, we call them heretics? When they have thus,
by means of questions, overthrown the faith of any, and rendered them uncontradicting hearers of
their own, they describe to them in private the unspeakable mystery of their Pleroma. But they are
altogether deceived, who imagine that they may learn from the Scriptural texts adduced by heretics,
that [doctrine] which their words plausibly teach. For error is plausible, and bears a resemblance
to the truth, but requires to be disguised; while truth is without disguise, and therefore has been
entrusted to children. And if any one of their auditors do indeed demand explanations, or start
objections to them, they affirm that he is one not capable of receiving the truth, and not having
from above the seed [derived] from their Mother; and thus really give him no reply, but simply
declare that he is of the intermediate regions, that is, belongs to animal natures. But if any one do
yield himself up to them like a little sheep, and follows out their practice, and their "redemption,"
such an one is puffed up to such an extent, that he thinks he is neither in heaven nor on earth, but
that he has passed within the Pleroma; and having already embraced his angel, he walks with a
strutting gait and a supercilious countenance, possessing all the pompous air of a cock. There are
those among them who assert that that man who comes from above ought to follow a good course
of conduct; wherefore they do also pretend a gravity [of demeanour] with a certain superciliousness.
The majority, however, having become scoffers also, as if already perfect, and living without regard
[to appearances], yea, in contempt [of that which is good], call themselves "the spiritual," and allege
that they have already become acquainted with that place of refreshing which is within their Pleroma.
3. But let us revert to the same line of argument [hitherto pursued]. For when it has been
manifestly declared, that they who were the preachers of the truth and the apostles of liberty termed
no one else God, or named him Lord, except the only true God the Father, and His Word, who has
the pre-eminence in all things; it shall then be clearly proved, that they (the apostles) confessed as
the Lord God Him who was the Creator of heaven and earth, who also spoke with Moses, gave to
him the dispensation of the law, and who called the fathers; and that they knew no other. The
opinion of the apostles, therefore, and of those (Mark and Luke) who learned from their words,
concerning God, has been made manifest.

### Chapter XVI.—Proofs from the apostolic writings, that Jesus Christ was one and the same,
the only begotten Son of God, perfect God and perfect man.
proposed by the former editors, viz., "discernere" for "discere."