"twelfth" day all animals will come from forest and mountain to the
fields, roaring and tasting of nothing; on the "thirteenth" day all
graves from east to west will open to allow the bodies to rise again;
on the "fourteenth" day all men will leave their abode, neither
understanding nor speaking, but rushing hither and thither like
madmen; on the "fifteenth" day all will die and will rise again with
those who died long before.
I answer that, When Christ shall come to judge He will appear in the
form of glory, on account of the authority becoming a judge. Now it
pertains to the dignity of judicial power to have certain signs that
induce people to reverence and subjection: and consequently many
signs will precede the advent of Christ when He shall come to
judgment, in order that the hearts of men be brought to subjection to
the coming judge, and be prepared for the judgment, being
forewarned by those signs. But it is not easy to know what these
signs may be: for the signs of which we read in the gospels, as
Augustine says, writing to Hesychius about the end of the world (Ep.
lxxx), refer not only to Christ's coming to judgment, but also to the
time of the sack of Jerusalem, and to the coming of Christ in
ceaselessly visiting His Church. So that, perhaps, if we consider
them carefully, we shall find that none of them refers to the coming
advent, as he remarks: because these signs that are mentioned in
the gospels, such as wars, fears, and so forth, have been from the
beginning of the human race: unless perhaps we say that at that time
they will be more prevalent: although it is uncertain in what degree
this increase will foretell the imminence of the advent. The signs
mentioned by Jerome are not asserted by him; he merely says that
he found them written in the annals of the Hebrews: and, indeed,
they contain very little likelihood.
Reply to Objection 1: According to Augustine (Ad Hesych., Ep. lxxx)
towards the end of the world there will be a general persecution of
the good by the wicked: so that at the same time some will fear,
namely the good, and some will be secure, namely the wicked. The
words: "When they shall say: Peace and security," refer to the
wicked, who will pay little heed to the signs of the coming judgment:
while the words of Lk. 21:26, "men withering away," etc., should be
referred to the good.
We may also reply that all these signs that will happen about the
time of the judgment are reckoned to occur within the time occupied
by the judgment, so that the judgment day contains them all.

Wherefore although men be terrified by the signs appearing about
the judgment day, yet before those signs begin to appear the wicked
will think themselves to be in peace and security, after the death of
Antichrist and before the coming of Christ, seeing that the world is
not at once destroyed, as they thought hitherto.
Reply to Objection 2: The day of the Lord is said to come as a thief,
because the exact time is not known, since it will not be possible to
know it from those signs: although, as we have already said, all
these most manifest sings which will precede the judgment
immediately may be comprised under the judgment day.
Reply to Objection 3: At His first advent Christ came secretly,
although the appointed time was known beforehand by the prophets.
Hence there was no need for such signs to appear at His first
coming, as will appear at His second advent, when He will come
openly, although the appointed time is hidden.