to him they agreed." [Acts 5:40] They reverenced the high character of the man.
"And they departed from the presence of the council, rejoicing that they were
counted worthy to suffer shame for the name of Christ." [Acts 5:41] What
miracles so wonderful as this? Nowhere is the like of this recorded of the old
saints: for Jeremiah indeed was scourged for the word of God, and they
threatened Elijah, and the rest: but in this case, even by this very thing, and not
only by their miracles, these showed forth the power of God. He does not say,
that they were not pained, but that though pained they rejoiced. How does this
appear? From their boldness afterwards: they were so instant still, even after
their beatings, in preaching the word. "But in the temple," it says, "and in every
house, they ceased not to teach and preach Jesus Christ." [Acts 5:42] "And in
those days"— when these things were done, when there were scourgings, when
there were threatenings, when the disciples were multiplying— also, it says,
"there arose a murmuring." [Acts 6:1] And this comes of the multitude: for it is
impossible to have strict order in a multitude. "There arose a murmuring," etc. to
—"And a great company of the priests were obedient to the faith.— There arose
murmuring against the Hebrews"— for that description of people seemed to be
more honorable— "because their widows were neglected in the daily
ministration." [Acts 6:1-7] So then there was a daily ministration for the
widows. And observe how he calls it a "ministration" ([διακονία]), and not
directly alms: extolling by this at once the doers, and those to whom it was done.
"Were neglected." This did not arise from malice, but perhaps from the
carelessness of the multitude. And therefore he brought it forward openly, for
this was no small evil. Observe, how even in the beginning the evils came not
only from without, but also from within. For you must not look to this only, that
it was set to rights, but observe that it was a great evil that it existed. "Then the
twelve," etc. [Acts 6:2] Do you observe how outward concerns succeed to
inward? They do not act at their own discretion, but plead for themselves to the
congregation. So ought it to be done now. "It is not reason," says he, "that we
should leave the word of God, and serve tables." First he puts to them the

unreasonableness of the thing; that it is not possible for both things to be done
with the same attention: just as when they were about to ordain Matthias, they
first show the necessity of the thing, that one was deficient, and there must needs
be twelve. And so here they showed the necessity; and they did it not sooner, but
waited till the murmuring arose; nor, on the other hand, did they suffer this to
spread far. And, lo! They leave the decision to them: those who pleased all, those
who of all were honestly reputed, them they present: not now twelve, but "seven,
full of the Spirit and of wisdom: well reported of" for their conversation. [Acts
6:3] Now when Matthias was to be presented, it was said, "Therefore must one of
these men which have companied with us all the time" [Acts 1:21]: but not so
here: for the case was not alike. And they do not now put it to the lot; they might
indeed themselves have made the election, as moved by the Spirit: but
nevertheless, they desire the testimony of the people. The fixing the number, and
the ordaining them, and for this kind of business, rested with them: but the
choice of the men they make over to the people, that they might not seem to act
from favor: just as God also leaves it to Moses to choose as elders those whom
he knew. [Numbers 11:16] "And of wisdom." For indeed there needs much
wisdom in such ministrations. For think not, because he has not the word
committed unto him, that such an one has no need of wisdom: he does need it,
and much too. "But we," says he, "will give ourselves continually to prayer, and
to the ministry of the word." [Acts 6:4] Again they plead for themselves,
beginning and ending with this. "Will give ourselves continually," he says. For so
it behooved, not just to do the mere acts, or in any chance way, but to be
continually doing them. "And the saying," we are told, "pleased the whole
multitude." (v. 5, 6.) This too was worthy of their wisdom. All approved of what
was said so sensible was it. "And they chose," it says (again it is the people
([αὐτοί]) that choose,) "Stephen, a man full of faith and of the Holy Ghost, and
Philip, and Prochorus, and Nicanor, and Timon, and Parmenas, and Nicolas a
proselyte of Antioch: whom they set before the Apostles: and when they had
prayed, they laid their hands on them." They separated them from the multitude,