THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.77, C.6.

what was stated above (Question 75, Article 2). Hence the substance
of the bread and wine cannot return while the sacramental species
remain; nor, again, when these species pass away; because then the
substance of the bread and wine would be without their proper
accidents, which is impossible. Unless perchance it be said that in
the last instant of the corruption of the species there returns (not,
indeed, the substance of bread and wine, because it is in that very
instant that they have the being of the substance generated from the
species, but) the matter of the bread and wine; which, matter,
properly speaking, would be more correctly described as created
anew, than as returning. And in this sense the aforesaid position
might be held.
However, since it does not seem reasonable to say that anything
takes place miraculously in this sacrament, except in virtue of the
consecration itself, which does not imply either creation or return of
matter, it seems better to say that in the actual consecration it is
miraculously bestowed on the dimensive quantity of the bread and
wine to be the subject of subsequent forms. Now this is proper to
matter; and therefore as a consequence everything which goes with
matter is bestowed on dimensive quantity; and therefore everything
which could be generated from the matter of bread or wine, if it were
present, can be generated from the aforesaid dimensive quantity of
the bread or wine, not, indeed, by a new miracle, but by virtue of the
miracle which has already taken place.
Reply to Objection 1: Although no matter is there out of which a
thing may be generated, nevertheless dimensive quantity supplies
the place of matter, as stated above.
Reply to Objection 2: Those sacramental species are indeed
accidents, yet they have the act and power of substance, as stated
above (Article 3).
Reply to Objection 3: The dimensive quantity of the bread and wine
retains its own nature, and receives miraculously the power and
property of substance; and therefore it can pass to both, that is, into
substance and dimension.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.77, C.6.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.77, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether the sacramental species can nourish?

Objection 1: It seems that the sacramental species cannot nourish,
because, as Ambrose says (De Sacram. v), "it is not this bread that
enters into our body, but the bread of everlasting life, which
supports the substance of our soul." But whatever nourishes enters
into the body. Therefore this bread does not nourish: and the same
reason holds good of the wine.
Objection 2: Further, as is said in De Gener. ii, "We are nourished by
the very things of which we are made." But the sacramental species
are accidents, whereas man is not made of accidents, because
accident is not a part of substance. Therefore it seems that the
sacramental species cannot nourish.
Objection 3: Further, the Philosopher says (De Anima ii) that "food
nourishes according as it is a substance, but it gives increase by
reason of its quantity." But the sacramental species are not a
substance. Consequently they cannot nourish.
On the contrary, The Apostle speaking of this sacrament says (1 Cor.
11:21): "One, indeed, is hungry, and another is drunk": upon which
the gloss observes that "he alludes to those who after the
celebration of the sacred mystery, and after the consecration of the
bread and wine, claimed their oblations, and not sharing them with
others, took the whole, so as even to become intoxicated thereby."
But this could not happen if the sacramental species did not nourish.
Therefore the sacramental species do nourish.
I answer that, This question presents no difficulty, now that we have
solved the preceding question. Because, as stated in De Anima ii,
food nourishes by being converted into the substance of the
individual nourished. Now it has been stated (Article 5) that the
sacramental species can be converted into a substance generated
from them. And they can be converted into the human body for the
same reason as they can into ashes or worms. Consequently, it is
evident that they nourish.
But the senses witness to the untruth of what some maintain; viz.
that the species do not nourish as though they were changed into
the human body, but merely refresh and hearten by acting upon the