THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.51, C.4.

quod 'Christus sit Deus') that "with other men, especially with such
as have wrought strenuously, their deeds shine forth in their lifetime;
but as soon as they die, their deeds go with them. But it is quite the
contrary with Christ: because previous to the cross all is sadness
and weakness, but as soon as He is crucified, everything comes to
light, in order that you may learn it was not an ordinary man that was
crucified."
Reply to Objection 1: Since Christ was not subject to sin, neither was
He prone to die or to return to dust. Yet of His own will He endured
death for our salvation, for the reasons alleged above (Question 51,
Article 1). But had His body putrefied or dissolved, this fact would
have been detrimental to man's salvation, for it would not have
seemed credible that the Divine power was in Him. Hence it is on His
behalf that it is written (Ps. 19:10): "What profit is there in my blood,
whilst I go down to corruption?" as if He were to say: "If My body
corrupt, the profit of the blood shed will be lost."
Reply to Objection 2: Christ's body was a subject of corruption
according to the condition of its passible nature, but not as to the
deserving cause of putrefaction, which is sin: but the Divine power
preserved Christ's body from putrefying, just as it raised it up from
death.
Reply to Objection 3: Christ rose from the tomb by Divine power,
which is not narrowed within bounds. Consequently, His rising from
the grave was a sufficient argument to prove that men are to be
raised up by Divine power, not only from their graves, but also from
any dust whatever.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.51, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether Christ was in the tomb only one day and

two nights?
Objection 1: It would seem that Christ was not in the tomb during
only one day and two nights; because He said (Mt. 12:40): "As Jonas
was in the whale's belly three days and three nights: so shall the Son
of man be in the heart of the earth three days and three nights." But
He was in the heart of the earth while He was in the grave. Therefore
He was not in the tomb for only one day and two nights.
Objection 2: Gregory says in a Paschal Homily (Hom. xxi): "As
Samson carried off the gates of Gaza during the night, even so
Christ rose in the night, taking away the gates of hell." But after
rising He was not in the tomb. Therefore He was not two whole
nights in the grave.
Objection 3: Further, light prevailed over darkness by Christ's death.
But night belongs to darkness, and day to light. Therefore it was
more fitting for Christ's body to be in the tomb for two days and a
night, rather than conversely.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Trin. iv): "There were thirty-six
hours from the evening of His burial to the dawn of the resurrection,
that is, a whole night with a whole day, and a whole night."
I answer that, The very time during which Christ remained in the
tomb shows forth the effect of His death. For it was said above
(Question 50, Article 6) that by Christ's death we were delivered from
a twofold death, namely, from the death of the soul and of the body:
and this is signified by the two nights during which He remained in
the tomb. But since His death did not come of sin, but was endured
from charity, it has not the semblance of night, but of day:
consequently it is denoted by the whole day during which Christ was
in the sepulchre. And so it was fitting for Christ to be in the
sepulchre during one day and two nights.
Reply to Objection 1: Augustine says (De Consens. Evang. iii):
"Some men, ignorant of Scriptural language, wished to compute as
night those three hours, from the sixth to the ninth hour, during
which the sun was darkened, and as day those other three hours
during which it was restored to the earth, that is, from the ninth hour