themselves and their rulers! What then? "Agrippa said to Paul, You are
permitted to speak for yourself." [Acts 26:1] From his great desire to hear, the
king permits him to speak. But Paul speaks out immediately with boldness, not
flattering, but for this reason saying that he is happy, namely, because (Agrippa)
knew all. "Then Paul stretched forth the hand, and answered for himself. I think
myself happy, king Agrippa, because I shall answer for myself this day before
you touching all the things whereof I am accused of the Jews. Especially because
I know you to be expert in all questions which are among the Jews: wherefore I
beseech you to hear me patiently." (v. 2, 3.) And yet, had he been conscious of
guilt, he should have feared at being tried in the presence of one who knew all
the facts: but this is a mark of a clear conscience, not to shrink from a judge who
has an accurate knowledge of the circumstances, but even to rejoice, and to call
himself happy. "I beseech you," he says, "to hear me patiently." Since he is about
to lengthen out his speech, and to say something about himself, on this account,
he premises an entreaty, and (then) says: "My manner of life from my youth,
which was at the first among my own nation at Jerusalem, know all the Jews:
which knew me from the beginning, if they would testify, that after the most
straitest sect of our religion I lived a Pharisee." (v. 4, 5.) Then how should I
have become a seditious person, who when young was (thus) testified of by all?
Then too from his sect: "after the most straitest sect" says he, "of our religion I
lived." "What then, if though the sect indeed be worthy of admiration, you are
evil?" Touching this also I call all to witness— touching my life and
conversation. "And now I stand and am judged for the hope of the promise made
of God unto our fathers: unto which promise our twelve tribes, instantly serving
God day and night, hope to come. For which hope's sake, king Agrippa, I am
accused of the Jews. Why should it be thought a thing incredible with you, that
God should raise the dead?" [Acts 26:6-8] Two arguments he lays down for the
Resurrection: one, the argument from the prophets: and he does not bring
forward any prophet (in particular,) but the doctrine itself as held by the Jews:
the other and stronger one, the argument from the facts— (especially from this,)

that Christ Himself held discourse with him. And he lays the ground for this by
(other) arguments, relating accurately his former madness. Then too, with high
commendation of the Jews, he says, "Night and day," says he, "serving (God)
look to attain unto." So that even if I had not been of unblemished life, it is not
for this (doctrine) that I ought to be brought to trial:— "for which hope, king
Agrippa, I am accused of the Jews." And then another argument "Why should it
be thought a thing incredible with you, that God should raise the dead?" Since,
if such an opinion had not existed, if they had not been brought up in these
dogmas, but they were now for the first time brought in, perhaps some one might
not have received the saying. Then he tells, how he persecuted: this also helps
the proof: and he brings forward the chief priests as witnesses, and the "strange
cities," and that he heard Him saying to him, "It is hard for you to kick against
the pricks," and shows the mercifulness of God, that, though being persecuted
He appeared (to men), and did that benefit not to me only, but also sent me as
teacher to others: and shows also the prophecy, now come to pass, which he then
heard, "Delivering you from the people, and from the Gentiles, unto whom I send
you." Showing all this, he says: I verily thought with myself, that I ought to do
many things contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth. Which thing I also did in
Jerusalem: and many of the saints did I shut up in prison, having received
authority from the chief priests; and when they were put to death, I gave my
voice against them. And I punished them oft in every synagogue, and compelled
them to blaspheme; and being exceedingly mad against them, I persecuted them
even unto strange cities. Whereupon as I went to Damascus with authority and
commission from the chief priests, at midday, O king, I saw in the way a light
from heaven, above the brightness of the sun, shining round about me and them
which journeyed with me. And when we were all fallen to the earth, I heard a
voice speaking unto me, and saying in the Hebrew tongue, Saul, Saul, why do
you persecute Me? It is hard for you to kick against the pricks. And I said, Who
are You, Lord? And he said, I am Jesus whom you persecute, but rise, and stand
upon your feet: for I have appeared unto you for this purpose, to make you a