the light which he bears; the "grace of healing" to the exorcist;
"diverse kinds of tongues" to the psalmist; "prophecy" to the reader;
and the "discerning of spirits" to the doorkeeper, for he excludes
some and admits others. But this is of no account, for the gratuitous
graces are not given, as the Orders are, to one same man. For it is
written (1 Cor. 12:4): "There are distributions of graces." Moreover
the episcopate [Question 40, Article 5] and the office of psalmist are
included, which are not Orders. Wherefore others account for the
Orders by likening them to the heavenly hierarchy, where the Orders
are distinguished in reference to cleansing, enlightening, and
perfecting. Thus they say that the doorkeeper cleanses outwardly, by
separating even in the body the good from the wicked; that the
acolyte cleanses inwardly, because by the light which he bears, he
signifies that he dispels inward darkness; and that the exorcist
cleanses both ways, for he casts out the devil who disturbs a man
both ways. But enlightening, which is effected by teaching, is done
by readers as regards prophetic doctrine; by subdeacons as to
apostolic doctrine; and by deacons as to the gospel doctrine; while
ordinary perfection, such as the perfection of Penance, Baptism, and
so forth is the work of the priest; excellent perfection, such as the
consecration of priests and virgins, is the work of the bishop; while
the most excellent perfection is the work of the Sovereign Pontiff in
whom resides the fulness of authority. But this again is of no
account; both because the orders of the heavenly hierarchy are not
distinguished by the aforesaid hierarchical actions, since each of
them is applicable to every Order; and because, according to
Dionysius (Eccl. Hier. v), perfecting belongs to the bishops alone,
enlightening to the priests, and cleansing to all the ministers.
Wherefore others suit the orders to the seven gifts, so that the
priesthood corresponds to the gift of wisdom, which feeds us with
the bread of life and understanding, even as the priest refreshes us
with the heavenly bread; fear to the doorkeeper, for he separates us
from the wicked; and thus the intermediate Orders to the
intermediate gifts. But this again is of no account, since the
sevenfold grace is given in each one of the Orders. Consequently we
must answer differently by saying that the sacrament of Order is
directed to the sacrament of the Eucharist, which is the sacrament of
sacraments, as Dionysius says (Eccl. Hier. iii). For just as temple,
altar, vessels, and vestments need to be consecrated, so do the
ministers who are ordained for the Eucharist; and this consecration
is the sacrament of Order. Hence the distinction of Orders is derived
from their relation to the Eucharist. For the power of Order is
directed either to the consecration of the Eucharist itself, or to some