things to come also. Why, if in the season of the conflicts they that confess are so
glorious, imagine what they will be in the season of the crowns. If the enemies
here applaud, how shall that tenderest of all fathers fail to admire and proclaim
you? Yea, then shall we have both our gifts for the good, and our punishments
for the evil. So that such as deny shall suffer harm, both here and there; here
living with an evil conscience, though they were never to die, they shall be
surely dead; and there, undergoing the last penalty: but the other sort will profit
both here and there, both here making a gain of their death, and in this way
becoming more glorious than the living, and there enjoying those unspeakable
blessings.
God then is in no wise prompt to punish only, but also to confer benefits;
and for this last more than for the first. But why has He put the reward once only,
the punishment twice? He knows that this would be more apt to correct us. For
this cause when He had said, "Fear Him which is able to destroy both soul and
body in hell," He says again, "Him will I also deny." So does Paul also,
continually making mention of hell.
Thus we see that He, having by all ways trained on His scholar (both by
opening Heaven to him, and by setting before him that fearful judgment-seat,
and by pointing to the amphitheatre of angels, and how in the midst of them the
crowns shall be proclaimed, which thing would thenceforth prepare the way for
the word of godliness to be very easily received); in what follows, lest they grow
timid and the word be hindered, He bids them be prepared even for slaughter
itself; to make them aware that such as continue in their error, will have to suffer
(among other things) for plotting against them.
4. Let us therefore despise death, although the time be not come that
requires it of us; for indeed it will translate us to a far better life. "But the body
decays." Why, on this account most especially we ought to rejoice, because
death decays, and mortality perishes, not the substance of the body. For neither,
should you see a statue being cast, would you call the process destruction, but an
improved formation. Just so do thou reason also concerning the body, and do not

bewail. Then it were right to bewail, had it remained in its chastisement.
"But," says one, "this ought to take place without the decay of our bodies;
they should continue entire." And what would this have advantaged either the
living or the departed? How long are you lovers of the body? How long are you
rivetted to the earth and gaping after shadows? Why, what good would this have
done? Or rather, what harm would it not have done? For did our bodies not
decay, in the first place the greatest of all evils, pride, would have continued with
many. For if even while this is going on, and worms gushing out, many have
earnestly sought to be gods; what would not have been the result did the body
continue?
In the second place, it would not be believed to be of earth; for if, its end
witnessing this, some yet doubt; what would they not have suspected if they did
not see this? Thirdly, the bodies would have been excessively loved; and most
men would have become more carnal and gross; and if even now some cleave to
men's tombs and coffins, after that themselves have perished, what would they
not have done, if they had even their image preserved? Fourthly, they would not
have earnestly desired the things to come. Fifthly, they that say the world is
eternal, would have been more confirmed, and would have denied God as
Creator. Sixthly, they would not have known the excellence of the soul, and how
great a thing is the presence of a soul in a body. Seventhly, many of them that
lose their relations would have left their cities, and have dwelt in the tombs, and
have become frantic, conversing continually with their own dead. For if even
now men form to themselves images, since they cannot keep the body (for
neither is it possible, but whether they will or no it glides and hurries from
them), and are rivetted to the planks of wood; what monstrous thing would they
not then have devised? To my thinking, the generality would have even built
temples for such bodies, and they that are skilled in such sorceries would have
persuaded evil spirits to speak through them; since at least even now, they that
venture on the arts of necromancy attempt many things more out of the way than
these. And how many idolatries would not have arisen from hence? When men