These words were spoken indeed to the Athenians: but it were seasonable
that one should say to us also, "that all men everywhere must repent, because he
has appointed a day, in the which He will judge the world." See how he brings
Him in as Judge also: Him, both provident for the world, and merciful and
forgiving and powerful and wise, and, in a word possessing all the attributes of a
Creator. "Having given assurance to all men," i.e. He has given proof in the
rising (of Jesus) from the dead. Let us repent then: for we must assuredly be
judged. If Christ rose not, we shall not be judged: but if he rose, we shall without
doubt be judged. "For to this end," it is said, "did He also die, that he might be
Lord both of the dead and living." [Romans 14:9] "For we shall all stand before
the judgment seat of Christ, that every one may receive according to that he has
done." [2 Corinthians 5:10] Do not imagine that these are but words. Lo! He
introduced also the subject of the resurrection of all men; for in no other way can
the world be judged. And that, "In that He has raised Him from the dead,"
relates to the body: for that was dead, that had fallen. Among the Greeks, as their
notions of Creation, so likewise of the Judgment, are children's fancies, ravings
of drunken men. But let us, who know these things accurately, do something that
is to the purpose: let us be made friends unto God. How long shall we be at
enmity with Him? How long shall we entertain dislike towards Him? "God
forbid!" you will say: "Why do you say such things?" I would wish not to say the
things I say, if you did not do the things ye do: but as things are, what is the use
now in keeping silence from words, when the plain evidence of deeds so cries
aloud? How then, how shall we love Him? I have told you thousands of ways,
thousands of times: but I will speak it also now. One way I seem to myself to
have discovered, a very great and admirable way. Namely, after acknowledging
to Him our general obligations—what none shall be able to express (I mean),
what has been done for each of us in his own person, of these also let us bethink
ourselves, because these are of great force: let each one of us reckon them up
with himself, and make diligent search, and as it were in a book let him have the
benefits of God written down; for instance, if at any time having fallen into

dangers he has escaped the hands of his enemies; if ever having gone out on a
journey at an untimely hour, he has escaped danger; if ever, having had an
encounter with wicked men, he has got the better of them; or if ever, having
fallen into sickness, he has recovered when all had given him over: for this
avails much for attaching us to God. For if that Mordecai, when the services
done by him were brought to the king's remembrance, found them to be so
available, that he in return rose to that height of splendor [Esther 6:2-11]: much
more we, if we call to mind, and make diligent enquiry of these two points, what
sins we have committed against God, and what good He has done to us, shall
thus both be thankful, and give Him freely all that is ours. But no one gives a
thought to any of these things: but just as regarding our sins we say that we are
sinners, while we do not enquire into them specifically, so with regard to God's
benefits (we say), that God has done us good, and do not specifically enquire,
where, and in how great number and at what time. But from this time forth let us
be very exact in our reckoning. For if any one can recall even those things which
happened long ago, let him reckon up all accurately, as one who will find a great
treasure. This is also profitable to us in keeping us from despair. For when we
see that he has often protected us, we shall not despair, nor suppose that we are
cast off: but we shall take it as a strong pledge of His care for us, when we
bethink us how, though we have sinned, we are not punished, but even enjoy
protection from Him. Let me now tell you a case, which I heard from a certain
person, in which was a child, and it happened on a time that he was in the
country with his mother, being not yet fifteen years old. Just then there came a
bad air, in consequence of which a fever attacked them both, for in fact it was the
autumn season. It happened that the mother succeeded in getting into the town
before (they could stop her); but the boy, when the physicians on the spot
ordered him, with the fever burning within him, to gargle his throat, resisted,
having forsooth his own wise view of the matter, and thinking he should be
better able to quench the fire, if he took nothing whatever, therefore, in his
unseasonable spirit of opposition, boy-like, he would take nothing. But when he