This then is one reason for the accident of bread remaining, that something may be
found permanent under the conversion. Another reason is this. If the substance of bread
was converted into the Body of Christ, and the accidents of bread also passed away,
there would not ensue upon such conversion the being of the Body of Christ in
substance where the bread was before: for nothing would be left to refer the Body of
Christ to that place. But since the dimensions of bread (quantitas dimensiva panis),
whereby the bread held this particular place, remain after conversion, while the
substance of bread is changed into the Body of Christ, the Body of Christ comes to be
under the dimensions of bread, and in a manner to occupy the place of the bread by
means of the said dimensions.

Thomas's own illustration, that because bread and wine can be changed into the Body
and Blood of Christ, therefore, of my two fingers, one can be changed into the other. Of
the intrinsic possibility of this latter conversion, -- and not even God can effect intrinsic
impossibilities, -- I confess I entertain the gravest doubts. And Catholic faith allows me
to doubt it. Vasquez (tom. 3, disp. 184) discusses an quaelibet res in quamlibet aliam
converti possit.

## CHAPTER LXIV--An Answer to Difficulties raised in respect of Place
IN this Sacrament something is present by force of conversion, and something by
natural concomitance. By force of conversion there is present that which is the
immediate term into which conversion is made. Such under the species of bread is the
Body of Christ, into which the substance of bread is converted by the words, This is my
body. Such again under the species of wine is the Blood of Christ, when it is said, This
is the chalice of my blood. By natural concomitance all other things are there, which,
though conversion is not made into them, nevertheless are really united with the term
into which conversion is made. Clearly, the term into which conversion of the bread is
made is not the Divinity of Christ, nor His Soul: nevertheless the Soul and the Divinity of
Christ are under the species of bread, because of the real union of them both with the
Body of Christ. If during the three days that Christ lay dead this Sacrament had been
celebrated, the Soul of Christ would not have been under the species of bread, because
it was not really united with His Body: nor would His Blood have been under the species
of bread, nor His Body under the species of wine, because of the separation of the two
in death. But now, because the Body of Christ in its nature is not without His Blood, the
Body and Blood are contained under both species; the Body under the species of bread
by force of conversion, and the Blood by natural concomitance; and conversely under
the species of wine.
Hereby we have an answer to the difficulty of the incommensurateness of the Body of
Christ with the space taken up by the bread. The substance of the bread is converted
directly into the substance of the Body of Christ: but the dimensions of the Body of
Christ are in the Sacrament by natural concomitance, not by force of conversion, since
the dimensions of the bread remain. Thus then the Body of Christ is not referred to
this particular place by means of its own dimensions, as though commensurate room
had to be found for them, but by means of the dimensions of the bread, which remain,
and for which commensurate room is found.
And so of the plurality of places. By its own proper dimensions the Body of Christ is in
one place only; but by means of the dimensions of the bread that passes into it, the
Body of Christ is in as many places as there are places in which the mystery of this
conversion is celebrated, -- not divided into parts, but whole in each: for every
consecrated bread is converted into the whole Body of Christ.