2 Corinthians 11:16
"Again I say." For he had even already used much preparatory corrective:
'But nevertheless I am not contented with what I have said, but I say yet again,'
"Let no man think me foolish." For this was what they did— boasted
without a reason.— But observe, I pray you, how often, when about to enter
upon his own praises, he checks himself. 'For indeed it is the act of folly,' he
says, 'to boast: but I do it, not as playing the fool, but because compelled. But if
you do not believe me, but though ye see there is a necessity will condemn me;
not even so will I decline the task. ' Do you see how he showed that there was
great necessity for his speaking. For he that shunned not even this suspicion,
consider what violent impulsion to speak he must have undergone, how he
travailed and was constrained to speak. But, nevertheless, even so he employs
this thing with moderation. For he did not say, 'that I may glory.' And when
about to do "a little," again he uses yet another deprecatory expression , saying,

2 Corinthians 11:17
"That which I speak, I speak not after the Lord, but as in foolishness, in this
confidence of glorifying."
Do you see how glorying is not "after the Lord?" For He says, "When you
shall have done all, say, We are unprofitable servants." [Luke 17:10] Howbeit,
by itself indeed it is not "after the Lord," but by the intention it becomes so. And
therefore he said, "That which I speak," not accusing the motive, but the words.
Since his aim is so admirable as to dignify the words also. For as a manslayer,
though his action be of those most strictly forbidden, has often been approved
from the intention; and as circumcision, although it is not 'after the Lord,' has
become so from the intention, so also glorying. And wherefore then does he not
use so great strictness of expression? Because he is hastening on to another
point, and he freely gratifies even to superfluity those who are desirous to find a
handle against him, so that he may say only the things that are profitable; for
when said they were enough to extinguish all that suspicion. "But as in
foolishness." Before he says, Would that you could bear with me in a little
foolishness,'' [2 Corinthians 11:4] but now "as in foolishness;" for the farther he
proceeds, the more he clears his language. Then that you may not think that he
plays the fool on all points, he added, "in this confidence of glorying." In this
particular he means: just as in another place he said, "that we be not put to
shame," and added, "in this confidence of glorying." [2 Corinthians 9:4] And
again, in another place, having said, "Or what I purpose do I purpose according
to the flesh, that with me there should be the yea yea, and the nay nay?" [2
Corinthians 1:17] And having shown that he cannot in all cases even fulfil what
he promises, because he does not purpose after the flesh, lest any should make
this suspicion stretch to the doctrine also, he adds, "But as God is faithful our
word towards you was not yea and nay." [2 Corinthians 1:18]