bears nothing of itself? But let us not be void of understanding. What takes place
is neither from the earth, nor from the grape-stone, but from Him who is Lord
both of the earth and of its seeds. For this reason He has caused the same thing to
be made both without them, and with them. In the first place, showing His own
power, when he said, "Let the earth bring forth the herb of grass." [From
Genesis 1:11] And secondly, besides showing His power, instructing us also to
be laborious and industrious.
Why then have these things been said by us? Not idly, but that we may
believe also in the Resurrection, and that, when we again wish to apprehend
something by our reasonings, but do not find it, we may not be angry and take
offense, but discreetly withdrawing and checking our reasoning, we may take
refuge in the power and skillfulness of God. Knowing these things therefore, let
us put a curb upon our reasonings. Let us not transgress our bounds, nor the
measures that have been assigned to our knowledge. For, "If any man," he says,
"thinks that he knows anything, he knows nothing yet as he ought to know." [1
Corinthians 8:2]
I speak not concerning God, he says, but concerning everything. For what?
Would you learn about the earth? What do you know? Tell me. How great is its
measure? What is its size? What is its manner of position? What is its essence?
What is its place? Where does it stand, and upon what? None of these things can
you tell? But that it is cold, and dry, and black, this you can tell— and nothing
farther. Again, concerning the sea? But there you will be reduced to the same
uncertainty, not knowing where it begins, and where it ends, and upon what it is
borne, what supports the bottom of it, and what sort of place there is for it, and
whether after it there is a continent, or it ends in water and air. And what do you
know of the things that are in it? But what? Let me pass over the elements.
Would you have us select the smallest of plants? The unfruitful grass, a thing
which we all know, tell me, how it is brought forth? Is not the material of it
water, and earth, and dung? What is it that makes it appear so beautiful, and have
such an admirable color? Whence does that beauty so fade away? This is not the

work of water, or of earth. Do you see that there is everywhere need of faith?
How does the earth bring forth, how does it travail? Tell me. But you can tell me
none of these things.
Be instructed, O man, in things that are here below, and be not curious nor
overmeddling about heaven. And would it were heaven, and not the Lord of
heaven! Do you not know the earth from which you were brought forth, in which
you were nourished, which thou inhabitest, on which you walk, without which
you can not even breathe; and are you curious about things so far removed?
Truly "man is vanity." [Psalm 39:5, and 144:5] And if any one should bid you
descend into the deep, and trace out things at the bottom of the sea, you would
not tolerate the command. But, when no one compels you, you are willing of
yourself to fathom the unsearchable abyss? Do not so, I beseech you. But let us
sail upwards, not floating, for we shall soon be weary, and sink; but using the
divine Scriptures, as some vessel, let us unfurl the sails of faith. If we sail in
them, then the Word of God will be present with us as our Pilot. But if we float
upon human reasonings, it will not be so. For to whom of those who float, is a
Pilot present? So that the danger is twofold, in that there is no vessel, and that
the Pilot is absent. For if even the boat without a pilot is unsafe, when both are
wanting, what hope is there of safety? Let us not then throw ourselves into
manifest danger, but let us go upon a safe vessel, having fastened ourselves by
the sacred anchor. For thus we shall sail into the tranquil haven, with much
merchandise, and at the same time with great safety, and we shall obtain the
blessings laid up for them that love Him, in Christ Jesus our Lord, with whom, to
the Father, together with the Holy Spirit, be glory, power, honor, now and always
and world without end. Amen.