justified, them He also glorified" by the gift, by the adoption.
Ver. 31. "What shall we then say to these things?"
As if he should say, Let me then hear no more about the dangers and the
malicious devices from every quarter. For even if some disbelieve the things to
come, still they have not a word to say against the good things that have already
taken place; as, for instance, the friendship of God towards you from the first,
the justifying, the glory. And yet these things He gave you by means seemingly
distressing. And those things which you thought to be disgracing, the Cross,
scourges, bonds, these are what have set the whole world aright. As then by what
Himself suffered, though of aspect forbidding in man's eye, even by these He
effected the liberty and salvation of the whole race; so also is He wont to do in
regard to those things which you endure, turning your sufferings unto glory and
renown for you. "If God be for us, who can be against us?"
Why, it may be said, who is there that is not against us? Why the world is
against us, both kings and peoples, both relations and countrymen. Yet these that
be against us, so far are they from thwarting us at all, that even without their will
they become to us the causes of crowns, and procurers of countless blessings, in
that God's wisdom turns their plots unto our salvation and glory. See how really
no one is against us! For it was this which gave new lustre to Job, the fact that
the devil was in arms against him. For the devil moved at once friends against
him, his wife against him, and wounds, and servants, and a thousand other
machinations. And it turned out that none of them was against him on the whole.
And yet this was no great thing to him, though it was great in itself, but what is a
far greater thing is, that it turned out that they were all for him. For since God
was for him, even things seemingly against him all became for him. And this
happened with the Apostles also, inasmuch as both the Jews, and they of the
Gentiles, and false brethren, and rulers, and peoples, and famines, and poverty,
and ten thousand things were against them; and yet nothing was against them.
For the things which made them the most bright and conspicuous, and great in
the sight both of God and of men, were these. Just reflect then what a word Paul

has uttered about the faithful, and those who are truly ([ἀ] [κριβὥς]) crucified,
such as not even the Emperor with his diadem can achieve. For against him there
are abundance of barbarians that arm themselves, and of enemies that invade,
and of bodyguards that plot, and of subjects many that oftentimes are ever and
anon rebelling, and thousands of other things. But against the faithful who takes
good heed unto God's laws, neither man, nor devil, nor anything besides, can
stand! For if you take away his money, you have become the procurer of a
reward to him. If you speak ill of him, by the evil report he gains fresh lustre in
God's sight. If you cast him into starvation, the more will his glory and his
reward be. If (what seems the most severe stroke of all) you give him over to
death, you are twining a crown of martyrdom about him. What then is equivalent
to this way of life, being that against which nothing can be done, but even they
that seem to devise mischief are no less of service to him than benefactors? This
is why he says, "If God be for us, who can be against us?" Next, not being
satisfied with what he had already said, the greatest sign of His love for us, and
that which he always is dwelling over, that he sets down here also; I mean, the
slaying of His Son. For He did not only justify us, he means, and glorify us, and
make us conformed to that Image, but not even His Son did He spare for you.
And therefore he proceeds to say,
Ver. 32. "He that spared not His own Son, but delivered Him up for us all,
how shall He not with Him also freely give us all things?"
And here the words he uses are high-wrought ([μεθ᾿ ὑτερβολἥς]) and
exceedingly warm, to show his love. How then is He to neglect us, in whose
behalf "He spared not His own Son, but delivered Him up for us all?" For reflect
what goodness it is not to spare even His own Son, but to give Him up, and to
give Him up for all, and those worthless, and unfeeling, and enemies, and
blasphemers. How then shall He not with Him also freely give us all things?
What he means then is much as follows; If He gave His own Son, and not
merely gave Him, but gave Him to death, why doubt any more about the rest,
since you have the Master? Why be dubious about the chattels, when you have