only best and good Being, by Him also who has the gift of immortality, having been formed after
His likeness (predestinated, according to the prescience of the Father, that we, who had as yet no
existence, might come into being), and made the first-fruits of creation—have received, in the
times known beforehand, [the blessings of salvation] according to the ministration of the Word,
who is perfect in all things, as the mighty Word, and very man, who, redeeming us by His own
blood in a manner consonant to reason, gave Himself as a redemption for those who had been led
into captivity. And since the apostasy tyrannized over us unjustly, and, though we were by nature
the property of the omnipotent God, alienated us contrary to nature, rendering us its own disciples,
the Word of God, powerful in all things, and not defective with regard to His own justice, did
righteously turn against that apostasy, and redeem from it His own property, not by violent means,
as the [apostasy] had obtained dominion over us at the beginning, when it insatiably snatched away
what was not its own, but by means of persuasion, as became a God of counsel, who does not use
violent means to obtain what He desires; so that neither should justice be infringed upon, nor the
ancient handiwork of God go to destruction. Since the Lord thus has redeemed us through His own
blood, giving His soul for our souls, and His flesh for our flesh, and has also poured out the
Spirit of the Father for the union and communion of God and man, imparting indeed God to men
by means of the Spirit, and, on the other hand, attaching man to God by His own incarnation, and
bestowing upon us at His coming immortality durably and truly, by means of communion with
God,—all the doctrines of the heretics fall to ruin.
2. Vain indeed are those who allege that He appeared in mere seeming. For these things were
not done in appearance only, but in actual reality. But if He did appear as a man, when He was not
a man, neither could the Holy Spirit have rested upon Him,—an occurrence which did actually take
place—as the Spirit is invisible; nor, [in that case], was there any degree of truth in Him, for He
was not that which He seemed to be. But I have already remarked that Abraham and the other
prophets beheld Him after a prophetical manner, foretelling in vision what should come to pass.
If, then, such a being has now appeared in outward semblance different from what he was in reality,
there has been a certain prophetical vision made to men; and another advent of His must be looked
forward to, in which He shall be such as He has now been seen in a prophetic manner. And I have
proved already, that it is the same thing to say that He appeared merely to outward seeming, and
[to affirm] that He received nothing from Mary. For He would not have been one truly possessing
flesh and blood, by which He redeemed us, unless He had summed up in Himself the ancient
formation of Adam. Vain therefore are the disciples of Valentinus who put forth this opinion, in
order that they my exclude the flesh from salvation, and cast aside what God has fashioned.
3. Vain also are the Ebionites, who do not receive by faith into their soul the union of God and
man, but who remain in the old leaven of [the natural] birth, and who do not choose to understand