"Ought this fellow to live? Or at all to breathe and see this sun?" whereas to the
other sort you are both cheerful and liberal, as though you were appointed to
dispense the prize of that ridiculous and Satanic unseemliness. Wherefore with
more propriety to those who appoint these sports and bestow nothing till they see
others punishing themselves, might these words be addressed, "Ought these men
to live, to breathe at all, or see the sun, who transgress against our common
nature, who insult God?" For whereas God says, "Give alms, and I give you the
kingdom of heaven," you hear not: but when the Devil shows you a head pierced
with nails, on a sudden you have become liberal. And the contrivance of the evil
spirit pregnant with so much mischief, has wrought upon you more than the
promise of God bringing innumerable blessings. If gold were to be laid down to
prevent the doing of these things or the looking upon them when done, there is
nothing which you ought not to practise and endure, to get rid of so excessive
madness; but you contrive every thing to have them done, and look on the doing
of them. Still do you ask then, tell me, to what end is hell-fire? Nay, ask not that
any more, but how is there one hell only? For of how many punishments are not
they worthy, who get up this cruel and merciless spectacle and laugh at what
both they and yourselves ought to weep over; yea, rather of the two, you who
compel them to such unseemly doings.
"But I do not compel them," say you. What else but compelling is it, I
should like to know? Those who are more modest and shed tears and invoke
God, you are impatient even of listening to; but for these thou both findest silver
in abundance and bringest around you many to admire them.
"Well, let us leave off," say you, "pitying them. And do you too enjoin this?"
Nay, it is not pity, O man, to demand so severe a punishment for a few pence, to
order men to maim themselves for necessary food and cut into many pieces the
skin of their head so mercilessly and pitifully. "Gently," say you, "for it is not we
who pierce those heads." Would it were thou, and the horror would not be so
horrible. For he that slays a man does a much more grievous thing than he who
bids him slay himself, which indeed happens in the case of these persons. For

they endure more bitter pains when they are bidden to be themselves the
executors of these wicked commands.
And all this in Antioch, where men were first called Christians, wherein are
bred the most civilized of mankind, where in old time the fruit of charity
flourished so abundantly. For not only to those at hand but also to those very far
off, they used to send, and this when famine was expected.
10. What then ought we to do? Say you. To cease from this savage practice:
and to convince all that are in need that by doing these things they will gain
nothing, but if they modestly approach they shall find your liberality great. Let
them be once aware of this, even though they be of all men most miserable, they
will never choose to punish themselves so severely, I pledge myself; nay, they
will even give you thanks for delivering them both from the mockery and the
pain of that way of life. But as it is, for charioteers you would let out even your
own children, and for dancers you would throw away your very souls, while for
Christ an hungered you spare not the smallest portion of your substance. But if
you give a little silver, you think as much of it as if you had laid out all you have,
not knowing that not the giving but the giving liberally, this is true almsgiving.
Wherefore also it is not those simply who give whom the prophet proclaims and
calls happy, but those who bestow liberally. For he does not say simply, He has
given, but what? [Psalm 112:8] "he has dispersed abroad, he has given to the
poor." For what profit is it, when out of it you give as it were a glass of water out
of the sea, and even a widow's magnanimity is beyond your emulation? And how
will you say, "Pity me, O Lord, according to your great pity, and according to
the multitude of your mercies blot out my transgression," yourself not pitying
according to any great pity, nay, haply not according to any little. For I am
greatly ashamed, I own, when I see many of the rich riding upon their goldenbitted chargers with a train of domestics clad in gold, and having couches of
silver and other and more pomp, and yet when there is need to give to a poor
man, becoming more beggarly than the very poorest.
11. But what is their constant talk? "He has," they say, "the common