His deliberate choice and determination. For the further evidence of
which we must remember that every agent intends to make
something finite, as is clear from what has been said above when we
treated of the infinite (Question 7, Articles 2,3). Now whosoever
intends some definite measure in his effect thinks out some definite
number in the essential parts, which are by their very nature required
for the perfection of the whole. For of those things which are
required not principally, but only on account of something else, he
does not select any definite number "per se"; but he accepts and
uses them in such numbers as are necessary on account of that
other thing. For instance, a builder thinks out the definite
measurements of a house, and also the definite number of rooms
which he wishes to make in the house; and definite measurements of
the walls and roof; he does not, however, select a definite number of
stones, but accepts and uses just so many as are sufficient for the
required measurements of the wall. So also must we consider
concerning God in regard to the whole universe, which is His effect.
For He pre-ordained the measurements of the whole of the universe,
and what number would befit the essential parts of that universe--that is to say, which have in some way been ordained in perpetuity;
how many spheres, how many stars, how many elements, and how
many species. Individuals, however, which undergo corruption, are
not ordained as it were chiefly for the good of the universe, but in a
secondary way, inasmuch as the good of the species is preserved
through them. Whence, although God knows the total number of
individuals, the number of oxen, flies and such like, is not preordained by God "per se"; but divine providence produces just so
many as are sufficient for the preservation of the species. Now of all
creatures the rational creature is chiefly ordained for the good of the
universe, being as such incorruptible; more especially those who
attain to eternal happiness, since they more immediately reach the
ultimate end. Whence the number of the predestined is certain to
God; not only by way of knowledge, but also by way of a principal
pre-ordination.
It is not exactly the same thing in the case of the number of the
reprobate, who would seem to be pre-ordained by God for the good
of the elect, in whose regard "all things work together unto
good" (Rm. 8:28). Concerning the number of all the predestined,
some say that so many men will be saved as angels fell; some, so
many as there were angels left; others, as many as the number of
angels created by God. It is, however, better to say that, "to God
alone is known the number for whom is reserved eternal happiness

[From the 'secret' prayer of the missal, 'pro vivis et defunctis.']"
Reply to Objection 1: These words of Deuteronomy must be taken as
applied to those who are marked out by God beforehand in respect
to present righteousness. For their number is increased and
diminished, but not the number of the predestined.
Reply to Objection 2: The reason of the quantity of any one part must
be judged from the proportion of that part of the whole. Thus in God
the reason why He has made so many stars, or so many species of
things, or predestined so many, is according to the proportion of the
principal parts to the good of the whole universe.
Reply to Objection 3: The good that is proportionate to the common
state of nature is to be found in the majority; and is wanting in the
minority. The good that exceeds the common state of nature is to be
found in the minority, and is wanting in the majority. Thus it is clear
that the majority of men have a sufficient knowledge for the
guidance of life; and those who have not this knowledge are said to
be half-witted or foolish; but they who attain to a profound
knowledge of things intelligible are a very small minority in respect
to the rest. Since their eternal happiness, consisting in the vision of
God, exceeds the common state of nature, and especially in so far as
this is deprived of grace through the corruption of original sin, those
who are saved are in the minority. In this especially, however,
appears the mercy of God, that He has chosen some for that
salvation, from which very many in accordance with the common
course and tendency of nature fall short.