was very prudent; for he is not as one perplexed, angry, and annoyed, but
perseveres, wishing to bring over the man, and manifesting to us from the first of
his preaching the firmness which becomes an Apostle. Wherefore also Christ
says, "Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile." So that there is such a
person as a false Israelite; but this is not such an one; for his judgment, Christ
says, is impartial, he speaks nothing from favor, or from ill-feeling. Yet the Jews,
when they were asked where Christ should be born, replied, "In Bethlehem"
[Matthew 2:5], and produced the evidence, saying, "And thou, Bethlehem, art by
no means the least among the princes of Judah." [Micah 5:2] Before they had
seen Him they bore this witness, but when they saw Him in their malice they
concealed the testimony, saying, "But as for this fellow, we know not whence He
is." [John 9:29] Nathanael did not so, but continued to retain the opinion which
he had from the beginning, that He was not "of Nazareth."
How then do the prophets call Him a Nazarene? From His being brought up
and abiding there. And He omits to say, "I am not 'of Nazareth,' as Philip has
told you, but of Bethlehem," that He may not at once make the account seem
questionable; and besides this, because, even if He had gained belief, He would
not have given sufficient proof that He was the Christ. For what hindered Him
without being Christ, from being of Bethlehem, like the others who were born
there? This then He omits; but He does that which has most power to bring him
over, for He shows that He was present when they were conversing. For when
Nathanael had said,

John 1:48
"Whence know Thou me? . . . Before that Philip called you, when you were under
the fig-tree, I saw you."
Observe a man firm and steady. When Christ had said, "Behold an Israelite
indeed," he was not made vain by this approbation, he ran not after this open
praise, but continues seeking and searching more exactly, and desires to learn
something certain. He still enquired as of a man, but Jesus answered as God. For
He said, "I have known you from the first," (him and the candor of his character,
this He knew not as a man, from having closely followed him, but as God from
the first,) "and but now I saw you by the fig-tree"; when there was no one present
there but only Philip and Nathanael who said all these things in private. It is
mentioned, that having seen him afar off, He said, "Behold an Israelite indeed";
to show, that before Philip came near, Christ spoke these words, that the
testimony might not be suspected. For this reason also He named the time, the
place, and the tree; because if He had only said, "Before Philip came to you, I
saw you," He might have been suspected of having sent him, and of saying
nothing wonderful; but now, by mentioning both the place where he was when
addressed by Philip, and the name of the tree, and the time of the conversation,
He showed that His foreknowledge was unquestionable.
And He did not merely show to him His foreknowledge, but instructed him
also in another way. For He brought him to a recollection of what they then had
said; as, "Can there any good thing come out of Nazareth?" And it was most
especially on this account that Nathanael received Him, because when he had
uttered these words, He did not condemn, but praised and approved him.
Therefore he was assured that this was indeed the Christ, both from His
foreknowledge, and from His having exactly searched out his sentiments, which
was the act of One who would show that He knew what was in his mind; and
besides, from His not having blamed, but rather praised him when he had