THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.5, C.4.

glory." Or because, as Augustine says (Qq. lxxxiii, qu. 80), "in all that
union the Word is the highest, and flesh the last and lowest. Hence,
wishing to commend the love of God's humility to us, the Evangelist
mentioned the Word and flesh, leaving the soul on one side, since it
is less than the Word and nobler than flesh." Again, it was
reasonable to mention flesh, which, as being farther away from the
Word, was less assumable, as it would seem.
Reply to Objection 2: The Word is the fountain of life, as the first
effective cause of life; but the soul is the principle of the life of the
body, as its form. Now the form is the effect of the agent. Hence from
the presence of the Word it might rather have been concluded that
the body was animated, just as from the presence of fire it may be
concluded that the body, in which fire adheres, is warm.
Reply to Objection 3: It is not unfitting, indeed it is necessary to say
that in Christ there was a nature which was constituted by the soul
coming to the body. But Damascene denied that in Jesus Christ
there was a common species, i.e. a third something resulting from
the Godhead and the humanity.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.5, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the Son of God assumed a human mind

or intellect?
Objection 1: It would seem that the Son of God did not assume a
human mind or intellect. For where a thing is present, its image is
not required. But man is made to God's image, as regards his mind,
as Augustine says (De Trin. xiv, 3,6). Hence, since in Christ there
was the presence of the Divine Word itself, there was no need of a
human mind.
Objection 2: Further, the greater light dims the lesser. But the Word
of God, Who is "the light, which enlighteneth every man that cometh
into this world," as is written Jn. 1:9, is compared to the mind as the
greater light to the lesser; since our mind is a light, being as it were a
lamp enkindled by the First Light (Prov. 20:27): "The spirit of a man
is the lamp of the Lord." Therefore in Christ Who is the Word of God,
there is no need of a human mind.
Objection 3: Further, the assumption of human nature by the Word of
God is called His Incarnation. But the intellect or human mind is
nothing carnal, either in its substance or in its act. for it is not the act
of a body, as is proved De Anima iii, 6. Hence it would seem that the
Son of God did not assume a human mind.
On the contrary, Augustine [Fulgentius] says (De Fide ad Petrum
xiv): "Firmly hold and nowise doubt that Christ the Son of God has
true flesh and a rational soul of the same kind as ours, since of His
flesh He says (Lk. 24:39): 'Handle, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh
and bones, as you see Me to have.' And He proves that He has a
soul, saying (Jn. 10:17): 'I lay down My soul that I may take it again.'
And He proves that He has an intellect, saying (Mt. 11:29): 'Learn of
Me, because I am meek and humble of heart.' And God says of Him
by the prophet (Is. 52:13): 'Behold my servant shall understand.'"
I answer that, As Augustine says (De Haeres. 49,50), "the
Apollinarists thought differently from the Catholic Church
concerning the soul of Christ, saying with the Arians, that Christ
took flesh alone, without a soul; and on being overcome on this
point by the Gospel witness, they went on to say that the mind was
wanting to Christ's soul, but that the Word supplied its place." But
this position is refuted by the same arguments as the preceding.