to those who attempt to comfort you, I also would second the words of your
handmaids by some contributions of my own. For while the tempest is still
severe, and a full gale of sorrow is blowing, he who exhorts another to desist
from grief would only provoke him to increased lamentations and having
incurred his hatred would add fuel to the flame by such speeches besides being
regarded himself as an unkind and foolish person. But when the troubled water
has begun to subside, and God has allayed the fury of the waves, then we may
freely spread the sails of our discourse. For in a moderate storm skill may
perhaps play its part; but when the onslaught of the wind is irresistible
experience is of no avail. For these reasons I have hitherto held my peace, and
even now have only just ventured to break silence because I have heard from
your uncle that one may begin to take courage, as some of your more esteemed
handmaids are now venturing to discourse at length upon these matters, women
also outside your own household, who are your kinsfolk, or are otherwise
qualified for this office. Now if you allow them to talk to you I have the greatest
hope and confidence that you will not disdain my words but do your best to give
them a calm and quiet hearing. Under any circumstances indeed the female sex
is the more apt to be sensitive to suffering; but when in addition there is youth,
and untimely widowhood, and inexperience in business, and a great crowd of
cares, while the whole life previously has been nurtured in the midst of luxury,
and cheerfulness and wealth, the evil is increased many fold, and if she who is
subjected to it does not obtain help from on high even an accidental thought will
be able to unhinge her. Now I hold this to be the foremost and greatest evidence
of God's care concerning you; for that you have not been overwhelmed by grief,
nor driven out of your natural condition of mind when such great troubles
suddenly concurred to afflict you was not due to any human assistance but to the
almighty hand the understanding of which there is no measure, the wisdom
which is past finding out, the "Father of mercies and the God of all comfort."
[2 Corinthians 1:3] "For He Himself" it is said "has smitten us, and He will heal
us; He will strike, and He will dress the wound and make us whole." [Hosea 6:2]

For as long as that blessed husband of yours was with you, you enjoyed
honour, and care and zealous attention; in fact you enjoyed such as you might
expect to enjoy from a husband; but since God took him to Himself He has
supplied his place to you. And this is not my saying but that of the blessed
prophet David for he says "He will take up the fatherless and the widow," and
elsewhere he calls Him "father of the fatherless and judge of the widow;" thus in
many passages you will see that He earnestly considers the cause of this class of
mankind.
2. But lest the continual repetition of this name of widow should upset your
soul, and disconcert your reason, having been inflicted on you in the very flower
of your age, I wish first of all to discourse on this point, and to prove to you that
this name of widow is not a title of calamity but of honour, aye the greatest
honour. For do not quote the erroneous opinion of the world as a testimony, but
the admonition of the blessed Paul, or rather of Christ. For in his utterances
Christ was speaking through him as he himself said "If you seek a proof of Christ
who is speaking in me?" [2 Corinthians 13:3] What then does he say? "Let not a
widow be enrolled under threescore years of age" and again "but the younger
widows refuse" [1 Timothy 5:9, 11] intending by both these sayings to indicate to
us the importance of the matter. And when he is making regulations about
bishops he nowhere prescribes a standard of age, but in this case he is very
particular on the point, and, pray, why so? Not because widowhood is greater
than priesthood, but because widows have greater labour to undergo than priests,
being encompassed on many sides by a variety of business public and private.
For as an unfortified city lies exposed to all who wish to plunder it, so a young
woman living in widowhood has many who form designs upon her on every side
not only those who aim at getting her money but also those who are bent upon
corrupting her modesty. And besides these we shall find that she is subjected to
other conditions also likely to occasion her fall. For the contempt of servants
their negligence of business, the loss of that respect which was formerly paid,
the sight of contemporaries in prosperity, and often the hankering after luxury,