species: whereas the species of man cannot be abstracted by the
intellect form "flesh and bones."
Mathematical species, however, can be abstracted by the intellect
from sensible matter, not only from individual, but also from
common matter; not from common intelligible matter, but only from
individual matter. For sensible matter is corporeal matter as subject
to sensible qualities, such as being cold or hot, hard or soft, and the
like: while intelligible matter is substance as subject to quantity. Now
it is manifest that quantity is in substance before other sensible
qualities are. Hence quantities, such as number, dimension, and
figures, which are the terminations of quantity, can be considered
apart from sensible qualities; and this is to abstract them from
sensible matter; but they cannot be considered without
understanding the substance which is subject to the quantity; for
that would be to abstract them from common intelligible matter. Yet
they can be considered apart from this or that substance; for that is
to abstract them from individual intelligible matter. But some things
can be abstracted even from common intelligible matter, such as
"being," "unity," "power," "act," and the like; all these can exist
without matter, as is plain regarding immaterial things. Because
Plato failed to consider the twofold kind of abstraction, as above
explained (ad 1), he held that all those things which we have stated
to be abstracted by the intellect, are abstract in reality.
Reply to Objection 3: Colors, as being in individual corporeal matter,
have the same mode of existence as the power of sight: therefore
they can impress their own image on the eye. But phantasms, since
they are images of individuals, and exist in corporeal organs, have
not the same mode of existence as the human intellect, and therefore
have not the power of themselves to make an impression on the
passive intellect. This is done by the power of the active intellect
which by turning towards the phantasm produces in the passive
intellect a certain likeness which represents, as to its specific
conditions only, the thing reflected in the phantasm. It is thus that
the intelligible species is said to be abstracted from the phantasm;
not that the identical form which previously was in the phantasm is
subsequently in the passive intellect, as a body transferred from one
place to another.
Reply to Objection 4: Not only does the active intellect throw light on
the phantasm: it does more; by its own power it abstracts the
intelligible species from the phantasm. It throws light on the

phantasm, because, just as the sensitive part acquires a greater
power by its conjunction with the intellectual part, so by the power of
the active intellect the phantasms are made more fit for the
abstraction therefrom of intelligible intentions. Furthermore, the
active intellect abstracts the intelligible species from the phantasm,
forasmuch as by the power of the active intellect we are able to
disregard the conditions of individuality, and to take into our
consideration the specific nature, the image of which informs the
passive intellect.
Reply to Objection 5: Our intellect both abstracts the intelligible
species from the phantasms, inasmuch as it considers the natures of
things in universal, and, nevertheless, understands these natures in
the phantasms since it cannot understand even the things of which it
abstracts the species, without turning to the phantasms, as we have
said above (Question 84, Article 7).