FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.5, C.3.

Reply to Objection 1: The one penny signifies that Happiness is one
in its object. But the many mansions signify the manifold Happiness
in the divers degrees of enjoyment.
Reply to Objection 2: Happiness is said to be the supreme good,
inasmuch as it is the perfect possession or enjoyment of the
Supreme Good.
Reply to Objection 3: None of the Blessed lacks any desirable good;
since they have the Infinite Good Itself, Which is "the good of all
good," as Augustine says (Enarr. in Ps. 134). But one is said to be
happier than another, by reason of diverse participation of the same
good. And the addition of other goods does not increase Happiness,
since Augustine says (Confess. v, 4): "He who knows Thee, and
others besides, is not the happier for knowing them, but is happy for
knowing Thee alone."

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.5, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether one can be happy in this life?

Objection 1: It would seem that Happiness can be had in this life. For
it is written (Ps. 118:1): "Blessed are the undefiled in the way, who
walk in the law of the Lord." But this happens in this life. Therefore
one can be happy in this life.
Objection 2: Further, imperfect participation in the Sovereign Good
does not destroy the nature of Happiness, otherwise one would not
be happier than another. But men can participate in the Sovereign
Good in this life, by knowing and loving God, albeit imperfectly.
Therefore man can be happy in this life.
Objection 3: Further, what is said by many cannot be altogether
false: since what is in many, comes, apparently, from nature; and
nature does not fail altogether. Now many say that Happiness can be
had in this life, as appears from Ps. 143:15: "They have called the
people happy that hath these things," to wit, the good things in this
life. Therefore one can be happy in this life.
On the contrary, It is written (Job 14:1): "Man born of a woman, living
for a short time, is filled with many miseries." But Happiness
excludes misery. Therefore man cannot be happy in this life.
I answer that, A certain participation of Happiness can be had in this
life: but perfect and true Happiness cannot be had in this life. This
may be seen from a twofold consideration.
First, from the general notion of happiness. For since happiness is a
"perfect and sufficient good," it excludes every evil, and fulfils every
desire. But in this life every evil cannot be excluded. For this present
life is subject to many unavoidable evils; to ignorance on the part of
the intellect; to inordinate affection on the part of the appetite, and to
many penalties on the part of the body; as Augustine sets forth in De
Civ. Dei xix, 4. Likewise neither can the desire for good be satiated in
this life. For man naturally desires the good, which he has, to be
abiding. Now the goods of the present life pass away; since life itself
passes away, which we naturally desire to have, and would wish to
hold abidingly, for man naturally shrinks from death. Wherefore it is
impossible to have true Happiness in this life.