3. Since, therefore, we did not scatter the seed in vain, but you hunted out
all who were absent, as I exhorted you; suffer us now to return you a
recompense; and having reminded you of a few things that were said before, to
repay you again what remains. What then were those matters that were before
treated of? We were enquiring how, and in what manner, before the giving of the
Scriptures, God ordered His dispensation toward us; and we said, that by means
of the creation He instructed our race, stretching out the heavens, and there
openly unfolding a vast volume, useful alike to the simple and the wise, to the
poor and to the rich, to Scythians and to barbarians, and to all in general who
dwell upon the earth; a volume which is much larger than the multitude of those
instructed by it. We discoursed also at length concerning the night, and the day,
and the order of these, as well as of the harmony which is strictly preserved by
them; and much was said respecting the measured dance of the seasons of the
year, and of their equality. For just as the day defrauds not the night even of half
an hour throughout the whole year, so also do these distribute all the days among
themselves equally. But, as I said before, not only does the greatness and beauty
of the creation show forth the Divine Architect, but the very manner likewise in
which it is compacted together, and the method of operation, transcending as it
does, the ordinary course of nature. For it would have been in accordance with
nature for water to be borne upon the earth; but now we see, on the contrary, that
the earth is supported by the waters. It would have been in accordance with
nature that fire should tend upwards; but now on the contrary we see the beams
of the sun directed towards the earth; and the waters to be above the heavens, yet
not falling away; and the sun running below them, yet not quenched by the
waters, nor dispelling their moisture. Besides these things we said that this whole
universe consists of four elements, these being adverse to and at strife with one
another; yet one does not consume the other, although they are mutually
destructive. Whence it is evident that some invisible power bridles them, and the
will of God becomes their bond.
4. Today, I wish to dwell a little more on this subject. Arouse yourselves,

however, and give earnest heed unto us! And that the wonder may appear more
clearly, I will draw the lesson concerning these things from our own bodies. This
body of ours, so short, and small, consists of four elements; viz. of what is warm,
that is, of blood; of what is dry, that is, of yellow bile; of what is moist, that is, of
phlegm; of what is cold, that is, of black bile. And let no one think this subject
foreign to that which we have in hand. "For He that is spiritual judges all
things; yet He Himself is judged of no man." [1 Corinthians 2:15] Thus also Paul
touched upon principles of agriculture, while discoursing to us of the
Resurrection; and said, "Thou fool; that which you sow is not quickened, except
it die." [1 Corinthians 15:38] But if that blessed man brought forward questions
of agriculture, neither should any one blame us if we handle matters pertaining
to medical science. For our discourse is now respecting the Creation of God; and
this ground-work of ideas will be necessary for our purpose. As, therefore, I said
before, this body of ours consists of four elements; and if either revolts against
the whole, death is the result of this revolt. As for instance, by a superabundance
"of bile" fever is produced; and should this proceed beyond a certain measure, it
effects a rapid dissolution. Again, when there is an excess of the cold element,
paralyses, agues, apoplexies, and an infinite number of other maladies are
generated. And every form of disease is the effect of an excess of these elements;
when either of them overpassing its own bounds, acts the part of a tyrant against
the rest, and mars the symmetry of the whole. Interrogate then him who says,
that all things are spontaneous and self-produced. If this little and diminutive
body, having the advantage of medicines, and of medical skill, and of a soul
within which regulates it, and of much moral wisdom, as well as innumerable
other helps, be not always able to continue in a state of order, but often perishes,
and is destroyed, when some disturbance takes place within it; how could a
world like this, containing substances of such vast bulk and compounded of
those same elements, remain during so long a time without any disturbance,
unless it enjoyed the advantage of a manifold providence? Neither would it be
reasonable to suppose that this body, which has the benefit of superintendence