consider, the very least shoot is a seed; for, if fitly consigned to the earth,
it produces a tree. But of this shoot there is a yet more subtle seed in
some grain of the same species, and this is visible even to us. But of this
grain also there is further still a seed, which, although we are unable to
see it with our eyes, yet we can conjecture its existence from our reason;
because, except there were some such power in those elements, there
would not so frequently be produced from the earth things which had not
been sown there; nor yet so many animals, without any previous
commixture of male and female; whether on the land, or in the water,
which yet grow, and by commingling bring forth others, while themselves
sprang up without any union of parents. And certainly bees do not
conceive the seeds of their young by commixture, but gather them as they
lie scattered over the earth with their mouth. For the Creator of these
invisible seeds is the Creator of all things Himself; since whatever comes
forth to our sight by being born, receives the first beginnings of its course
from hidden seeds, and takes the successive increments of its proper size
and its distinctive forms from these as it were original rules. As therefore
we do not call parents the creators of men, nor farmers the creators of
corn,—although it is by the outward application of their actions that the
power2 of God operates within for the creating these things;—so it is not
right to think not only the bad but even the good angels to be creators, if,
through the subtilty of their perception and body, they know the seeds of
things which to us are more hidden, and scatter them secretly through fit
temperings of the elements, and so furnish opportunities of producing
things, and of accelerating their increase. But neither do the good angels
do these things, except as far as God commands, nor do the evil ones do
them wrongfully, except as far as He righteously permits. For the
malignity of the wicked one makes his own will wrongful; but the power
to do so, he receives rightfully, whether for his own punishment, or, in
the case of others, for the punishment of the wicked, or for the praise of
the good.
14. Accordingly, the Apostle Paul, distinguishing God's creating and
forming within, from the operations of the creature which are applied
from without, and drawing a similitude from agriculture, says, "I planted,
Apollos watered; but God gave the increase." As, therefore, in the case of
spiritual life itself, no one except God can work righteousness in our

minds, yet men also are able to preach the gospel as an outward means,
not only the good in sincerity, but also the evil in pretence;4 so in the
creation of visible things it is God that works from within; but the exterior
operations, whether of good or bad, of angels or men, or even of any kind
of animal, according to His own absolute power, and to the distribution of
faculties, and the several appetites for things pleasant, which He Himself
has imparted, are applied by Him to that nature of things wherein He
creates all things, in like manner as agriculture is to the soil. Wherefore I
can no more call the bad angels, evoked by magic arts, the creators of the
frogs and serpents, than I can say that bad men were creators of the corn
crop, which I see to have sprung up through their labor.
15. Just as Jacob, again, was not the creator of the colors in the flocks,
because he placed the various colored rods for the several mothers, as
they drank, to look at in conceiving. Yet neither were the cattle
themselves creators of the variety of their own offspring, because the
variegated image, impressed through their eyes by the sight of the varied
rods, clave to their soul, but could affect the body that was animated by
the spirit thus affected only through sympathy with this commingling, so
far as to stain with color the tender beginnings of their offspring. For that
they are so affected from themselves, whether the soul from the body, or
the body from the soul, arises in truth from suitable reasons, which
immutably exist in that highest wisdom of God Himself, which no extent
of place contains; and which, while it is itself unchangeable, yet quits not
one even of those things which are changeable, because there is not one
of them that is not created by itself. For it was the unchangeable and
invisible reason of the wisdom of God, by which all things are created,
which caused not rods, but cattle, to be born from cattle; but that the
color of the cattle conceived should be in any degree influenced by the
variety of the rods, came to pass through the soul of the pregnant cattle
being affected through their eyes from without, and so according to its
own measure drawing inwardly within itself the rule of formation, which
it received from the innermost power of its own Creator. How great,
however, may be the power of the soul in affecting and changing
corporeal substance (although certainly it cannot be called the creator of
the body, because every cause of changeable and sensible substance, and
all its measure and number and weight, by which are brought to pass