persecuted to withdraw; neither is it a great distance that He allows them, but so
much as to go about the cities of Israel.
Then again, He trains them for another branch of self-command; first,
casting out all care for their food: secondly, all fear of their perils; and now, that
of calumny. Since from that first anxiety He freed them, by saying, "The
workman is worthy of his hire," [Matthew 10:10] and by signifying that many
would receive them; and from their distress about their dangers, by saying, "Take
no thought how or what you shall speak," and, "He that endures unto the end,
the same shall be saved."
But since withal it was likely that they should also bring upon themselves
an evil report, which to many seems harder to bear than all; see whence He
comforts them even in this case, deriving the encouragement from Himself, and
from all that had been said touching Himself; to which nothing else was equal.
For as He said in that other place, "You shall be hated of all men," and added,
"for my name's sake," so also here.
And in another way He mitigates it, joining a fresh topic to that former.
What kind of one then is it?
"The disciple," says He, "is not above his Master, nor the servant above his
Lord. It is enough for the disciple that he be as his Master, and the servant as his
Lord. If they have called the Master of the house Beelzebub, how much more
shall they call them of His household? Fear them not therefore."
[Matthew 10:24-26]
See how He discovers Himself to be the Lord and God and Creator of all
things. What then? Is there not any disciple above his Master, or servant above
his Lord? So long as he is a disciple, and a servant, he is not, by the nature of
that honor. For tell me not here of the rare instances, but take the principle from
the majority. And He says not, "How much more His servants," but "them of His
household," to show how very near He felt them to be to Him. And elsewhere
too He said, "Henceforth I call you not servants; you are my friends." And He
said not, If they have insulted the Master of the house, and calumniated Him; but

states also the very form of the insult, that they "called Him Beelzebub."
Then He gives also another consolation, not inferior to this: for this indeed
is the greatest; but because for them who were not yet living strictly, there was
need also of another, such as might have special power to refresh them, He states
it likewise. And the saying seems indeed in form to be an universal proposition,
nevertheless not of all matters, but of those in hand only, is it spoken. For what
says He?
"There is nothing covered, that shall not be revealed; nor hid, that shall not
be known." [Matthew 10:16] Now what He says is like this. It is indeed
sufficient for your encouragement, that I also shared with you in the same
reproach; I who am your Master and Lord. But if it still grieve you to hear these
words, consider this other thing too, that even from this suspicion you will soon
be released. For why do ye grieve? At their calling you sorcerers and deceivers?
But wait a little, and all men will address you as saviors, and benefactors of the
world. Yea, for time discovers all things that are concealed, it will both refute
their false accusation, and make manifest your virtue. For when the event shows
you saviors, and benefactors, and examples of all virtue, men will not give heed
to their words, but to the real state of the case; and they will appear false
accusers, and liars, and slanderers, but you brighter than the sun, length of time
revealing and proclaiming you, and uttering a voice clearer than a trumpet, and
making all men witnesses of your virtue. Let not therefore what is now said
humble you, but let the hope of the good things to come raise you up. For it
cannot be, that what relates to you should be hid.
2. Then, having rid them of all distress, and fears, and anxiety, and set them
above men's reproaches, then, and not till then, He seasonably discourses to
them also of boldness in their preaching.
For, "What I tell you," says He, "in darkness, that speak ye in light; and
what you have heard in the ear, that preach ye upon the housetops."
[Matthew 10:27]
Yet it was not at all darkness, when He was saying these things; neither was