25:26] But not by words alone, but by deeds also does He then convict them:
even as the Evangelist also says, "They shall look on Him whom they pierced."
[John 19:37] For the resurrection shall be of all at the same time, of sinners and
of the righteous. At the same time shall He be present to all in the judgment.
8. Consider therefore who they are who shall then be in dismay, who in
grief, who dragged away to the fire, while the others are crowned. "Come" (He
says), "ye blessed of My Father, inherit the kingdom which has been prepared for
you from the foundation of the world." [Matthew 25:34] And again, "Depart
from Me into the fire which has been prepared for the devil and his angels."
[Matthew 25:41]
Let us not merely hear the words but write them also before our sight, and
let us imagine Him to be now present and saying these things, and that we are
led away to that fire. What heart shall we have? What consolation? And what,
when we are cut asunder? And what when we are accused of rapacity? What
excuse shall we have to utter? What specious argument? None: but of necessity
bound, bending down, we must be dragged to the mouths of the furnace, to the
river of fire, to the darkness, to then ever-dying punishments, and entreat no one.
For it is not, it is not possible, He says, to pass across from this side to that: for
"there is a great gulf between us and you" [Luke 16:26],and it is not possible
even for those who wish it to go across, and stretch out a helping hand: but we
must needs burn continually, no one aiding us, even should it be father or
mother, or any whosoever, yea though he have much boldness toward God. For,
it says, "A brother does not redeem; shall man redeem?" [Psalm 49:8]
Since then it is not possible to have one's hopes of salvation in another, but
[it must be] in one's self after the lovingkindness of God, let us do all things, I
entreat you, so that our conduct may be pure, and our course of life the best, and
that it may not receive any stain even from the beginning. But if not, at all
events, let us not sleep after the stain, but continue always washing away the
pollution by repentance, by tears, by prayers, by works of mercy.
What then, you say, if I cannot do works of mercy? But you have "a cup of

cold water" [Matthew 10:42], however poor you are. But you have "two mites"
[Mark 12:42], in whatever poverty you are; but you have feet, so as to visit the
sick, so as to enter into a prison; but you have a roof, so as to receive strangers.
For there is no pardon, no, none for him who does not do works of mercy.
These things we say to you continually, that we may effect if it be but a
little by the continued repetition: these things we say, not caring so much for
those who receive the benefits, as for yourselves. For you give to them indeed
things here, but in return you receive heavenly things: which may we all obtain,
in Christ Jesus our Lord, with whom to the Father be glory, together with the
Holy Ghost, now and ever, and world without end. Amen.