good, and humane, continue in error?" this would be my answer: He has some
other passion, vainglory, or indolence of mind, or want of carefulness about his
own salvation, accounting that all things which concern him are drifted along
loosely and at random. Peter calls the man irreproachable in all things one that
"works righteousness," [and Paul says] "touching the righteousness which is in
the law found blameless." Again, "I give thanks to God, whom I serve from my
forefathers with a pure conscience," [2 Timothy 1:3] How then, you will say,
were unclean persons considered worthy of the Gospel? Because they wished
and longed for it. Thus the one sort, though in error, are attracted by Him,
because they are clean from passions; the others, of their own accord
approaching, are not thrust back. Many also even from their ancestors have
received the true religion.

1 Corinthians 3:3
5. "For whereas there is among you jealousy and strife."
At this point he prepares himself to wrestle with those whose part was
obedience: for in what went before he has been casting down the rulers of the
Church, where he said that wisdom of speech is nothing worth. But here he
strikes at those in subjection, in the words,

1 Corinthians 3:4
"For when one says, I am Paul, and I of Apollos, are you not carnal?"
And he points out that this, so far from helping them at all or causing them
to acquire any thing, had even become an obstacle to their profiting in the
greater things. For this it was which brought forth jealousy, and jealousy had
made them "carnal;" and the having become "carnal" left them not at liberty to
hear truths of the sublimer sort.

1 Corinthians 3:5
"Who then is Paul, and who is Apollos?"
In this way, after producing and proving his facts, he makes his accusation
henceforth more openly. Moreover, he employs his own name, doing away all
harshness and not suffering them to be angry at what it is said. For if Paul is
nothing and murmur not, much less ought they to think themselves ill used. Two
ways, you see, he has of soothing them; first by bringing forward his own
person, then by not robbing them of all as if they contributed nothing. Rather he
allows them some small portion: small though it be, he does allow it. For having
said, "Who is Paul, and who Apollos," he adds, "but ministers by whom you
believed." Now this in itself is a great thing, and deserving of great rewards:
although in regard of the archetype and the root of all good, it is nothing. (For
not he that "ministers" to our blessings, but he that provides and gives them, he
is our Benefactor.) And he said not, "Evangelists," but "Ministers," which is
more. For they had not merely preached the Gospel, but had also ministered unto
us; the one being a matter of word only, while the other has deed also. And so, if
even Christ be a minister only of good things, and not the root Himself and the
fountain, (I mean, of course, in that He is a Son,) observe to what an issue this
matter is brought. ([ποῦ τὸ πρᾶγμα κατάγεται] . "how deep and high it is made to
go.") How then, you will ask, does he say that He was made a Minister of
Circumcision? [Romans 15:8] He is speaking in that place of His secret
dispensation in the Flesh, and not in the same sense which we have now
mentioned. For there, by "Minister," he means "Fulfiller," ([πληρωτὴν], i.e. of
types), and not one that of his own store gives out the blessings.
Further, he said not, "Those who guide you into the Faith," but "those by
whom you believed;" again attributing the greater share to themselves, and
indicating by this also the subordinate class of ministers ([τοὺς διακόνους