Word," he anticipates and removes beforehand the evil suspicion, showing that
the Son is from the Father, and that without His suffering (change).
8. Do you see then that as I said, he has not been silent as to the Father in
his words concerning the Son? And if these instances are not sufficient fully to
explain the whole matter, marvel not, for our argument is God, whom it is
impossible to describe, or to imagine worthily; hence this man nowhere assigns
the name of His essence, (for it is not possible to say what God is, as to essence,)
but everywhere he declares Him to us by His workings. For this "Word" one may
see shortly after called "Light," and the "Light" in turn named "Life."
Although not for this reason only did he so name Him; this was the first
reason, and the second was because He was about to declare to us the things of
the Father. For "all things," He says, "that I have heard from my Father, I have
made known unto you." [John 15:15] He calls Him both "Light" and "Life," for
He has freely given to us the light which proceeds from knowledge, and the life
which follows it. In short, one name is not sufficient, nor two, nor three, nor
more, to teach us what belongs to God. But we must be content to be able even
by means of many to apprehend, though but obscurely, His attributes.
And he has not called Him simply "Word," but with the addition of the
article, distinguishing Him from the rest in this way also. Do you see then that I
said not without cause that this Evangelist speaks to us from heaven? Only see
from the very beginning whither he has drawn up the soul, having given it
wings, and has carried up with him the mind of his hearers. For having set it
higher than all the things of sense, than earth, than sea, than heaven, he leads it
by the hand above the very angels, above cherubim and seraphim, above thrones
and principalities and powers; in a word, persuades it to journey beyond all
created things.
9. What then? When he has brought us to such a height as this, is he in truth
able to stop us there? By no means; but just as one by transporting into the midst
of the sea a person who was standing on the beach, and looking on cities, and
beaches, and havens, removes him indeed from the former objects, yet does not

stay his sight anywhere, but brings him to a view without bound; so this
Evangelist, having brought us above all creation, and escorted us towards the
eternal periods which lie beyond it, leaves the sight suspended, not allowing it to
arrive at any limit upwards, as indeed there is none.
For the intellect, having ascended to "the beginning," enquires what
"beginning"; and then finding the "was" always outstripping its imagination, has
no point at which to stay its thought; but looking intently onwards, and being
unable to cease at any point, it becomes wearied out, and turns back to things
below. For this "was in the beginning," is nothing else than expressive of ever
being and being infinitely.
Do you see true philosophy and divine doctrines? Not like those of the
Greeks, who assign times, and say that some indeed of the gods are younger,
some elder. There is nothing of this with us. For if God Is, as certainly He Is,
then nothing was before Him. If He is Creator of all things, He must be first; if
Master and Lord of all, then all, both creatures and ages, are after Him.
10. I had desired to enter the lists yet on other difficulties, but perhaps our
minds are wearied out; when therefore I have advised you on those points which
are useful to us for the hearing, both of what has been said, and of what is yet to
be said, I again will hold my peace. What then are these points? I know that
many have become confused by reason of the length of what has been spoken.
Now this takes place when the soul is heavy laden with many burdens of this
life. For as the eye when it is clear and transparent is keen-sighted also, and will
not easily be tired in making out even the minutest bodies; but when from some
bad humor from the head having poured into it, or some smoke-like fumes
having ascended to it from beneath, a kind of thick cloud is formed before the
ball, this does not allow it clearly to perceive even any larger object; so is
naturally the case with the soul. For when it is purified, and has no passion to
disturb it, it looks steadfastly to the fit objects of its regard; but when, darkened
by many passions, it loses its proper excellence, then it is not easily able to be
sufficient for any high thing, but soon is wearied, and falls back; and turning