## Homily 38 on First Corinthians

1 Corinthians 15:1-2
Now I make known unto you, brethren, the gospel which I preached unto
you, which also ye received, wherein also ye stand; by which also you are saved:
in what words I preached it unto you.
Having finished the discourse of spiritual gifts, he passes to that which is of
all most necessary, the subject of the resurrection. For in this too they were
greatly unsound. And as in men's bodies, when the fever lays actual hold of their
solid parts, I mean the nerves and the veins and the primary elements, the
mischief becomes incurable unless it receive much attention; just so at that time
also it was like to happen. Since to the very elements of godliness the mischief
was proceeding. Wherefore also Paul uses great earnestness. For not of morals
was his discourse henceforth nor about one man's being a fornicator, another
covetous, and another having his head covered; but about the very sum of all
good things. For touching the resurrection itself they were at variance. Because
this being all our hope, against this point did the devil make a vehement stand,
and at one time he was wholly subverting it, at another his word was that it was
"past already;" which also Paul writing to Timothy called a gangrene, I mean,
this wicked doctrine, and those that brought it in he branded, saying, "Of whom
is Hymenœus and Philetus, who concerning the truth have erred, saying that the
resurrection is past already, and overthrow the faith of some." [2 Timothy 2:1718] At one time then they said thus, but at another that the body rises not again
but the purification of the soul is the resurrection.
But these things that wicked demon persuaded them to say, not wishing to
overturn the resurrection only, but also to show that all the things done for our
sakes are a fable. For if they were persuaded that there is no resurrection of

bodies, he would have gradually persuaded them that neither was Christ raised.
And thereupon he would introduce also this in due course, that He had not come
nor had done what He did. For such is the craft of the devil. Wherefore also Paul
calls it "cunning craftiness ," because he does not straightway signify what he
intends to effect, for fear of being detected, but dressing himself up in a mask of
one kind, he fabricates arts of another kind: and like a crafty enemy attacking a
city with walls, he secretly undermines it from below: so as thereby to be hardly
guarded against and to succeed in his endeavors. Therefore such snares on his
part being continually detected, and these his crafty ambushes hunted out by this
admirable and mighty man, he said, "For we are not ignorant of his devices." [2
Corinthians 2:11] So also here he unfolds his whole guile and points out all his
stratagems, and whatsoever he would fain effect, Paul puts before us, with much
exactness going over all. Yea, and therefore he put this head after the rest, both
because it was extremely necessary and because it involves the whole of our
condition.
And observe his consideration: how first having secured his own, he then
proceeds even beyond in his discourse, and them that are without he does
abundantly reduce to silence. Now he secures his own, not by reasonings, but by
things which had already happened and which themselves had received and
believed to have taken place: a thing which was most of all apt to shame them,
and capable of laying hold on them. Since if they were unwilling to believe after
this, it was no longer Paul but themselves they would disbelieve: which thing
was a censure on those who had once for all received it and changed their minds.
For this cause then he begins also from hence, implying that he needs no other
witnesses to prove his speaking truth, but those very persons who were deceived.
2. But that what I say may become clearer, we must needs in what follows
attend to the very words. What then are these? "I make known unto you,
brethren," says he, "the gospel which I preached unto you." Do you see with
what modesty he commences? Do you see how from the beginning he points out
that he is bringing in no new nor strange thing? For he who "makes known" that