judging from what follows, could not affirm that it was so: since he would not
have given his advice in general terms. For if he were writing these things only
for the priests, he would have said, "It is good for the teacher not to touch a
woman." But now he has made it of universal application, saying, "It is good for
a man;" not for priest only. And again, "Are you loosed from a wife? Seek not a
wife." He said not, "You who are a priest and teacher," but indefinitely. And the
whole of his speech goes on entirely in the same tones. And in saying, "Because
of fornications, let every man have his own wife" by the very cause alleged for
the concession he guides men to continence.

1 Corinthians 7:3-4
2. "Let the husband pay the wife the honor due to her: in like manner the
wife the husband."
Now what is the meaning of "the due honor? The wife has not power over
her own body;" but is both the slave and the mistress of the husband. And if you
decline the service which is due, you have offended God. But if you wish to
withdraw yourself, it must be with the husband's permission, though it be but a
for short time. For this is why he calls the matter a debt, to show that no one is
master of himself but that they are servants to each other.
When therefore you see an harlot tempting you, say, "My body is not mine,
but my wife's." The same also let the woman say to those who would undermine
her chastity, "My body is not mine, but my husband's."
Now if neither husband nor wife has power even over their own body, much
less have they over their property. Hear ye, all that have husbands and all that
have wives: that if you must not count your body your own, much less your
money.
Elsewhere I grant He gives to the husband abundant precedence, both in the
New Testament, and the Old saying, ([ἡ ἀποστρόφή σου], LXX. Genesis 3:16.)
"Your turning shall be towards your husband, and he shall rule over you." Paul
does so too by making a distinction thus, and writing, [Ephesians 5:25-33]
"Husbands, love your wives; and let the wife see that she reverence her
husband." But in this place we hear no more of greater and less, but it is one and
the same right. Now why is this? Because his speech was about chastity. "In all
other things," says he, "let the husband have the prerogative; but not so where
the question is about chastity." "The husband has no power over his own body,
neither the wife." There is great equality of honor, and no prerogative.

1 Corinthians 7:5-9
3. "Defraud ye not one the other, except it be by consent."
What then can this mean? "Let not the wife," says he, "exercise continence,
if the husband be unwilling; nor yet the husband without the wife's consent."
Why so? Because great evils spring from this sort of continence. For adulteries
and fornications and the ruin of families have often arisen from hence. For if
when men have their own wives they commit fornication, much more if you
defraud them of this consolation. And well says he, "Defraud not; fraud" here,
and "debt" above, that he might show the strictness of the right of dominion in
question. For that one should practice continence against the will of the other is
"defrauding;" but not so, with the other's consent: any more than I count myself
defrauded, if after persuading me you take away any thing of mine. Since only
he defrauds who takes against another's will and by force. A thing which many
women do, working sin rather than righteousness, and thereby becoming
accountable for the husband's uncleanness, and rending all asunder. Whereas
they should value concord above all things, since this is more important than all
beside.
We will, if you please, consider it with a view to actual cases. Thus,
suppose a wife and husband, and let the wife be continent, without consent of
her husband; well then, if hereupon he commit fornication, or though abstaining
from fornication fret and grow restless and be heated and quarrel and give all
kind of trouble to his wife; where is all the gain of the fasting and the
continence, a breach being made in love? There is none. For what strange
reproaches, how much trouble, how great a war must of course arise! since when
in an house man and wife are at variance, the house will be no better off than a
ship in a storm when the master is upon ill terms with the man at the head.
Wherefore he says, "Defraud not one another, unless it be by consent for a