SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.156, C.5.

is impossible for clemency or meekness to be absolutely the
greatest virtues, since they owe their praise to the fact that they
withdraw a man from evil, by mitigating anger or punishment. Now it
is more perfect to obtain good than to lack evil. Wherefore those
virtues like faith, hope, charity, and likewise prudence and justice,
which direct one to good simply, are absolutely greater virtues than
clemency and meekness.
Yet nothing prevents clemency and meekness from having a certain
restricted excellence among the virtues which resist evil inclinations.
For anger, which is mitigated by meekness, is, on account of its
impetuousness, a very great obstacle to man's free judgment of
truth: wherefore meekness above all makes a man self-possessed.
Hence it is written (Ecclus. 10:31): "My son, keep thy soul in
meekness." Yet the concupiscences of the pleasures of touch are
more shameful, and harass more incessantly, for which reason
temperance is more rightly reckoned as a principal virtue. as stated
above (Question 141, Article 7, ad 2). As to clemency, inasmuch as it
mitigates punishment, it would seem to approach nearest to charity,
the greatest of the virtues, since thereby we do good towards our
neighbor, and hinder his evil.
Reply to Objection 1: Meekness disposes man to the knowledge of
God, by removing an obstacle; and this in two ways. First, because it
makes man self-possessed by mitigating his anger, as stated above;
secondly, because it pertains to meekness that a man does not
contradict the words of truth, which many do through being
disturbed by anger. Wherefore Augustine says (De Doctr. Christ. ii,
7): "To be meek is not to contradict Holy Writ, whether we
understand it, if it condemn our evil ways, or understand it not, as
though we might know better and have a clearer insight of the truth."
Reply to Objection 2: Meekness and clemency make us acceptable to
God and men, in so far as they concur with charity, the greatest of
the virtues, towards the same effect, namely the mitigation of our
neighbor's evils.
Reply to Objection 3: Mercy and piety agree indeed with meekness
and clemency by concurring towards the same effect, namely the
mitigation of our neighbor's evils. Nevertheless they differ as to
motive. For piety relieves a neighbor's evil through reverence for a
superior, for instance God or one's parents: mercy relieves a
neighbor's evil, because this evil is displeasing to one, in so far as

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.156, C.5.

one looks upon it as affecting oneself, as stated above (Question 30,
Article 2): and this results from friendship which makes friends
rejoice and grieve for the same things: meekness does this, by
removing anger that urges to vengeance, and clemency does this
through leniency of soul, in so far as it judges equitable that a
person be no further punished.