hindered himself by his occupation; his life is no other than to be employed
about the Church. "And to esteem them," he says, "exceeding highly in love for
their work's sake; be at peace with them." Do you see how well he is aware that
unpleasant feelings arise? He does not merely say "love," but "very highly," as
children love their fathers. For through them you were begotten by that eternal
generation: through them you have obtained the kingdom: through their hands
all things are done, through them the gates of heaven are opened to you. Let no
one raise divisions, let no one be contentious. He who loves Christ, whatever the
Priest may be, will love him, because through him he has obtained the awful
Mysteries. Tell me, if wishing to see a palace resplendent with much gold, and
radiant with the brightness of precious stones, you could find him who had the
key, and he being called upon immediately opened it, and admitted you within,
would you not prefer him above all men? Would you not love him as dearly as
your eyes? Would you not kiss him? This man has opened heaven to you, and
thou dost not kiss him, nor pay him court. If you have a wife, do you not love
him above all, who procured her for you? So if you love Christ, if you love the
kingdom of heaven, acknowledge through whom you obtained it. On this
account he says, "for their work's sake, be at peace with them."
Ver. 14. "And we exhort you, brethren, admonish the disorderly, encourage
the faint-hearted, support the weak, be long suffering toward all."
Here he addresses those who have rule. Admonish, he says, "the
disorderly," not of imperiousness, he says, nor of self-will rebuke them, but with
admonition. "Encourage the fainthearted, support the weak, be longsuffering
toward all." For he who is rebuked with harshness, despairing of himself,
becomes more bold in contempt. On this account it is necessary by admonition
to render the medicine sweet. But who are the disorderly? All those who do what
is contrary to the will of God. For this order of the Church is more harmonious
than the order of an army; so that the reviler is disorderly, the drunkard is
disorderly, and the covetous, and all who sin; for they walk not orderly in their
rank, but out of the line, wherefore also they are overthrown. But there is also

another kind of evils, not such as this indeed, but itself also a vice, little
mindedness. For this is destructive equally with sloth. He who cannot bear an
insult is feeble-minded. He who cannot endure trial is feeble-minded. This is he
who is sown upon the rock. There is also another sort, that of weakness.
"Support the weak," he says; now weakness occurs in regard to faith. But
observe how he does not permit them to be despised. And elsewhere also in his
Epistles he says, "Them that are weak in the faith receive ye." [Romans 14:1] For
in our bodies too we do not suffer the weak member to perish. "Be longsuffering
toward all," he says. Even toward the disorderly? Yes, certainly. For there is no
medicine equal to this, especially for the teacher, none so suitable to those who
are under rule. It can quite shame and put out of countenance him that is fiercer
and more shameless than all men.
Ver. 15. "See that none render unto any one evil for evil."
If we ought not to render evil for evil, much less evil for good; much less,
when evil has not been previously done, to render evil, Such an one, you say, is a
bad man, and has aggrieved me, and done me much injury. Do you wish to
revenge yourself upon him? Do not retaliate. Leave him unpunished. Well, is this
the stopping-place? By no means;
"But always follow after that which is good, one toward another, and
toward all."
This is the higher philosophy, not only not to requite evil with evil, but to
render good for evil. For this is truly revenge that brings harm to him and
advantage to yourself, or rather great advantage even to him, if he will. And that
you may not think that this is said with respect to the faithful, therefore he has
said, "both one toward another and toward all."
Ver. 16. "Rejoice always."
This is said with respect to the temptations that bring in affliction. Hear ye,
as many as have fallen into poverty, or into distressing circumstances. For from
these joy is engendered. For when we possess such a soul that we take revenge
on no one, but do good to all, whence, tell me, will the sting of grief be able to