even if there be something to make it rise, from being rent it cannot retain the
inflation. So also do thou be humble-minded. Consider that the publican was
justified by one word, although that was not humiliation, but a true confession.
Now if this has power so great, how much more humiliation. Remit offenses to
those who have transgressed against you, for this too remits sins. And
concerning the former He says, "I saw that he went sorrowful, and I healed his
ways;" [Isaiah 57:17-18; Septuagint] and in Ahab's case, this appeased the wrath
of God: [1 Kings 21:29] concerning the latter, "Remit, and it shall be remitted
unto you." There is also again another way which brings us this medicine;
condemning what we have done amiss; for, "Declare first your transgressions,
that you may be justified." [Isaiah 43:26. Septuagint] And for one in afflictions
to give thanks looses his sins; and almsgiving, which is greater than all.
Reckon up therefore the medicines which heal your wounds, and apply all
unremittingly , humbleness, confession, forgetting wrongs, giving thanks in
afflictions, showing mercy both in alms and actions, persevering in prayer. So
did the widow propitiate the cruel and unyielding judge. And if she the unjust,
much more thou the gentle. There is yet another way along with these, defending
the oppressed; "for," He says, "judge the fatherless, and plead for the widow;
and come, and let us reason together, and though your sins be as scarlet, I will
make them white as snow." [Isaiah 1:17-18] What excuse then can we deserve if
with so many ways leading us up to heaven, and so many medicines to heal our
wounds, even after the Laver we continue where we were. Let us then not only
continue so, but let those indeed who have never yet fallen abide in their proper
loveliness; yea, rather let them cultivate it more and more, (for these good
works, where they find not sins, make the beauty greater:) and let us who in
many things have done amiss, in order to the correction of our sins use the
means mentioned: that we may stand at the tribunal of Christ with much
boldness, whereunto may all we attain through the grace and love towards men
of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father, together with the Holy Spirit,
be glory, and power, and honor, now and ever, world without end. Amen.

## Homily 5 on Second Corinthians

2 Corinthians 2:12-13
Now when I came to Troas for the gospel of Christ, and when a door was
opened unto me in the Lord, I had no relief for my spirit, because I found not
Titus my brother.
These words seem on the one hand to be unworthy of Paul, if because of a
brother's absence he threw away so great an opportunity of saving; and on the
other, to hang apart from the context. What then? Will ye that we should first
prove that they hang upon the context, or, that he has said nothing unworthy of
himself? As I think, the second , for so the other point also will be easier and
clearer.
How then do these (words) hang upon those before them? Let us recall to
mind what those were, and so we shall perceive this. What then were those
before? What he said at the beginning. "I would not have you," says he,
"ignorant concerning our affliction which befell us in Asia, that we were
weighed down exceedingly, beyond our power." [2 Corinthians 1:8] Now having
shown the manner of his deliverance, and inserted the intermediate matter, he is
of necessity led to teach them again that in yet another way he had been
afflicted. How, and in what way? In not finding Titus. [vii. 6; 8:6, 16, 22, 23,
12:18] Fearful indeed, and enough to prostrate the soul, is it even to endure
trials; but when there is none to comfort and that can help to bear the burden, the
tempest becomes greater. Now Titus is he, whom further on he speaks of as
having come to him from them, and of whom he runs through many and great
praises, and whom he said he had sent. With the view then of showing that in
this point also he had been afflicted for their sakes, he said these things.
That the words then in question hang on what went before is from all this