"Errantes ab artifice." The whole sentence is most obscure.

in such a course, thou wilt fall into utter madness, whilst thou deemest thyself loftier and greater
than thy Creator, and imaginest that thou canst penetrate beyond His dominions.

### Chapter XXVI.—"Knowledge puffeth up, but love edifieth."
1. It is therefore better and more profitable to belong to the simple and unlettered class, and by
means of love to attain to nearness to God, than, by imagining ourselves learned and skilful, to be
found [among those who are] blasphemous against their own God, inasmuch as they conjure up
another God as the Father. And for this reason Paul exclaimed, "Knowledge puffeth up, but love
edifieth:" not that he meant to inveigh against a true knowledge of God, for in that case he would
have accused himself; but, because he knew that some, puffed up by the pretence of knowledge,
fall away from the love of God, and imagine that they themselves are perfect, for this reason that
they set forth an imperfect Creator, with the view of putting an end to the pride which they feel on
account of knowledge of this kind, he says, "Knowledge puffeth up, but love edifieth." Now there
can be no greater conceit than this, that any one should imagine he is better and more perfect than
He who made and fashioned him, and imparted to him the breath of life, and commanded this very
thing into existence. It is therefore better, as I have said, that one should have no knowledge whatever
of any one reason why a single thing in creation has been made, but should believe in God, and
continue in His love, than that, puffed up through knowledge of this kind, he should fall away
from that love which is the life of man; and that he should search after no other knowledge except
[the knowledge of] Jesus Christ the Son of God, who was crucified for us, than that by subtle
questions and hair-splitting expressions he should fall into impiety.
2. For how would it be, if any one, gradually elated by attempts of the kind referred to, should,
because the Lord said that "even the hairs of your head are all numbered," set about inquiring
into the number of hairs on each one's head, and endeavour to search out the reason on account of
which one man has so many, and another so many, since all have not an equal number, but many
thousands upon thousands are to be found with still varying numbers, on this account that some
have larger and others smaller heads, some have bushy heads of hair, others thin, and others scarcely
any hair at all,—and then those who imagine that they have discovered the number of the hairs,
should endeavour to apply that for the commendation of their own sect which they have conceived?
Or again, if any one should, because of this expression which occurs in the Gospel, "Are not two