THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.80, C.7.

committed is greater. And since Christ's Godhead is greater than His
humanity, and His humanity greater than the sacraments of His
humanity, hence it is that those are the gravest sins which are
committed against the Godhead, such as unbelief and blasphemy.
The second degree of gravity is held by those sins which are
committed against His humanity: hence it is written (Mt. 12:32):
"Whosoever shall speak a word against the Son of Man, it shall be
forgiven him; but he that shall speak against the Holy Ghost, it shall
not be forgiven him, neither in this world nor in the world to come."
In the third place come sins committed against the sacraments,
which belong to Christ's humanity; and after these are the other sins
committed against mere creatures.
Accidentally, one sin can be graver than another on the sinner's part.
for example, the sin which is the result of ignorance or of weakness
is lighter than one arising from contempt, or from sure knowledge;
and the same reason holds good of other circumstances. And
according to this, the above sin can be graver in some, as happens
in them who from actual contempt and with consciousness of sin
approach this sacrament: but in others it is less grave; for instance,
in those who from fear of their sin being discovered, approach this
sacrament with consciousness of sin.
So, then, it is evident that this sin is specifically graver than many
others, yet it is not the greatest of all.
Reply to Objection 1: The sin of the unworthy recipient is compared
to the sin of them who slew Christ, by way of similitude, because
each is committed against Christ's body; but not according to the
degree of the crime. Because the sin of Christ's slayers was much
graver, first of all, because their sin was against Christ's body in its
own species, while this sin is against it under sacramental species;
secondly, because their sin came of the intent of injuring Christ,
while this does not.
Reply to Objection 2: The sin of the fornicator receiving Christ's
body is likened to Judas kissing Christ, as to the resemblance of the
sin, because each outrages Christ with the sign of friendship. but not
as to the extent of the sin, as was observed above (ad 1). And this
resemblance in crime applies no less to other sinners than to
fornicators: because by other mortal sins, sinners act against the
charity of Christ, of which this sacrament is the sign, and all the
more according as their sins are graver. But in a measure the sin of

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.80, C.7.

fornication makes one more unfit for receiving this sacrament,
because thereby especially the spirit becomes enslaved by the flesh,
which is a hindrance to the fervor of love required for this
sacrament.
However, the hindrance to charity itself weighs more than the
hindrance to its fervor. Hence the sin of unbelief, which
fundamentally severs a man from the unity of the Church, simply
speaking, makes him to be utterly unfit for receiving this sacrament;
because it is the sacrament of the Church's unity, as stated above
(Question 61, Article 2). Hence the unbeliever who receives this
sacrament sins more grievously than the believer who is in sin; and
shows greater contempt towards Christ Who is in the sacrament,
especially if he does not believe Christ to be truly in this sacrament;
because, so far as lies in him, he lessens the holiness of the
sacrament, and the power of Christ acting in it, and this is to despise
the sacrament in itself. But the believer who receives the sacrament
with consciousness of sin, by receiving it unworthily despises the
sacrament, not in itself, but in its use. Hence the Apostle (1 Cor.
11:29) in assigning the cause of this sin, says, "not discerning the
body of the Lord," that is, not distinguishing it from other food: and
this is what he does who disbelieves Christ's presence in this
sacrament.
Reply to Objection 3: The man who would throw this sacrament into
the mire would be guilty of more heinous sin than another
approaching the sacrament fully conscious of mortal sin. First of all,
because he would intend to outrage the sacrament, whereas the
sinner receiving Christ's body unworthily has no such intent;
secondly, because the sinner is capable of grace; hence he is more
capable of receiving this sacrament than any irrational creature.
Hence he would make a most revolting use of this sacrament who
would throw it to dogs to eat, or fling it in the mire to be trodden
upon.