assuredly too mean, and unworthy of such a benefit. And to prove that I say not
this upon conjecture; when they fell into the furnace, they bewailed themselves
after this sort, saying, [Daniel 4:6-10] "We have sinned, we have done iniquity,
we cannot open our mouth." And therefore they said, "But if not." But if they did
not plainly say this, namely, "God is able to deliver us; but if he deliver us not,
for our sin's sake He will not deliver us;" wonder not at it. For they would have
seemed to the barbarians to be sheltering the weakness of God under the pretext
of their own sins. Wherefore His power only is what they speak of: the reason
they allege not. And besides, they were well disciplined not to be over-curious
about the judgments of God.
With these words then, they entered into the fire; and they neither cast insult
upon the king, nor overturned the statue. For such should the courageous man
be, temperate and mild; and that especially in dangers; that he may not seem to
go forth to such contests in wrath and vain-glory; but with fortitude and selfpossession. For whoso deals insolently undergoes the suspicion of those faults:
but he that endures, and is forced into the struggle, and goes through the trial
with meekness, is not only admired as brave, but his self-possession also and
consideration cause him to be no less extolled. And this is what they did at that
time; showing forth all fortitude and gentleness, and doing nothing for reward
nor for recompense or return. "'Though He be not willing 'so it stands' to deliver
us, we will not serve your gods:' for we have already our recompense in that we
are counted worthy to be kept from all impiety, and for that end to give our
bodies to be burned."
We then also having already our recompense, (for indeed we have it in that
we have been vouchsafed the full knowledge of Him, vouch-safed to be made
members of Christ,) let us take care that we make them not members of an
harlot. For with this most tremendous saying we must conclude our discourse, in
order that having the fear of the threat in full efficacy, we may remain purer than
gold, this fear helping to make us so. For so shall we be able, delivered from all
fornication, to see Christ. Whom God grant us all to behold with boldness at that

day, through the grace and loving-kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ; to Whom
be the glory, for evermore. Amen.

## Homily 19 on First Corinthians

1 Corinthians 7:1-2
Now concerning the things whereof ye wrote to me: it is good for a man not
to touch a woman. But because of fornications, let each man have his own wife;
and let each woman have her own husband.
Having corrected the three heaviest things laid to their charge, one, the
distraction of the Church, another, about the fornicator, a third, about the
covetous person, he thenceforth uses a milder sort of speech. And he interposes
some exhortation and advice about marriage and virginity, giving the hearers
some respite from more unpleasant subjects. But in the second Epistle he does
the contrary; he begins from the milder topics, and ends with the more
distressing. And here also, after he has finished his discourse about virginity, he
again launches forth into matter more akin to reproof; not setting all down in
regular order, but varying his discourse in either kind, as the occasion required
and the exigency of the matters in hand.
Wherefore he says, "Now concerning the things whereof ye wrote unto me."
For they had written to him, "Whether it was right to abstain from one's wife, or
not:" and writing back in answer to this and giving rules about marriage, he
introduces also the discourse concerning virginity: "It is good for a man not to
touch a woman." "For if," says he, "thou enquire what is the excellent and
greatly superior course, it is better not to have any connection whatever with a
woman: but if you ask what is safe and helpful to your own infirmity, be
connected by marriage."
But since it was likely, as also happens now, that the husband might be
willing but the wife not, or perhaps the reverse, mark how he discusses each
case. Some indeed say that this discourse was addressed by him to priests. But I,