SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.94, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether divination by the stars is unlawful?

Objection 1: It would seem that divination by the stars is not
unlawful. It is lawful to foretell effects by observing their causes:
thus a physician foretells death from the disposition of the disease.
Now the heavenly bodies are the cause of what takes place in the
world, according to Dionysius (Div. Nom. iv). Therefore divination by
the stars is not unlawful.
Objection 2: Further, human science originates from experiments,
according to the Philosopher (Metaph. i, 1). Now it has been
discovered through many experiments that the observation of the
stars is a means whereby some future events may be known
beforehand. Therefore it would seem not unlawful to make use of
this kind of divination.
Objection 3: Further, divination is declared to be unlawful in so far as
it is based on a compact made with the demons. But divination by
the stars contains nothing of the kind, but merely an observation of
God's creatures. Therefore it would seem that this species of
divination is not unlawful.
On the contrary, Augustine says (Confess. iv, 3): "Those astrologers
whom they call mathematicians, I consulted without scruple;
because they seemed to use no sacrifice, nor to pray to any spirit for
their divinations which art, however, Christian and true piety rejects
and condemns."
I answer that, As stated above (Articles 1,2), the operation of the
demon thrusts itself into those divinations which are based on false
and vain opinions, in order that man's mind may become entangled
in vanity and falsehood. Now one makes use of a vain and false
opinion if, by observing the stars, one desires to foreknow the future
that cannot be forecast by their means. Wherefore we must consider
what things can be foreknown by observing the stars: and it is
evident that those things which happen of necessity can be
foreknown by this mean,: even so astrologers forecast a future
eclipse.
However, with regard to the foreknowledge of future events acquired
by observing the stars there have been various opinions. For some

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.94, C.6.

have stated that the stars signify rather than cause the things
foretold by means of their observation. But this is an unreasonable
statement: since every corporeal sign is either the effect of that for
which it stands (thus smoke signifies fire whereby it is caused), or it
proceeds from the same cause, so that by signifying the cause, in
consequence it signifies the effect (thus a rainbow is sometimes a
sign of fair weather, in so far as its cause is the cause of fair
weather). Now it cannot be said that the dispositions and movements
of the heavenly bodies are the effect of future events; nor again can
they be ascribed to some common higher cause of a corporeal
nature, although they are referable to a common higher cause, which
is divine providence. on the contrary the appointment of the
movements and positions of the heavenly bodies by divine
providence is on a different principle from the appointment of the
occurrence of future contingencies, because the former are
appointed on a principle of necessity, so that they always occur in
the same way, whereas the latter are appointed on a principle of
contingency, so that the manner of their occurrence is variable.
Consequently it is impossible to acquire foreknowledge of the future
from an observation of the stars, except in so far as effects can be
foreknown from their causes.
Now two kinds of effects escape the causality of heavenly bodies. In
the first place all effects that occur accidentally, whether in human
affairs or in the natural order, since, as it is proved in Metaph. vi [Ed.
Did. v, 3], an accidental being has no cause, least of all a natural
cause, such as is the power of a heavenly body, because what
occurs accidentally, neither is a "being" properly speaking, nor is
"one"---for instance, that an earthquake occur when a stone falls, or
that a treasure be discovered when a man digs a grave---for these
and like occurrences are not one thing, but are simply several
things. Whereas the operation of nature has always some one thing
for its term, just as it proceeds from some one principle, which is the
form of a natural thing.
In the second place, acts of the free-will, which is the faculty of will
and reason, escape the causality of heavenly bodies. For the intellect
or reason is not a body, nor the act of a bodily organ, and
consequently neither is the will, since it is in the reason, as the
Philosopher shows (De Anima iii, 4,9). Now no body can make an
impression on an incorporeal body. Wherefore it is impossible for
heavenly bodies to make a direct impression on the intellect and will:
for this would be to deny the difference between intellect and sense,