THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.77, C.4.

Reply to Objection 1: The sacramental species, although they are
forms existing without matter, still retain the same being which they
had before in matter, and therefore as to their being they are like
forms which are in matter.
Reply to Objection 2: The action of an accidental form depends upon
the action of a substantial form in the same way as the being of
accident depends upon the being of substance; and therefore, as it
is an effect of Divine power that the sacramental species exist
without substance, so is it an effect of Divine power that they can act
without a substantial form, because every action of a substantial or
accidental form depends upon God as the first agent.
Reply to Objection 3: The change which terminates in a substantial
form is not effected by a substantial form directly, but by means of
the active and passive qualities, which act in virtue of the substantial
form. But by Divine power this instrumental energy is retained in the
sacramental species, just as it was before: and consequently their
action can be directed to a substantial form instrumentally, just in
the same way as anything can act outside its species, not as by its
own power, but by the power of the chief agent.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.77, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the sacramental species can be

corrupted?
Objection 1: It seems that the sacramental species cannot be
corrupted, because corruption comes of the separation of the form
from the matter. But the matter of the bread does not remain in this
sacrament, as is clear from what was said above (Question 75,
Article 2). Therefore these species cannot be corrupted.
Objection 2: Further, no form is corrupted except accidentally, that
is, when its subject is corrupted; hence self-subsisting forms are
incorruptible, as is seen in spiritual substances. But the sacramental
species are forms without a subject. Therefore they cannot be
corrupted.
Objection 3: Further, if they be corrupted, it will either be naturally or
miraculously. But they cannot be corrupted naturally, because no
subject of corruption can be assigned as remaining after the
corruption has taken place. Neither can they be corrupted
miraculously, because the miracles which occur in this sacrament
take place in virtue of the consecration, whereby the sacramental
species are preserved: and the same thing is not the cause of
preservation and of corruption. Therefore, in no way can the
sacramental species be corrupted.
On the contrary, We perceive by our senses that the consecrated
hosts become putrefied and corrupted.
I answer that, Corruption is "movement from being into nonbeing" (Aristotle, Phys. v). Now it has been stated (Article 3) that the
sacramental species retain the same being as they had before when
the substance of the bread was present. Consequently, as the being
of those accidents could be corrupted while the substance of the
bread and wine was present, so likewise they can be corrupted now
that the substance has passed away.
But such accidents could have been previously corrupted in two
ways: in one way, of themselves; in another way, accidentally. They
could be corrupted of themselves, as by alteration of the qualities,
and increase or decrease of the quantity, not in the way in which
increase or decrease is found only in animated bodies, such as the