1 Corinthians 1:11
"For it has been signified unto me concerning you, my brethren, by them
which are of the household of Chloe." Neither did he say this at the very
beginning, but first he brought forward his charge; as one who put confidence in
his informants. Because, had it not been so, he would not have found fault: for
Paul was not a person to believe lightly. Neither then did he immediately say, "it
has been signified," lest he might seem to blame on their authority: neither does
he omit all mention of them, lest he should seem to speak only from himself.
And again, he styles them "brethren;" for although the fault be plain, there is
nothing against calling people brethren still. Consider also his prudence in not
speaking of any distinct person, but of the entire family; so as not to make them
hostile towards the informer: for in this way he both protects him, and fearlessly
opens the accusation. For he had an eye to the benefit not of the one side only,
but of the other also. Wherefore he says not, "It has been declared to me by
certain," but he indicates also the household, lest they might suppose that he was
inventing.
4. What was declared? "That there are contentions among you." Thus,
when he is rebuking them, he says, "That there be no divisions among you;" but
when he is reporting the statements of others, he does it more gently; saying, For
it has been declared unto me...that there are contentions among you; in order that
he might not bring trouble upon the informants.

1 Corinthians 1:12
Next he declares also the kind of contention.
"That each one of you says, I am of Paul, and I of Apollos, and I of
Cephas." "I say, contentions," says he, "I mean, not about private matters, but of
the more grievous sort." "That each one of you says;" for the corruption
pervaded not a part, but the whole of the Church. And yet they were not
speaking about himself, nor about Peter, nor about Apollos; but he signifies that
if these were not to be leaned on, much less others. For that they had not spoken
about them, he says further on: "And these things I have transferred in a figure
unto myself and Apollos, that you may learn in us not to go beyond the things
which are written." For if it were not right for them to call themselves by the
name of Paul, and of Apollos, and of Cephas, much less of any others. If under
the Teacher and the first of the Apostles, and one that had instructed so much
people, it were not right to enroll themselves, much less under those who were
nothing. By way of hyperbole then, seeking to withdraw them from their disease,
he sets down these names. Besides, he makes his argument less severe, not
mentioning by name the rude dividers of the Church, but concealing them, as
behind a sort of masks, with the names of the Apostles.
"I am of Paul, and I of Apollos, and I of Cephas." Not esteeming himself
before Peter has he set his name last, but preferring Peter to himself, and that
greatly. He arranged his statement in the way of climax, ([κατὰ αῦξησιν]) that he
might not be supposed to do this for envy; or, from jealousy, to be detracting
from the honor of others. Wherefore also he put his own name first. For he who
puts himself foremost to be rejected, does so not for love of honor, but for
extreme contempt of this sort of reputation. He puts himself, you see, in the way
of the whole attack, and then mentions Apollos, and then Cephas. Not therefore
to magnify himself did he do this, but in speaking of wrong things he