For both Christ went out of His borders, and the woman out of her borders, and
so it became possible for them to fall in with each other: thus He says, "Behold a
woman of Canaan coming out of her own coasts."
The evangelist speaks against the woman, that he may show forth her
marvellous act, and celebrate her praise the more. For when you hear of a
Canaanitish woman, you should call to mind those wicked nations, who overset
from their foundations the very laws of nature. And being reminded of these,
consider also the power of Christ's advent. For they who were cast out, that they
might not pervert any Jews, these appeared so much better disposed than the
Jews, as even to come out of their coasts, and approach Christ; while those were
driving Him away, even on His coming unto them.
2. Having then come unto Him, she says nothing else, but "Have mercy on
me," and by her cry brings about them many spectators. For indeed it was a
pitiful spectacle to see a woman crying aloud in so great affliction, and that
woman a mother, and entreating for a daughter, and for a daughter in such evil
case: she not even venturing to bring into the Master's sight her that was
possessed, but leaving her to lie at home, and herself making the entreaty.
And she tells her affliction only, and adds nothing more; neither does she
drag the physician to her house, like that nobleman, saying, "Come and lay your
hand upon her," and, "Come down ere my child die."
But having described both her calamity, and the intensity of the disease, she
pleads the Lord's mercy, and cries aloud; and she says not, "Have mercy on my
daughter," but, "Have mercy on me." For she indeed is insensible of her disease,
but it is I that suffer her innumerable woes; my disease is with consciousness,
my madness with perception of itself.
2. "But He answered her not a word." [Matthew 15:23]
What is this new and strange thing? The Jews in their perverseness He leads
on, and blaspheming He entreats them, and tempting Him He dismisses them
not; but to her, running unto Him, and entreating, and beseeching Him, to her
who had been educated neither in the law, nor in the prophets, and was

exhibiting so great reverence; to her He does not vouchsafe so much as an
answer.
Whom would not this have offended, seeing the facts so opposite to the
report? For whereas they had heard, that He went about the villages healing, her,
when she had come to Him, He utterly repels. And who would not have been
moved by her affliction, and by the supplication she made for her daughter in
such evil case? For not as one worthy, nor as demanding a due, not so did she
approach Him, but she entreated that she might find mercy, and merely gave a
lamentable account of her own affliction; yet is she not counted worthy of so
much as an answer.
Perhaps many of the hearers were offended, but she was not offended. And
why say I, of the hearers? For I suppose that even the very disciples must have
been in some degree affected at the woman's affliction, and have been greatly
troubled, and out of heart.
Nevertheless not even in this trouble did they venture to say, "Grant her
this favor," but, "His disciples came and besought Him, saying, Send her away,
for she cries after us." For we too, when we wish to persuade any one,
oftentimes say the contrary.
But Christ says, "I am not sent, but unto the lost sheep of the house of
Israel." [Matthew 15:24]
What then did the woman, after she heard this? Was she silent, and did she
desist? Or did she relax her earnestness? By no means, but she was the more
instant. But it is not so with us; rather, when we fail to obtain, we desist; whereas
it ought to make us the more urgent.
And yet, who would not have been driven to perplexity by the word which
was then spoken? Why His silence were enough to drive her to despair, but His
answer did so very much more. For together with herself, to see them also in
utter perplexity that were pleading with her, and to hear that the thing is even
impossible to be done, was enough to cast her into unspeakable perplexity.
Yet nevertheless the woman was not perplexed, but on seeing her advocates