FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether there can be any suitable cause for the

sacraments of the Old Law?
Objection 1: It would seem that there can be no suitable cause for
the sacraments of the Old Law. Because those things that are done
for the purpose of divine worship should not be like the observances
of idolaters: since it is written (Dt. 12:31): "Thou shalt not do in like
manner to the Lord thy God: for they have done to their gods all the
abominations which the Lord abhorreth." Now worshippers of idols
used to knive themselves to the shedding of blood: for it is related (3
Kgs. 18:28) that they "cut themselves after their manner with knives
and lancets, till they were all covered with blood." For this reason the
Lord commanded (Dt. 14:1): "You shall not cut yourselves nor make
any baldness for the dead." Therefore it was unfitting for
circumcision to be prescribed by the Law (Lev. 12:3).
Objection 2: Further, those things which are done for the worship of
God should be marked with decorum and gravity; according to Ps.
34:18: "I will praise Thee in a grave people." But it seems to savor of
levity for a man to eat with haste. Therefore it was unfittingly
commanded (Ex. 12:11) that they should eat the Paschal lamb "in
haste." Other things too relative to the eating of the lamb were
prescribed, which seem altogether unreasonable.
Objection 3: Further, the sacraments of the Old Law were figures of
the sacraments of the New Law. Now the Paschal lamb signified the
sacrament of the Eucharist, according to 1 Cor. 5:7: "Christ our
Pasch is sacrificed." Therefore there should also have been some
sacraments of the Old Law to foreshadow the other sacraments of
the New Law, such as Confirmation, Extreme Unction, and
Matrimony, and so forth.
Objection 4: Further, purification can scarcely be done except by
removing something impure. But as far as God is concerned, no
bodily thing is reputed impure, because all bodies are God's
creatures; and "every creature of God is good, and nothing to be
rejected that is received with thanksgiving" (1 Tim. 4:4). It was
therefore unfitting for them to be purified after contact with a corpse,
or any similar corporeal infection.
Objection 5: Further, it is written (Ecclus. 34:4): "What can be made

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.6.

clean by the unclean?" But the ashes of the red heifer [Heb. 9:13]
which was burnt, were unclean, since they made a man unclean: for
it is stated (Num. 19:7, seqq.) that the priest who immolated her was
rendered unclean "until the evening"; likewise he that burnt her; and
he that gathered up her ashes. Therefore it was unfittingly
prescribed there that the unclean should be purified by being
sprinkled with those cinders.
Objection 6: Further, sins are not something corporeal that can be
carried from one place to another: nor can man be cleansed from sin
by means of something unclean. It was therefore unfitting for the
purpose of expiating the sins of the people that the priest should
confess the sins of the children of Israel on one of the buck-goats,
that it might carry them away into the wilderness: while they were
rendered unclean by the other, which they used for the purpose of
purification, by burning it together with the calf outside the camp; so
that they had to wash their clothes and their bodies with water (Lev.
16).
Objection 7: Further, what is already cleansed should not be
cleansed again. It was therefore unfitting to apply a second
purification to a man cleansed from leprosy, or to a house; as laid
down in Lev. 14.
Objection 8: Further, spiritual uncleanness cannot be cleansed by
material water or by shaving the hair. Therefore it seems
unreasonable that the Lord ordered (Ex. 30:18, seqq.) the making of
a brazen laver with its foot, that the priests might wash their hands
and feet before entering the temple; and that He commanded (Num.
8:7) the Levites to be sprinkled with the water of purification, and to
shave all the hairs of their flesh.
Objection 9: Further, that which is greater cannot be cleansed by
that which is less. Therefore it was unfitting that, in the Law, the
higher and lower priests, as stated in Lev. 8 [Ex. 29], and the Levites,
according to Num. 8, should be consecrated with any bodily
anointing, bodily sacrifices, and bodily oblations.
Objection 1:: Further, as stated in 1 Kgs. 16:7, "Man seeth those
things that appear, but the Lord beholdeth the heart." But those
things that appear outwardly in man are the dispositions of his body
and his clothes. Therefore it was unfitting for certain special