He rejoices. Hence shall peace also be yours from His love; hence shall every
evil be removed. This saved the world, this ended the long war, this blended
together heaven and earth, this made men angels. This then let us also imitate,
for love is the mother of countless good things. By this we were saved, by this
all those unspeakable good things [come] to us.'
2. Then to lead them on unto it, he says,

2 Corinthians 13:12
"Salute one another with a holy kiss."
What is "holy?" not hollow, not treacherous, like the kiss which Judas gave
to Christ. For therefore is the kiss given, that it may be fuel unto love, that it may
kindle the disposition, that we may so love each other, as brothers brothers, as
children parents, as parents children; yea, rather even far more. For those things
are a disposition implanted by nature, but these by spiritual grace. Thus our souls
bound unto each other. And therefore when we return after an absence we kiss
each other, our souls hastening unto mutual intercourse. For this is that member
which most of all declares to us the workings of the soul. But about this holy
kiss somewhat else may yet be said. To what effect? We are the temple of Christ;
we kiss then the porch and entrance of the temple when we kiss each other. See
ye not how many kiss even the porch of this temple, some stooping down, others
grasping it with their hand, and putting their hand to their mouth. And through
these gates and doors Christ both had entered into us, and does enter, whenever
we communicate. You who partake of the mysteries understand what I say. For it
is in no common manner that our lips are honored, when they receive the Lord's
Body. It is for this reason chiefly that we here kiss. Let them give ear who speak
filthy things, who utter railing, and let them shudder to think what that mouth is
they dishonor; let those give ear who kiss obscenely. Hear what things God has
proclaimed by your mouth, and keep it undefiled. He has discoursed of the life to
come, of the resurrection, of immortality, that death is not death, of those other
innumerable mysteries. For he that is about to be initiated comes to the priest's
mouth as it were an oracle, to hear things full of awe. For he lost his life even
from his forefathers, and comes to seek it again, and to ask how he may haply
find and get it back. Then God announces to him how it may be found, and that
mouth becomes more awful than the very mercy-seat. For that mercy-seat never

sent forth a voice like this, but spoke much of lesser things, of wars and such
peace as is here below: but this speaks all about heaven and the life to come, and
things new and that pass understanding. And having said,

2 Corinthians 13:13
"Salute one another with an holy kiss," he added, "All the saints salute
you."
By this also giving them good hopes. He has added this in the place of the
kiss, knitting them together by the salutation, for the words also proceed from
the same mouth from which the kiss. Do you see how he brings them all
together, both those who are widely separated in the body and those who are
near, these by the kiss and those by the written message?