reminding (one another) of things to come, of the Judgment. (So from both these
scenes) each returns home: from the wedding, grieved, because he himself is not
in the enjoyment of the like good fortune; from the mourning, light-hearted,
because he has not himself undergone the like affliction, and having all his
inward fever quenched. But what will you? Shall we take for another contrast the
prisons and the theatres? For the one is a place of suffering, the other of pleasure.
Let us again examine. In the former there is seriousness of mind; for where there
is sadness, there must needs be seriousness. He who aforetime was rich, and
inflated with his own importance, now will even suffer any common person to
converse with him, fear and sorrow, like some mightier fire, having fallen on his
soul, and softening down his harshness: then he becomes humble, then of a sad
countenance, then he feels the changes of life, then he bears up manfully against
everything. But in a theatre all is the reverse of this— laughter, ribaldry, devil's
pomp, dissoluteness, waste of time, useless spending of days, planning for
extravagant lust, adultery made a study of, practical training to fornication,
schooling in intemperance, encouragement to filthiness, matter for laughter,
patterns for the practice of indecency. Not so the prison: there you will find
humbleness of mind, exhoration, incentive to seriousness, contempt of worldly
things; (these) are all trodden under foot and spurned and, fear stands over (the
man there), as a schoolmaster over a child, controlling him to all his duties. But
if you will, let us examine in a different way. I should like you to meet a man on
his return from a theatre, and another coming out of prison; and while you would
see the soul of the one fluttered, perturbed, actually tied and bound, that of the
other you would see enlarged, set free, buoyant as on wings. For the one returns
from the theatre, enfettered by the sight of the women there, bearing about
chains harder than any iron, the scenes, the words, the gestures, that he saw
there. But the other on his return from the prison, released from all (bounds),
will no longer think that he suffers any evil as comparing his own case with that
of (those) others. (To think) that he is not in bonds will make him thankful ever
after; he will despise human affairs, as seeing so many rich men there in

calamity, men (once) having power to do many and great things, and now lying
bound there: and if he should suffer anything unjustly, he will bear up against
this also; for of this too there were many examples there: he will be led to reflect
upon the Judgment to come and will shudder, seeing here (in the earthly prison)
how it will be there. For as it is with one here shut up in prison, so in that world
also before the Judgment, before the Day that is to come. Towards wife,
children, and servants, he will be more gentle.
Not so he that comes from the theatre: he will look upon his wife with more
dislike, he will be peevish with his servants, bitter towards his children, and
savage towards all. Great are the evils theatres cause to cities, great indeed, and
we do not even know that they are great. Shall we examine other scenes of
laughter also, I mean the feasts, with their parasites, their flatterers, and
abundance of luxury, and (compare with them) places where are the halt and
blind? As before, in the former is drunkenness, luxury, and dissoluteness, in the
latter the reverse.— See also with regard to the body, when it is hot-blooded,
when it is in good case, it undergoes the quickest change to sickness: not so,
when it has been kept low. Then let me make my meaning clearer to you:— let
there be a body having plenty of blood, plenty of flesh, plump with good living:
this body will be apt even from any chance food to engender a fever, if it be
simply idle. But let there be another, struggling rather with hunger and hardship:
this is not easily overcome, not easily wrestled down by disease. Blood, though
it may be healthy in us, does often by its very quantity engender disease: but if it
be small in quantity, even though it be not healthy, it can be easily worked off.
So too in the case of the soul, that which leads an easy, luxurious life, has its
impulses quickly swayed to sin: for such a soul is next neighbor to folly, to
pleasure, to vainglory also, and envy, and plottings, and slanderings. Behold this
great city of ours, what a size it is! Whence arise the evils? Is it not from those
who are rich? Is it not from those who are in enjoyment? Who are they that
"drag" men "before the tribunals?" Who, that dissipate properties? Those who
are wretched and outcasts, or those who are inflated with consequence, and in