deeps call upon God, for it is said, "Out of the depths have I cried to You, O
Lord." From beneath, out of the heart, draw forth a voice, make your prayer a
mystery. Do you see not that even in the houses of kings all tumult is put away,
and great on all sides is the silence? Do thou also therefore, entering as into a
palace—not that on the earth, but what is far more awful than it, that which is in
heaven,— show forth great seemliness. Yea, for you are joined to the choirs of
angels, and art in communion with archangels, and art singing with the
seraphim. And all these tribes show forth much goodly order, singing with great
awe that mystical strain, and their sacred hymns to God, the King of all. With
these then mingle yourself, when you are praying, and emulate their mystical
order.
For not unto men are you praying, but to God, who is everywhere present,
who hears even before the voice, who knows the secrets of the mind. If you so
pray, great is the reward you shall receive.
"For your Father," says He, "who sees in secret, shall reward you openly."
He said not, "shall freely give you," but, "shall reward you;" yea, for He has
made Himself a debtor to you, and even from this has honored you with great
honor. For because He Himself is invisible, He would have your prayer be so
likewise.
5. Then He speaks even the very words of the prayer.
"When ye pray," says He, "use no vain repetitions, even as the heathen do."
You see that when He was discoursing of almsgiving, He removed only that
mischief which comes of vainglory, and added nothing more; neither did He say
whence one should give alms; as from honest labor, and not from rapine nor
covetousness: this being abundantly acknowledged among all. And also before
that, He had thoroughly cleared up this point, when He blessed them "that
hunger after righteousness."
But touching prayer, He adds somewhat over and above; "not to use vain
repetitions." And as there He derides the hypocrites, so here the heathen;
shaming the hearer everywhere most of all by the vileness of the persons. For

since this, in most cases, is especially biting and stinging, I mean our appearing
to be likened to outcast persons; by this topic He dissuades them; calling
frivolousness, here, by the name of "vain repetition:" as when we ask of God
things unsuitable, kingdoms, and glory, and to get the better of enemies, and
abundance of wealth, and in general what does not at all concern us.
"For He knows," says He, "what things you have need of." [Matthew 6:8]
And herewith He seems to me to command in this place, that neither should
we make our prayers long; long, I mean, not in time, but in the number and
length of the things mentioned. For perseverance indeed in the same requests is
our duty: His word being, "continuing instant in prayer." [Romans 12:12]
And He Himself too, by that example of the widow, who prevailed with the
pitiless and cruel ruler, by the continuance of her intercession; [Luke 18:1] and
by that of the friend, who came late at night time, and roused the sleeper from
his bed, [Luke 11:5] not for his friendship's, but for his importunity's sake; what
did He, but lay down a law, that all should continually make supplication unto
Him? He does not however bid us compose a prayer of ten thousand clauses, and
so come to Him and merely repeat it. For this He obscurely signified when He
said, "They think that they shall be heard for their much speaking."
"For He knows," says He, "what things you have need of." And if He know,
one may say, what we have need of, wherefore must we pray? Not to instruct
Him, but to prevail with Him; to be made intimate with Him, by continuance in
supplication; to be humbled; to be reminded of your sins.
6. "After this manner, therefore, pray ye," says He: "Our Father, which art
in heaven."
See how He straightway stirred up the hearer, and reminded him of all
God's bounty in the beginning. For he who calls God Father, by him both
remission of sins, and taking away of punishment, and righteousness, and
sanctification, and redemption, and adoption, and inheritance, and brotherhood
with the Only-Begotten, and the supply of the Spirit, are acknowledged in this
single title. For one cannot call God Father, without having attained to all those