John 7:16
"My doctrine is not Mine."
Again He answers to their secret thoughts, referring them to the Father, and
so desiring to stop their mouths.

John 7:17
"If any man will do His will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God,
or whether I speak of Myself."
What He says is this, "Cast out from yourselves the malice and wrath and
envy and hatred which has without cause been conceived against Me, then there
is nothing to hinder you from knowing that My words are indeed the words of
God. For at present these things cast a darkness over you, and destroy the light
of right judgment, while if you remove them this shall no longer be your case."
Yet He spoke not (plainly) thus, (for so He would have confounded them
exceedingly,) but implied it all by saying, "He that does His will shall know of
the doctrine, whether it is of God, or whether I speak of Myself"; that is,
"whether I speak anything different and strange and contrary to God." For, "of
Myself" is always put with this meaning, that "I say nothing except what seems
good to Him, but all that the Father wills, I will also."
"If any man do His will, he shall know of the doctrine."
"What means," "If any man do His will?" "If any man be a lover of the life
which is according to virtue, he shall know the power of the sayings." "If any
man will give heed to the prophecies, to see whether I speak according to them
or not."
2. But how is the doctrine His and not His? For He said not, "This doctrine
is not Mine"; but having first said, "it is Mine," and having claimed it as His
own, He then added, "it is not Mine." How then can the same thing be both "His"
and not "His"? It is "His," because He spoke it not as one who had been taught;
and it is "not His," because it was the doctrine of the Father. How then says He,
"All that is the Father's is Mine, and Mine His"? [John 17:10] "For if because
the doctrine is the Father's, it is not yours, that other assertion is false, for
according to that it ought to be yours." But the "is not Mine," affords a strong
proof that His doctrine and the Father's are one; as if He had said, "It has nothing

different, as though it were another's. For though My Person be different, yet so
do I speak and do as not to be supposed to speak or do anything contrary to the
Father, but rather the very same things that the Father says and does." Then He
adds another incontrovertible argument, bringing forward something merely
human, and instructing them by things to which they were accustomed. And
what is that?

John 7:18
"He that speaks of himself seeks his own glory."
That is, "He that desires to establish any doctrine of his own, desires to do
so only that he himself may enjoy the glory. Now if I desire not to enjoy glory,
wherefore should I desire to establish any doctrine of My own? He that speaks of
himself, that is, who speaks anything peculiar or different from others, speaks on
this account, that he may establish his own glory; but if I seek the glory of Him
that sent Me, wherefore should I choose to teach other things?" Do you see that
there was a cause wherefore He said there too that He "did nothing of Himself"?
[c. v. 19, and 8:28] What was it? It was that they might believe that He desired
not the honor of the many. Therefore when His words are lowly, "I seek," He
says, "the glory of the Father," everywhere desiring to persuade them that He
Himself loves not glory. Now there are many reasons for His using lowly words,
as that He might not be deemed unbegotten, or opposed to God, His being
clothed with flesh, the infirmity of His hearers, that He might teach men to be
modest, and to speak no great thing of themselves: while for speaking lofty
words one could only find one reason, the greatness of His Nature. And if when
He said, "Before Abraham was, I am" [John 8:58], they were offended, what
would have been their case if they had continually heard high expressions?