THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.84, C.8.

sacrament requires to be decided by the institution; while the
sacrament derives its form and power entirely from the institution of
Christ, from Whose Passion the power of the sacraments proceeds.
Accordingly the matter of this sacrament pre-exists, being provided
by nature; since it is by a natural principle of reason that man is
moved to repent of the evil he has done: yet it is due to Divine
institution that man does penance in this or that way. Wherefore at
the outset of His preaching, our Lord admonished men, not only to
repent, but also to "do penance," thus pointing to the particular
manner of actions required for this sacrament. As to the part to be
taken by the ministers, this was fixed by our Lord when He said to
Peter (Mt. 16:19): "To thee will I give the keys of the kingdom of
heaven," etc.; but it was after His resurrection that He made known
the efficacy of this sacrament and the source of its power, when He
said (Lk. 24:47) that "penance and remission of sins should be
preached in His name unto all nations," after speaking of His
Passion and resurrection. Because it is from the power of the name
of Jesus Christ suffering and rising again that this sacrament is
efficacious unto the remission of sins.
It is therefore evident that this sacrament was suitably instituted in
the New Law.
Reply to Objection 1: It is a natural law that one should repent of the
evil one has done, by grieving for having done it, and by seeking a
remedy for one's grief in some way or other, and also that one
should show some signs of grief, even as the Ninevites did, as we
read in Jn. 3. And yet even in their case there was also something of
faith which they had received through Jonas' preaching, inasmuch
as they did these things in the hope that they would receive pardon
from God, according as we read (Jn. 3:9): "Who can tell if God will
turn and forgive, and will turn away from His fierce anger, and we
shall not perish?" But just as other matters which are of the natural
law were fixed in detail by the institution of the Divine law, as we
have stated in the FS, Question 91, Article 4; FS, Question 95, Article
2; FS, Question 99, so was it with Penance.
Reply to Objection 2: Things which are of the natural law were
determined in various ways in the old and in the New Law, in keeping
with the imperfection of the old, and the perfection of the New.
Wherefore Penance was fixed in a certain way in the Old Law---with
regard to sorrow, that it should be in the heart rather than in external

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.84, C.8.

signs, according to Joel 2:13: "Rend your hearts and not your
garments"; and with regard to seeking a remedy for sorrow, that they
should in some way confess their sins, at least in general, to God's
ministers. Wherefore the Lord said (Lev. 5:17,18): "If anyone sin
through ignorance . . . he shall offer of the flocks a ram without
blemish to the priest, according to the measure and estimation of the
sin, and the priest shall pray for him, because he did it ignorantly,
and it shall be forgiven him"; since by the very fact of making an
offering for his sin, a man, in a fashion, confessed his sin to the
priest. And accordingly it is written (Prov. 28:13): "He that hideth his
sins, shall not prosper: but he that shall confess, and forsake them,
shall obtain mercy." Not yet, however, was the power of the keys
instituted, which is derived from Christ's Passion, and consequently
it was not yet ordained that a man should grieve for his sin, with the
purpose of submitting himself by confession and satisfaction to the
keys of the Church, in the hope of receiving forgiveness through the
power of Christ's Passion.
Reply to Objection 3: If we note carefully what our Lord said about
the necessity of Baptism (Jn. 3:3, seqq.), we shall see that this was
said before His words about the necessity of Penance (Mt. 4:17);
because He spoke to Nicodemus about Baptism before the
imprisonment of John, of whom it is related afterwards (Jn. 3:23, 24)
that he baptized, whereas His words about Penance were said after
John was cast into prison.
If, however, He had admonished men to do penance before
admonishing them to be baptized, this would be because also before
Baptism some kind of penance is required, according to the words of
Peter (Acts 2:38): "Do penance, and be baptized, every one of you."
Reply to Objection 4: Christ did not use the Baptism which He
instituted, but was baptized with the baptism of John, as stated
above (Question 39, Articles 1,2). Nor did He use it actively by
administering it Himself, because He "did not baptize" as a rule, "but
His disciples" did, as related in Jn. 4:2, although it is to be believed
that He baptized His disciples, as Augustine asserts (Ep. cclxv, ad
Seleuc.). But with regard to His institution of this sacrament it was
nowise fitting that He should use it, neither by repenting Himself, in
Whom there was no sin, nor by administering the sacrament to
others, since, in order to show His mercy and power, He was wont to
confer the effect of this sacrament without the sacrament itself, as
stated above (Article 5, ad 3). On the other hand, He both received