FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.77, C.6.

difficulty, according as it is the object of the irascible part, as stated
above (Question 23, Article 1). Again, concupiscence is twofold, as
stated above (Question 30, Article 3). One is natural, and is directed
to those things which sustain the nature of the body, whether as
regards the preservation of the individual, such as food, drink, and
the like, or as regards the preservation of the species, such as
sexual matters: and the inordinate appetite of such things is called
"concupiscence of the flesh." The other is spiritual concupiscence,
and is directed to those things which do not afford sustentation or
pleasure in respect of the fleshly senses, but are delectable in
respect of the apprehension or imagination, or some similar mode of
perception; such are money, apparel, and the like; and this spiritual
concupiscence is called "concupiscence of the eyes," whether this
be taken as referring to the sight itself, of which the eyes are the
organ, so as to denote curiosity according to Augustine's exposition
(Confess. x); or to the concupiscence of things which are proposed
outwardly to the eyes, so as to denote covetousness, according to
the explanation of others.
The inordinate appetite of the arduous good pertains to the "pride of
life"; for pride is the inordinate appetite of excellence, as we shall
state further on (Question 84, Article 2; SS, Question 162, Article 1).
It is therefore evident that all passions that are a cause of sin can be
reduced to these three: since all the passions of the concupiscible
part can be reduced to the first two, and all the irascible passions to
the third, which is not divided into two because all the irascible
passions conform to spiritual concupiscence.
Reply to Objection 1: "Pride of life" is included in covetousness
according as the latter denotes any kind of appetite for any kind of
good. How covetousness, as a special vice, which goes by the name
of "avarice," is the root of all sins, shall be explained further on
(Question 84, Article 1).
Reply to Objection 2: "Concupiscence of the eyes" does not mean
here the concupiscence for all things which can be seen by the eyes,
but only for such things as afford, not carnal pleasure in respect of
touch, but in respect of the eyes, i.e. of any apprehensive power.
Reply to Objection 3: The sense of sight is the most excellent of all
the senses, and covers a larger ground, as stated in Metaph. i: and

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.77, C.6.

so its name is transferred to all the other senses, and even to the
inner apprehensions, as Augustine states (De Verb. Dom., serm.
xxxiii).
Reply to Objection 4: Avoidance of evil is caused by the appetite for
good, as stated above (Question 25, Article 2; Question 39, Article 2);
and so those passions alone are mentioned which incline to good,
as being the causes of those which cause inordinately the avoidance
of evil.