FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.50, C.4.

Reply to Objection 2: The sensitive powers of dumb animals do not
act at the command of reason; but if they are left to themselves,
such animals act from natural instinct: and so in them there are no
habits ordained to operations. There are in them, however, certain
dispositions in relation to nature, as health and beauty. But whereas
by man's reason brutes are disposed by a sort of custom to do
things in this or that way, so in this sense, to a certain extent, we can
admit the existence of habits in dumb animals: wherefore Augustine
says (Questions. lxxxiii, qu. 36): "We find the most untamed beasts,
deterred by fear of pain, from that wherein they took the keenest
pleasure; and when this has become a custom in them, we say that
they are tame and gentle." But the habit is incomplete, as to the use
of the will, for they have not that power of using or of refraining,
which seems to belong to the notion of habit: and therefore, properly
speaking, there can be no habits in them.
Reply to Objection 3: The sensitive appetite has an inborn aptitude
to be moved by the rational appetite, as stated in De Anima iii, text.
57: but the rational powers of apprehension have an inborn aptitude
to receive from the sensitive powers. And therefore it is more
suitable that habits should be in the powers of sensitive appetite
than in the powers of sensitive apprehension, since in the powers of
sensitive appetite habits do not exist except according as they act at
the command of the reason. And yet even in the interior powers of
sensitive apprehension, we may admit of certain habits whereby man
has a facility of memory, thought or imagination: wherefore also the
Philosopher says (De Memor. et Remin. ii) that "custom conduces
much to a good memory": the reason of which is that these powers
also are moved to act at the command of the reason.
On the other hand the exterior apprehensive powers, as sight,
hearing and the like, are not susceptible of habits, but are ordained
to their fixed acts, according to the disposition of their nature, just
as the members of the body, for there are no habits in them, but
rather in the powers which command their movements.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.50, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether there is any habit in the intellect?

Objection 1: It would seem that there are no habits in the intellect.
For habits are in conformity with operations, as stated above (Article
1). But the operations of man are common to soul and body, as
stated in De Anima i, text. 64. Therefore also are habits. But the
intellect is not an act of the body (De Anima iii, text. 6). Therefore the
intellect is not the subject of a habit.
Objection 2: Further, whatever is in a thing, is there according to the
mode of that in which it is. But that which is form without matter, is
act only: whereas what is composed of form and matter, has
potentiality and act at the same time. Therefore nothing at the same
time potential and actual can be in that which is form only, but only
in that which is composed of matter and form. Now the intellect is
form without matter. Therefore habit, which has potentiality at the
same time as act, being a sort of medium between the two, cannot be
in the intellect; but only in the "conjunction," which is composed of
soul and body.
Objection 3: Further, habit is a disposition whereby we are well or ill
disposed in regard to something, as is said (Metaph. v, text. 25). But
that anyone should be well or ill disposed to an act of the intellect is
due to some disposition of the body: wherefore also it is stated (De
Anima ii, text. 94) that "we observe men with soft flesh to be quick
witted." Therefore the habits of knowledge are not in the intellect,
which is separate, but in some power which is the act of some part
of the body.
On the contrary, The Philosopher (Ethic. vi, 2,3,10) puts science,
wisdom and understanding, which is the habit of first principles, in
the intellective part of the soul.
I answer that, concerning intellective habits there have been various
opinions. Some, supposing that there was only one "possible" [FP,
Question 79, Article 2, ad 2] intellect for all men, were bound to hold
that habits of knowledge are not in the intellect itself, but in the
interior sensitive powers. For it is manifest that men differ in habits;
and so it was impossible to put the habits of knowledge directly in
that, which, being only one, would be common to all men. Wherefore
if there were but one single "possible" intellect of all men, the habits