Homily 53 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts XXVI. 30-32
"And when he had thus spoken, the king rose up, and the governor, and
Bernice, and they that sat with them: and when they had gone aside, they talked
between themselves, saying, This man does nothing worthy of death or of bonds.
Then said Agrippa unto Festus, This man might have been set at liberty, if he
had not appealed unto Cæsar."
See how again also they pass sentence in his favor, and after having said,
"You are beside yourself," [Acts 26:24] they acquit him, as undeserving not only
of death, but also of bonds, and indeed would have released him entirely, if he
had not appealed to Cæsar. But this was done providentially, that he should also
depart with bonds. "Unto bonds," he says, "as an evil doer." [1 Timothy 2:9] For
if his Lord "was reckoned among the transgressors" [Mark 15:28], much more
he: but as the Lord did not share with them in their character, so neither did Paul.
For in this is seen the marvellous thing, the being mixed up with such, and yet
receiving no harm from them. "And when it was determined that we should sail
into Italy, they delivered Paul and certain other prisoners unto one named
Julius, a centurion of Augustus' band. And entering into a ship of Adramyttium,
we launched, meaning to sail by the coasts of Asia; one Aristarchus, a
Macedonian of Thessalonica, being with us. And the next day we touched at
Sidon." [Acts 27:1-3] See how far Aristarchus also accompanies Paul. To good
and useful purpose is Aristarchus present, as he would take back the report of all
to Macedonia. "And Julius courteously entreated Paul, and gave him liberty to
go unto his friends to refresh himself. Julius gave Paul liberty," it says, acting
"courteously, that he might refresh himself;" as it was but natural that he should
be much the worse from his bonds and the fear, and the being dragged hither and
there. See how the writer does not hide this either, that Paul wished "to refresh

himself. And when we had launched from thence, we sailed under Cyprus,
because the winds were contrary." [Acts 27:4] Again trials, again contrary
winds. See how the life of the saints is thus interwoven throughout: escaped
from the court of justice, they fall in with shipwreck and storm. "And when we
had sailed over the sea of Cilicia and Pamphylia, we came to Myra, a city of
Lycia. And there the centurion found a ship of Alexandria sailing into Italy; and
he put us therein." (v. 5, 6.) "A ship of Alexandria," it says. It is likely that both
those (in the former ship) would bear to Asia the report of what had befallen
Paul, and that these would do the same in Lycia. See how God does not innovate
or change the order of nature, but suffers them to sail into the unfavorable winds.
But even so the miracle is wrought. That they may sail safely, He did not let
them go out in the (open) sea, but they always sailed near the land. "And when
we had sailed slowly many days, and scarce had come over against Cnidus, the
wind not suffering us, we sailed under Crete, over against Salmone; and, hardly
passing it, came unto a place which is called the fair havens; near whereunto
was the city of Lasea. Now when much time was spent, and when sailing was
now dangerous, because the fast was now already past, Paul admonished them."
[Acts 27:7-9] By "the fast" here, I suppose he means that of the Jews. For they
departed thence a long time after the Pentecost, so that it was much about
midwinter that they arrived at the coasts of Crete. And this too was no slight
miracle, that they also should be saved on his account. "Paul admonished them,
and said unto them, Sirs, I perceive that this voyage will be with hurt and much
damage, not only of the lading and ship, but also of our lives. Nevertheless the
centurion believed the master and the owner of the ship, more than those things
which were spoken by Paul. And because the haven was not commodious to
winter in, the more part advised to depart thence also, if by any means they
might attain to Phenice, and there to winter; which is an haven of Crete, and lies
toward the southwest and northwest. And when the south wind blew softly,
supposing that they had obtained their purpose, loosing thence, they sailed close
to Crete. But not long after there arose against it a tempestuous wind, called