that He might crown the woman.
"Be it unto you even as you will." Now what He says is like this: "Your faith
indeed is able to effect even greater things than these; nevertheless, Be it unto
you even as you will."
This was akin to that voice that said, "Let the Heaven be, and it was."
[Genesis 1:3]
"And her daughter was made whole from that very hour."
Do you see how this woman too contributed not a little to the healing of her
daughter? For to this purpose neither did Christ say, "Let your little daughter be
made whole," but, "Great is your faith, be it unto you even as you will;" to teach
you that the words were not used at random, nor were they flattering words, but
great was the power of her faith.
The certain test, however, and demonstration thereof, He left to the issue of
events. Her daughter accordingly was straightway healed.
But mark thou, I pray you, how when the apostles had failed, and had not
succeeded, this woman had success. So great a thing is assiduity in prayer. Yea,
He had even rather be solicited by us, guilty as we are, for those who belong to
us, than by others in our behalf. And yet they had more liberty to speak; but she
exhibited much endurance.
And by the issue He also excused Himself to His disciples for the delay,
and showed that with reason He had not assented to their request.
4. "And Jesus departed from thence, and came near unto the sea of Galilee;
and went up into the mountain, and sat down there. And great multitudes came
unto Him, having with them those that were lame, blind, maimed, dumb; and
cast them at His feet; and He healed them, insomuch that the multitudes
wondered, when they saw the dumb to speak, the maimed to be whole, the lame
to walk, and the blind to see, and they glorified the God of Israel."
Now He goes about Himself, now sits awaiting the diseased, and has the
lame brought up unto the mountain. And no longer do they touch so much as His
garment, but advance a higher step, being cast at His feet: and they showed their

faith doubly, first, by going up into the mountain though lame, then by wanting
nothing else but to be cast at His feet only.
And great was the marvel and strange, to see them that were carried
walking, the blind needing not any to lead them by the hand. Yea, both the
multitude of the healed, and the facility of their cure amazed them.
Do you see, how the woman indeed He healed with so much delay, but
these immediately? Not because these are better than she is, but because she is
more faithful than they. Therefore, while in her case He defers and delays, to
manifest her constancy; on these He bestows the gift immediately, stopping the
mouths of the unbelieving Jews, and cutting away from them every plea. For the
greater favors one has received, so much the more is he liable to punishment, if
he be insensible, and the very honor make him no better. Therefore you see the
rich also proving wicked, are more punished than the poor, for not being
softened even by their prosperity. For tell me not that they gave alms. Since if
they gave not in proportion to their substance, not even so shall they escape; our
alms being judged not by the measure of our gifts, but by the largeness of our
mind. But if these suffer punishment, much more they that are eager about
unnecessary things; who build houses of two and three stories, but despise the
hungry; who give heed to covetousness, but neglect almsgiving.
5. But since the discourse has fallen on almsgiving, come then, let us
resume again today that argument, which I was making three days ago
concerning benevolence, and left unfinished. You remember, when lately I was
speaking of vanity about your shoes, and of that empty trouble, and the luxury of
the young, that it was from almsgiving that our discourse passed on to those
charges against you. What were the matters then at that time brought forward?
That almsgiving is a kind of art, having its workshop in Heaven, and for its
teacher, not man, but God. Then inquiring what is an art, and what not an art, we
came upon fruitless labors, and evil devices, among which we made mention
also of this art concerning men's shoes.
Have ye then recalled it to mind? Come now, let us today also resume what