properly said to rule or serve, yet every hypostasis or person may be
properly said to be ruling or serving in this or that nature. And in this
way nothing prevents Christ being subject or servant to the Father in
human nature.
Reply to Objection 3: As Augustine says (De Trin. i, 8): "Christ will
give the kingdom to God and the Father, when He has brought the
faithful, over whom He now reigns by faith, to the vision," i.e. to see
the essence common to the Father and the Son: and then He will be
totally subject to the Father not only in Himself, but also in His
members by the full participation of the Godhead. And then all things
will be fully subject to Him by the final accomplishment of His will
concerning them; although even now all things are subject to Him as
regards His power, according to Mt. 28:18: "All power is given to Me
in heaven and in earth."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.20, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether Christ is subject to Himself?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ is not subject to Himself. For
Cyril says in a synodal letter which the Council of Ephesus (Part I,
ch. xxvi) received: "Christ is neither servant nor master of Himself. It
is foolish, or rather impious, to think or say this." And Damascene
says the same (De Fide Orth. iii, 21): "The one Being, Christ, cannot
be the servant or master of Himself." Now Christ is said to be the
servant of the Father inasmuch as He is subject to Him. Hence Christ
is not subject to Himself.
Objection 2: Further, servant has reference to master. Now nothing
has a relation to itself, hence Hilary says (De Trin. vii) that nothing is
like or equal to itself. Hence Christ cannot be said to be the servant
of Himself, and consequently to be subject to Himself.
Objection 3: Further, "as the rational soul and flesh are one man; so
God and man are one Christ," as Athanasius says (Symb. Fid.). Now
man is not said to be subject to himself or servant to himself or
greater than himself because his body is subject to his soul.
Therefore, Christ is not said to be subject to Himself because His
Manhood is subject to His Godhead.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Trin. i, 7): "Truth shows in this
way" (i.e. whereby the Father is greater than Christ in human nature)
"that the Son is less than Himself."
Further, as he argues (De Trin. i, 7), the form of a servant was so
taken by the Son of God that the form of God was not lost. But
because of the form of God, which is common to the Father and the
Son, the Father is greater than the Son in human nature. Therefore
the Son is greater than Himself in human nature.
Further, Christ in His human nature is the servant of God the Father,
according to Jn. 20:17: "I ascend to My Father and to your Father to
My God and your God." Now whoever is the servant of the Father is
the servant of the Son; otherwise not everything that belongs to the
Father would belong to the Son. Therefore Christ is His own servant
and is subject to Himself.
I answer that, As was said above (Article 1, ad 2), to be master or