SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.9, C.3.

Reply to Objection 2: The will's contempt causes the intellect's
dissent, which completes the notion of unbelief. Hence the cause of
unbelief is in the will, while unbelief itself is in the intellect.
Reply to Objection 3: He that believes a wicked angel to be a good
one, does not dissent from a matter of faith, because "his bodily
senses are deceived, while his mind does not depart from a true and
right judgment" as the gloss observes [Augustine, Enchiridion lx].
But, according to the same authority, to adhere to Satan when he
begins to invite one to his abode, i.e. wickedness and error, is not
without sin.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.9, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether unbelief is the greatest of sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that unbelief is not the greatest of sins.
For Augustine says (De Bapt. contra Donat. iv, 20): "I should hesitate
to decide whether a very wicked Catholic ought to be preferred to a
heretic, in whose life one finds nothing reprehensible beyond the
fact that he is a heretic." But a heretic is an unbeliever. Therefore we
ought not to say absolutely that unbelief is the greatest of sins.
Objection 2: Further, that which diminishes or excuses a sin is not,
seemingly, the greatest of sins. Now unbelief excuses or diminishes
sin: for the Apostle says (1 Tim. 1:12,13): "I . . . before was a
blasphemer, and a persecutor and contumelious; but I obtained . . .
mercy . . . because I did it ignorantly in unbelief." Therefore unbelief
is not the greatest of sins.
Objection 3: Further, the greater sin deserves the greater
punishment, according to Dt. 25:2: "According to the measure of the
sin shall the measure also of the stripes be." Now a greater
punishment is due to believers than to unbelievers, according to
Heb. 10:29: "How much more, do you think, he deserveth worse
punishments, who hath trodden under foot the Son of God, and hath
esteemed the blood of the testament unclean, by which he was
sanctified?" Therefore unbelief is not the greatest of sins.
On the contrary, Augustine, commenting on Jn. 15:22, "If I had not
come, and spoken to them, they would not have sin," says (Tract.
lxxxix in Joan.): "Under the general name, He refers to a singularly
great sin. For this," viz. infidelity, "is the sin to which all others may
be traced." Therefore unbelief is the greatest of sins.
I answer that, Every sin consists formally in aversion from God, as
stated above (FS, Question 71, Article 6; FS, Question 73, Article 3).
Hence the more a sin severs man from God, the graver it is. Now
man is more than ever separated from God by unbelief, because he
has not even true knowledge of God: and by false knowledge of God,
man does not approach Him, but is severed from Him.
Nor is it possible for one who has a false opinion of God, to know
Him in any way at all, because the object of his opinion is not God.
Therefore it is clear that the sin of unbelief is greater than any sin