gained; meanwhile while gaining it, he argues from their past experience. For it
was when you obeyed Faith, he says, not the Law, that you received the Spirit
and wrought miracles.
And here, as the Law was the subject of discussion, he moots another
special point of controversy, and very opportunely and with much cogency
introduces a notice of Abraham.
Ver. 6. "Even as Abraham believed God, and it was reckoned unto him for
righteousness."
Even the miracles done by themselves, he says, declare the power of Faith,
but I shall attempt if you will suffer me to draw my proofs from ancient
narratives also. Then, as they made great account of the Patriarch, he brings his
example forward, and shows that he too was justified by Faith. And if he who
was before grace, was justified by Faith, although plentiful in works, much more
we. For what loss was it to him, not being under the Law? None, for his faith
sufficed unto righteousness. The Law did not then exist, he says, neither does it
now exist, any more than then. In disproving the need of the Law, he introduces
one who was justified before the Law, lest an objection should also be made to
him; for as then it was not yet given, so now, having been given, it was
abrogated. And as they made much of their descent from Abraham, and feared
lest, abandoning the Law, they should be considered strangers to his kin; Paul
removes this fear by turning their argument against themselves, and proves that
faith is especially concerned in connecting them with Abraham. He draws out
this argument more at length in the Epistle to the Romans; however he urges it
also here in, the words,
Ver. 7. "Know therefore, that they which be of faith, the same are sons of
Abraham."
Which he proves by ancient testimony thus:
Ver. 8. "And the Scripture, foreseeing that God would justify the Gentiles by
faith, preached the Gospel beforehand unto Abraham, saying, In you shall all the
nations be blessed."

If then those were Abraham's sons, not, who were related to him by blood,
but who follow his faith, for this is the meaning of the words, "In you all the
nations," it is plain that the heathen are brought into kindred with him.
Hereby too is proved another important point. It perplexed them that the
Law was the older, and Faith afterwards. Now he removes this notion by
showing that Faith was anterior to the Law; as is evident from Abraham's case,
who was justified before the giving of the Law. He shows too that late events fell
out according to prophecy; "The Scripture," says he, "foreseeing that God would
justify the Gentiles by faith, preached the Gospel beforehand unto Abraham."
Attend to this point. He Himself who gave the Law, had decreed, before He gave
it, that the heathen should be justified by Faith. And he says not "revealed," but,
"preached the Gospel," to signify that the patriarch was in joy at this method of
justification, and in great desire for its accomplishment.
Further, they were possessed with another apprehension; it was written,
"Cursed is every one that continues not in all things that are written in the book
of the Law, to do them." [Deuteronomy 27:26] And this he removes, with great
skill and prudence, turning their argument against themselves, and showing that
those who relinquish the Law are not only not cursed, but blessed; and they who
keep it, not only not blessed but cursed. They said that he who kept not the Law
was cursed, but he proves that he who kept it was cursed, and he who kept it not,
blessed. Again, they said that he who adhered to Faith alone was cursed, but he
shows that he who adhered to Faith alone, is blessed. And how does he prove all
this? For it is no common thing which we have promised; wherefore it is
necessary to give close attention to what follows. He had already shown this, by
referring to the words spoken to the Patriarch, "In you shall all nations be
blessed," [Genesis 12:4] at a time, that is, when Faith existed, not the Law; so he
adds by way of conclusion,
Ver. 9. "So then they which be of faith are blessed with the faithful
Abraham."
Then, that they might not turn round, and object that, true it was Abraham