intellectual, not indeed through the active seminal power, but by the
power of a higher agent, namely God enlightening (the soul) from
without. For this reason the Philosopher says that the intellect
comes from without. But this will not hold. First, because no
substantial form is susceptible of more or less; but addition of
greater perfection constitutes another species, just as the addition of
unity constitutes another species of number. Now it is not possible
for the same identical form to belong to different species. Secondly,
because it would follow that the generation of an animal would be a
continuous movement, proceeding gradually from the imperfect to
the perfect, as happens in alteration. Thirdly, because it would follow
that the generation of a man or an animal is not generation simply,
because the subject thereof would be a being in act. For if the
vegetative soul is from the beginning in the matter of offspring, and
is subsequently gradually brought to perfection; this will imply
addition of further perfection without corruption of the preceding
perfection. And this is contrary to the nature of generation properly
so called. Fourthly, because either that which is caused by the action
of God is something subsistent: and thus it must needs be
essentially distinct from the pre-existing form, which was nonsubsistent; and we shall then come back to the opinion of those who
held the existence of several souls in the body---or else it is not
subsistent, but a perfection of the pre-existing soul: and from this it
follows of necessity that the intellectual soul perishes with the body,
which cannot be admitted.
There is again another explanation, according to those who held that
all men have but one intellect in common: but this has been
disproved above (Question 76, Article 2).
We must therefore say that since the generation of one thing is the
corruption of another, it follows of necessity that both in men and in
other animals, when a more perfect form supervenes the previous
form is corrupted: yet so that the supervening form contains the
perfection of the previous form, and something in addition. It is in
this way that through many generations and corruptions we arrive at
the ultimate substantial form, both in man and other animals. This
indeed is apparent to the senses in animals generated from
putrefaction. We conclude therefore that the intellectual soul is
created by God at the end of human generation, and this soul is at
the same time sensitive and nutritive, the pre-existing forms being
corrupted.

Reply to Objection 3: This argument holds in the case of diverse
agents not ordered to one another. But where there are many agents
ordered to one another, nothing hinders the power of the higher
agent from reaching to the ultimate form; while the powers of the
inferior agents extend only to some disposition of matter: thus in the
generation of an animal, the seminal power disposes the matter, but
the power of the soul gives the form. Now it is manifest from what
has been said above (Question 105, Article 5; Question 110, Article 1)
that the whole of corporeal nature acts as the instrument of a
spiritual power, especially of God. Therefore nothing hinders the
formation of the body from being due to a corporeal power, while the
intellectual soul is from God alone.
Reply to Objection 4: Man begets his like, forasmuch as by his
seminal power the matter is disposed for the reception of a certain
species of form.
Reply to Objection 5: In the action of the adulterer, what is of nature
is good; in this God concurs. But what there is of inordinate lust is
evil; in this God does not concur.