SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.163, C.2.

death may be painful.
Reply to Objection 8: According to Augustine (Gen. ad lit. [De Pecc.
Mer. et Rem. i, 16; Gen. ad lit. ii. 32]), "although our first parents lived
thereafter many years, they began to die on the day when they heard
the death-decree, condemning them to decline to old age."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.163, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the particular punishments of our first

parents are suitably appointed in Scripture?
Objection 1: It would seem that the particular punishments of our
first parents are unsuitably appointed in Scripture. For that which
would have occurred even without sin should not be described as a
punishment for sin. Now seemingly there would have been "pain in
child-bearing," even had there been no sin: for the disposition of the
female sex is such that offspring cannot be born without pain to the
bearer. Likewise the "subjection of woman to man" results from the
perfection of the male, and the imperfection of the female sex. Again
it belongs to the nature of the earth "to bring forth thorns and
thistles," and this would have occurred even had there been no sin.
Therefore these are unsuitable punishments of the first sin.
Objection 2: Further, that which pertains to a person's dignity does
not, seemingly, pertain to his punishment. But the "multiplying of
conceptions" pertains to a woman's dignity. Therefore it should not
be described as the woman's punishment.
Objection 3: Further, the punishment of our first parents' sin is
transmitted to all, as we have stated with regard to death (Article 1).
But all "women's conceptions" are not "multiplied," nor does "every
man eat bread in the sweat of his face." Therefore these are not
suitable punishments of the first sin.
Objection 4: Further, the place of paradise was made for man. Now
nothing in the order of things should be without purpose. Therefore
it would seem that the exclusion of man from paradise was not a
suitable punishment of man.
Objection 5: Further, this place of the earthly paradise is said to be
naturally inaccessible. Therefore it was useless to put other
obstacles in the way lest man should return thither, to wit the
cherubim, and the "flaming sword turning every way."
Objection 6: Further, immediately after his sin man was subject to
the necessity of dying, so that he could not be restored to
immortality by the beneficial tree of life. Therefore it was useless to
forbid him to eat of the tree of life, as instanced by the words of Gn.
3:22: "See, lest perhaps he . . . take . . . of the tree of life . . . and live

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.163, C.3.

for ever."
Objection 7: Further, to mock the unhappy seems inconsistent with
mercy and clemency, which are most of all ascribed to God in
Scripture, according to Ps. 144:9, "His tender mercies are over all His
works." Therefore God is unbecomingly described as mocking our
first parents, already reduced through sin to unhappy straits, in the
words of Gn. 3:22, "Behold Adam is become as one of Us, knowing
good and evil."
Objection 8: Further, clothes are necessary to man, like food,
according to 1 Tim. 6:8, "Having food, and wherewith to be covered,
with these we are content." Therefore just as food was appointed to
our first parents before their sin, so also should clothing have been
ascribed to them. Therefore after their sin it was unsuitable to say
that God made for them garments of skin.
Objection 9: Further, the punishment inflicted for a sin should
outweigh in evil the gain realized through the sin: else the
punishment would not deter one from sinning. Now through sin our
first parents gained in this, that their eyes were opened, according to
Gn. 3:7. But this outweighs in good all the penal evils which are
stated to have resulted from sin. Therefore the punishments
resulting from our first parents' sin are unsuitably described.
On the contrary, These punishments were appointed by God, Who
does all things, "in number, weight, and measure " (Wis. 11:21).
I answer that, As stated in the foregoing Article, on account of their
sin, our first parents were deprived of the Divine favor, whereby the
integrity of human nature was maintained in them, and by the
withdrawal of this favor human nature incurred penal defects. Hence
they were punished in two ways. In the first place by being deprived
of that which was befitting the state of integrity, namely the place of
the earthly paradise: and this is indicated (Gn. 3:23) where it is
stated that "God sent him out of the paradise of pleasure." And since
he was unable, of himself, to return to that state of original
innocence, it was fitting that obstacles should be placed against his
recovering those things that were befitting his original state, namely
food (lest he should take of the tree of life) and place; for "God
placed before . . . paradise . . . Cherubim, and a flaming sword."
Secondly, they were punished by having appointed to them things