for, that they might not assert this, he determined the time also. Thus he did not
say simply, "according to the covenant which I made with their fathers," lest you
should say [it was] the one made with Abraham, or that with Noah: but he
declares what [covenant it was], "not according to the covenant which I made
with their fathers" in the Exodus. Wherefore he added also, "in the day that I
took them by the hand, to lead them out of the land of Egypt; because they
continued not in My covenant, and I regarded them not, says the Lord." You see
that the evils begin first from ourselves ("they" themselves first, says he,
continued not in [the "covenant"]) and the negligence is from ourselves, but the
good things from Him; I mean the [acts] of bounty. He here introduces, as it
were, an apology showing the cause why He forsakes them.

Hebrews 8:10
5. [Hebrews 8:10] "For this," he says, "is the covenant that I will make with
the house of Israel after those days, says the Lord; I will put My laws into their
mind, and write them in their hearts, and I will be to them a God, and they shall
be to Me a people." Thus He says this concerning the New [covenant] because
His words are "not according to the covenant which I covenanted."
But what other difference is there beside this? Now if any person should say
that "the difference is not in this respect, but in respect to its being put into their
hearts; He makes no mention of any difference of ordinances, but points out the
mode of its being given: for no longer" (he says) "shall the covenant be in
writings, but in hearts;" let the Jew in that case show that this was ever carried
into effect; but he could not, for it was made a second time in writings after the
return from Babylon. But I show that the Apostles received nothing in writing,
but received [it] in their hearts through the Holy Ghost. Wherefore also Christ
said, "When He comes, He will bring all things to your remembrance, and He
shall teach you." [John 14:26]

Hebrews 8:11-12
6. "And they shall not teach" (he says) "every man his neighbor, and every
man his brother, saying, Know the Lord: for all shall know Me from the least to
the greatest. For I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins and
their iniquities will I remember no more." Behold also another sign. "From the
least even to the greatest of them" (he says) "they shall know Me, and they shall
not say, Know the Lord." When has this been fulfilled save now? For our
[religion] is manifest: but theirs [i.e. the Jews'] was not manifest, but had been
shut up in a corner.
[A covenant] is then said to be "new," when it is different and shows some
advantage over the old. "Nay surely," says one, "it is new also when part of it has
been taken away, and part not. For instance, when an old house is ready to fall
down, if a person leaving the whole, has patched up the foundation, straightway
we say, he has made it new, when he has taken some parts away, and brought
others into their place. For even the heaven also is thus called 'new,' when it is
no longer 'of brass,' but gives rain; and the earth likewise is new when it is not
un fruitful, not when it has been changed; and the house is likewise new, when
portions of it have been taken away, and portions remain. And thus, he says, he
has well termed it 'a New Covenant.'"
If then I show that that covenant had become "Old" in this respect, that it
yielded no fruit? And that you may know this exactly, read what Haggai says,
what Zechariah, what the Messenger, when the return from the Captivity had not
yet fully taken place; and what Esdras charges. How then did [the people]
receive him? And how no man enquired of the Lord, inasmuch as they [the
priests] themselves also transgressed, and knew it not even themselves? Do you
see how your [interpretation] is broken down, while I maintain my own: that this
[covenant] must be called "New" in the proper sense of the word?