willingly or unwillingly, all that you have goes to others, and they again give it
up to others, and they again to others. For we are all sojourners; and the tenant of
the house is more truly perchance the owner of it, for the owner dies, and the
tenant lives, and still enjoys the house. And if the latter hires it, the other might
be said to hire it too: for he built it, and was at pains with it, and fitted it up.
Property, in fact, is but a word: we are all owners in fact but of other men's
possessions. Those things only are our own, which we have sent before us to the
other world. Our goods here are not our own; we have only a life interest in
them; or rather they fail us during our lives. Only the virtues of the soul are
properly our own, as almsgiving and charity. Worldly goods, even by those
without, were called external things, because they are without us. But let us
make them internal. For we cannot take our wealth with us, when we depart
hence, but we can take our charities. But let us rather send them before us, that
they may prepare for us an abode in the eternal mansions. [Luke 16:9]
Goods are named from use, not from lordship, and are not our own, and
possessions are not a property but a loan. For how many masters has every estate
had, and how many will it have! There is a sensible proverb, (and popular
proverbs, when they contain any wisdom, are not to be despised,) "O field, how
many men's have you been, and how many men's will you be?" This we should
say to our houses and all our goods. Virtue alone is able to depart with us, and to
accompany us to the world above. Let us then give up and extinguish that love of
wealth, that we may kindle in us an affection for heavenly things. These two
affections cannot possess one soul. For it is said, "Either he will hate the one,
and love the other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other."
[Matthew 6:24] Do you see a man with a long train of attendants, clearing a way
along the streets, clothed in silken garments, riding aloft, and stiffening his neck?
Be not overawed, but smile. As we laugh when we see children playing at kings,
so laugh at his state, for it is no better than theirs, nor indeed so pleasant, for
there is not the same innocence and simplicity as with children. With them it is
laughter and pleasure, here is a man made ridiculous and contemptible.

Glorify God, Who has kept you free from this theatrical ostentation. For, if
you will, humble as your station is, you may be higher than he who is exalted in
his chariot. And why? Because, though his body is a little raised from the earth,
his soul is fixed upon it, for "My strength," he says, "cleaves to my flesh" [Psalm
102:6], but thou in your spirit walkest in heaven. What though he has many
attendants clearing his way? Is he more honored by this than his horse? And
what an absurdity is it, to drive men before one to clear the way for a beast to
pass! Then what sort of honor is it to bestride a horse? An honor shared by his
slaves. Yet some are so vain of this, that they have it led after them even though
they do not want it. What greater folly can there be? To wish to be distinguished
by their horses, by the costliness of their garments, by their retinue! What can be
more contemptible than glory which consists in horses, and servants? Are you
virtuous? Use not such distinctions. Have ornaments in yourself. Be not indebted
for your glory to the presence of others. To such honor the most wicked, corrupt,
and base of men may attain; all indeed who are rich. Actors and dancers may
ride on horseback with a servant running before them, yet are they but actors and
dancers still. Their horses and attendants procure them no respect. For when the
graces of the soul are wanting to such persons, the addition of these external
things is superfluous and vain. And as when a wall is weak, or a body
disordered, whatever you put upon it, it still remains unsound and decayed; so in
this case; the soul continues the same, and receives no advantage from things
without, not though the man wear a thousand ornaments of gold. Let us not
therefore be anxious for such things. Let us withdraw ourselves from temporal
things, and pursue greater, even spiritual distinctions, which will render us truly
objects of veneration, that we also may obtain the blessings of futurity, through
the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom, etc.