God with weakness? Lest any one should on this account refuse to come near
you and to join the fold? No, says he, not such are my bonds. They can shine
brightly even in kings' palaces. "So that my bonds," says he, "became manifest in
Christ, throughout the whole prætorian guard: and most of the brethren in the
Lord, being confident through my bonds, are more abundantly bold to speak the
word of God without fear." [Philippians 1:13-14] Behold ye a force in bonds
stronger than the raising of the dead. They beheld me bound, and they are the
more courageous. For where bonds are, there of necessity is something great
also. Where affliction is, there verily is salvation also, there verily is solace,
there verily are great achievements. For when the devil kicks, then is he,
doubtless, hit. When he binds God's servants, then most of all does the word gain
ground. And mark how this is every where the case. Paul was imprisoned; and in
the prison he did these things, yea, says he, by my very bonds themselves. He
was imprisoned at Rome, and brought the more converts to the faith; for not only
was he himself emboldened, but many others also because of him. He was
imprisoned at Jerusalem, and preaching in his bonds he struck the king with
amazement, [Acts 26:28] and made the governor tremble. [Acts 24:25] For being
afraid, it is related, he let him go, and he that had bound him was not ashamed to
receive instruction concerning the things to come at the hands of him whom he
had bound. In bonds he sailed, and retrieved the wreck, and bound fast the
tempest. It was when he was in bonds that the monster fastened on him, and fell
off from his hand, having done him no hurt. He was bound at Rome, and
preaching in bonds drew thousands to his cause, holding forward, in the place of
every other, this very argument, I mean his chain.
It is not however our lot to be bound now-a-days. And yet there is another
chain if we have a mind to wear it. And what is it? It is to restrain our hand, to be
not so forward to covetousness. With this chain let us bind ourselves. Let the fear
of God be unto us instead of a bond of iron. Let us loose them that are bound by
poverty, by affliction. There is no comparison between opening the doors of a
prison, and releasing an enthralled soul. There is no comparison between loosing

the bonds of prisoners and "setting at liberty them that are bruised;" [Luke 4:18]
this last is far greater than the other; for the other there is no reward in store, for
this last there are ten thousand rewards.
Paul's chain has proved a long one, and has detained us a length of time.
Yea, long indeed it is, and more beautiful than any cord of gold. A chain this,
which draws them that are bound by it, as it were by a kind of invisible
machinery, to Heaven, and, like a golden cord let down, draws them up to the
Heaven of heavens. And the wonderful thing is this, that, bound, as it is, below,
it draws its captives upwards: and indeed this is not the nature of the things
themselves. But where God orders and disposes, look not for the nature of
things, nor for natural sentence, but for things above nature and natural
sequence.
Let us learn not to sink under affliction, nor to repine; for look at this
blessed saint. He had been scourged, and sorely scourged, for it is said, "When
they had laid many stripes upon them." He had been bound too, and that again
sorely, for the jailor cast him into the inner ward, and with extraordinary
security. And though he was in so many perils, at midnight, when even the most
wakeful are asleep with sleep, another and a stronger bond upon them, they
chanted and sang praise unto the Lord. What can be more adamantine than these
souls? They bethought them how that the holy Children sang even in fire and
furnace. [Daniel 3:1-30] Perhaps they thus reasoned with themselves, "we have
as yet suffered nothing like that."
But our discourse has done well, in that it has thus brought us out again to
other bonds, and into another prison. What am I to do? I would fain be silent, but
am not able. I have discovered another prison, far more wonderful and more
astonishing than the former. But, come now, rouse yourselves, as though I were
just commencing my discourse, and attend to me with your minds fresh. I would
fain break off the discourse, but it will not suffer me; for just as a man in the
midst of drinking cannot bear to break off his draught, whatever any one may
promise him; so I too, now I have laid hold of this glorious cup of the prison of