forasmuch as not even this checked him, He submitted to be kissed, and gave
Himself up willingly; and they laid their hands on Him, and seized Him that
night on which they ate the passover, to such a degree did they boil with rage,
and were mad. However, they would have had no strength, unless He had
Himself suffered it. Yet this delivers not Judas from intolerable punishment, but
even more exceedingly condemns him, for that though he had received such
proof of His power, and lenity, and meekness, and gentleness, he became fiercer
than any wild beast.
Knowing then these things, let us flee from covetousness. For that, that it
was, which then drove him to madness; that exercises them who are taken
thereby in the most extreme cruelty and inhumanity. For, when it makes them to
despair of their own salvation, much more does it cause them to overlook that of
the rest of mankind. And so tyrannical is the passing, as sometimes to prevail
over the keenest lust. Wherefore indeed I am exceedingly ashamed, that to spare
their money, may indeed have bridled their unchastity, but for the fear of Christ
they were not willing to live chastely and with gravity.
Wherefore I say, let us flee from it; for I will not cease for ever saying this.
For why, O man, do you gather gold? Why do you make your bondage more
bitter? Why your watching more grievous? Why your anxiety more painful?
Account for your own the metals buried in the mines, those in the kings' courts.
For indeed if you had all that heap, you would keep it only, and wouldest not use
it. For if now you have not used the things you possess, but abstainest from them
as though they belonged to others, much more would this be the case with you, if
you had more. For it is the way of the covetous, the more they heap up around
them, the more to be sparing of it. "But I know," do you say, "that these things
are mine." The possession then is in supposition only, not in enjoyment. But I
should be an object of fear to men, do you say. Nay, but you would by this
become a more easy prey both to rich and poor, to robbers, and false accusers,
and servants, and in general to all that are minded to plot against you. For if you
are desirous to be an object of fear, cut off the occasions by which they are able

to lay hold of you and pain you, whoever have set their hearts thereon. Do you
not hear the parable that says, that the poor and naked man, not even a hundred
men gathered together are ever able to strip? For he has his poverty as his
greatest protection, which not even the king shall ever be able to subdue and
take.
3. The covetous man indeed all join in vexing. And why do I say men,
when moths and worms war against such a man? And why do I speak of moths?
Length of time is enough alone, even when no one troubles him, to do the
greatest injury to such a man.
What then is the pleasure of wealth? For I see its discomforts, but do thou
tell me the pleasure of it. And what are its discomforts? Do you say: anxieties,
plots, enmities, hatred, fear; to be ever thirsting and in pain.
For if any one were to embrace a damsel he loves, but were not able to
satisfy his desire, he undergoes the utmost torment. Even so also does the rich
man. For he has plenty, and is with her, but cannot satisfy all his desire; but the
same result takes place as some wise man mentions; "The lust of eunuch to
deflower a virgin;" and, "Like an eunuch embracing a virgin and groaning;" so
are all the rich.
Why should one speak of the other things? How such a one is displeasing to
all, to his servants, his laborers, his neighbors, to them that handle public affairs,
to them that are injured, to them that are not injured, to his wife most of all, and
to his children more than to any. For not as men does he bring them up, but more
miserably than menials and purchased slaves.
And countless occasions for anger, and vexation, and insult, and ridicule
against himself, does he bring about, being set forth as a common laughing stock
to all. So the discomforts are these, and perhaps more than these; before one
could never go through them all in discourse, but experience will be able to set
them before us.
But tell me the pleasure from hence. "I appear to be rich," he says, "and am
reputed to be rich." And what kind of pleas ure to be so reputed? It is a very