SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.33, C.6.

Reply to Objection 2: Hatred of the evil that is contrary to one's
natural good, is the first of the soul's passions, even as love of one's
natural good is. But hatred of one's connatural good cannot be first,
but is something last, because such like hatred is a proof of an
already corrupted nature, even as love of an extraneous good.
Reply to Objection 3: Evil is twofold. One is a true evil, for the reason
that it is incompatible with one's natural good, and the hatred of
such an evil may have priority over the other passions. There is,
however, another which is not a true, but an apparent evil, which,
namely, is a true and connatural good, and yet is reckoned evil on
account of the corruption of nature: and the hatred of such an evil
must needs come last. This hatred is vicious, but the former is not.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.33, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether hatred arises from envy?

Objection 1: It seems that hatred does not arise from envy. For envy
is sorrow for another's good. Now hatred does not arise from
sorrow, for, on the contrary, we grieve for the presence of the evil we
hate. Therefore hatred does not arise from envy.
Objection 2: Further, hatred is opposed to love. Now love of our
neighbor is referred to our love of God, as stated above (Question
25, Article 1; Question 26, Article 2). Therefore hatred of our
neighbor is referred to our hatred of God. But hatred of God does not
arise from envy, for we do not envy those who are very far removed
from us, but rather those who seem to be near us, as the
Philosopher states (Rhet. ii). Therefore hatred does not arise from
envy.
Objection 3: Further, to one effect there is one cause. Now hatred is
caused by anger, for Augustine says in his Rule that "anger grows
into hatred." Therefore hatred does not arise from envy.
On the contrary, Gregory says (Moral. xxxi, 45) that "out of envy
cometh hatred."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 5), hatred of his neighbor is a
man's last step in the path of sin, because it is opposed to the love
which he naturally has for his neighbor. Now if a man declines from
that which is natural, it is because he intends to avoid that which is
naturally an object to be shunned. Now every animal naturally avoids
sorrow, just as it desires pleasure, as the Philosopher states (Ethic.
vii, x). Accordingly just as love arises from pleasure, so does hatred
arise from sorrow. For just as we are moved to love whatever gives
us pleasure, in as much as for that very reason it assumes the
aspect of good; so we are moved to hate whatever displeases us, in
so far as for this very reason it assumes the aspect of evil.
Wherefore, since envy is sorrow for our neighbor's good, it follows
that our neighbor's good becomes hateful to us, so that "out of envy
cometh hatred."
Reply to Objection 1: Since the appetitive power, like the
apprehensive power, reflects on its own acts, it follows that there is
a kind of circular movement in the actions of the appetitive power.