For if our preaching were a matter of display and ambition, it would have
been right to jump from one subject to another and change about continually,
taking no thought for you, but only for your applauses. But since we have not
devoted our zeal to this, but our labors are all for your profit, we shall not cease
discoursing to you on the same subjects, till you succeed in learning them. For I
might have said much about Gentile superstition, and about the Manichæans,
and about the Marcionists, and by the grace of God have given them heavy
blows, but this sort of discourse is out of season. For to those who do not yet
know accurately their own affairs, to those who have not yet learned that to be
covetous is evil, who would utter such discourses as those, and lead them on to
other subjects before the time?
We then shall not cease to say the same things, whether ye be persuaded or
not. We fear however, that by continually saying the same things, if you hearken
not, we may make the condemnation heavier for the disobedient.
I must not however say this in regard to you all; for I know many who are
benefited by their coming here, who might with justice cry out against those
others, as insidiously injuring them by their ignorance and inattention. But not
even so will they be injured. For hearing the same things continually is useful
even to those who know them, since by often hearing what we know we are
more deeply affected. We know, for instance, that Humility is an excellent thing,
and that Christ often discoursed about it; but when we listen to the words
themselves and the reflections made upon them, we are yet more affected, even
if we hear them ten thousand times.
2. It is then a fitting time for us also to say now to you, "Wherefore leaving
the beginning of the doctrine of Christ, let us go unto perfection."
What is "the beginning of the doctrine"? He goes on to state it himself,
saying, "not laying again" (these are his words) "the foundation of repentance
from dead works, and faith toward God, of the doctrine of baptisms and of laying
on of hands, of the resurrection of the dead, and of eternal judgment."
But if this be "the Beginning," what else is our doctrine save to repent "from

dead works," and through the Spirit to receive "the faith," in "the resurrection of
the dead, and eternal judgment"? But what is "the Beginning"? "The Beginning,"
he says, is nothing else than this, when there is not a strict life. For as it is
necessary to instruct one who is entering on the study of grammar, in the
Elements first, so also must the Christian know these things accurately, and have
no doubt concerning them. And should he again have need of teaching, he has
not yet the foundation. For one who is firmly grounded ought to be fixed and to
stand steady, and not be moved about. But if one who has been catechised and
baptized is going ten years afterwards to hear again about the Faith, and that we
ought to "believe" in "the resurrection of the dead," he does not yet have the
foundation, he is again seeking after the beginning of the Christian religion. For
that the Faith is the foundation, and the rest the building, hear him [the Apostle]
saying; "I have laid the foundation and another builds thereupon." [1
Corinthians 3:10] "If any man build upon this foundation, gold, silver, precious
stones, wood, hay, stubble." [1 Corinthians 3:12]
"Not laying again" (he says) "the foundation of repentance from dead
works."
3. But what is, "let us go on unto perfection"? Let us henceforth proceed (he
means) even to the very roof, that is, let us have the best life. For as in the case
of the letters the Alpha involves the whole, and as the foundation, the whole
building, so also does full assurance concerning the Faith involve purity of life.
And without this it is not possible to be a Christian, as without foundations there
can be no building; nor skill in literature without the letters. Still if one should be
always going round about the letters, or if about the foundation, not about the
building, he will never gain anything.
Do not however think that the Faith is depreciated by being called
elementary: for it is indeed the whole power: for when he says, "For every one
that uses milk is unskilled in the word of righteousness, for he is a babe"
[Hebrews 5:13], it is not this which he calls "milk." But to be still doubting about
these things is [a sign] of a mind feeble, and needing many discourses. For these