temperance by speech full of gravity.
But if a word merely have such great power, tell me, how is it thou dost
despise the Scriptures? And if an admonition can do such great things, far more
when the admonitions are with the Spirit. Yes, for a word from the divine
Scriptures, made to sound in the ear, does more than fire soften the hardened
soul, and renders it fit for all good things.
11. In this way too did Paul, when he had found the Corinthians puffed up
and inflamed, compose them, and make them more considerate. For they were
priding themselves on those very things, touching which they ought to have been
ashamed, and to have hid their face. But after they had received the letter, hear
the change in them, of which the Teacher himself has borne witness for them,
saying on this wise: for "this very thing, that you sorrowed after a godly sort,
what carefulness it wrought in you, yea, what clearing of yourselves, yea, what
indignation, yea, what zeal, yea, what revenge." In this way do we bring to order
servants and children, wives, and friends, and make our enemies friends.
In this way the great men too, they that were dear to God, became better.
David, for instance, after his sin, when he had had the benefit of certain words,
then it was that he came unto that most excellent repentance; and the apostles
also by this mean became what they did become, and drew after them the whole
world.
"And what is the profit," one may say, "when any one hears, but does not
what is said?" No little will the profit be even from hearing. For he will go on to
condemn himself, and to groan inwardly, and will come in time also to do the
things that are spoken of. But he that does not even know that he has sinned,
when will he cease from his negligence? When will he condemn himself?
Let us not therefore despise the hearing of the divine Scriptures. For this is
of Satan's devising; not suffering us to see the treasure, lest we should gain the
riches. Therefore he says that the hearing the divine laws is nothing, lest he
should see us from the hearing acquiring the practice also.
Knowing then this his evil art, let us fortify ourselves against him on all

sides, that being fenced with this armor, we may both abide unconquered
ourselves, and smite him on the head: and thus, having crowned ourselves with
the glorious wreaths of victory, we may attain unto the good things to come, by
the grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and
might for ever and ever. Amen.

## Homily 3 on Matthew

Matt. I. 1.
"The book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the Son of David, the Son of
Abraham."
Behold a third discourse, and we have not yet made an end of the prefatory
matter. It was not then for nought that I said, It is the nature of these thoughts to
have a great depth.
Come, then, let us speak today what remains. What is it then that is now
required? Why Joseph's genealogy is traced, who had no part in the birth. And
one cause we have mentioned already; but it is necessary to mention likewise the
other, that which is more mystical and secret than the first. What then is this? He
would not that it should be manifest to the Jews, at the time of the birth, that
Christ was born of a virgin.
Nay, be not troubled at the strangeness of the saying. For it is no statement
of mine, but of our fathers, wonderful and illustrious men. For if He disguised
many things from the first, calling Himself Son of Man, and has not everywhere
clearly unfolded to us even His equality with the Father; why do you wonder at
His having for a time disguised this also, taking order as He was for a certain
great and marvellous purpose? and would have condemned her for adultery. For
if in regard to the other matters, for which they had frequent precedents likewise
in the old dispensation, they were quite shameless in their obstinacy (for so,
because He had cast out devils, they called Him possessed; and because He
healed on the Sabbath day, they supposed Him to be an adversary of God; and
yet oftentimes even before this had the Sabbath been broken), what would they
not have said, if this had been told them? Especially as they had all time before
this on their side, in that it never had produced any such thing. For if after so
many miracles they still called Him son of Joseph, how before the miracles