the Spirit and have enjoyed so great a gift, if they become of grovelling mind
and fall down to the earth. For I hear many saying these words worthy of all
scorn, 'Give me today and take tomorrow.' 'For,' says one, 'if indeed there be such
things there as you affirm, then it is one for one; but if there be no such thing at
all, then it is two for nothing.' What can be more lawless than these words? Or
what more idle prating ? We are discoursing about Heaven and those
unspeakable good things; and you bring forth unto us the terms of the racecourse , yet art not ashamed nor hidest your face, while uttering such things as
befit maniacs? Blushest thou not that art so rivetted to the present things? Will
you not cease from being distraught and beside yourself, and in youth a dotard?
Were Greeks indeed to talk in this way, it were no marvel: but that believers
should vent such dotage, of what forgiveness does it admit? For do you hold
those immortal hopes in utter suspicion? Do you think these things to be utterly
doubtful? And in what are these things deserving of pardon? 'And who has
come,' says one, 'and brought back word what is there?' Of men indeed not any
one, but God, more trustworthy than all, has declared these things. But you
behold not what is there. Neither do you see God. Will you then deny that there
is a God, because you see Him not? 'Yes,' he replies, 'I firmly believe there is a
God.' If then an infidel should ask you, 'And who came from Heaven and
brought back word of this?' what will you answer? Whence do you know that
there is a God? 'From the things that are seen,' he answers, 'from the fair order
existing through the whole creation, from its being manifest to all.' Therefore
receive also in the same way the doctrine of the judgment. 'How?' he asks. I will
question you, and do thou answer me. Is this God just, and will He render to
each according to his deserving? Or, on the contrary, does He will the wicked
should live happily and in luxury, and the good in the contrary things? 'By no
means,' he answers, 'for man even would not feel thus.' Where then shall they
who have done virtuously here, enjoy the things that be good? And where the
wicked the opposites, except there is to be a life and retribution hereafter? Do
you see that at present it is one for one, and not two for one. But I will show you,

as I proceed, that it is not even one against one, but it shall be for the righteous
two for nothing; and for the sinners and these that live here riotously, quite the
contrary. For they that have lived riotously here have received not even one for
one; but those who pass their life in virtue two for nothing. For who are at in
rest, they that have abused this present life, or they that followed heavenly
wisdom? Perhaps you will say the former, but I prove it of the latter, summoning
for my witnesses those very men that have enjoyed these present things; and
they will not be so shameless as to deny what I am going to say. For oftentimes
have they imprecated curses upon matchmakers and upon the day that their
bridal chamber was wreathed, and have proclaimed them happy who have not
married. Many too of the young, even when they might have married, have
refused for no other reason than the troublesomeness of the thing. And this I say,
not as accusing marriage; for it is "honorable;" [Hebrews 13:4] but those who
have used it amiss. Now if they who have lived a married life, often considered
their life not worth the living; what shall we say of those who have been swept
down into whores' deep pits, and are more slavishly and wretchedly treated than
any captive? What of those who have grown rotten in luxury and have enveloped
their bodies with a thousand diseases? 'But it is a pleasure to be had in honor.'
Yea, rather, nothing is bitterer than this slavery. For he that seeks vain honor is
more servile than any slave, and desirous of pleasing any body; but he that treads
it under foot is superior to all, who cares not for the glory that comes from
others. 'But the possession of wealth is desirable.' Yet we have often shown that
they who are loose from it and have nothing, enjoy greater riches and repose.
'But to be drunken is pleasant.' But who will say this? Surely then if to be
without riches is pleasanter than to have them, and not to marry than to marry,
and not to seek vainglory than to seek it, and not to live luxuriously than to live
so; even in this world they who are not riveted to those present things have the
advantage. And as yet I say not how that the former, even though he be racked
with ten thousand tortures, has that good hope to carry him through: while the
latter, even though he is in the enjoyment of a thousand delights, has the fear of