1 Corinthians 14:26
4. "What is it then, brethren? When ye come together, each one has a psalm,
has a teaching, has a tongue, has a revelation, has an interpretation. Let all
things be done unto edifying."
Do you see the foundation and the rule of Christianity? How, as it is the
artificer's work to build, so it is the Christian's to profit his neighbors in all
things.
But since he had vehemently run down the gift; lest it might seem to be
superfluous, for with a view to pull down their pride and no more, he did this:—
again he reckons it with the other gifts, saying, "has a psalm, has a teaching, has
a tongue." For of old they used also to make psalms by a gift and to teach by a
gift. Nevertheless, "let all these look to one thing," says he, the correction of
their neighbor: let nothing be done at random. For if you come not to edify your
brother, why do you come here at all? In fact, I do not make much account of the
difference of the gifts. One thing concerns me, one thing is my desire, to do all
things "unto edifying." Thus also he that has the lesser gift will outrun him that
has the greater, if this be not wanting. Yea, therefore are the gifts bestowed, that
each might be edified; since unless this take place, the gift will rather turn to the
condemnation of the receiver. For what, tell me, is the use of prophesying? What
is the use of raising the dead, when there is none who profits by it? But if this be
the end of the gifts, and if it be possible to effect it in another way without gifts,
boast not yourself on the score of the signs, nor do thou bewail yourself to whom
the gifts are denied.

1 Corinthians 14:27
5. "And if any man speaks in a tongue, let it be by two, or at the most by
three, and that in turn; and let one interpret."

1 Corinthians 14:28
"But if there be no interpreter, let him keep silence in the Church; and let
him speak to himself, and to God."
What do you say, tell me? Having spoken so much of tongues, that the gift
is a thing unprofitable, a thing superfluous, if it have no interpreter, do you
command again to speak with tongues? I do not command, says he, neither do I
forbid; as when he says, "if any of them that believe not bid you to a feast and
you be disposed to go," he says it not laying down a law for them to go, but not
hindering them: so likewise here. "And let him speak to himself and to God." If
he endure not to be silent, says he, but is so ambitious and vain-glorious, "let him
speak by himself. " And thus, by the very fact of so permitting, he greatly
checked and put them to shame. Which he does also elsewhere, discoursing of
converse with a wife and saying, "But this I say because of your incontinency."
But not so did he speak, when he was discoursing of prophecy. How then? In a
tone of command and legislation: "Let the prophets speak, two or three." And he
no where here seeks the interpreter, nor does he stop the mouth of him that
prophesies as under the former head, saying, "If there be no interpreter, let him
keep silence;" because in fact he who speaks in a tongue is not sufficient of
himself. Wherefore if any has both gifts, let him speak. But if he has not, yet
wish to speak, let him do so with the interpreter's aid. For the prophet is an
interpreter, but of God; whereas you are of man. "But if there be no interpreter,
let him keep silence:" for nothing ought to be done superfluously, nothing for
ambition. Only "let him speak to himself and to God;" i.e., mentally, or quietly
and without noise: at least, if he will speak. For this is surely not the tone of one
making a law, but it may be of one who shames them more even by his
permission; as when he says, "but if any hunger, let him eat at home:" and
seeming to give permission, he touches them hereby the more sharply. "For you