I answer that, Multiplicity of Orders was introduced into the Church
for three reasons. First to show forth the wisdom of God, which is
reflected in the orderly distinction of things both natural and
spiritual. This is signified in the statement of 3 Kgs. 10:4,5 that
"when the queen of Saba saw . . . the order of" Solomon's
"servants . . . she had no longer any spirit in her," for she was
breathless from admiration of his wisdom. Secondly, in order to
succor human weakness, because it would be impossible for one
man, without his being heavily burdened, to fulfill all things
pertaining to the Divine mysteries; and so various orders are
severally appointed to the various offices; and this is shown by the
Lord giving Moses seventy ancients to assist him. Thirdly, that men
may be given a broader way for advancing (to perfection), seeing
that the various duties are divided among many men, so that all
become the co-operators of God; than which nothing is more Godlike, as Dionysius says (Eccl. Hier. iii).
Reply to Objection 1: The other sacraments are given that certain
effects may be received; but this sacrament is given chiefly that
certain acts may be performed. Hence it behooves the sacrament of
Order to be differentiated according to the diversity of acts, even as
powers are differentiated by their acts.
Reply to Objection 2: The division of Order is not that of an integral
whole into its parts, nor of a universal whole, but of a potential
whole, the nature of which is that the notion of the whole is found to
be complete in one part, but in the others by some participation
thereof. Thus it is here: for the entire fulness of the sacrament is in
one Order, namely the priesthood, while in the other sacraments
there is a participation of Order. And this is signified by the Lord
saying (Num. 11:17): "I will take of thy spirit and give to them, that
they may bear with thee the burden of the people." Therefore all the
Orders are one sacrament.
Reply to Objection 3: In a kingdom, although the entire fulness of
power resides in the king, this does not exclude the ministers having
a power which is a participation of the kingly power. It is the same in
Order. In the aristocratic form of government, on the contrary, the
fulness of power resides in no one, but in all.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether there are seven Orders?

Objection 1: It would seem that there are not seven Orders. For the
Orders of the Church are directed to the hierarchical acts. But there
are only three hierarchical acts, namely "to cleanse, to enlighten, and
to perfect," for which reason Dionysius distinguishes three Orders
(Eccl. Hier. v). Therefore there are not seven.
Objection 2: Further, all the sacraments derive their efficacy and
authenticity from their institution by Christ, or at least by His
apostles. But no mention except of priests and deacons is made in
the teaching of Christ and His apostles. Therefore seemingly there
are no other Orders.
Objection 3: Further, by the sacrament of Order a man is appointed
to dispense the other sacraments. But there are only six other
sacraments. Therefore there should be only six Orders.
Objection 4: On the other hand, It would seem that there ought to be
more. For the higher a power is, the less is it subject to
multiplication. Now the hierarchical power is in the angels in a higher
way than in us, as Dionysius says (Eccl. Hier. i). Since then there are
nine Orders in the angelic hierarchy, there should be as many, or
more, in the Church.
Objection 5: Further, the prophecy of the Psalms is the most noble of
all the prophecies. Now there is one Order, namely of readers, for
reading the other prophecies in the Church. Therefore there ought to
be another Order for reading the Psalms, especially since (Decretals,
Dist. xxi, cap. Cleros) the "psalmist" is reckoned as the second
Order after the doorkeeper.
I answer that, Some show the sufficiency of the orders from their
correspondence with the gratuitous graces which are indicated 1
Cor. 12. For they say that the "word of wisdom" belongs to the
bishop, because he is the ordainer of others, which pertains to
wisdom; the "word of knowledge" to the priest, for he ought to have
the key of knowledge; "faith" to the deacon, for he preaches the
Gospel; the "working of miracles" to the subdeacon, who sets
himself to do deeds of perfection by the vow of continency;
"interpretation of speeches" to the acolyte, this being signified by