the true idea of the genus itself is derived from a respect to the
subject; for quantity is called the measure of substance, and quality
is the disposition of substance. But the true idea of relation is not
taken from its respect to that in which it is, but from its respect to
something outside. So if we consider even in creatures, relations
formally as such, in that aspect they are said to be "assistant," and
not intrinsically affixed, for, in this way, they signify a respect which
affects a thing related and tends from that thing to something else;
whereas, if relation is considered as an accident, it inheres in a
subject, and has an accidental existence in it. Gilbert de la Porree
considered relation in the former mode only.
Now whatever has an accidental existence in creatures, when
considered as transferred to God, has a substantial existence; for
there is no accident in God; since all in Him is His essence. So, in so
far as relation has an accidental existence in creatures, relation
really existing in God has the existence of the divine essence in no
way distinct therefrom. But in so far as relation implies respect to
something else, no respect to the essence is signified, but rather to
its opposite term.
Thus it is manifest that relation really existing in God is really the
same as His essence and only differs in its mode of intelligibility; as
in relation is meant that regard to its opposite which is not
expressed in the name of essence. Thus it is clear that in God
relation and essence do not differ from each other, but are one and
the same.
Reply to Objection 1: These words of Augustine do not imply that
paternity or any other relation which is in God is not in its very being
the same as the divine essence; but that it is not predicated under
the mode of substance, as existing in Him to Whom it is applied; but
as a relation. So there are said to be two predicaments only in God,
since other predicaments import habitude to that of which they are
spoken, both in their generic and in their specific nature; but nothing
that exists in God can have any relation to that wherein it exists or of
whom it is spoken, except the relation of identity; and this by reason
of God's supreme simplicity.
Reply to Objection 2: As the relation which exists in creatures
involves not only a regard to another, but also something absolute,
so the same applies to God, yet not in the same way. What is
contained in the creature above and beyond what is contained in the

meaning of relation, is something else besides that relation; whereas
in God there is no distinction, but both are one and the same; and
this is not perfectly expressed by the word "relation," as if it were
comprehended in the ordinary meaning of that term. For it was
above explained (Question 13, Article 2), in treating of the divine
names, that more is contained in the perfection of the divine essence
than can be signified by any name. Hence it does not follow that
there exists in God anything besides relation in reality; but only in
the various names imposed by us.
Reply to Objection 3: If the divine perfection contained only what is
signified by relative names, it would follow that it is imperfect, being
thus related to something else; as in the same way, if nothing more
were contained in it than what is signified by the word "wisdom," it
would not in that case be a subsistence. But as the perfection of the
divine essence is greater than can be included in any name, it does
not follow, if a relative term or any other name applied to God signify
something imperfect, that the divine essence is in any way
imperfect; for the divine essence comprehends within itself the
perfection of every genus (Question 4, Article 2).