will you not suspect, even against your will, that there is a hell? Reckon those
here who before you have been severely punished, consider that God is no
respecter of persons, and that though you have done numberless wickednesses,
you have suffered no such thing, and you will have the idea of hell. For God has
so implanted that idea within us, that no one can ever be ignorant of it. For poets
and philosophers and fabulists, and in short all men, have philosophized
concerning the retribution that is there, and have said that the greater number are
punished in Hades. And if those things are fables, yet what we have received are
not so.
I say not these things as wishing to frighten you, nor to lay a burden on
your souls, but to make them wise, and render them easier. I could wish also
myself that there were no punishment— yes, myself most of all men. And why
so? Because while each of you fears for his own soul, I have to answer for this
office also in which I preside over you. So that most of all it is impossible for me
to escape. But it cannot be that there is not punishment and a hell. What can I
do? Where then, they say, is the kindness of God to men? In many places. But on
this subject I will rather discourse at some other season, that we may not confuse
the discourses concerning hell. In the meantime let not that slip, which we have
gained. For it is no small advantage to be persuaded concerning hell. For the
recollection of such discourses, like some bitter medicine, will be able to clear
off every vice, if it be constantly settled in your mind. Let us therefore use it, that
having a pure heart, we may so be thought worthy to see those things, which eye
has not seen, nor ear heard, nor have entered into the heart of man. Which may
we all obtain by the grace and mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom, etc.

## Homily 9 on First Thessalonians

[1 Thessalonians 5:1, 2]
"But concerning the times and the seasons, brethren, you have no need that
anything be written unto you. For yourselves know perfectly that the day of the
Lord so comes as a thief in the night."
Nothing, as it seems, is so curious, and so fondly prone to pry into things
obscure and concealed, as the nature of men. And this is wont to happen to it,
when the mind is unsettled and in an imperfect state. For the simpler sort of
children never cease teasing their nurses, and tutors, and parents, with their
frequent questions, in which there is nothing else but "when will this be?" and
"when that?" And this comes to pass also from living in indulgence, and having
nothing to do. Many things therefore our mind is in haste to learn already and to
comprehend, but especially concerning the period of the consummation; and
what wonder if we are thus affected, for those holy men, themselves, were most
of all affected in the same way? And before the Passion, the Apostles come and
say to Christ, "Tell us, when shall these things be, and what shall be the sign of
Your coming, and of the end of the world?" [Matthew 24:23] And after the
Passion and the Resurrection from the dead, they said to Him, Tell us, "dost
Thou at this time restore again the kingdom to Israel?" [From Acts 1:6] And
they asked Him nothing sooner than this.
But it was not so afterwards, when they had been vouchsafed the Holy
Ghost. Not only do they not themselves inquire, nor complain of this ignorance,
but they repress those who labor under this unseasonable curiosity. Hear for
instance what the blessed Paul now says, "But concerning the times and the
seasons, brethren, you have no need that anything be written unto you." Why has
he not said that no one knows? Why has he not said, that it is not revealed,
instead of saying, "You have no need that anything be written unto you"?