only, but also from the title of life itself. For when was virginity so largely
planted every where in the world? When contempt of wealth, and of life, and of
all things besides? For such as were wicked and wizards, would have effected
nothing like this, but the contrary in all respects: while these introduced among
us the life of angels; and not introduced merely, but established it in our own
land, in that of the barbarians, in the very extremities of the earth. Whence it is
manifest that it was the power of Christ every where that effected all, which
every where shines, and swifter than any lightning illumines the hearts of men.
All these things, then, considering, and accepting what has been done as a clear
proof of the promise of the things to come, worship with us the invincible might
of The Crucified, that you may both escape the intolerable punishments, and
obtain the everlasting kingdom; of which may all we partake through the grace
and love towards men of our Lord Jesus Christ; to Whom be glory world without
end. Amen.

## Homily 9 on Second Corinthians

2 Corinthians 4:8-9
We are pressed on every side, yet not straitened; perplexed, yet not unto
despair; pursued, yet not forsaken.
He still dwells upon proving that the whole work is to be ascribed to the
power of God, repressing the highmindedness of those that glory in themselves.
'For not this only,' says he, 'is marvelous, that we keep this treasure in earthen
vessels, but that even when enduring ten thousand hardships, and battered on
every side, we [still] preserve and lose it not. Yet though there were a vessel of
adamant, it would neither have been strong enough to carry so vast a treasure,
nor have sufficed against so many machinations; yet, as it is, it both bears it and
suffers no harm, through God's grace.' For, "we are pressed on every side," says
he, "but not straitened." What is, "on every side?"
'In respect of our foes, in respect of our friends, in respect of necessaries, in
respect of other needs, by them which be hostile, by them of our own household.'
"Yet not straitened." And see how he speaks contrarieties, that thence also he
may show the strength of God. For, "we are pressed on every side, yet not
straitened," says he; "perplexed, yet not unto despair;" that is, 'we do not quite
fall off. For we are often, indeed, wrong in our calculations , and miss our aim,
yet not so as to fall away from what is set before us: for these things are
permitted by God for our discipline, not for our defeat.'
2 Corinthians 4:9. "Pursued, yet not forsaken; smitten down, yet not
destroyed." For these trials do indeed befal, but not the consequences of the
trials. And this indeed through the power and Grace of God. In other places
indeed he says that these things were permitted in order both to their own
humble-mindedness, and to the safety of others: for "that I should not be exalted