SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.153, C.3.

father as guide and guardian, and under whom he progresses in
goods both internal and external. Hence human nature rebels
against an indeterminate union of the sexes and demands that a man
should be united to a determinate woman and should abide with her
a long time or even for a whole lifetime. Hence it is that in the human
race the male has a natural solicitude for the certainty of offspring,
because on him devolves the upbringing of the child: and this
certainly would cease if the union of sexes were indeterminate.
This union with a certain definite woman is called matrimony; which
for the above reason is said to belong to the natural law. Since,
however, the union of the sexes is directed to the common good of
the whole human race, and common goods depend on the law for
their determination, as stated above (FS, Question 90, Article 2), it
follows that this union of man and woman, which is called
matrimony, is determined by some law. What this determination is
for us will be stated in the Third Part of this work (XP, Question 50,
seqq.), where we shall treat of the sacrament of matrimony.
Wherefore, since fornication is an indeterminate union of the sexes,
as something incompatible with matrimony, it is opposed to the
good of the child's upbringing, and consequently it is a mortal sin.
Nor does it matter if a man having knowledge of a woman by
fornication, make sufficient provision for the upbringing of the child:
because a matter that comes under the determination of the law is
judged according to what happens in general, and not according to
what may happen in a particular case.
Reply to Objection 1: Fornication is reckoned in conjunction with
these things, not as being on a par with them in sinfulness, but
because the matters mentioned there were equally liable to cause
dispute between Jews and Gentiles, and thus prevent them from
agreeing unanimously. For among the Gentiles, fornication was not
deemed unlawful, on account of the corruption of natural reason:
whereas the Jews, taught by the Divine law, considered it to be
unlawful. The other things mentioned were loathsome to the Jews
through custom introduced by the law into their daily life. Hence the
Apostles forbade these things to the Gentiles, not as though they
were unlawful in themselves, but because they were loathsome to
the Jews, as stated above (FS, Question 103, Article 4, ad 3).
Reply to Objection 2: Fornication is said to be a sin, because it is
contrary to right reason. Now man's reason is right, in so far as it is

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.153, C.3.

ruled by the Divine Will, the first and supreme rule. Wherefore that
which a man does by God's will and in obedience to His command, is
not contrary to right reason, though it may seem contrary to the
general order of reason: even so, that which is done miraculously by
the Divine power is not contrary to nature, though it be contrary to
the usual course of nature. Therefore just as Abraham did not sin in
being willing to slay his innocent son, because he obeyed God,
although considered in itself it was contrary to right human reason
in general, so, too, Osee sinned not in committing fornication by
God's command. Nor should such a copulation be strictly called
fornication, though it be so called in reference to the general course
of things. Hence Augustine says (Confess. iii, 8): "When God
commands a thing to be done against the customs or agreement of
any people, though it were never done by them heretofore, it is to be
done"; and afterwards he adds: "For as among the powers of human
society, the greater authority is obeyed in preference to the lesser,
so must God in preference to all."
Reply to Objection 3: Abraham and Jacob went in to their
handmaidens with no purpose of fornication, as we shall show
further on when we treat of matrimony (XP, Question 65, Article 5, ad
2). As to Juda there is no need to excuse him, for he also caused
Joseph to be sold.
Reply to Objection 4: Simple fornication is contrary to the love of our
neighbor, because it is opposed to the good of the child to be born,
as we have shown, since it is an act of generation accomplished in a
manner disadvantageous to the future child.
Reply to Objection 5: A person, who, while given to works of piety,
yields to the inconstancy of the flesh, is freed from eternal loss, in so
far as these works dispose him to receive the grace to repent, and
because by such works he makes satisfaction for his past
inconstancy; but not so as to be freed by pious works, if he persist
in carnal inconstancy impenitent until death.
Reply to Objection 6: One copulation may result in the begetting of a
man, wherefore inordinate copulation, which hinders the good of the
future child, is a mortal sin as to the very genus of the act, and not
only as to the inordinateness of concupiscence. On the other hand,
one meal does not hinder the good of a man's whole life, wherefore
the act of gluttony is not a mortal sin by reason of its genus. It