of such miraculous interpositions]. For as she has received freely from God, freely also does she
minister [to others].
5. Nor does she perform anything by means of angelic invocations, or by incantations, or by
any other wicked curious art; but, directing her prayers to the Lord, who made all things, in a pure,
sincere, and straightforward spirit, and calling upon the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, she has
been accustomed to work miracles for the advantage of mankind, and not to lead them into error.
If, therefore, the name of our Lord Jesus Christ even now confers benefits [upon men], and cures
thoroughly and effectively all who anywhere believe on Him, but not that of Simon, or Menander,
or Carpocrates, or of any other man whatever, it is manifest that, when He was made man, He held
fellowship with His own creation, and did all things truly through the power of God, according
to the will of the Father of all, as the prophets had foretold. But what these things were, shall be
described in dealing with the proofs to be found in the prophetical writings.

### Chapter XXXIII.—Absurdity of the doctrine of the transmigration of souls.

1. We may subvert their doctrine as to transmigration from body to body by this fact, that souls
remember nothing whatever of the events which took place in their previous states of existence.
For if they were sent forth with this object, that they should have experience of every kind of action,
they must of necessity retain a remembrance of those things which have been previously
accomplished, that they might fill up those in which they were still deficient, and not by always
hovering, without intermission, round the same pursuits, spend their labour wretchedly in vain (for
the mere union of a body [with a soul] could not altogether extinguish the memory and contemplation
of those things which had formerly been experienced), and especially as they came [into the
world] for this very purpose. For as, when the body is asleep and at rest, whatever things the soul
sees by herself, and does in a vision, recollecting many of these, she also communicates them to
the body; and as it happens that, when one awakes, perhaps after a long time, he relates what he
saw in a dream, so also would he undoubtedly remember those things which he did before he came
into this particular body. For if that which is seen only for a very brief space of time, or has been
on the general question of angelic invocation.

conceived of simply in a phantasm, and by the soul alone, through means of a dream, is remembered
after she has mingled again with the body, and been dispersed through all the members, much more
would she remember those things in connection with which she stayed during so long a time, even
throughout the whole period of a bypast life.
2. With reference to these objections, Plato, that ancient Athenian, who also was the first to
introduce this opinion, when he could not set them aside, invented the [notion of] a cup of oblivion,
imagining that in this way he would escape this sort of difficulty. He attempted no kind of proof
[of his supposition], but simply replied dogmatically [to the objection in question], that when souls
enter into this life, they are caused to drink of oblivion by that demon who watches their entrance
[into the world], before they effect an entrance into the bodies [assigned them]. It escaped him, that
[by speaking thus] he fell into another greater perplexity. For if the cup of oblivion, after it has
been drunk, can obliterate the memory of all the deeds that have been done, how, O Plato, dost
thou obtain the knowledge of this fact (since thy soul is now in the body), that, before it entered
into the body, it was made to drink by the demon a drug which caused oblivion? For if thou hast a
remembrance of the demon, and the cup, and the entrance [into life], thou oughtest also to be
acquainted with other things; but if, on the other hand, thou art ignorant of them, then there is no
truth in the story of the demon, nor in the cup of oblivion prepared with art.
3. In opposition, again, to those who affirm that the body itself is the drug of oblivion, this
observation may be made: How, then, does it come to pass, that whatsoever the soul sees by her
own instrumentality, both in dreams and by reflection or earnest mental exertion, while the body
is passive, she remembers, and reports to her neighbours? But, again, if the body itself were [the
cause of] oblivion, then the soul, as existing in the body, could not remember even those things
which were perceived long ago either by means of the eyes or the ears; but, as soon as the eye was
turned from the things looked at, the memory of them also would undoubtedly be destroyed. For
the soul, as existing in the very [cause of] oblivion, could have no knowledge of anything else than
that only which it saw at the present moment. How, too, could it become acquainted with divine
things, and retain a remembrance of them while existing in the body, since, as they maintain, the
body itself is [the cause of] oblivion? But the prophets also, when they were upon the earth,
remembered likewise, on their returning to their ordinary state of mind, whatever things they
spiritually saw or heard in visions of heavenly objects, and related them to others. The body,
therefore, does not cause the soul to forget those things which have been spiritually witnessed; but
the soul teaches the body, and shares with it the spiritual vision which it has enjoyed.
Pythagoras, who learned it from the Egyptians. Comp. Clem. Alex., Strom., i. 15: Herodot., ii. 123.