itself as present"---i.e. to know how it differs from other things;
which is to know its essence and nature.
Reply to Objection 1: The mind knows itself by means of itself,
because at length it acquires knowledge of itself, though led thereto
by its own act: because it is itself that it knows since it loves itself,
as he says in the same passage. For a thing can be called selfevident in two ways, either because we can know it by nothing else
except itself, as first principles are called self-evident; or because it
is not accidentally knowable, as color is visible of itself, whereas
substance is visible by its accident.
Reply to Objection 2: The essence of an angel is an act in the genus
of intelligible things, and therefore it is both intellect and the thing
understood. Hence an angel apprehends his own essence through
itself: not so the human mind, which is either altogether in
potentiality to intelligible things---as is the passive intellect---or is
the act of intelligible things abstracted from the phantasms---as is
the active intellect.
Reply to Objection 3: This saying of the Philosopher is universally
true in every kind of intellect. For as sense in act is the sensible in
act, by reason of the sensible likeness which is the form of sense in
act, so likewise the intellect in act is the object understood in act, by
reason of the likeness of the thing understood, which is the form of
the intellect in act. So the human intellect, which becomes actual by
the species of the object understood, is itself understood by the
same species as by its own form. Now to say that in "things without
matter the intellect and what is understood are the same," is equal to
saying that "as regards things actually understood the intellect and
what is understood are the same." For a thing is actually understood
in that it is immaterial. But a distinction must be drawn: since the
essences of some things are immaterial---as the separate
substances called angels, each of which is understood and
understands, whereas there are other things whose essences are not
wholly immaterial, but only the abstract likenesses thereof. Hence
the Commentator says (De Anima iii) that the proposition quoted is
true only of separate substances; because in a sense it is verified in
their regard, and not in regard of other substances, as already stated
(Reply OBJ 2).

### ARTICLE 2. Whether our intellect knows the habits of the soul

by their essence?
Objection 1: It would seem that our intellect knows the habits of the
soul by their essence. For Augustine says (De Trin. xiii, 1): "Faith is
not seen in the heart wherein it abides, as the soul of a man may be
seen by another from the movement of the body; but we know most
certainly that it is there, and conscience proclaims its existence";
and the same principle applies to the other habits of the soul.
Therefore the habits of the soul are not known by their acts, but by
themselves.
Objection 2: Further, material things outside the soul are known by
their likeness being present in the soul, and are said therefore to be
known by their likenesses. But the soul's habits are present by their
essence in the soul. Therefore the habits of the soul are known by
their essence.
Objection 3: Further, "whatever is the cause of a thing being such is
still more so." But habits and intelligible species cause things to be
known by the soul. Therefore they are still more known by the soul in
themselves.
On the contrary, Habits like powers are the principles of acts. But as
is said (De Anima ii, 4), "acts and operations are logically prior to
powers." Therefore in the same way they are prior to habits; and
thus habits, like the powers, are known by their acts.
I answer that, A habit is a kind of medium between mere power and
mere act. Now, it has been said (Article 1) that nothing is known but
as it is actual: therefore so far as a habit fails in being a perfect act, it
falls short in being of itself knowable, and can be known only by its
act; thus, for example, anyone knows he has a habit from the fact
that he can produce the act proper to that habit; or he may inquire
into the nature and idea of the habit by considering the act. The first
kind of knowledge of the habit arises from its being present, for the
very fact of its presence causes the act whereby it is known. The
second kind of knowledge of the habit arises from a careful inquiry,
as is explained above of the mind (Article 1).
Reply to Objection 1: Although faith is not known by external