THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.3, C.4.

abstract Personality by our intellect, we may still understand the
Nature assuming.
Reply to Objection 1: Because in God "what is," and "whereby it is,"
are one, if any one of the things which are attributed to God in the
abstract is considered in itself, abstracted from all else, it will still be
something subsisting, and consequently a Person, since it is an
intellectual nature. Hence just as we now say three Persons, on
account of holding three personal properties, so likewise if we
mentally exclude the personal properties there will still remain in our
thought the Divine Nature as subsisting and as a Person. And in this
way It may be understood to assume human nature by reason of Its
subsistence or Personality.
Reply to Objection 2: Even if the personal properties of the three
Persons are abstracted by our mind, nevertheless there will remain
in our thoughts the one Personality of God, as the Jews consider.
And the assumption can be terminated in It, as we now say it is
terminated in the Person of the Word.
Reply to Objection 3: If we mentally abstract the Personality, it is
said that nothing remains by way of resolution, i.e. as if the subject
of the relation and the relation itself were distinct because all we can
think of in God is considered as a subsisting suppositum. However,
some of the things predicated of God can be understood without
others, not by way of resolution, but by the way mentioned above.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.3, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether one Person without another can assume

a created nature?
Objection 1: It would seem that one Person cannot assume a created
nature without another assuming it. For "the works of the Trinity are
inseparable," as Augustine says (Enchiridion xxxviii). But as the
three Persons have one essence, so likewise They have one
operation. Now to assume is an operation. Therefore it cannot
belong to one without belonging to another.
Objection 2: Further, as we say the Person of the Son became
incarnate, so also did the Nature; for "the whole Divine Nature
became incarnate in one of Its hypostases," as Damascene says (De
Fide Orth. iii, 6). But the Nature is common to the three Persons.
Therefore the assumption is.
Objection 3: Further, as the human nature in Christ is assumed by
God, so likewise are men assumed by Him through grace, according
to Rm. 14:3: "God hath taken him to Him." But this assumption
pertains to all the Persons; therefore the first also.
On the contrary, Dionysius says (Div. Nom. ii) that the mystery of the
Incarnation pertains to "discrete theology," i.e. according to which
something "distinct" is said of the Divine Persons.
I answer that, As was said above (Article 1), assumption implies two
things, viz. the act of assuming and the term of assumption. Now the
act of assumption proceeds from the Divine power, which is
common to the three Persons, but the term of the assumption is a
Person, as stated above (Article 2). Hence what has to do with action
in the assumption is common to the three Persons; but what
pertains to the nature of term belongs to one Person in such a
manner as not to belong to another; for the three Persons caused
the human nature to be united to the one Person of the Son.
Reply to Objection 1: This reason regards the operation, and the
conclusion would follow if it implied this operation only, without the
term, which is a Person.
Reply to Objection 2: The Nature is said to be incarnate, and to
assume by reason of the Person in Whom the union is terminated, as