that was not able even to bear arms; he was compelled to give proofs of his own
valor. And when he cut off Saul's skirt, he said not what he said out of display,
but to repel an ill suspicion which they had scattered abroad against him, saying,
that he wished to kill him. [1 Samuel 24:4, etc.] It is meet therefore every where
to seek for the reason. For he that looks to the advantage of his hearers even
though he should praise himself, not only deserves not to be found fault with, but
even to be crowned; and if he is silent, then to be found fault with. For if David
had then been silent in the matter of Goliath, they would not have allowed him to
go out to the battle, nor to have raised that illustrious trophy. On this account
then he speaks being compelled; and that not to his brethren, although he was
distrusted by them too as well as by the king; but envy stopped their ears.
Therefore leaving them alone, he tells his tale to him who was not as yet envious
of him.
4. For envy is a fearful, a fearful thing, and persuades men to despise their
own salvation. In this way did both Cain destroy himself, and again, before his
time, the devil who was the destroyer of his father. So did Saul invite an evil
demon against his own soul; and when he had invited, he again envied his
physician. For such is the nature of envy; he knew that he was saved, yet he
would rather have perished than see him that saved him had in honor. What can
be more grievous than this passion? One cannot err in calling it the devil's
offspring. And in it is contained the fruit of vainglory, or rather its root also; for
both these evils are wont mutually to produce each other. And thus in truth it was
that Saul even thus envied, when they said, "David smote by ten thousands," [1
Samuel 18:7] than which what can be more senseless? For why do you envy?
Tell me! 'Because such an one praised him?' Yet surely you ought to rejoice;
besides, thou dost not know even whether the praise be true. And do you
therefore grieve because without being admirable he has been praised as such?
And yet you ought to feel pity. For if he be good, you ought not to envy him
when praised, but yourself to praise along with those that speak well of him; but
if not such, why are you galled? Why thrust the sword against yourself? 'Because

admired by men.' But men today are and tomorrow are not. 'But because he
enjoys glory?' Of what sort, tell me? That of which the prophet says that it is "the
flower of grass." [Isaiah 40:6. Septuagint] Are you then therefore envious
because you bear no burden, nor carriest about with you such loads of grass? But
if he seems to you to be enviable on this account, then why not also woodcutters
who carry burdens every day and come to the city [with them]? For that burden
is nothing better than this, but even worse. For theirs indeed galls the body only,
but this has oftentimes harmed the soul even and occasioned greater solicitude
than pleasure. And should one have gained renown through eloquence, the fear
he endures is greater than the good report he bears; yea, what is more, the one is
short, the other perpetual. 'But he is in favor with those in authority?' In that too
again is danger and envy. For as you feel towards him, so do many others feel.
'But he is praised continually?' This produces bitter slavery. For he will not dare
to do fearlessly anything of what according to his judgment he should, lest he
should offend those that extol him, for that distinction is a hard bondage to him.
So that the more he is known to, so many the more masters he has, and his
slavery becomes the greater, as masters of his are found in every quarter. A
servant indeed, when he is released from the eye of his master, both takes breath
and lives in all freedom; but this man meets with masters at every turn, for he is
the slave of all that appear in the forum. And even should some necessary object
press, he dares not set foot in the forum, except it be with his servants following,
and his horse, and all his other show set in array, lest his masters condemn him.
And if he sees some friend of those who are truly so , he has not the boldness to
talk with him on an equal footing: for he is afraid of his masters, lest they depose
him from his glory. So that the more distinguished he is, so much the more he is
enslaved. And if he suffer anything that is disagreeable, the insult is the more
annoying, both in that he has more to witness it and it seems to infringe his
dignity. It is not only an insult, but a calamity also, for he has also many who
exult at it; and in like way if he come to the enjoyment of any good thing, he has
more who envy and detract and do their vigilance to destroy him. Is this then a