SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.81, C.3.

Reply to Objection 2: Bodily fatness is produced by the natural heat
in the process of digestion, and at the same time the natural heat
thrives, as it were, on this fatness. In like manner charity both
causes devotion (inasmuch as love makes one ready to serve one's
friend) and feeds on devotion. Even so all friendship is safeguarded
and increased by the practice and consideration of friendly deeds.
Reply to Objection 3: Devotion to God's holy ones, dead or living,
does not terminate in them, but passes on to God, in so far as we
honor God in His servants. But the devotion of subjects to their
temporal masters is of another kind, just as service of a temporal
master differs from the service of God.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.81, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether contemplation or meditation is the cause

of devotion?
Objection 1: It would seem that contemplation or meditation is not
the cause of devotion. No cause hinders its effect. But subtle
considerations about abstract matters are often a hindrance to
devotion. Therefore contemplation or meditation is not the cause of
devotion.
Objection 2: Further, if contemplation were the proper and essential
cause of devotion, the higher objects of contemplation would arouse
greater devotion. But the contrary is the case: since frequently we
are urged to greater devotion by considering Christ's Passion and
other mysteries of His humanity than by considering the greatness
of His Godhead. Therefore contemplation is not the proper cause of
devotion.
Objection 3: Further, if contemplation were the proper cause of
devotion, it would follow that those who are most apt for
contemplation, are also most apt for devotion. Yet the contrary is to
be noticed, for devotion is frequently found in men of simplicity and
members of the female sex, who are defective in contemplation.
Therefore contemplation is not the proper cause of devotion.
On the contrary, It is written (Ps. 38:4): "In my meditation a fire shall
flame out." But spiritual fire causes devotion. Therefore meditation is
the cause of devotion.
I answer that, The extrinsic and chief cause of devotion is God, of
Whom Ambrose, commenting on Lk. 9:55, says that "God calls
whom He deigns to call, and whom He wills He makes religious: the
profane Samaritans, had He so willed, He would have made devout."
But the intrinsic cause on our part must needs be meditation or
contemplation. For it was stated above (Article 1) that devotion is an
act of the will to the effect that man surrenders himself readily to the
service of God. Now every act of the will proceeds from some
consideration, since the object of the will is a good understood.
Wherefore Augustine says (De Trin. ix, 12; xv, 23) that "the will arises
from the intelligence." Consequently meditation must needs be the
cause of devotion, in so far as through meditation man conceives
the thought of surrendering himself to God's service. Indeed a