THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.86, C.6.

guilt has been forgiven, the dispositions caused by preceding acts
should not remain, which are called the remnants of sin. Yet they
remain weakened and diminished, so as not to domineer over man,
and they are after the manner of dispositions rather than of habits,
like the "fomes" which remains after Baptism.
Reply to Objection 1: God heals the whole man perfectly; but
sometimes suddenly, as Peter's mother-in-law was restored at once
to perfect health, so that "rising she ministered to them" (Lk. 4:39),
and sometimes by degrees, as we said above (Question 44, Article 3,
ad 2) about the blind man who was restored to sight (Mt. 8). And so
too, He sometimes turns the heart of man with such power, that it
receives at once perfect spiritual health, not only the guilt being
pardoned, but all remnants of sin being removed as was the case
with Magdalen (Lk. 7); whereas at other times He sometimes first
pardons the guilt by operating grace, and afterwards, by cooperating grace, removes the remnants of sin by degrees.
Reply to Objection 2: Sin too, sometimes induces at once a weak
disposition, such as is the result of one act, and sometimes a
stronger disposition, the result of many acts.
Reply to Objection 3: One human act does not remove all the
remnants of sin, because, as stated in the Predicaments (Categor.
viii) "a vicious man by doing good works will make but little progress
so as to be any better, but if he continue in good practice, he will end
in being good as to acquired virtue." But God's grace does this much
more effectively, whether by one or by several acts.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.86, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether the forgiveness of guilt is an effect of

Penance?
Objection 1: It would seem that the forgiveness of guilt is not an
effect of penance as a virtue. For penance is said to be a virtue, in so
far as it is a principle of a human action. But human action does
nothing towards the remission of guilt, since this is an effect of
operating grace. Therefore the forgiveness of guilt is not an effect of
penance as a virtue.
Objection 2: Further, certain other virtues are more excellent than
penance. But the forgiveness of sin is not said to be the effect of any
other virtue. Neither, therefore, is it the effect of penance as a virtue.
Objection 3: Further, there is no forgiveness of sin except through
the power of Christ's Passion, according to Heb. 9:22: "Without
shedding of blood there is no remission." Now Penance, as a
sacrament, produces its effect through the power of Christ's
Passion, even as the other sacraments do, as was shown above
(Question 62, Articles 4,5). Therefore the forgiveness of sin is the
effect of Penance, not as a virtue, but as a sacrament.
On the contrary, Properly speaking, the cause of a thing is that
without which it cannot be, since every defect depends on its cause.
Now forgiveness of sin can come from God without the sacrament of
Penance, but not without the virtue of penance, as stated above
(Question 84, Article 5, ad 3; Question 85, Article 2); so that, even
before the sacraments of the New Law were instituted, God
pardoned the sins of the penitent. Therefore the forgiveness of sin is
chiefly the effect of penance as a virtue.
I answer that, Penance is a virtue in so far as it is a principle of
certain human acts. Now the human acts, which are performed by
the sinner, are the material element in the sacrament of Penance.
Moreover every sacrament produces its effect, in virtue not only of
its form, but also of its matter. because both these together make the
one sacrament, as stated above (Question 60, Article 6, ad 2, Article
7). Hence in Baptism forgiveness of sin is effected, in virtue not only
of the form but also of the matter, viz. water, albeit chiefly in virtue of
the form from which the water receives its power---and, similarly, the
forgiveness of sin is the effect of Penance, chiefly by the power of