FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.108, C.3.

the common notion of justice. Consequently Our Lord left the judicial
precepts to the discretion of those who were to have spiritual or
temporal charge of others. But as regards the judicial precepts of the
Old Law, some of them He explained, because they were
misunderstood by the Pharisees, as we shall state later on (Article 3,
ad 2).

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.108, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the New Law directed man sufficiently as

regards interior actions?
Objection 1: It would seem that the New Law directed man
insufficiently as regards interior actions. For there are ten
commandments of the decalogue directing man to God and his
neighbor. But Our Lord partly fulfilled only three of them: as regards,
namely, the prohibition of murder, of adultery, and of perjury.
Therefore it seems that, by omitting to fulfil the other precepts, He
directed man insufficiently.
Objection 2: Further, as regards the judicial precepts, Our Lord
ordained nothing in the Gospel, except in the matter of divorcing of
wife, of punishment by retaliation, and of persecuting one's enemies.
But there are many other judicial precepts of the Old Law, as stated
above (Question 104, Article 4; Question 105). Therefore, in this
respect, He directed human life insufficiently.
Objection 3: Further, in the Old Law, besides moral and judicial,
there were ceremonial precepts about which Our Lord made no
ordination. Therefore it seems that He ordained insufficiently.
Objection 4: Further, in order that the mind be inwardly well
disposed, man should do no good deed for any temporal whatever.
But there are many other temporal goods besides the favor of man:
and there are many other good works besides fasting, alms-deeds,
and prayer. Therefore Our Lord unbecomingly taught that only in
respect of these three works, and of no other earthly goods ought we
to shun the glory of human favor.
Objection 5: Further, solicitude for the necessary means of
livelihood is by nature instilled into man, and this solicitude even
other animals share with man: wherefore it is written (Prov. 6:6,8):
"Go to the ant, O sluggard, and consider her ways . . . she provideth
her meat for herself in the summer, and gathereth her food in the
harvest." But every command issued against the inclination of
nature is an unjust command, forasmuch as it is contrary to the law
of nature. Therefore it seems that Our Lord unbecomingly forbade
solicitude about food and raiment.
Objection 6: Further, no act of virtue should be the subject of a

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.108, C.4.

prohibition. Now judgment is an act of justice, according to Ps.
18:15: "Until justice be turned into judgment." Therefore it seems
that Our Lord unbecomingly forbade judgment: and consequently
that the New Law directed man insufficiently in the matter of interior
acts.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Serm. Dom. in Monte i, 1): We
should take note that, when He said: "'He that heareth these My
words,' He indicates clearly that this sermon of the Lord is replete
with all the precepts whereby a Christian's life is formed."
I answer that, As is evident from Augustine's words just quoted, the
sermon, contains the whole process of forming the life of a
Christian. Therein man's interior movements are ordered. Because
after declaring that his end is Beatitude; and after commending the
authority of the apostles, through whom the teaching of the Gospel
was to be promulgated, He orders man's interior movements, first in
regard to man himself, secondly in regard to his neighbor.
This he does in regard to man himself, in two ways, corresponding
to man's two interior movements in respect of any prospective
action, viz. volition of what has to be done, and intention of the end.
Wherefore, in the first place, He directs man's will in respect of the
various precepts of the Law: by prescribing that man should refrain
not merely from those external works that are evil in themselves, but
also from internal acts, and from the occasions of evil deeds. In the
second place He directs man's intention, by teaching that in our
good works, we should seek neither human praise, nor worldly
riches, which is to lay up treasures on earth.
Afterwards He directs man's interior movement in respect of his
neighbor, by forbidding us, on the one hand, to judge him rashly,
unjustly, or presumptuously; and, on the other, to entrust him too
readily with sacred things if he be unworthy.
Lastly, He teaches us how to fulfil the teaching of the Gospel; viz. by
imploring the help of God; by striving to enter by the narrow door of
perfect virtue; and by being wary lest we be led astray by evil
influences. Moreover, He declares that we must observe His
commandments, and that it is not enough to make profession of
faith, or to work miracles, or merely to hear His words.