When therefore you are beginning to correct this, though you should
transgress your law a first, a second, a third, a twentieth time, do not despair, but
rise up again, and resume the same diligence, and you will surely prevail.
For perjury surely is no trifling mischief. If to swear is of the evil one, how
great the penalty which false swearing will bring! Did ye give praise to what has
been said? Nay, I want not applause, nor tumults, nor noise. One thing only do I
wish, that quietly and intelligently listening, you should do what is said. This is
the applause, this the panegyric for me. But if you praise what I say, but doest
not what you applaud, greater is the punishment, more aggravated the
accusation: and to us it is shame and ridicule. For the things here present are no
dramatic spectacle; neither do ye now sit gazing on actors, that you may merely
applaud. This place is a spiritual school. Wherefore also there is but one thing
aimed at, duly to perform the things that have been spoken, and to show forth
our obedience by our works. For then only shall we have obtained all. Since as
things are, to say the truth, we have fairly given up in despair. For I have not
ceased giving these admonitions either to those whom I meet in private, or in
discourse with you all in common. Yet I see no advantage at all gained, but you
are still clinging to the former rude beginnings, which thing is enough to fill the
teacher with weariness.
See, for example, Paul himself, hardly bearing it, because his scholars were
delaying a long time in their earlier lessons: "For when for the time," says he,
"ye ought to be teachers, you have need to be taught again which be the first
principles of the oracles of God. "
Wherefore we too mourn and lament. And if I see you persisting, I will
forbid you for the future to set foot on this sacred threshold, and partake of the
immortal mysteries; as we do fornicators and adulterers, and persons charged
with murder. Yea, for it is better to offer our accustomed prayers, with two or
three, who keep the laws of God, than to sweep together a multitude of
trangressors and corrupters of others.
Let me have no rich man, no potentate, puffing at me here, and drawing up

his eyebrows; all these things are to me a fable, a shade, a dream. For no one of
those who are now rich, will stand up for me there, when I am called to account
and accused, as not having thoroughly vindicated the laws of God, with all due
earnestness. For this, this ruined even that admirable old man, [1 Samuel 3:13]
though in his own life giving no handle for blame; yet for all that, because he
overlooked the treading under foot of God's laws, he was chastised with his
children, and paid that grievous penalty. And if, where the absolute authority of
nature was so great, he who failed to treat his own children with due firmness
endured so grievous a punishment; what indulgence shall we have, freed as we
are from that dominion, and yet ruining all by flattery?
In order therefore that you may not destroy both us and your own selves
with us, be persuaded, I entreat you; set very many to watch over you, and call
you to account, and so free yourselves from the habit of oaths; that going on
orderly from thence, you may both with all facility succeed in attaining unto all
other virtue, and may enjoy the good things to come; which God grant that we
may all win, by the grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to
whom be glory and might now and always, even for ever and ever. Amen.