Prophets, because He draws testimonies from them? Away with the thought. It is
because of the infirmity of His hearers that He so orders His discourse, and says
that He spoke what He spoke having heard it from the Father, not because He
needed a teacher, but that they might believe that nothing that He said was false.
John's meaning is of this kind: "I desire to hear what He says, for He comes from
above, bringing thence those tidings which none but life knows rightly; for 'what
He has seen and heard,' is the expression of one who declares this."
"And no man receives His testimony." Yet He had disciples, and many
besides gave heed to His words. How then says John, "No man"? He says "no
man," instead of "few men," for had he meant "no man at all," how could he
have added,

John 3:33
"He that has received His testimony, has set to his seal that God is true."
Here he touches his own disciples, as not being likely for a time to be firm
believers. And that they did not even after this believe in Him, is clear from what
is said afterwards; for John even when dwelling in prison sent them thence to
Christ, that he might the more bind them to Him. Yet even then they scarcely
believed, to which Christ alluded when He said, "And blessed is he whosoever
shall not be offended in Me." [Matthew 11:6] And therefore now he said, "And
no man receives His testimony," to make sure his own disciples; all but saying,
"Do not, because for a time few shall believe in Him, therefore deem that His
words are false; for, 'He speaks that He has seen.'" Moreover he says this to
touch also the insensibility of the Jews. A charge which the Evangelist at
commencing brought against them, saying, "He came unto His own, and His
own received Him not." For this is no reproach against Him, but an accusation of
those who received Him not. [John 1:11]
"He that has received His testimony has set to his seal that God is true."
Here he terrifies them also by showing that he who believes not on Him,
disbelieves not Him alone, but the Father also; wherefore he adds:

John 3:34
"He whom God has sent speaks the words of God."
Since then He speaks His words, he that believes and he that believes not,
believes or believes not God. "Hath set to His seal," that is, "has declared."
Then, to increase their dread, he says, "that God is true;" thus showing, that no
man could disbelieve Christ without making God who sent Him guilty of a
falsehood. Because, since He says nothing save what is from the Father, but all
that He says is His, he that hears not Him, hears not Him that sent Him. See how
by these words again he strikes them with fear. As yet they thought it no great
thing not to hearken to Christ; and therefore he held so great a danger above the
heads of the unbelievers, that they might learn that they hearken not to God
Himself, who hearken not to Christ. Then he proceeds with the discourse,
descending to the measure of their infirmity, and saying,
"For God gives not the Spirit by measure."
Again, as I said, he brings down his discourse to lower ground, varying it
and making it suitable to be received by those who heard it then; otherwise he
could not have raised them and increased their fear. For had he spoken anything
great and sublime concerning Jesus Himself, they would not have believed, but
might even have despised Him. Therefore he leads up all to the Father, speaking
for a while of Christ as of a man. But what is it that he says, "God gives not the
Spirit by measure"? He would show that we all have received the operation of
the Spirit, by measure, (for in this place he means by "Spirit" the operation of the
Spirit, for this it is that is divided,) but that Christ has all Its operation
unmeasured and entire. Now if His operations be unmeasured, much more His
Essence. Do you see too that the Spirit is Infinite? How then can He who has
received all the operation of the Spirit, who knows the things of God, who says,
"We speak that We have heard, and testify that We have seen" [John 3:11], be
rightly suspected? He says nothing which is not "of God," or which is not of "the