FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.55, C.5.

I answer that, This definition comprises perfectly the whole essential
notion of virtue. For the perfect essential notion of anything is
gathered from all its causes. Now the above definition comprises all
the causes of virtue. For the formal cause of virtue, as of everything,
is gathered from its genus and difference, when it is defined as "a
good quality": for "quality" is the genus of virtue, and the difference,
"good." But the definition would be more suitable if for "quality" we
substitute "habit," which is the proximate genus.
Now virtue has no matter "out of which" it is formed, as neither has
any other accident; but it has matter "about which" it is concerned,
and matter "in which" it exits, namely, the subject. The matter about
which virtue is concerned is its object, and this could not be
included in the above definition, because the object fixes the virtue
to a certain species, and here we are giving the definition of virtue in
general. And so for material cause we have the subject, which is
mentioned when we say that virtue is a good quality "of the mind."
The end of virtue, since it is an operative habit, is operation. But it
must be observed that some operative habits are always referred to
evil, as vicious habits: others are sometimes referred to good,
sometimes to evil; for instance, opinion is referred both to the true
and to the untrue: whereas virtue is a habit which is always referred
to good: and so the distinction of virtue from those habits which are
always referred to evil, is expressed in the words "by which we live
righteously": and its distinction from those habits which are
sometimes directed unto good, sometimes unto evil, in the words,
"of which no one makes bad use."
Lastly, God is the efficient cause of infused virtue, to which this
definition applies; and this is expressed in the words "which God
works in us without us." If we omit this phrase, the remainder of the
definition will apply to all virtues in general, whether acquired or
infused.
Reply to Objection 1: That which is first seized by the intellect is
being: wherefore everything that we apprehend we consider as
being, and consequently as gone, and as good, which are
convertible with being. Wherefore we say that essence is being and
is one and is good; and that oneness is being and one and good:
and in like manner goodness. But this is not the case with specific
forms, as whiteness and health; for everything that we apprehend, is
not apprehended with the notion of white and healthy. We must,

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.55, C.5.

however, observe that, as accidents and non-subsistent forms are
called beings, not as if they themselves had being, but because
things are by them; so also are they called good or one, not by some
distinct goodness or oneness, but because by them something is
good or one. So also is virtue called good, because by it something
is good.
Reply to Objection 2: Good, which is put in the definition of virtue, is
not good in general which is convertible with being, and which
extends further than quality, but the good as fixed by reason, with
regard to which Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iv) "that the good of the
soul is to be in accord with reason."
Reply to Objection 3: Virtue cannot be in the irrational part of the
soul, except in so far as this participates in the reason (Ethic. i, 13).
And therefore reason, or the mind, is the proper subject of virtue.
Reply to Objection 4: Justice has a righteousness of its own by
which it puts those outward things right which come into human use,
and are the proper matter of justice, as we shall show further on
(Question 60, Article 2; SS, Question 58, Article 8). But the
righteousness which denotes order to a due end and to the Divine
law, which is the rule of the human will, as stated above (Question
19, Article 4), is common to all virtues.
Reply to Objection 5: One can make bad use of a virtue objectively,
for instance by having evil thoughts about a virtue, e.g. by hating it,
or by being proud of it: but one cannot make bad use of virtue as
principle of action, so that an act of virtue be evil.
Reply to Objection 6: Infused virtue is caused in us by God without
any action on our part, but not without our consent. This is the sense
of the words, "which God works in us without us." As to those things
which are done by us, God causes them in us, yet not without action
on our part, for He works in every will and in every nature.