SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.14, C.2.

through which a man understands other things; to which principle a
man may attend or not attend. That he does not attend thereto
happens in two ways. Sometimes it is due to the fact that a man's
will is deliberately turned away from the consideration of that
principle, according to Ps. 35:4, "He would not understand, that he
might do well": whereas sometimes it is due to the mind being more
busy about things which it loves more, so as to be hindered thereby
from considering this principle, according to Ps. 57:9, "Fire," i.e. of
concupiscence, "hath fallen on them and they shall not see the sun."
In either of these ways blindness of mind is a sin.
Reply to Objection 1: The blindness that excuses from sin is that
which arises from the natural defect of one who cannot see.
Reply to Objection 2: This argument considers the second kind of
blindness which is a punishment.
Reply to Objection 3: To understand the truth is, in itself, beloved by
all; and yet, accidentally it may be hateful to someone, in so far as a
man is hindered thereby from having what he loves yet more.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.14, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether dulness of sense is a sin distinct from

blindness of mind?
Objection 1: It seems that dulness of sense is not a distinct sin from
blindness of mind. Because one thing has one contrary. Now
dulness is opposed to the gift of understanding, according to
Gregory (Moral. ii, 49); and so is blindness of mind, since
understanding denotes a principle of sight. Therefore dulness of
sense is the same as blindness of mind.
Objection 2: Further, Gregory (Moral. xxxi, 45) in speaking of dulness
describes it as "dullness of sense in respect of understanding." Now
dulness of sense in respect of understanding seems to be the same
as a defect in understanding, which pertains to blindness of mind.
Therefore dulness of sense is the same as blindness of mind.
Objection 3: Further, if they differ at all, it seems to be chiefly in the
fact that blindness of mind is voluntary, as stated above (Article 1),
while dulness of sense is a natural defect. But a natural defect is not
a sin: so that, accordingly, dulness of sense would not be a sin,
which is contrary to what Gregory says (Moral. xxxi, 45), where he
reckons it among the sins arising from gluttony.
On the contrary, Different causes produce different effects. Now
Gregory says (Moral. xxxi, 45) that dulness of sense arises from
gluttony, and that blindness of mind arises from lust. Now these
others are different vices. Therefore those are different vices also.
I answer that, Dull is opposed to sharp: and a thing is said to be
sharp because it can pierce; so that a thing is called dull through
being obtuse and unable to pierce. Now a bodily sense, by a kind of
metaphor, is said to pierce the medium, in so far as it perceives its
object from a distance or is able by penetration as it were to perceive
the smallest details or the inmost parts of a thing. Hence in corporeal
things the senses are said to be acute when they can perceive a
sensible object from afar, by sight, hearing, or scent, while on the
other hand they are said to be dull, through being unable to perceive,
except sensible objects that are near at hand, or of great power.
Now, by way of similitude to bodily sense, we speak of sense in
connection with the intellect; and this latter sense is in respect of