THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.72, C.3.

Reply to Objection 2: Baptism is bestowed that spiritual life may be
received simply; wherefore simple matter is fitting to it. But this
sacrament is given that we may receive the fulness of the Holy
Ghost, Whose operations are manifold, according to Wis. 7:22, "In
her is the" Holy "Spirit . . . one, manifold"; and 1 Cor. 12:4, "There are
diversities of graces, but the same Spirit." Consequently a
compound matter is appropriate to this sacrament.
Reply to Objection 3: These properties of oil, by reason of which it
symbolizes the Holy Ghost, are to be found in olive oil rather than in
any other oil. In fact, the olive-tree itself, through being an evergreen,
signifies the refreshing and merciful operation of the Holy Ghost.
Moreover, this oil is called oil properly, and is very much in use,
wherever it is to be had. And whatever other liquid is so called,
derives its name from its likeness to this oil: nor are the latter
commonly used, unless it be to supply the want of olive oil.
Therefore it is that this oil alone is used for this and certain other
sacraments.
Reply to Objection 4: Baptism is the sacrament of absolute
necessity; and so its matter should be at hand everywhere. But it is
enough that the matter of this sacrament, which is not of such great
necessity, be easily sent to all parts of the world.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.72, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether it is essential to this sacrament that the

chrism which is its matter be previously consecrated by a
bishop?
Objection 1: It seems that it is not essential to this sacrament, that
the chrism, which is its matter, be previously consecrated by a
bishop. For Baptism which bestows full remission of sins is not less
efficacious than this sacrament. But, though the baptismal water
receives a kind of blessing before being used for Baptism; yet this is
not essential to the sacrament: since in a case of necessity it can be
dispensed with. Therefore neither is it essential to this sacrament
that the chrism should be previously consecrated by a bishop.
Objection 2: Further, the same should not be consecrated twice. But
the sacramental matter is sanctified, in the very conferring of the
sacrament, by the form of words wherein the sacrament is bestowed;
hence Augustine says (Tract. lxxx in Joan.): "The word is added to
the element, and this becomes a sacrament." Therefore the chrism
should not be consecrated before this sacrament is given.
Objection 3: Further, every consecration employed in the
sacraments is ordained to the bestowal of grace. But the sensible
matter composed of oil and balm is not receptive of grace. Therefore
it should not be consecrated.
On the contrary, Pope Innocent I says (Ep. ad Decent.): "Priests,
when baptizing, may anoint the baptized with chrism, previously
consecrated by a bishop: but they must not sign the brow with the
same oil; this belongs to the bishop alone, when he gives the
Paraclete." Now this is done in this sacrament. Therefore it is
necessary for this sacrament that its matter be previously
consecrated by a bishop.
I answer that, The entire sanctification of the sacraments is derived
from Christ, as stated above (Question 64, Article 3). But it must be
observed that Christ did use certain sacraments having a corporeal
matter, viz. Baptism, and also the Eucharist. And consequently, from
Christ's very act in using them, the matter of these sacraments
received a certain aptitude to the perfection of the sacrament. Hence
Chrysostom (Chromatius, In Matth. 3:15) says that "the waters of
Baptism could never wash away the sins of believers, had they not