SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.44, C.6.

and as to the direction of human affairs according to Divine rules (by
being able to direct not only themselves but also others according to
those rules). This degree of wisdom is not common to all that have
sanctifying grace, but belongs rather to the gratuitous graces, which
the Holy Ghost dispenses as He will, according to 1 Cor. 12:8: "To
one indeed by the Spirit is given the word of wisdom," etc.
Reply to Objection 1: The Apostle speaks there of wisdom, as
extending to the hidden mysteries of Divine things, as indeed he
says himself (2 Cor. 1:7): "We speak the wisdom of God in a mystery,
a wisdom which is hidden."
Reply to Objection 2: Although it belongs to those alone who are in
authority to direct and judge other men, yet every man is competent
to direct and judge his own actions, as Dionysius declares (Ep. ad
Demophil.).
Reply to Objection 3: Baptized idiots, like little children, have the
habit of wisdom, which is a gift of the Holy Ghost, but they have not
the act, on account of the bodily impediment which hinders the use
of reason in them.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.44, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether the seventh beatitude corresponds to the

gift of wisdom?
Objection 1: It seems that the seventh beatitude does not
correspond to the gift of wisdom. For the seventh beatitude is:
"Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the children
of God." Now both these things belong to charity: since of peace it is
written (Ps. 118:165): "Much peace have they that love Thy law," and,
as the Apostle says (Rm. 5:5), "the charity of God is poured forth in
our hearts by the Holy Ghost Who is given to us," and Who is "the
Spirit of adoption of sons, whereby we cry: Abba [Father]" (Rm.
8:15). Therefore the seventh beatitude ought to be ascribed to
charity rather than to wisdom.
Objection 2: Further, a thing is declared by its proximate effect rather
than by its remote effect. Now the proximate effect of wisdom seems
to be charity, according to Wis. 7:27: "Through nations she
conveyeth herself into holy souls; she maketh the friends of God and
prophets": whereas peace and the adoption of sons seem to be
remote effects, since they result from charity, as stated above
(Question 29, Article 3). Therefore the beatitude corresponding to
wisdom should be determined in respect of the love of charity rather
than in respect of peace.
Objection 3: Further, it is written (James 3:17): "The wisdom, that is
from above, first indeed is chaste, then peaceable, modest, easy to
be persuaded, consenting to the good, full of mercy and good fruits,
judging without dissimulation." Therefore the beatitude
corresponding to wisdom should not refer to peace rather than to the
other effects of heavenly wisdom.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Serm. Dom. in Monte i, 4) that
"wisdom is becoming to peacemakers, in whom there is no
movement of rebellion, but only obedience to reason."
I answer that, The seventh beatitude is fittingly ascribed to the gift of
wisdom, both as to the merit and as to the reward. The merit is
denoted in the words, "Blessed are the peacemakers." Now a
peacemaker is one who makes peace, either in himself, or in others:
and in both cases this is the result of setting in due order those
things in which peace is established, for "peace is the tranquillity of