our bodies free?" Let such go and learn what is a free body. It is not immunity
from punishment that makes the body free, but perseverance in a life of
righteousness. The bodies of these youths, for instance, were free, though they
were given over to the furnace, because they had before put off the slavery of
sin. For this alone is liberty; and not an immunity from punishment, or from
suffering anything fearful. But having heard of the furnace, call thou to mind the
"rivers of fire," which there shall be in that fearful day. For as on the above
occasion, the fire seized upon some, but reverenced others, so also shall it be
with those rivers. If any one should then have hay, wood, stubble, he increases
the fire; but if he has gold and silver, he becomes the brighter. Let us therefore
get together this kind of material, and let us bear the present state of things
nobly; knowing that this tribulation will both bring us deliverance from that
punishment if we understand how to practise true wisdom, and will also make us
better here; and not only us, but often those too, who throw us into trouble, if we
be vigilant; so abundant is the force of this spiritual wisdom; which was the case
then even with the tyrant. For when he knew that they had suffered no harm,
hear how he changed his language. "You servants of the most high God, come
forth, and come hither." [Daniel 3:26] Did not you say, a little before "Who is
that God that shall deliver you out of my hands?" [Daniel 3:15] What has
happened? Whence this change? Thou saw those without destroyed, and do you
call on those within? Whence has it come to pass that you are grown wise in
such matters. You see how great a change took place in the monarch! Whilst he
had not yet exercised his power over them, he blasphemed, but as soon as he had
cast them into fire, he began to show moral wisdom. For this reason also God
permitted all to take place, whatsoever the tyrant wished, in order that He might
make it manifest, that none will be able to injure those who are kept by Him.
And what He did towards Job, He performed here. For on that occasion also, He
permitted the devil to manifest all his power; and not till he had exhausted all his
darts, and no further mode of plotting against him remained, was the combatant
led out of the field, that the victory might be brilliant and indubitable. So here

too He did the very same thing. He willed to overthrow their city, and God
stayed him not: he willed to carry them away captive, and He hindered him not:
he willed to bind them, and He permitted; to cast them into the furnace, and He
allowed it: to heat the flame beyond its measure, and this too He suffered; and
when there was nothing further left for the tyrant to do, and he had exhausted all
his strength, then God manifested His own power, and the patience of the youths.
Do you see how God permitted these tribulations even to the end, that He might
show the assailants the spiritual wisdom of those whom they assailed, as well as
His own providence. Both of which circumstances also that man then discerned,
and cried out, "You servants of the most high God, come forth, and come hither."
12. But consider thou with me the magnanimity of the youths; for they
neither sprang out before the call, lest some should suppose they feared the fire;
nor when they were called did they remain within, lest any one should think that
they were ambitious and contentious. "As soon," say they, "as you have learned
whose servants we are, as soon as you have acknowledged our Lord, we come
forth to be heralds to all who are present of the power of God." Or rather, not
only they themselves, but even the enemy with his own voice, yea, both orally,
and by his epistle, proclaimed to all men both the constancy of the combatants,
and the strength of Him who presided over the contest. And even as the heralds,
when they proclaim the names of the victorious combatants in the midst of the
theatre, mention also the cities to which they belong; "such an one, of such a
city!" So he too, instead of their city, proclaimed their Lord, by saying,
"Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, you servants of the most high God, come
forth, and come hither." What has come to pass, that you call them the servants
of God? Were they not your servants? "Yea," says he, "but they have overthrown
my sovereignty; they have trampled under foot my pride. They have shown by
deeds, that He is their true Lord. If they were the servants of men, the fire would
not have feared them; the flame would not have made way for them; for the
creation knows nothing of reverencing or honoring the servants of men."
Therefore again he says, "Blessed be the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and