great man? So let us account of the man in this case also. The passions are the
tyrant: if then we despise them, we shall be great: but if we rescue others also
from them, we shall be far greater, as being sufficient not only for ourselves, but
for others also. But if any one, at a tyrant's bidding, beat some other of his
subjects, is this greatness of soul? No, indeed: but the extreme of slavery, in
proportion as he is great. And now also there is set before us ([πρόκειται]) a soul
that is a noble one and a free: but this the prodigal has ordered to be beaten by
his passions: the man then that beats himself, shall we call high-souled? By no
means. Well then * *, but let us see what is greatness of soul, and what
prodigality; what is economy, and what meanness; what is gentleness, and (what)
dulness and cowardice; what boldness, and what forwardness: that having
distinguished these things from each other, we may be enabled to pass (this life)
well-pleasing to the Lord, and to attain unto the good things promised, through
the grace and mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, to Whom be the glory for ever and
ever. Amen.

Homily 49 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts XXIII. 6-8
"But when Paul perceived that the one part were Sadducees, and the other
Pharisees, he cried out in the council, Men and brethren, I am a Pharisee, the
son of a Pharisee: of the hope and resurrection of the dead I am called in
question. And when he had so said, there arose a dissension between the
Pharisees and the Sadducees: and the multitude was divided. For the Sadducees
say that there is no resurrection, neither angel, nor spirit: but the Pharisees
confess both."
Again he discourses simply as man, and he does not on all occasions alike
enjoy the benefit of supernatural aid. "I am a Pharisee, the son of a Pharisee:"
both in this, and in what comes after it, he wished to divide the multitude, which
had an evil unanimity against him. And he does not speak a falsehood here
either: for he was a Pharisee by descent from his ancestors. "Of the hope and
resurrection of the dead I am called in question." For since they would not say
for what reason they arraigned him, he is compelled therefore to declare it
himself. "But the Pharisees," it says, "confess both." And yet there are three
things: how then does he say both? "Spirit and Angel" is put as one. When he is
on their side, then they plead for him. "And there arose a great cry: and the
scribes that were of the Pharisees' part arose, and strove, saying, We find no evil
in this man: but" (what) "if a spirit has spoken to him, or an angel?" [Acts 23:9]
Why did they not plead for him before this? Do you observe, how, when the
passions give way, the truth is discovered? Where is the crime, say they, if an
angel has spoken to him, or a spirit? Paul gives them no handle against him.
"And when there arose a great dissension, the tribune, fearing lest Paul should
have been pulled in pieces of them, commanded the soldiers to go down, and to
take him by force from among them, and to bring him into the castle." [Acts