In a sense her journey of faith is longer. The Holy Spirit had already come down upon
her, and she became his faithful spouse at the Annunciation, welcoming the Word of the
true God, offering "the full submission of intellect and will...and freely assenting to the
truth revealed by him," indeed abandoning herself totally to God through "the obedience
of faith," whereby she replied to the angel: "Behold, I am the handmaid of the Lord; let
it be to me according to your word." The journey of faith made by Mary, whom we see
praying in the Upper Room, is thus longer than that of the others gathered there: Mary
"goes before them," "leads the way" for them. The moment of Pentecost in Jerusalem
had been prepared for by the moment of the Annunciation in Nazareth, as well as by the
Cross. In the Upper Room Mary's journey meets the Church's journey of faith. In what
way?

Among those who devoted themselves to prayer in the Upper Room, preparing to go
"into the whole world" after receiving the Spirit, some had been called by Jesus gradually
from the beginning of his mission in Israel. Eleven of them had been made Apostles, and
to them Jesus had passed on the mission which he himself had received from the Father.
"As the Father has sent me, even so I send you" (Jn. 20:21), he had said to the Apostles
after the Resurrection. And forty days later, before returning to the Father, he had added:
"when the Holy Spirit has come upon you...you shall be my witnesses...to the end of the
earth" (cf. Acts 1:8). This mission of the Apostles began the moment they left the Upper
Room in Jerusalem. The Church is born and then grows through the testimony that Peter
and the Apostles bear to the Crucified and Risen Christ (cf. Acts 2:31-34; 3:15-18; 4:10-
12; 5:30-32).

Mary did not directly receive this apostolic mission. She was not among those whom
Jesus sent "to the whole world to teach all nations" (cf. Mt. 28:19) when he conferred this
mission on them. But she was in the Upper Room, where the Apostles were preparing to
take up this mission with the coming of the Spirit of Truth: she was present with them. In
their midst Mary was "devoted to prayer" as the "mother of Jesus" (cf. Acts 1:13-14), of
the Crucified and Risen Christ. And that first group of those who in faith looked "upon
Jesus as the author of salvation," knew that Jesus was the Son of Mary, and that she was

his Mother, and that as such she was from the moment of his conception and birth a
unique witness to the mystery of Jesus, that mystery which before their eyes had been
disclosed and confirmed in the Cross and Resurrection. Thus, from the very first moment,
the Church "looked at" Mary through Jesus, just as she "looked at" Jesus through Mary.
For the Church of that time and of every time Mary is a singular witness to the years of
Jesus' infancy and hidden life at Nazareth, when she "kept all these things, pondering
them in her heart" (Lk. 2:19; cf. Lk. 2:51).