Homily 22 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts X. 1-4
"There was a certain man in Cæsarea called Cornelius, a centurion of the
band called the Italian band, a devout man, and one that feared God with all his
house, which gave much alms to the people, and prayed to God always. He saw
in a vision evidently about the ninth hour of the day an angel of God coming in
to him, and saying unto him, Cornelius. And when he looked on him, he was
afraid, and said, What is it, Lord? And he said unto him, Your prayers and your
alms have come up for a memorial before God."
This man is not a Jew, nor of those under the Law, but he had already
forestalled our manner of life. Observe, thus far, two persons, both of high rank,
receiving the faith, the eunuch at Gaza and this man; and the pains taken on
behalf of these men. But do not imagine that this was because of their high rank:
God forbid! It was because of their piety. For that the Scripture mentions their
dignified stations, is to show the greatness of their piety; since it is more
wonderful when a person being in a position of wealth and power is such as
these were. What makes the praise of the former is, his undertaking so long a
journey, and this when there was no (festival) season to require it, and his
reading on his road, and while riding in his chariot, and his beseeching Philip,
and numberless other points: and the great praise of the latter is, that he makes
alms and prayers, and is a just man, holding such a command. The reason why
the writer describes the man so fully, is, that none may say that the Scripture
history relates falsehoods: "Cornelius," he says, "a centurion of the band called
the Italian band." [Acts 10:1] A "band," [σπεἵρα], is what we now call a
"numerous." "A devout man," he says, "and one that feared God with all his
house" [Acts 10:2]: that you may not imagine that it is because of his high
station that these things are done.— When Paul was to be brought over, there is

no angel, but the Lord Himself: and He does not send him to some great one, but
to a very ordinary person: but here, on the contrary, He brings the chief Apostle
(to these Gentiles), not sends them to him: herein condescending to their
weakness, and knowing how such persons need to be treated. As indeed on many
occasions we find Christ Himself hasting (to such), as being more infirm. Or (it
may be) because (Cornelius) was not able himself to leave his home. But here
again is a high commendation of alms, just as was there given by means of
Tabitha. "A devout man," it says, "and one that feared God with all his house."
Let us hear this, whoever of us neglect them of our own house, whereas this man
was careful of his soldiers also. "And that gave alms," it says, "to all the people."
Both his doctrines and his life were right. "He saw in a vision evidently, about
the ninth hour of the day, an angel of God coming in to him, and saying unto
him, Cornelius." [Acts 10:3] Why does he see the angel? This also was in order
to the full assurance of Peter, or rather, not of him, but of the others, the weaker
ones. "At the ninth hour," when he was released from his cares and was at quiet,
when he was engaged in prayers and compunction. "And when he looked on him,
he was afraid." [Acts 10:4] Observe how what the angel speaks he does not
speak immediately, but first rouses and elevates his mind. At the sight, there was
fear, but a fear in moderation, just so far as served to fix his attention. Then also
the words relieved him of his fear. The fear roused him: the praise mitigated
what was unpleasant in the fear. "Your prayers," says he, "and your alms have
come up for a memorial before God. And now send men to Joppa, and call for
one Simon, whose surname is Peter." [Acts 10:5] Lest they should come to a
different person, he designates the man not only by his surname, but by the
place. "And the same," says he, "is lodging with one Simon a tanner, who has his
house by the seaside." [Acts 10:6] Do you mark how the Apostles, for love of
solitude and quiet, affected the retired quarters of the cities? "With one Simon a
tanner:" how then if it chanced that there was another? Behold, there is another
token, his dwelling by the seaside. All three tokens could not possibly coincide
(elsewhere). He does not tell him for what purpose, that he may not take off the