thine alms, let not thy left hand know what thy right hand doeth." And we are proved to be
righteous by whatsoever else we do well, redeeming, as it were, our property from strange hands.
But thus do I say, "from strange hands," not as if the world were not God's possession, but that we
have gifts of this sort, and receive them from others, in the same way as these men had them from
the Egyptians who knew not God; and by means of these same do we erect in ourselves the tabernacle
of God: for God dwells in those who act uprightly, as the Lord says: "Make to yourselves friends
of the mammon of unrighteousness, that they, when ye shall be put to flight, may receive you
into eternal tabernacles." For whatsoever we acquired from unrighteousness when we were
heathen, we are proved righteous, when we have become believers, by applying it to the Lord's
advantage.
4. As a matter of course, therefore, these things were done beforehand in a type, and from them
was the tabernacle of God constructed; those persons justly receiving them, as I have shown, while
we were pointed out beforehand in them,—[we] who should afterwards serve God by the things
of others. For the whole exodus of the people out of Egypt, which took place under divine
guidance, was a type and image of the exodus of the Church which should take place from among
the Gentiles; and for this cause He leads it out at last from this world into His own inheritance,
which Moses the servant of God did not [bestow], but which Jesus the Son of God shall give for
an inheritance. And if any one will devote a close attention to those things which are stated by the
prophets with regard to the [time of the] end, and those which John the disciple of the Lord saw in
the Apocalypse, he will find that the nations [are to] receive the same plagues universally, as
Egypt then did particularly.

### Chapter XXXI.—We should not hastily impute as crimes to the men of old time those actions
which the Scripture has not condemned, but should rather seek in them types of things to
come: an example of this in the incest committed by Lot.

We here follow the punctuation of Massuet in preference to that of Harvey.
they saw "similitudes," as we do in the Faery Queen of Spenser, or the Pilgrim's Progress. The ancients may have carried this
principle too far, but as a principle it receives countenance from our Lord Himself and His apostles. To us there is often a barren
bush, where the Fathers saw a bush that burned with fire.]

1. When recounting certain matters of this kind respecting them of old time, the presbyter
[before mentioned] was in the habit of instructing us, and saying: "With respect to those misdeeds
for which the Scriptures themselves blame the patriarchs and prophets, we ought not to inveigh
against them, nor become like Ham, who ridiculed the shame of his father, and so fell under a curse;
but we should [rather] give thanks to God in their behalf, inasmuch as their sins have been forgiven
them through the advent of our Lord; for He said that they gave thanks [for us], and gloried in our
salvation. With respect to those actions, again, on which the Scriptures pass no censure, but
which are simply set down [as having occurred], we ought not to become the accusers [of those
who committed them], for we are not more exact than God, nor can we be superior to our Master;
but we should search for a type [in them]. For not one of those things which have been set down
in Scripture without being condemned is without significance." An example is found in the case
of Lot, who led forth his daughters from Sodom, and these then conceived by their own father; and
who left behind him within the confines [of the land] his wife, [who remains] a pillar of salt unto
this day. For Lot, not acting under the impulse of his own will, nor at the prompting of carnal
concupiscence, nor having any knowledge or thought of anything of the kind, did [in fact] work
out a type [of future events]. As says the Scripture: "And that night the elder went in and lay with
her father; and Lot knew not when she lay down, nor when she arose." And the same thing took
place in the case of the younger: "And he knew not," it is said, "when she slept with him, nor when
she arose." Since, therefore, Lot knew not [what he did], nor was a slave to lust [in his actions],
the arrangement [designed by God] was carried out, by which the two daughters (that is, the two
churches), who gave birth to children begotten of one and the same father, were pointed out,
apart from [the influence of] the lust of the flesh. For there was no other person, [as they supposed],
who could impart to them quickening seed, and the means of their giving birth to children, as it is
written: "And the elder said unto the younger, And there is not a man on the earth to enter in unto
us after the manner of all the earth: come, let us make our father drunk with wine, and let us lie
with him, and raise up seed from our father."
2. Thus, after their simplicity and innocence, did these daughters [of Lot] so speak, imagining
that all mankind had perished, even as the Sodomites had done, and that the anger of God had come
down upon the whole earth. Wherefore also they are to be held excusable, since they supposed that
they only, along with their father, were left for the preservation of the human race; and for this
reason it was that they deceived their father. Moreover, by the words they used this fact was pointed
example of what is written: "to the pure all things are pure." Tit. i. 15.]