FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.50, C.3.

a condition for a habit, as we have said above (Question 49, Article
4). And since the soul is the principle of operation through its
powers, therefore, regarded in this sense, habits are in the soul in
respect of its powers.
Reply to Objection 1: The essence of the soul belongs to human
nature, not as a subject requiring to be disposed to something
further, but as a form and nature to which someone is disposed.
Reply to Objection 2: Accident is not of itself the subject of accident.
But since among accidents themselves there is a certain order, the
subject, according as it is under one accident, is conceived as the
subject of a further accident. In this way we say that one accident is
the subject of another; as superficies is the subject of color, in which
sense power is the subject of habit.
Reply to Objection 3: Habit takes precedence of power, according as
it implies a disposition to nature: whereas power always implies a
relation to operation, which is posterior, since nature is the principle
of operation. But the habit whose subject is a power, does not imply
relation to nature, but to operation. Wherefore it is posterior to
power. Or, we may say that habit takes precedence of power, as the
complete takes precedence of the incomplete, and as act takes
precedence of potentiality. For act is naturally prior to potentiality,
though potentiality is prior in order of generation and time, as stated
in Metaph. vii, text. 17; ix, text. 13.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.50, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether there can be any habits in the powers of

the sensitive parts?
Objection 1: It would seem that there cannot be any habits in the
powers of the sensitive part. For as the nutritive power is an
irrational part, so is the sensitive power. But there can be no habits
in the powers of the nutritive part. Therefore we ought not to put any
habit in the powers of the sensitive part.
Objection 2: Further, the sensitive parts are common to us and the
brutes. But there are not any habits in brutes: for in them there is no
will, which is put in the definition of habit, as we have said above
(Question 49, Article 3). Therefore there are no habits in the sensitive
powers.
Objection 3: Further, the habits of the soul are sciences and virtues:
and just as science is related to the apprehensive power, so it virtue
related to the appetitive power. But in the sensitive powers there are
no sciences: since science is of universals, which the sensitive
powers cannot apprehend. Therefore, neither can there be habits of
virtue in the sensitive part.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. iii, 10) that "some
virtues," namely, temperance and fortitude, "belong to the irrational
part."
I answer that, The sensitive powers can be considered in two ways:
first, according as they act from natural instinct: secondly, according
as they act at the command of reason. According as they act from
natural instinct, they are ordained to one thing, even as nature is; but
according as they act at the command of reason, they can be
ordained to various things. And thus there can be habits in them, by
which they are well or ill disposed in regard to something.
Reply to Objection 1: The powers of the nutritive part have not an
inborn aptitude to obey the command of reason, and therefore there
are no habits in them. But the sensitive powers have an inborn
aptitude to obey the command of reason; and therefore habits can
be in them: for in so far as they obey reason, in a certain sense they
are said to be rational, as stated in Ethic. i, 13.