but for all your life subjectest it to this evil slavery. And as if any man having
had a lyre given him with golden strings, and beautifully constructed, instead of
awakening with it the most harmonious music, were to cover it over with much
dung and clay; even so do these men. Now the word, dung, I use not of living,
but of luxurious living, and of that great wantonness. Because what is more than
necessary is not nourishment, but merely injurious. For in truth the belly alone
was made merely for the reception of food; but the month, and the throat, and
tongue, for other things also, far more necessary than these: or rather, not even
the belly for the reception of food simply, but for the reception of moderate food.
And this it makes manifest by crying out loudly against us, when we tease it by
this greediness; nor does it clamor against us only, but also avenging that wrong
exacts of us the severest penalty. And first it punishes the feet, that bear and
conduct us to those wicked revels, then the hands that minister to it, binding
them together for having brought unto it such quantities and kinds of provisions;
and many have distorted even their very mouth, and eyes, and head. And as a
servant receiving an order beyond his power, not seldom out of desperation
becomes insolent to the giver of the order: so the belly too, together with these
members, often ruins and destroys, from being over-strained, the very brain
itself. And this God has well ordered, that from excess so much mischief should
arise; that when of your own will thou dost not practise self-restraint, at least
against your will, for fear of so great ruin, you may learn to be moderate.
Knowing then these things, let us flee luxury, let us study moderation, that
we may both enjoy health of body, and having delivered our soul from all
infirmity, may attain unto the good things to come, by the grace and love
towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and might forever and
ever. Amen.

## Homily 45 on Matthew

Matthew 13:10-11.
" And the disciples came and said unto Him, Why do You speak unto them
in parables? He answered and said unto them, Because it is given unto you to
know the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, but to them it is not given."
We have good cause to admire the disciples, how, longing as they do to
learn, they know when they ought to ask. For they do it not before all: and this
Matthew shows by saying, "And they came." And, as to this assertion not being
conjecture, Mark has expressed it more distinctly, by saying, that "they came to
Him privately." [Mark 4:10] This then His brethren and His mother should also
have done, and not have called Him out, and made a display.
But mark their kindly affection also, how they have much regard for the
others, and seek their good first, and then their own. "For why," it is said, "do
You speak unto them in parables?" They did not say, why do you speak unto us
in parables? Yea, and on other occasions also their kindliness towards men
appears in many ways; as when they say, "Send the multitude away;"
[Luke 9:12] and, "Do you know that they were offended?" [Matthew 15:12]
What then says Christ? "Because it is given unto you," so He speaks, "to
know the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, but to them it is not given." But
this He said, not bringing in necessity, or any allotment made causelessly and at
random, but implying them to be the authors of all their own evils, and wishing
to represent that the thing is a gift, and a grace bestowed from above.
It by no means follows, however, because it is a gift, that therefore free will
is taken away; and this is evident from what comes after. To this purpose, in
order that neither the one sort may despair, nor the other grow careless, upon
being told that "it is given," He signifies the beginning to be with ourselves.
"For whosoever has, to him shall be given, and he shall have more