SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.186, C.7.

I answer that, As Augustine says (De Doctr. Christ. iii, 12), "in all
external things, it is not the use but the intention of the user that is at
fault." In order to judge of this it is necessary to observe that coarse
and homely apparel may be considered in two ways. First, as being a
sign of a man's disposition or condition, because according to
Ecclus. 19:27, "the attire . . . of the man" shows "what he is." In this
way coarseness of attire is sometimes a sign of sorrow: wherefore
those who are beset with sorrow are wont to wear coarser clothes,
just as on the other hand in times of festivity and joy they wear finer
clothes. Hence penitents make use of coarse apparel, for example,
the king (Jonas 3:6) who "was clothed with sack-cloth," and Achab
(3 Kgs. 21:27) who "put hair-cloth upon his flesh." Sometimes,
however, it is a sign of the contempt of riches and worldly
ostentation. Wherefore Jerome says (Ep. cxxv ad Rustico Monach.):
"Let your somber attire indicate your purity of mind, your coarse
robe prove your contempt of the world, yet so that your mind be not
inflated withal, lest your speech belie your habit." In both these ways
it is becoming for religious to wear coarse attire, since religion is a
state of penance and of contempt of worldly glory.
But that a person wish to signify this to others arises from three
motives. First, in order to humble himself: for just as a man's mind is
uplifted by fine clothes, so is it humbled by lowly apparel. Hence
speaking of Achab who "put hair-cloth on his flesh," the Lord said to
Elias: "Hast thou not seen Achab humbled before Me?" (3 Kgs.
21:29). Secondly, in order to set an example to others; wherefore a
gloss on Mt. 3:4, "(John) had his garments of camel's hair," says:
"He who preaches penance is clothed in the habit of penance."
Thirdly, on account of vainglory; thus Augustine says (cf. Objection
3) that "even the weeds of mourning may be a subject of
ostentation."
Accordingly in the first two ways it is praiseworthy to wear humble
apparel, but in the third way it is sinful.
Secondly, coarse and homely attire may be considered as the result
of covetousness or negligence, and thus also it is sinful.
Reply to Objection 1: Coarseness of attire has not of itself the
appearance of evil, indeed it has more the appearance of good,
namely of the contempt of worldly glory. Hence it is that wicked
persons hide their wickedness under coarse clothing. Hence

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.186, C.7.

Augustine says (De Serm. Dom. in Monte ii, 24) that "the sheep
should not dislike their clothing for the reason that the wolves
sometimes hide themselves under it."
Reply to Objection 2: Jerome is speaking there of the coarse attire
that is worn on account of human glory.
Reply to Objection 3: According to our Lord's teaching men should
do no deeds of holiness for the sake of show: and this is especially
the case when one does something strange. Hence Chrysostom
[Hom. xiii in Matth. in Opus Imperfectum] says: "While praying a man
should do nothing strange, so as to draw the gaze of others, either
by shouting or striking his breast, or casting up his hands," because
the very strangeness draws people's attention to him. Yet blame
does not attach to all strange behavior that draws people's attention,
for it may be done well or ill. Hence Augustine says (De Serm. Dom.
in Monte ii, 12) that "in the practice of the Christian religion when a
man draws attention to himself by unwonted squalor and
shabbiness, since he acts thus voluntarily and not of necessity, we
can gather from his other deeds whether his behavior is motivated
by contempt of excessive dress or by affectation." Religious,
however, would especially seem not to act thus from affectation,
since they wear a coarse habit as a sign of their profession whereby
they profess contempt of the world.