Ver. 2 . "A great multitude followed Him beholding the miracles that He
did." What is here told marks not a very wise state of mind; for when they had
enjoyed such teaching, they still were more attracted by the miracles, which was
a sign of the grosser state. For "miracles," It says, "are not for believers, but for
unbelievers." The people described by Matthew acted not thus, but how? They
all, he says "were astonished at His doctrine, because He taught as one having
authority." [Matthew 7:28-29]
"And why does He occupy the mountain now, and sit there with His
disciples?" Because of the miracle which was about to take place. And that the
disciples alone went up with Him, was a charge against the multitude which
followed Him not. Yet not for this only did He go up into the mountain, but to
teach us ever to rest at intervals from the tumults and confusion of common life.
For solitude is a thing meet for the study of wisdom. And often does He go up
alone into a mountain, and spend the night there, and pray, to teach us that the
man who will come most near to God must be free from all disturbance, and
must seek times and places clear of confusion.

John 6:4
"And the Passover, a feast of the Jews, was near."
"How then," says some one, "does He not go up unto the feast, but, when all
are pressing to Jerusalem, goes Himself into Galilee, and not Himself alone, but
takes His disciples with Him, and proceeds thence to Capernaum?" Because
henceforth He was quietly annulling the Law, taking occasion from the
wickedness of. the Jews.

John 6:5
"And as He lifted up His eyes, He beheld a great company."
This shows that He sat not at any time idly with the disciples, but perhaps
carefully conversing with them, and making them attend and turn towards Him,
a thing which peculiarly marks His tender care, and the humility and
condescension of His demeanor towards them. For they sat with Him, perhaps
looking at one another; then having lifted up His eyes, He beheld the multitudes
coming unto Him. Now the other Evangelists say, that the disciples came and
asked and besought Him that He would not send them away fasting, while St.
John says, that the question was put to Philip by Christ. Both occurrences seem
to me to be truly reported, but not to have taken place at the same time, the
former account being prior to the other, so that the two are entirely different.
Wherefore then does He ask "Philip"? He knew which of His disciples
needed most instruction; for this is he who afterwards said, "Show us the Father,
and it suffices us" [John 14:8], and on this account Jesus was beforehand
bringing him into a proper state. For had the miracle simply been done, the
marvel would not have seemed so great, but now He beforehand constrains him
to confess the existing want, that knowing the state of matters he might be the
more exactly acquainted with the magnitude of the miracle about to take place.
Wherefore He says . . .