FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.59, C.5.

passions; now every action and passion is followed by pleasure or
sorrow, so that in this way virtue is about pleasures and sorrows,"
viz. as about something that results from virtue.
Reply to Objection 2: Not only the sensitive appetite which is the
subject of the passions, is rational by participation, but also the will,
where there are no passions, as stated above.
Reply to Objection 3: Some virtues have passions as their proper
matter, but some virtues not. Hence the comparison does not hold
for all cases.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.59, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether there can be moral virtue without

passion?
Objection 1: It would seem that moral virtue can be without passion.
For the more perfect moral virtue is, the more does it overcome the
passions. Therefore at its highest point of perfection it is altogether
without passion.
Objection 2: Further, then is a thing perfect, when it is removed from
its contrary and from whatever inclines to its contrary. Now the
passions incline us to sin which is contrary to virtue: hence (Rm.
7:5) they are called "passions of sins." Therefore perfect virtue is
altogether without passion.
Objection 3: Further, it is by virtue that we are conformed to God, as
Augustine declares (De Moribus Eccl. vi, xi, xiii). But God does all
things without passion at all. Therefore the most perfect virtue is
without any passion.
On the contrary, "No man is just who rejoices not in his deeds," as
stated in Ethic. i, 8. But joy is a passion. Therefore justice cannot be
without passion; and still less can the other virtues be.
I answer that, If we take the passions as being inordinate emotions,
as the Stoics did, it is evident that in this sense perfect virtue is
without the passions. But if by passions we understand any
movement of the sensitive appetite, it is plain that moral virtues,
which are about the passions as about their proper matter, cannot be
without passions. The reason for this is that otherwise it would
follow that moral virtue makes the sensitive appetite altogether idle:
whereas it is not the function of virtue to deprive the powers
subordinate to reason of their proper activities, but to make them
execute the commands of reason, by exercising their proper acts.
Wherefore just as virtue directs the bodily limbs to their due external
acts, so does it direct the sensitive appetite to its proper regulated
movements.
Those moral virtues, however, which are not about the passions, but
about operations, can be without passions. Such a virtue is justice:
because it applies the will to its proper act, which is not a passion.
Nevertheless, joy results from the act of justice; at least in the will, in

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.59, C.6.

which case it is not a passion. And if this joy be increased through
the perfection of justice, it will overflow into the sensitive appetite; in
so far as the lower powers follow the movement of the higher, as
stated above (Question 17, Article 7; Question 24, Article 3).
Wherefore by reason of this kind of overflow, the more perfect a
virtue is, the more does it cause passion.
Reply to Objection 1: Virtue overcomes inordinate passion; it
produces ordinate passion.
Reply to Objection 2: It is inordinate, not ordinate, passion that leads
to sin.
Reply to Objection 3: The good of anything depends on the condition
of its nature. Now there is no sensitive appetite in God and the
angels, as there is in man. Consequently good operation in God and
the angels is altogether without passion, as it is without a body:
whereas the good operation of man is with passion, even as it is
produced with the body's help.