wild imaginations does he form. "O that there were an earthquake," he says, "in
the city, that all the rest being swallowed up, I might be left alone, to have, if
possible, the possessions of all! O that a pestilence would come and destroy
everything but gold! O that there might be a submersion, or an eruption of the
sea!" Such are his imaginations. He prays for nothing good, but for earthquakes,
and thunderbolts, for wars, and plagues, and the like. Well, tell me now, thou
wretched man, more servile than any slave, if all things were gold, would you
not be destroyed by your gold, and perish with hunger? If the world were
swallowed up by an earthquake, you also would perish by your fatal desire. For
if there were no other men than yourself, the necessaries of life would fail you.
For suppose that the other inhabitants of the earth were destroyed at once, and
that their gold and silver came of its own accord to you. (For such men fancy to
themselves absurdities, and impossibilities.) But if their gold and silver, their
vests of silk and cloth of gold, came into your hands, what would it profit you?
Death would only the more certainly overtake you, when there were none to
prepare bread or till the earth for you; wild beasts would prowl around, and the
devil agitate your soul with fear. Many devils indeed now possess it, but then
they would lead you to desperation, and plunge you at once into destruction. But
you say, "I would wish there should be tilling of the land and men to prepare
food." Then they would consume somewhat. "But I would not have them
consume anything." So insatiable is this desire! For what can be more ridiculous
than this? Do you see the impossibility of the thing? He wishes to have many to
minister to him, yet he grudges them their share of food, because it diminishes
his substance! What then? Would you then have men of stone? This is all a
mockery; and waves, and tempest, and huge billows, and violent agitation, and
storm, overwhelm the soul. It is ever hungry, ever thirsty. Shall we not pity and
mourn for him? Of bodily diseases this is thought a most painful one, and it is
called by physicians bulimy, when a man being filled, is yet always hungry. And
is not the same disorder in the soul more lamentable? For avarice is the morbid
hunger of the soul, which is always filling, never satisfied, but still craving. If it

were necessary to drink hellebore, or submit to anything a thousand times worse,
would it not be worth our while to undertake it readily, that we might be
delivered from this passion? There is no abundance of riches that can fill the
belly of greediness. And shall we not be ashamed, that men can be thus
transported with the love of money, while we show not any proportion of such
earnestness in love to God, and honor Him not as bullion is honored? For money
men will undergo watchings, and journeyings and continual perils, and hatred,
and hostility, and, in short, everything. But we do not venture to utter a mere
word for God, nor incur an enmity, but if we are required to assist any of those
who are persecuted, we abandon the injured person, withdrawing ourselves from
the hatred of the powerful, and the danger it involves. And though God has given
us power that we might succor him, yet we suffer him to perish, from our
unwillingness to incur men's hatred and displeasure. And this many profess to
justify, saying, "Be loved for nothing, but be not hated for nothing." But is this to
be hated for nothing? Or what is better than such hatred? For to be hated on
account of God is better than to be loved on His account: for when we are loved
for God's sake, we are debtors for the honor, but when we are hated for His sake,
He is our debtor to reward us. The lovers of wealth know no limit to their love,
be it never so great; but we, if we have done ever so little, think that we have
fulfilled everything. We love not God as much, no, not by many times over so
much, as they love gold. Their inordinate rage for gold is a heavy accusation
against them. It is our condemnation that we are not so beside ourselves for God;
that we do not bestow upon the Lord of all as much love as they bestow upon
mere earth, for gold from the mine is no better.
Let us then behold their madness, and be ashamed of ourselves. For what
though we are not inflamed with the love of gold, while we are not earnest in our
prayers to God? For in their case men despise wife, children, substance, and their
own safety, and that when they are not certain that they shall increase their
substance. For often, in the very midst of their hopes, they lose at once their life
and their labor. But we, though we know that, if we love Him as we ought to