John 11:24
"I know that he shall rise again in the last day," to prove more clearly His
authority, He replies,

John 11:25
"I am the Resurrection and the Life."
Showing that He needed no other to help Him, if so be that He Himself is
the Life; since if He needed another, how could He be "the Resurrection and the
Life"? Yet He did not plainly state this, but merely hinted it. But when she says
again, "Whatsoever you will ask," He replies,
"He that believes in Me, though he were dead, yet shall he live."
Showing that He is the Giver of good things, and that we must ask of Him.

John 11:26
"And whosoever lives and believes in Me, shall never die."
Observe how He leads her mind upward; for to raise Lazarus was not the
only thing sought; it was necessary that both she and they who were with her
should learn the Resurrection. Wherefore before the raising of the dead He
teaches heavenly wisdom by words. But if He is "the Resurrection," and "the
Life," He is not confined by place, but, present everywhere, knows how to heal.
If therefore they had said, as did the centurion, "Speak the word, and my servant
shall be healed" [Matthew 8:8], He would have done so; but since they
summoned Him to them, and begged Him to come, He condescends in order to
raise them from the humble opinion they had formed of Him, and comes to the
place. Still while condescending, He showed that even when absent He had
power to heal. On this account also He delayed, for the mercy would not have
been apparent as soon as it was given, had there not been first an ill savor (from
the corpse). But how did the woman know that there was to be a Resurrection?
They had heard Christ say many things about the Resurrection, yet still she now
desired to see Him. And observe how she still lingers below; for after hearing, "I
am the Resurrection and the Life," not even so did she say, "Raise him," but,

John 11:27
"I believe that You are the Christ, the Son of God."
What is Christ's reply? "He that believes in Me, though he were dead, yet
shall he live," (here speaking of this death which is common to all. ) "And
whosoever lives and believes in Me, shall never die" [John 11:26], signifying
that other death. "Since then I am the Resurrection and the Life, be not thou
troubled, though your brother be already dead, but believe, for this is not death."
For a while He comforted her on what had happened; and gave her glimpses of
hope, by saying, "He shall rise again," and, "I am the Resurrection"; and that
having risen again, though he should again die, he shall suffer no harm, so that it
needs not to fear this death. What He says is of this kind: "Neither is this man
dead, nor shall you die." "Believest thou this?" She says, "I believe that You are
the Christ, the Son of God."
"Which should come into the world."
The woman seems to me not to understand the saying; she was conscious
that it was some great thing, but did not perceive the whole meaning, so that
when asked one thing, she answered another. Yet for a while at least she had this
gain, that she moderated her grief; such was the power of the words of Christ.
On this account Martha went forth first, and Mary followed. For their affection
to their Teacher did not allow them strongly to feel their present sorrow; so that
the minds of these women were truly wise as well as loving.
4. But in our days, among our other evils there is one malady very prevalent
among our women; they make a great show in their dirges and wailings, baring
their arms, tearing their hair, making furrows down their cheeks. And this they
do, some from grief, others from ostentation and rivalry, others from
wantonness; and they bare their arms, and this too in the sight of men. Why
doest thou, woman? Do you strip yourself in unseemly sort, tell me, thou who art
a member of Christ, in the midst of the market-place, when men are present