in want. But if a man say, I cannot even be content with a wife only, he deceives
himself and reasons falsely; and they condemn him who without a wife lives in
chastity. But how, tell me, can you help using abusive words? Can you not help
cursing? Why, the doing these things is irksome, not the refraining from them.
What excuse then have we for not observing precepts so easy and light? We
cannot name any at all. That the punishment then is eternal is plain from all that
has been said.
4. But since Paul's saying appears to some to tell the other way, come let us
bring it forward also and search it out thoroughly. For having said, "If any man's
work abide which he has built thereon, he shall receive a reward; and if any
man's work shall be burned, he shall suffer loss," he adds, "but himself shall be
saved, yet so as through fire." What shall we say then to this? Let us consider
first what is "the Foundation," and what "the gold," and what "the precious
stones," and what "the hay," and what the "stubble."
"The Foundation," then, he has himself plainly signified to be Christ,
saying, "For other foundation can no man lay than that which is laid, which," he
says "is Jesus Christ."
Next, the building seems to me to be actions. Although some maintain that
this also is spoken concerning teachers and disciples and concerning corrupt
heresies: but the reasoning does not admit it. For if this be it, in what sense,
while "the work is destroyed," is the "builder" to be "saved," though it be
"through fire?" Of right, the author ought rather of the two to perish; but now it
will be found that the severer penalty is assigned to him who has been built into
the work. For if the teacher was the cause of the wickedness, he is worthy to
suffer severer punishment: how then shall he be "saved?" If, on the contrary, he
was not the cause but the disciples became such through their own perverseness,
he is no whit deserving of punishment, no, nor yet of sustaining loss: he, I say,
who built so well. In what sense then does he say, "he shall suffer loss?"
From this it is plain that the discourse is about actions. For since he means
next in course to put out his strength against the man who had committed

fornication, he begins high up and long beforehand to lay down the
preliminaries. For he knew how while discussing one subject, in the very
discourse about that thing to prepare the grounds of another to which he intends
to pass on. For so in his rebuke for not awaiting one another at their meals, he
laid the grounds of his discourse concerning the mysteries. And also because
now he is hastening on towards the fornicator, while speaking about the
"Foundation," he adds, Do you not know that you are the Temple of God? And
that the Spirit of God dwells in you? If any man destroy ([Φθείρη], rec. version,
"defile.") the Temple of God, him will God destroy. Now these things, he said, as
beginning now to agitate with fears the soul of him that had been unchaste.