THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.69, C.10.

baptized in Christ, in so far as he receives Christ's sacrament. And
thus all put on Christ, through being configured to Him by the
character, but not through being conformed to Him by grace.
Reply to Objection 2: When God changes man's will from evil to
good, man does not approach with insincerity. But God does not
always do this. Nor is this the purpose of the sacrament, that an
insincere man be made sincere; but that he who comes in sincerity,
be justified.
Reply to Objection 3: A man is said to be insincere who makes a
show of willing what he wills not. Now whoever approaches Baptism,
by that very fact makes a show of having right faith in Christ, of
veneration for this sacrament, and of wishing to conform to the
Church, and to renounce sin. Consequently, to whatever sin a man
wishes to cleave, if he approach Baptism, he approaches insincerely,
which is the same as to approach without devotion. But this must be
understood of mortal sin, which is in opposition to grace: but not of
venial sin. Consequently, here insincerity includes, in a way, every
sin.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.69, C.11.

### ARTICLE 10. Whether Baptism produces its effect when the

insincerity ceases?
Objection 1: It seems that Baptism does not produce its effect, when
the insincerity ceases. For a dead work, which is void of charity, can
never come to life. But he who approaches Baptism insincerely,
receives the sacrament without charity. Therefore it can never come
to life so as to bestow grace.
Objection 2: Further, insincerity seems to be stronger than Baptism,
because it hinders its effect. But the stronger is not removed by the
weaker. Therefore the sin of insincerity cannot be taken away by
Baptism which has been hindered by insincerity. And thus Baptism
will not receive its full effect, which is the remission of all sins.
Objection 3: Further, it may happen that a man approach Baptism
insincerely, and afterwards commit a number of sins. And yet these
sins will not be taken away by Baptism; because Baptism washes
away past, not future, sins. Such a Baptism, therefore, will never
have its effect, which is the remission of all sins.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Bapt. cont. Donat. i): "Then
does Baptism begin to have its salutary effect, when truthful
confession takes the place of that insincerity which hindered sins
from being washed away, so long as the heart persisted in malice
and sacrilege."
I answer that, As stated above (Question 66, Article 9), Baptism is a
spiritual regeneration. Now when a thing is generated, it receives
together with the form, the form's effect, unless there be an obstacle;
and when this is removed, the form of the thing generated produces
its effect: thus at the same time as a weighty body is generated, it
has a downward movement, unless something prevent this; and
when the obstacle is removed, it begins forthwith to move
downwards. In like manner when a man is baptized, he receives the
character, which is like a form; and he receives in consequence its
proper effect, which is grace whereby all his sins are remitted. But
this effect is sometimes hindered by insincerity. Wherefore, when
this obstacle is removed by Penance, Baptism forthwith produces its
effect.