21. Today's consumerist cultures do not foster passion and zeal but rather addiction and compulsion.

They demand resistance. A compassionate response to these cultural malaises will be necessary and unavoidable if we are to share in the lives of our contemporaries. In such changing circumstances, our responsibility as Jesuits to collaborate at multiple levels has become an imperative. Thus our provinces must work ever more together. So also must we work with others: religious men and women of other communities, lay persons, members of ecclesial movements, people who share our values but not our beliefs; in short, all persons of good will.

22. God has created a world with diverse inhabitants, and this is good. Creation expresses the rich beauty of this lovable world: people working, laughing, and thriving together are signs that God is alive among us. However, diversity becomes problematic when the differences between people are lived in such a way that some prosper at the expense of others who are excluded in such a way that people fight, killing each other, and are intent on destruction. Then God in Christ suffers in and with the world, which he wants to renew. Precisely here is our mission situated. It is here that we must discern our mission according to the criteria of the magis and the more universal good. God is present in the darkness of life intent on making all things new. God needs collaborators in this endeavor: people whose grace consists in being received under the banner of his Son. "Nations" beyond geographical definitions await us, "nations" that today include those who are poor and displaced, those who are profoundly lonely, those who ignore God's existence, and those who use God as an instrument for political purposes. There are new "nations," and we have been sent to them.

23. Recalling Father Jeronimo Nadal, we can say with him: the world is our house. As Father Kolvenbach said recently, "A stable monastery does not serve us, because we have received the entire world to tell about the good news...we do not close ourselves up in the cloister, but we remain in the world amid the multitude of men and women that the Lord loves, since they are in the world." All men and women are our concern for dialogue and for proclamation because our mission is that of the Church: to discover Jesus Christ where we have not noticed him before and to reveal him where he has not been seen before. In other words, we look to "find God in all things," following what Saint Ignatius proposes to us in the "Contemplation for Achieving Love." The entire world becomes the object of our interest and concern.

24. Thus as this world changes, so does the context of our mission; and new frontiers beckon that we must be willing to embrace. So we plunge ourselves more deeply into that dialogue with religions that may show us that the Holy Spirit is at work all over the world that God loves. We turn also to the "frontier" of the earth, increasingly degraded and plundered. Here, with passion for environmental justice, we shall meet once again the Spirit of God seeking to liberate a suffering creation, which demands of us space to live and breathe.