John 17:15
"I pray not that You should take them out of the world, but that You should keep
them from the evil."
Again He simplifies His language; again He renders it more clear; which is
the act of one showing, by making entreaty for them with exactness, nothing else
but this, that He has a very tender care for them. Yet He Himself had told them,
that the Father would do all things whatsoever they should ask. How then does
He here pray for them? As I said, for no other purpose than to show His love.

John 17:16
"They are not of the world, even as I am not of the world."
How then says He in another place, "Which You gave Me out of the world;
Yours they were"? [John 17:6] There He speaks of their nature; here of wicked
actions. And He puts together a long encomium of them; first, that "they were
not of the world"; then, that "the Father Himself had given them"; and that "they
had kept His word;" and that on this account "they were hated." And if He says,
"As I am not of the world," be not troubled; for the "as" is not here expressive of
unvarying exactness. For as, when in the case of Him and the Father the "as" is
used, a great Equality is signified, because of the Relationship in Nature; so
when it is used of us and Him, the interval is great, because of the great and
infinite interval between the respective natures. For if He "did no sin, neither
was guile found in His mouth" [1 Peter 2:22], how could the Apostles be
reckoned equal to Him? What is it then that He says, "They are not of the
world"? "They look to another world, they have nothing common with earth, but
have become citizens of heaven." And by these words He shows His love, when
He commends them to the Father, and commits them to Him who begot Him.
When He says, "Keep them," He does not speak merely of delivering them from
dangers, but also with regard to their continuance in the faith. Wherefore He
adds,

John 17:17
"Sanctify them through Your truth." "Make them holy by the gift of the Spirit, and
of right doctrines." As when He says, "You are clean through the word which I
spoke unto you" [ John 15:3], so now He says the same thing, "Instruct them,
teach them the truth." "And yet He says that the Spirit does this. How then does
He now ask it from the Father?" That you may again learn their equality of
Honor. For right doctrines asserted concerning God sanctify the soul. And if He
says that they are sanctified by the word, marvel not. And to show that He
speaks of doctrines, He adds,
"Your word is truth."
That is, "there is no falsehood in it, and all that is said in it must needs
come to pass"; and again, it signifies nothing typical or bodily. As also Paul says
concerning the Church, that He has sanctified it by the Word. For the Word of
God is wont also to cleanse. [Ephesians 5:26] Moreover, the, "sanctify them,"
seems to me to signify something else, such as this, "Set them apart for the Word
and for preaching." And this is made plain from what follows. For, He says,