to wipe out a long-standing evil: I speak not of perjury alone, but even of oaths
in good faith. But so and so, says one, a forbearing man, consecrated to the
priesthood, living in much self-control and piety, takes an oath. Do not speak to
me of this forbearing person, this self-controlled, pious man who is consecrated
to the priesthood; but if you will, add that this man is Peter, or Paul, or even an
angel descended out of heaven. For not even in such a case do I regard the
dignity of their persons. For the law which I read upon oaths, is not that of the
servant, but of the King: and when the edicts of a king are read, let every claim
of the servants be silent. But if you are able to say that Christ bade us use oaths,
or that Christ did not punish the doing of this, show me, and I am persuaded. But
if he forbids it with so much care, and takes so much thought about the matter as
to class him who takes an oath with the evil one (for whatsoever is more than
these, namely, than yea and nay, says he, is of the devil), [Matthew 5:35] why do
you bring this person and that person forward? For not because of the
carelessness of your fellow servants, but from the injunctions of his own laws,
will God record his vote against you. I have commanded, he says, you ought to
obey, not to shelter yourself behind such and such a person and concern yourself
with other persons' evil. Since the great David sinned a grievous sin, is it then
safe for us to sin? Tell me: on this account then we ought to make sure of this
point, and only to emulate the good works of the saints; and if there is
carelessness, and transgression of the law anywhere, we ought to flee from it
with great care. For our reckoning is not with our fellow-servants, but with our
Master, and to him we shall give account for all done in our life. Let us prepare
ourselves therefore for this tribunal. For even if he who transgresses this law be
beyond everything revered and great, he shall certainly pay the penalty attaching
to the transgression. For God is no respecter of persons. How then and in what
way is it possible to flee from this sin? For one ought to show not only that the
crime is grievous, but to give counsel how we may escape from it. Have you a
wife, have you a servant, children, friends, acquaintance, neighbors? To all these
enjoin caution on these matters. Custom is a grievous thing, terrible to supplant,

and hard to guard against, and it often attacks us unwilling and unknowing;
therefore in so far as you know the power of custom, to such an extent study to
be freed from any evil custom, and transfer yourself to any other most useful
one. For as that custom is often able to trip you up, though you are careful, and
guardest yourself, and takest thought, and consideration, so if you transfer
yourself to the good custom of abstaining from oaths, you will not be able, either
involuntarily or carelessly, to fall into the fault of oaths. For custom is really
great and has the power of nature. In order then that we do not continually
distress ourselves let us transfer ourselves to another custom, and ask thou each
one of your kindred and acquaintance this favor, that he advise you and exhort
you to flee from oaths, and reprove you, when detected in them. For the watch
over you which takes place on their part, is to them too counsel and a suggestion
to what is right. For he who reproves another for oaths, will not himself easily
fall into this pit. For much swearing is no ordinary pit, not only when it is about
little matters but about the greatest. And we, whether buying vegetables, or
quarrelling over two farthings, or in a rage with our servants and threatening
them, always call upon God as our witness. But a freeman, possessed of some
barren dignity, you would not dare to call upon as witness in the market to such
things; but even if you attempted it, you will pay the penalty of your insolence.
But the King of Heaven, the Lord of Angels, when disputing both about
purchases and money, and what not, you drag in for a testimony. And how can
these things be borne? Whence then should we escape from this evil custom?
After setting those guards of which I spoke round us, let us fix on a specified
time to ourselves for amendment, and adding thereto condemnation if, when the
time has passed, we have not amended this. How long time will suffice for the
purpose? I do not think that they who are very wary, and on the alert, and
watchful about their own salvation, should need more than ten days, so as to be
altogether free from the evil custom of oaths. But if after ten days we be detected
swearing, let us add a penalty due to ourselves, and let us fix upon the greatest
punishment and condemnation of the transgression; what then is this