FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.60, C.5.

passions contradicting reason in the same manner, e.g. by impelling
to that which is contrary to reason, or by withdrawing from that
which is in accord with reason. Wherefore the different passions of
the concupiscible faculty do not require different moral virtues,
because their movements follow one another in a certain order, as
being directed to the one same thing, viz. the attainment of some
good or the avoidance of some evil: thus from love proceeds desire,
and from desire we arrive at pleasure; and it is the same with the
opposite passions, for hatred leads to avoidance or dislike, and this
leads to sorrow. On the other hand, the irascible passions are not all
of one order, but are directed to different things: for daring and fear
are about some great danger; hope and despair are about some
difficult good; while anger seeks to overcome something contrary
which has wrought harm. Consequently there are different virtues
about such like passions: e.g. temperance, about the concupiscible
passions; fortitude, about fear and daring; magnanimity, about hope
and despair; meekness, about anger.
Reply to Objection 1: All the passions concur in one common
principle and end; but not in one proper principle or end: and so this
does not suffice for the unity of moral virtue.
Reply to Objection 2: Just as in the natural order the same principle
causes movement from one extreme and movement towards the
other; and as in the intellectual order contraries have one common
ratio; so too between contrary passions there is but one moral
virtue, which, like a second nature, consents to reason's dictates.
Reply to Objection 3: Those three passions are directed to the same
object in a certain order, as stated above: and so they belong to the
same virtue.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.60, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether the moral virtues differ in point of the

various objects of the passions?
Objection 1: It would seem that the moral virtues do not differ
according to the objects of the passions. For just as there are
objects of passions, so are there objects of operations. Now those
moral virtues that are about operations, do not differ according to
the objects of those operations: for the buying and selling either of a
house or of a horse belong to the one same virtue of justice.
Therefore neither do those moral virtues that are about passions
differ according to the objects of those passions.
Objection 2: Further, the passions are acts or movements of the
sensitive appetite. Now it needs a greater difference to differentiate
habits than acts. Hence diverse objects which do not diversify the
species of passions, do not diversify the species of moral virtue: so
that there is but one moral virtue about all objects of pleasure, and
the same applies to the other passions.
Objection 3: Further, more or less do not change a species. Now
various objects of pleasure differ only by reason of being more or
less pleasurable. Therefore all objects of pleasure belong to one
species of virtue: and for the same reason so do all fearful objects,
and the same applies to others. Therefore moral virtue is not
diversified according to the objects of the passions.
Objection 4: Further, virtue hinders evil, even as it produces good.
But there are various virtues about the desires for good things: thus
temperance is about desires for the pleasure of touch, and
"eutrapelia" [eutrapelia] about pleasures in games. Therefore there
should be different virtues about fears of evils.
On the contrary, Chastity is about sexual pleasures, abstinence
about pleasures of the table, and "eutrapelia" about pleasures in
games.
I answer that, The perfection of a virtue depends on the reason;
whereas the perfection of a passion depends on the sensitive
appetite. Consequently virtues must needs be differentiated
according to their relation to reason, but the passions according to
their relation to the appetite. Hence the objects of the passions,