FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.2, C.2.

And as to artificial wealth, it is not sought save for the sake of
natural wealth; since man would not seek it except because, by its
means, he procures for himself the necessaries of life. Consequently
much less can it be considered in the light of the last end. Therefore
it is impossible for happiness, which is the last end of man, to
consist in wealth.
Reply to Objection 1: All material things obey money, so far as the
multitude of fools is concerned, who know no other than material
goods, which can be obtained for money. But we should take our
estimation of human goods not from the foolish but from the wise:
just as it is for a person whose sense of taste is in good order, to
judge whether a thing is palatable.
Reply to Objection 2: All things salable can be had for money: not so
spiritual things, which cannot be sold. Hence it is written (Prov.
17:16): "What doth it avail a fool to have riches, seeing he cannot
buy wisdom."
Reply to Objection 3: The desire for natural riches is not infinite:
because they suffice for nature in a certain measure. But the desire
for artificial wealth is infinite, for it is the servant of disordered
concupiscence, which is not curbed, as the Philosopher makes clear
(Polit. i, 3). Yet this desire for wealth is infinite otherwise than the
desire for the sovereign good. For the more perfectly the sovereign
good is possessed, the more it is loved, and other things despised:
because the more we possess it, the more we know it. Hence it is
written (Ecclus. 24:29): "They that eat me shall yet hunger." Whereas
in the desire for wealth and for whatsoever temporal goods, the
contrary is the case: for when we already possess them, we despise
them, and seek others: which is the sense of Our Lord's words (Jn.
4:13): "Whosoever drinketh of this water," by which temporal goods
are signified, "shall thirst again." The reason of this is that we realize
more their insufficiency when we possess them: and this very fact
shows that they are imperfect, and the sovereign good does not
consist therein.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.2, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether man's happiness consists in honors?

Objection 1: It would seem that man's happiness consists in honors.
For happiness or bliss is "the reward of virtue," as the Philosopher
says (Ethic. i, 9). But honor more than anything else seems to be that
by which virtue is rewarded, as the Philosopher says (Ethic. iv, 3).
Therefore happiness consists especially in honor.
Objection 2: Further, that which belongs to God and to persons of
great excellence seems especially to be happiness, which is the
perfect good. But that is honor, as the Philosopher says (Ethic. iv, 3).
Moreover, the Apostle says (1 Tim. 1:17): "To . . . the only God be
honor and glory." Therefore happiness consists in honor.
Objection 3: Further, that which man desires above all is happiness.
But nothing seems more desirable to man than honor: since man
suffers loss in all other things, lest he should suffer loss of honor.
Therefore happiness consists in honor.
On the contrary, Happiness is in the happy. But honor is not in the
honored, but rather in him who honors, and who offers deference to
the person honored, as the Philosopher says (Ethic. i, 5). Therefore
happiness does not consist in honor.
I answer that, It is impossible for happiness to consist in honor. For
honor is given to a man on account of some excellence in him; and
consequently it is a sign and attestation of the excellence that is in
the person honored. Now a man's excellence is in proportion,
especially to his happiness, which is man's perfect good; and to its
parts, i.e. those goods by which he has a certain share of happiness.
And therefore honor can result from happiness, but happiness
cannot principally consist therein.
Reply to Objection 1: As the Philosopher says (Ethic. i, 5), honor is
not that reward of virtue, for which the virtuous work: but they
receive honor from men by way of reward, "as from those who have
nothing greater to offer." But virtue's true reward is happiness itself,
for which the virtuous work: whereas if they worked for honor, it
would no longer be a virtue, but ambition.
Reply to Objection 2: Honor is due to God and to persons of great