Most of the mss. read "intolerabiliorem," but one reads as above, and is followed by all the editors.

words: "Lord, lay not this sin to their charge." Thus were they perfected who knew one and the
same God, who from beginning to end was present with mankind in the various dispensations; as
the prophet Hosea declares: "I have filled up visions, and used similitudes by the hands of the
prophets." Those, therefore, who delivered up their souls to death for Christ's Gospel—how
could they have spoken to men in accordance with old-established opinion? If this had been the
course adopted by them, they should not have suffered; but inasmuch as they did preach things
contrary to those persons who did not assent to the truth, for that reason they suffered. It is evident,
therefore, that they did not relinquish the truth, but with all boldness preached to the Jews and
Greeks. To the Jews, indeed, [they proclaimed] that the Jesus who was crucified by them was the
Son of God, the Judge of quick and dead, and that He has received from His Father an eternal
kingdom in Israel, as I have pointed out; but to the Greeks they preached one God, who made all
things, and Jesus Christ His Son.
14. This is shown in a still clearer light from the letter of the apostles, which they forwarded
neither to the Jews nor to the Greeks, but to those who from the Gentiles believed in Christ,
confirming their faith. For when certain men had come down from Judea to Antioch—where also,
first of all, the Lord's disciples were called Christians, because of their faith in Christ—and sought
to persuade those who had believed on the Lord to be circumcised, and to perform other things
after the observance of the law; and when Paul and Barnabas had gone up to Jerusalem to the
apostles on account of this question, and the whole Church had convened together, Peter thus
addressed them: "Men, brethren, ye know how that from the days of old God made choice among
you, that the Gentiles by my mouth should hear the word of the Gospel, and believe. And God, the
Searcher of the heart, bare them witness, giving them the Holy Ghost, even as to us; and put no
difference between us and them, purifying their hearts by faith. Now therefore why tempt ye God,
to impose a yoke upon the neck of the disciples, which neither our fathers nor we were able to bear?
But we believe that, through the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, we are to be saved, even as they."
After him James spoke as follows: "Men, brethren, Simon hath declared how God did purpose to
take from among the Gentiles a people for His name. And thus do the words of the prophets
agree, as it is written, After this I will return, and will build again the tabernacle of David, which
is fallen down; and I will build the ruins thereof, and I will set it up: that the residue of men may
seek after the Lord, and all the Gentiles, among whom my name has been invoked, saith the Lord,
doing these things. Known from eternity is His work to God. Wherefore I for my part give
judgment, that we trouble not them who from among the Gentiles are turned to God: but that it be
with the readings of the Cambridge ms.