SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.9, C.4.

that occurs in the perversion of morals. This does not apply to the
sins that are opposed to the theological virtues, as we shall stated
further on (Question 20, Article 3; Question 34, Article 2, ad 2;
Question 39, Article 2, ad 3).
Reply to Objection 1: Nothing hinders a sin that is more grave in its
genus from being less grave in respect of some circumstances.
Hence Augustine hesitated to decide between a bad Catholic, and a
heretic not sinning otherwise, because although the heretic's sin is
more grave generically, it can be lessened by a circumstance, and
conversely the sin of the Catholic can, by some circumstance, be
aggravated.
Reply to Objection 2: Unbelief includes both ignorance, as an
accessory thereto, and resistance to matters of faith, and in the latter
respect it is a most grave sin. In respect, however, of this ignorance,
it has a certain reason for excuse, especially when a man sins not
from malice, as was the case with the Apostle.
Reply to Objection 3: An unbeliever is more severely punished for
his sin of unbelief than another sinner is for any sin whatever, if we
consider the kind of sin. But in the case of another sin, e.g. adultery,
committed by a believer, and by an unbeliever, the believer, other
things being equal, sins more gravely than the unbeliever, both on
account of his knowledge of the truth through faith, and on account
of the sacraments of faith with which he has been satiated, and
which he insults by committing sin.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.9, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether every act of an unbeliever is a sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that each act of an unbeliever is a sin.
Because a gloss on Rm. 14:23, "All that is not of faith is sin," says:
"The whole life of unbelievers is a sin." Now the life of unbelievers
consists of their actions. Therefore every action of an unbeliever is a
sin.
Objection 2: Further, faith directs the intention. Now there can be no
good save what comes from a right intention. Therefore, among
unbelievers, no action can be good.
Objection 3: Further, when that which precedes is corrupted, that
which follows is corrupted also. Now an act of faith precedes the
acts of all the virtues. Therefore, since there is no act of faith in
unbelievers, they can do no good work, but sin in every action of
theirs.
On the contrary, It is said of Cornelius, while yet an unbeliever (Acts
10:4,31), that his alms were acceptable to God. Therefore not every
action of an unbeliever is a sin, but some of his actions are good.
I answer that, As stated above (FS, Question 85, Articles 2,4) mortal
sin takes away sanctifying grace, but does not wholly corrupt the
good of nature. Since therefore, unbelief is a mortal sin, unbelievers
are without grace indeed, yet some good of nature remains in them.
Consequently it is evident that unbelievers cannot do those good
works which proceed from grace, viz. meritorious works; yet they
can, to a certain extent, do those good works for which the good of
nature suffices.
Hence it does not follow that they sin in everything they do; but
whenever they do anything out of their unbelief, then they sin. For
even as one who has the faith, can commit an actual sin, venial or
even mortal, which he does not refer to the end of faith, so too, an
unbeliever can do a good deed in a matter which he does not refer to
the end of his unbelief.
Reply to Objection 1: The words quoted must be taken to mean
either that the life of unbelievers cannot be sinless, since without
faith no sin is taken away, or that whatever they do out of unbelief, is