disposition of the soul. For the Ninevites did not need many days to blot out their
sin, but the short space of one day availed to efface all their iniquity: and the
robber also did not take a long time to effect his entrance into Paradise, but in
such a brief moment as one might occupy in uttering a single word, did he wash
off all the sins which he had committed in his whole life, and received the prize
bestowed by the divine approval even before the Apostles. And we also see the
martyrs obtain glorious crowns for themselves in the course, not of many years,
but of a few days, and often in a single day only.
7. Wherefore we have need of zeal in every direction, and much preparation
of mind: and if we so order our conscience as to hate our former wickedness, and
choose the contrary path with as much energy as God desires and commands, we
shall not have anything less on account of the short space of time: many at least
who were last have far outstripped those who were first. For to have fallen is not
a grievous thing, but to remain prostrate after falling, and not to get up again;
and, playing the coward and the sluggard, to conceal feebleness of moral
purpose under the reasoning of despair. To whom also the prophet spoke in
perplexity saying "Does he who falls not rise up, or he who turns away not turn
back?" [Jeremiah 8:4] But if you inquire of me for instances of persons who
have fallen away after having believed, all these things have been said with
reference to such persons, for he who has fallen belonged formerly to those who
were standing, not to those who were prostrate; for how should one in that
condition fall? But other things also shall be said, partly by means of parables,
partly by plainer deeds and words. Now that sheep which had got separated from
the ninety and nine, [Luke 15:4-5] and then was brought back again, represents
to us nothing else than the fall and return of the faithful; for it was a sheep not of
some alien flock, but belonging to the same number as the rest, and was formerly
pastured by the same shepherd, and it strayed on no common straying, but
wandered away to the mountains and in valleys, that is to say some long journey,
far distant from the right path. Did he then suffer it to stray? By no means, but
brought it back neither driving it, nor beating it, but taking it upon his shoulders.

For as the best physicians bring back those who are far gone in sickness with
careful treatment to a state of health, not only treating them according to the
laws of the medical art, but sometimes also giving them gratification: even so
God conducts to virtue those who are much depraved, not with great severity, but
gently and gradually, and supporting them on every side, so that the separation
may not become greater, nor the error more prolonged. And the same truth is
implied in the parable of the prodigal son as well as in this. For he also was no
stranger, but a son, and a brother of the child who had been well pleasing to the
father, and he plunged into no ordinary vice, but went to the very extremity, so to
say, of evil, he the rich and free and well-bred son being reduced to a more
miserable condition than that of household slaves, strangers, and hirelings.
Nevertheless he returned again to his original condition, and had his former
honour restored to him. But if he had despaired of his life, and, dejected by what
had befallen him, had remained in the foreign land, he would not have obtained
what he did obtain, but would have been consumed with hunger, and so have
undergone the most pitiable death: but since he repented, and did not despair, he
was restored, even after such great corruption, to the same splendour as before,
and was arrayed in the most beautiful robe, and enjoyed greater honours than his
brother who had not fallen. For "these many years," says he "do I serve you,
neither transgressed I your commandment at any time, and yet thou never gavest
me a kid, that I might make merry with my friends; but when this your son has
come who has devoured your living with harlots, you have killed for him the
fatted calf." [Luke 15:29-30] So great is the power of repentance.
8. Having then such great examples, let us not continue in evil, nor despair
of reconciliation, but let us say also ourselves "I will go to my Father," and let us
draw near to God. For He Himself never turns away from us, but it is we who
put ourselves far off: for "I am a God" we read "at hand and not a God afar off."
And again, when He was rebuking them by the mouth of this prophet He said
"Do not your sins separate between you and me?" Inasmuch then as this is the
cause which puts us far from God, let us remove this obnoxious barrier, which