Himself orders these things. Let us then give up unto Him the more perfect
understanding of this matter, and apply ourselves to what follows, and in the
calamities of others let us learn to bear all things nobly. Yea, for it was no little
scene of woe, which then befell Bethlehem, the children were snatched from
their mother's breast, and dragged unto this unjust slaughter.
And if you are yet faint-hearted, and not equal to controlling yourself in
these things, learn the end of him who dared all this, and recover yourself a little.
For very quickly was he overtaken by punishment for these things; and he paid
the due penalty of such an abominable act, ending his life by a grievous death,
and more pitiable than that which he now dared inflict; suffering also countless
additional ills, which you may know of by perusing Josephus' account of these
events. But, lest we should make our discourse long, and interrupt its continuity,
we have not thought it necessary to insert that account in what we are saying.
4. "Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremy the prophet,
[Jeremiah 31:15] saying, In Rama was there a voice heard, Rachel weeping for
her children, and would not be comforted, because they are not." [Matthew 2:1718]
Thus having filled the hearer with horror by relating these things: the
slaughter so violent and unjust, so extremely cruel and lawless; he comforts him
again, by saying, Not from God's wanting power to prevent it did all this take
place, nor from any ignorance of His, but when He both knew it, and foretold it,
and that loudly by His prophet. Be not troubled then, neither despond, looking
unto His unspeakable providence, which one may most clearly see, alike by what
He works, and by what He permits. And this He intimated in another place also,
when discoursing to His disciples. I mean where, having forewarned them of the
judgment seats, and executions, and of the wars of the world, and of the battle
that knows no truce, to uphold their spirit and to comfort them He says, "Are not
two sparrows sold for a farthing? And one of them shall not fall on the ground
without your Father which is in Heaven." [Matthew 10:29] These things He said,
signifying that nothing is done without His knowledge, but while He knows all,

yet not in all does He act. "Be not then troubled," He says, "neither be
disturbed." For if He know what ye suffer, and has power to hinder it, it is quite
clear that it is in His providence and care for you that He does not hinder it. And
this we ought to bear in mind in our own temptations also, and great will be the
consolation we shall thence receive.
But what, it may be said, has Rachel to do with Bethlehem? For it says,
"Rachel weeping for her children." And what has Rama to do with Rachel?
Rachel was the mother of Benjamin, and on his death, they buried her in the
horse-course that was near this place. The tomb then being near, and the portion
pertaining unto Benjamin her infant (for Rama was of the tribe of Benjamin),
from the head of the tribe first, and next from the place of her sepulture, He
naturally denominates her young children who were massacred. Then to show
that the wound that befell her was incurable and cruel, He says, "she would not
be comforted because they are not."
Hence again we are taught this, which I mentioned before, never to be
confounded when what is happening is contrary to the promise of God. Behold,
for instance, when He had come for the salvation of the people, or rather for the
salvation of the world, of what kind were His beginnings. His mother, first, in
flight; His birth-place is involved in irremediable calamities, and a murder is
perpetrated of all murders the bitterest, and there is lamentation and great
mourning, and wailings everywhere. But be not troubled; for He is wont ever to
accomplish His own dispensations by their contraries, affording us from thence a
very great demonstration of His power.
Thus did He lead on His own disciples also, and prepared them to do all
their duty, bringing about things by their contraries, that the marvel might be
greater. They, at any rate, being scourged and persecuted, and suffering terrors
without end, did in this way get the better of them that were beating and
persecuting them.
5. "But when Herod was dead, behold, an angel of the Lord appears in a
dream to Joseph saying, Arise, and take the young Child and His mother, and go