aside to sleep and sloth, lets pass things that concern it with a view to excellence
and the life thence arising, instead of receiving them with much readiness.
And that you may not suffer this, (I shall not cease continually thus to warn
you,) strengthen your minds, that you may not hear what the faithful among the
Hebrews heard from Paul. For to them he said that he had "many things to say,
and hard to be uttered" [Hebrews 5:11]; not as though they were by nature such,
but because, says he, "you are dull of hearing." For it is the nature of the weak
and infirm man to be confused even by few words as by many, and what is clear
and easy he thinks hard to be comprehended. Let not any here be such an one,
but having chased from him all worldly care, so let him hear these doctrines.
For when the desire of money possesses the hearer, the desire of hearing
cannot possess him as well; since the soul, being one, cannot suffice for many
desires; but one of the two is injured by the other, and, from division, becomes
weaker as its rival prevails, and expends all upon itself.
And this is wont to happen in the case of children. When a man has only
one, he loves that one exceedingly. But when he has become father of many, then
also his dispositions of affection being divided become weaker.
If this happens where there is the absolute rule and power of nature, and the
objects beloved are akin one with another, what can we say as to that desire and
disposition which is according to deliberate choice; especially where these
desires lie directly opposed to each other; for the love of wealth is a thing
opposed to the love of this kind of hearing. We enter heaven when we enter here;
not in place, I mean, but in disposition; for it is possible for one who is on earth
to stand in heaven, and to have vision of the things that are there, and to hear the
words from thence.
11. Let none then introduce the things of earth into heaven; let no one
standing here be careful about what is at his house. For he ought to bear with
him, and to preserve both at home and in his business, what he gains from this
place, not to allow it to be loaded with the burdens of house and market. Our
reason for entering in to the chair of instruction is, that thence we may cleanse

ourselves from the filth of the outer world; but if we are likely even in this little
space to be injured by things said or done without, it is better for us not to enter
at all. Let no one then in the assembly be thinking about domestic matters, but
let him at home be stirring with what he heard in the assembly. Let these things
be more precious to us than any. These concern the soul, but those the body; or
rather what is said here concerns both body and soul. Wherefore let these things
be our leading business, and all others but occasional employments; for these
belong both to the future and the present life, but the rest neither to the one nor
the other, unless they be managed according to the law laid down for these.
Since from these it is impossible to learn not only what we shall hereafter be,
and how we shall then live, but how we shall rightly direct this present life also.
For this house is a spiritual surgery, that whatever wounds we may have
received without, here we may heal, not that we may gather fresh ones to take
with us hence. Yet if we do not give heed to the Spirit speaking to us, we shall
not only fail to clear ourselves of our former hurts, but shall get others in
addition.
Let us then with much earnestness attend to the book as it is being unfolded
to us; since if we learn exactly its first principles and fundamental doctrines, we
shall not afterwards require much close study, but after laboring a little at the
beginning, shall be able, as Paul says, to instruct others also. [Romans 15:14]
For this Apostle is very sublime, abounding in many doctrines, and on these he
dwells more than on other matters.
Let us not then be careless hearers. And this is the reason why we set them
forth to you little by little, so that all may be easily intelligible to you, and may
not escape your memory. Let us fear then lest we come under the condemnation
of that word which says, "If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not
had sin." [John 15:22] For what shall we be profited more than those who have
not heard, if even after hearing we go our way home bearing nothing with us, but
only wondering at what has been said.
Allow us then to sow in good ground; allow us, that you may draw us the