operation, but a quality or disposition. Wherefore according to
others it must be stated that beatitude and dowry differ even in
reality, beatitude being the perfect operation itself by which the soul
is united to God, while the dowries are habits or dispositions or any
other qualities directed to this same perfect operation, so that they
are directed to beatitude instead of being in it as parts thereof.
Reply to Objection 1: Beatitude, properly speaking, is not an
adornment of the soul, but something resulting from the soul's
adornment; since it is an operation, while its adornment is a certain
comeliness of the blessed themselves.
Reply to Objection 2: Beatitude is not directed to the union but is the
union itself of the soul with Christ. This union is by an operation,
whereas the dowries are gifts disposing to this same union.
Reply to Objection 3: Vision may be taken in two ways. First,
actually, i.e. for the act itself of vision; and thus vision is not a
dowry, but beatitude itself. Secondly, it may be taken habitually, i.e.
for the habit whereby this act is elicited, namely the clarity of glory,
by which the soul is enlightened from above to see God: and thus it
is a dowry and the principle of beatitude, but not beatitude itself. The
same answer applies to OBJ 4.
Reply to Objection 5: Beatitude is the sum of all goods not as though
they were essential parts of beatitude, but as being in a way directed
to beatitude, as stated above.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether it is fitting that Christ should receive a

dowry?
Objection 1: It would seem fitting that Christ should receive a dowry.
For the saints will be conformed to Christ through glory, according
to Phil. 3:21, "Who will reform the body of our lowness made like to
the body of His glory." Therefore Christ also will have a dowry.
Objection 2: Further, in the spiritual marriage a dowry is given in
likeness to a carnal marriage. Now there is a spiritual marriage in
Christ, which is peculiar to Him, namely of the two natures in one
Person, in regard to which the human nature in Him is said to have
been espoused by the Word, as a gloss [St. Augustine, De Consensu
Evang. i, 40] has it on Ps. 18:6, "He hath set His tabernacle in the
sun," etc., and Apoc. 21:3, "Behold the tabernacle of God with men."
Therefore it is fitting that Christ should have a dowry.
Objection 3: Further, Augustine says (De Doctr. Christ. iii) that
Christ, according to the Rule [Liber regularum] of Tyconius, on
account of the unity of the mystic body that exists between the head
and its members, calls Himself also the Bride and not only the
Bridegroom, as may be gathered from Is. 61:10, "As a bridegroom
decked with a crown, and as a bride adorned with her jewels." Since
then a dowry is due to the bride, it would seem that Christ ought to
receive a dowry.
Objection 4: Further, a dowry is due to all the members of the
Church, since the Church is the spouse. But Christ is a member of
the Church according to 1 Cor. 12:27, "You are the body of Christ,
and members of member, i.e. of Christ," according to a gloss.
Therefore the dowry is due to Christ.
Objection 5: Further, Christ has perfect vision, fruition, and joy. Now
these are the dowries. Therefore, etc.
On the contrary, A distinction of persons is requisite between the
bridegroom and the bride. But in Christ there is nothing personally
distinct from the Son of God Who is the Bridegroom, as stated in Jn.
3:29, "He that hath the bride is the bridegroom." Therefore since the
dowry is allotted to the bride or for the bride, it would seem unfitting
for Christ to have a dowry.