Homily 16 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts 7:6-7
"And God spoke on this wise, That his seed should sojourn in a strange
land; and that they should bring them into bondage, and entreat them evil four
hundred years. And the nation to whom they shall be in bondage will I judge,
said God: and after that shall they come forth, and serve Me in this place."
See, what a number of years the Promise has been given, and the manner of
the Promise, and nowhere sacrifice, nowhere circumcision! He here shows, how
God Himself suffered them to be afflicted, not that He had anything to lay to
their charge. "And they shall bring them into bondage," etc. But nevertheless,
they did not these things with impunity. "And the nation to whom they shall be in
bondage I will judge, said God." For, to show that they are not to go by this, in
estimating who are pious (by reason of their saying, "He trusted in God, let Him
deliver Him,") [Matthew 27:43].— He, the Same that promised, He that gave the
land, first permits the evils. So also now, though He has promised a Kingdom,
yet He suffers us to be exercised in temptations. If here the freedom was not to
be till after four hundred years, what wonder, with regard to the Kingdom? Yet
he performed it, and lapse of time availed not to falsify His word. Moreover, it
was no ordinary bondage they underwent. And the matter does not terminate
solely in the punishment of those (their oppressors); but they themselves also,
He says, shall enjoy a mighty salvation. Here he reminds them too of the benefit
which they enjoyed. "And he gave him the covenant of circumcision: and so he
begot Isaac." Here he lets himself down to lower matters. "And circumcised him
on the eighth day: and Isaac (begot) Jacob, and Jacob the twelve patriarchs."
[Acts 7:8].— Here he seems to hint now at the type. "And the patriarchs moved
with envy, sold Joseph into Egypt." [Acts 7:9] Here again, the type of Christ.
Though they had no fault to find with him, and though he came on purpose to

bring them their food, they thus ill-treated him. Still here again the promise,
though it is a long while first, receives its fulfillment. "And God was with him"—
this also is for them— "and delivered him out of all his afflictions." [Acts 7:10].
He shows that unknowingly they helped to fulfil the prophecy, and that they
were themselves the cause, and that the evils recoiled on their own selves. "And
gave him favor and wisdom in the sight of Pharaoh king of Egypt, Gave him
favor," in the eyes of a barbarian, to him, the slave, the captive: his brethren sold
him, this (barbarian) honored him. "Now there came a dearth over all the land of
Egypt and Canaan, and great affliction: and our fathers found no sustenance.
But when Jacob heard that there was grain in Egypt, he sent out our fathers first.
And at the second time Joseph was made known to his brethren." [Acts 7:11-13].
They came down to buy, and had to depend upon him for everything. What then
did he? ["He made himself known to his brethren:"] not to this point only did he
carry his friendliness; he also made them known to Pharaoh, and brought them
down into the land. "And Joseph's kindred was made known unto Pharaoh. Then
sent Joseph, and called his father Jacob to him, and all his kindred, threescore
and fifteen souls. So Jacob went down into Egypt, and died, he, and our fathers,
and were carried over into Sychem, and laid in the sepulchre that Abraham
bought for a sum of money of the sons of Emmor the father of Sychem. But when
the time of the promise drew near, which God had sworn to Abraham the people
grew and multiplied in Egypt, till another king arose, which knew not Joseph."
[Acts 7:13-18]. Then again, fresh disappointment ([ἀ] [νελπιστία]): first, famine,
but they came through that: secondly, the falling into the hands of their enemy:
thirdly, the being destroyed by the king. Then (to show) God's fullness of ways
and means ([εὐμήχανον]), "In which time," it says, "Moses was born, and was
exceeding fair." [Acts 7:20] If the former circumstance was wonderful, that
Joseph was sold by his brethren, here again is another circumstance more
wonderful still, that the king "nourished" the very person who was to overthrow
his dominion, being himself the person that was to perish. Do you observe all
along a figurative enacting, so to say, of the resurrection of the dead? But it is