when a violent storm is raised on every side, and the waves succeed each other
— then that we are not shaken, is a proof of no less than this, that it grows, and
grows exceedingly, and becomes loftier. For as in the case of the flood all the
stony and lower parts are soon hidden, but as many things as are above, it
reaches not them, so also the faith that has become lofty, is not drawn
downwards. For this reason he does not say "your faith grows;" but "grows
exceedingly, and the love of each one of you all toward one another abounds."
Do you see how this contributes for the ease of affliction, to be in close guard
together, and to adhere to one another? From this also arose much consolation.
The love and faith, therefore, that is weak, afflictions shake, but that which is
strong they render stronger. For a soul that is in grief, when it is weak, can add
nothing to itself; but that which is strong does it then most. And observe their
love. They did not love one indeed, and not love another, but it was equal on the
part of all. For this he has intimated, by saying, "of each one of you all toward
one another." For it was equally poised, as that of one body. Since even now we
find love existing among many, but this love becoming the cause of division. For
when we are knit together in parties of two or three, and the two indeed, or three
or four, are closely bound to one another, but draw themselves off from the rest,
because they can have recourse to these, and in all things confide in these; this is
the division of love— not love. For tell me, if the eye should bestow upon the
hand the foresight which it has for the whole body, and withdrawing itself from
the other members, should attend to that alone, would it not injure the whole?
Assuredly. So also if we confine to one or two the love which ought to be
extended to the whole Church of God, we injure both ourselves and them, and
the whole. For these things are not of love, but of division; schisms, and
distracting rents. Since even if I separate and take a member from the whole
man, the part separated indeed is united in itself, is continuous, all compacted
together, yet even so it is a separation, since it is not united to the rest of the
body.
For what advantage is it, that you love a certain person exceedingly? It is a

human love. But if it is not a human love, but you love for God's sake, then love
all. For so God has commanded to love even our enemies. And if He has
commanded to love our enemies, how much more those who have never
aggrieved us? But, do you say, I love, but not in that way. Rather, you do not
love at all. For when you accuse, when you envy, when you lay snares, how do
you love? "But," do you say, "I do none of these things." But when a man is ill
spoken of, and you do not shut the mouth of the speaker, dost not disbelieve his
sayings, dost not check him, of what love is this the sign? "And the love," he
says, "of each one of you all toward one another abounds."
Ver. 4. "So that we ourselves glory in you in the Churches of God."
Indeed in the first Epistle he says, that all the Churches of Macedonia and
Achaia resounded, having heard of their faith. "So that we need not," he says, "to
speak anything. For they themselves report concerning us what manner of
entering in we had unto you." [1 Thessalonians 1:8] But here he says, "so that
we glory." What then is it that is said? There he says that they need not
instruction from him, but here he has not said that we teach them, but "we glory,"
and are proud of you. If therefore we both give thanks to God for you, and glory
among men, much more ought you to do so for your own good deeds. For if your
good actions are worthy of boasting from others, how are they worthy of
lamentation from you? It is impossible to say. "So that we ourselves," he says,
"glory in you in the Churches of God, for your patience and faith."
Here he shows that much time had elapsed. For patience is shown by much
time, not in two or three days. And he does not merely say patience. It is the part
of patience indeed properly not yet to enjoy the promised blessings. But here he
speaks of a greater patience. And of what sort is that? That which is shown in
persecutions. "For your patience," he says, "and faith in all your persecutions
and in the afflictions which you endure." For they were living with enemies who
were continually endeavoring on every side to injure them, and they were
manifesting a patience firm and immovable. Let all those blush who for the sake
of the patronage of men pass over to other doctrines. For while it was yet the