He says this, partly teaching the ruler of the synagogue to believe, partly
proclaiming the woman's praise, and affording her by these words delight and
advantage equal to her bodily health.
For that He did this as minded to glorify her, and to amend others, and not
to show Himself glorious, is manifest from hence; that He indeed would have
been equally an object of admiration even without this (for the miracles were
pouring around Him faster than the snow-flakes, and He both had done and was
to do far greater things than these): but the woman, had this not happened, would
have gone away hid, deprived of those great praises. For this cause He brought
her forward, and proclaimed her praise, and cast out her fear, (for "she came," it
is said, "trembling" ); and He caused her to be of good courage, and together
with health of body, He gave her also other provisions for her journey, in that He
said, "Go in peace." [Luke 8:48]
3. "And when He came into the ruler's house, and saw the minstrels and the
people making a noise, He says unto them, Give place, for the maid is not dead,
but sleeps. And they laughed Him to scorn."
Noble tokens, surely, these, of the rulers of synagogues; in the moment of
her death pipes and cymbals raising a dirge! What then does Christ? All the rest
He cast out, but the parents He brought in; to leave no room for saying that He
healed her in any other way. And before her resurrection too, He raises her in His
word; saying, "The maid is not dead, but sleeps." And in many instances besides
He does this. As then on the sea He expels tumult from the mind of the bystanders, at the same time both signifying that it is easy for Him to raise the dead
(which same thing He did with respect to Lazarus also, saying, "Our friend
Lazarus sleeps [John 11:11];" and also teaching us not to fear death; for that it is
not death, but is henceforth become a sleep. Thus, since He Himself was to die,
He does in the persons of others prepare His disciples beforehand to be of good
courage, and to bear the end meekly. Since in truth, when He had come, death
was from that time forward a sleep.
But yet they laughed Him to scorn: He however was not indignant at being

disbelieved by those for whom He was a little afterwards to work miracles;
neither did He rebuke their laughter, in order that both it and the pipes, and the
cymbals, and all the other things, might be a sure proof of her death. For since
for the most part, after the miracles are done, men disbelieve, He takes them
beforehand by their own answers; which was done in the case both of Lazarus
and of Moses. For to Moses first He says, "What is that in your hand?"
[Exodus 4:2] in order that when he saw it become a serpent, He should not forget
that it was a rod before, but being reminded of his own saying, might be amazed
at what was done. And with regard to Lazarus He says, "Where have ye laid
him?" [John 11:34, 39] that they who had said, "Come and see," and "he stinks,
for he has been dead four days," might no longer be able to disbelieve His
having raised a dead man.
Seeing then the cymbals and the multitude, He put them all out, and in the
presence of the parents works the miracle; not introducing another soul, but
recalling the same that had gone out, and awakening her as it were out of a sleep.
And He holds her by the hand, assuring the beholders; so as by that sight to
make a way for the belief of her resurrection. For whereas the father said, "Lay
your hand upon her;" [Matthew 9:18] He on His part does somewhat more, for
He lays no hand on her, but rather takes hold of her, and raises her, implying that
to Him all things are ready. And He not only raises her up, but also commands to
give her meat, that the event might not seem to be an illusion. And He does not
give it Himself, but commands them; as also with regard to Lazarus He said,
"Loose him, and let him go," [John 11:44] and afterwards makes him partaker of
His table. [John 12:2] For so is He wont always to establish both points, making
out with all completeness the demonstration alike of the death and of the
resurrection.
But do thou mark, I pray you, not her resurrection only, but also His
commanding "to tell no man;" and by all learn thou this especially, His freedom
from haughtiness and vainglory. And withal learn this other thing also, that He
cast them that were beating themselves out of the house, and declared them