both without and within, should scarcely be sufficient for its own preservation;
and that a world such as this is, enjoying no such superintendence, should during
so many years suffer nothing of that sort which our body suffers. For how, I ask,
is it that not one of these elements has gone beyond its own boundaries, nor
swallowed up all the rest? Who has brought them together from the beginning?
Who has bound? Who has bridled? Who has held them together during so long a
period? For if the body of the world were simple and uniform, what I speak of
would not have been so impossible. But when there has been such a strife
between the elements, even from the beginning; who so senseless as to think that
these things would have come together, and remained together when united,
without One to effect this conjunction? For if we who are evil-affected towards
one another not by nature, but by will, cannot come spontaneously to an
agreement as long as we remain at variance, and hold ourselves ungraciously
towards one another; if we have yet need of some one else to bring us into a state
of conjunction; and after this conjunction further to clench us, and persuade us to
abide by our reconciliation, and not again to be at variance; how could the
elements, which neither partake of sense nor reason, and which are naturally
adverse, and inimical to each other, have come together, and agreed and
remained with one another, if there were not some ineffable Power which
effected this conjunction; and after this conjunction, always restrained them by
the same bond?
5. Do you not perceive how this body wastes away, withers, and perishes
after the secession of the soul, and each of the elements thereof returns to its own
appointed place? This very same thing, indeed, would also happen to the world,
if the Power which always governs it had left it devoid of Its own providence.
For if a ship does not hold together without a pilot, but soon founders, how could
the world have held together so long a time if there was no one governing its
course? And that I may not enlarge, suppose the world to be a ship; the earth to
be placed below as the keel; the sky to be the sail; men to be the passengers; the
subjacent abyss, the sea. How is it then that during so long a time, no shipwreck

has taken place? Now let a ship go one day without a pilot and crew,
[Acts 27:30-31] and you will see it straightway foundering! But the world,
though subsisting now five thousand years, and many more, has suffered nothing
of the kind. But why do I talk of a ship? Suppose one has pitched a small hut in
the vineyards; and when the fruit is gathered, leaves it vacant; it stands, however,
scarce two or three days, but soon goes to pieces, and tumbles down! Could not
a hut, forsooth, stand without superintendence? How then could the
workmanship of a world, so fair and marvellous; the laws of the night and day;
the interchanging dances of the seasons; the course of nature chequered and
varied as it is in every way throughout the earth, the sea, the sky; in plants, and
in animals that fly, swim, walk, creep; and in the race of men, far more dignified
than any of these, continue yet unbroken, during so long a period, without some
kind of providence? But in addition to what has been said, follow me while I
enumerate the meadows, the gardens, the various tribes of flowers; all sorts of
herbs, and their uses; their odours, forms, disposition, yea, but their very names;
the trees which are fruitful, and which are barren; the nature of metals—and of
animals,— in the sea, or on the land; of those that swim, and those that traverse
the air; the mountains, the forests, the groves; the meadow below, and the
meadow above; for there is a meadow on the earth, and a meadow too in the sky;
the various flowers of the stars; the rose below, and the rainbow above! Would
you have me point out also the meadow of birds? Consider the variegated body
of the peacock, surpassing every dye, and the fowls of purple plumage.
Contemplate with me the beauty of the sky; how it has been preserved so long
without being dimmed; and remains as bright and clear as if it had been only
fabricated today; moreover, the power of the earth, how its womb has not
become effete by bringing forth during so long a time! Contemplate with me the
fountains; how they burst forth and fail not, since the time they were begotten, to
flow forth continually throughout the day and night! Contemplate with me the
sea, receiving so many rivers, yet never exceeding its measure! But how long
shall we pursue things unattainable! It is fit, indeed, that over every one of these