because the remission, as stated above, is proportionate, not to the
toil, but to the merits which are applied. Yet he who toils most gains
most merit. This, however, is to be understood of those cases in
which an indulgence is given in an undeterminate manner. For
sometimes a distinction is expressed: thus the Pope at the time of
general absolution grants an indulgence of five years to those who
come from across the seas, and one of three years to those who
come from across the mountains, to others an indulgence of one
year. Nor does a person gain the indulgence each time he visits the
church during the term of indulgence, because sometimes it is
granted for a fixed time; thus when it is said, "Whoever visits such
and such a church until such and such a day, shall gain so much
indulgence," we must understand that it can be gained only once. on
the other hand if there be a continual indulgence in a certain church,
as the indulgence of forty days to be gained in the church of the
Blessed Peter, then a person gains the indulgence as often as he
visits the church.
Reply to Objection 5: An indulgence requires a cause, not as a
measure of the remission of punishment, but in order that the
intention of those whose merits are applied, may reach to this
particular individual. Now one person's good is applied to another in
two ways: first, by charity; and in this way, even without
indulgences, a person shares in all the good deeds done, provided
he have charity: secondly, by the intention of the person who does
the good action; and in this way, provided there be a lawful cause,
the intention of a person who has done something for the profit of
the Church, may reach to some individual through indulgences.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether an indulgence ought to be granted for

temporal help?
Objection 1: It would seem that an indulgence ought not to be
granted for temporal help. Because the remission of sins is
something spiritual. Now to exchange a spiritual for a temporal thing
is simony. Therefore this ought not to be done.
Objection 2: Further, spiritual assistance is more necessary than
temporal. But indulgences do not appear to be granted for spiritual
assistance. Much less therefore ought they to be granted for
temporal help.
On the contrary, stands the common custom of the Church in
granting indulgences for pilgrimages and almsgiving.
I answer that, Temporal things are subordinate to spiritual matters,
since we must make use of temporal things on account of spiritual
things. Consequently an indulgence must not be granted for the
sake of temporal matters as such, but in so far as they are
subordinate to spiritual things: such as the quelling of the Church's
enemies, who disturb her peace; or such as the building of a church,
of a bridge, and other forms of almsgiving. It is therefore evident that
there is no simony in these transactions, since a spiritual thing is
exchanged, not for a temporal but for a spiritual commodity.
Hence the Reply to the First Objection is clear.
Reply to Objection 2: Indulgences can be, and sometimes are,
granted even for purely spiritual matters. Thus Pope Innocent IV
granted an indulgence of ten days to all who prayed for the king of
France; and in like manner sometimes the same indulgence is
granted to those who preach a crusade as to those who take part in
it.