spirit of Him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, He that
raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies by
His Spirit which dwelleth in you."
6. Therefore on this double death of ours our Saviour bestowed His own
single death; and to cause both our resurrections, He appointed
beforehand and set forth in mystery and type His own one resurrection.
For He was not a sinner or ungodly, that, as though dead in spirit, He
should need to be renewed in the inner man, and to be recalled as it were
to the life of righteousness by repentance; but being clothed in mortal
flesh, and in that alone dying, in that alone rising again, in that alone did
He answer to both for us; since in it was wrought a mystery as regards the
inner man, and a type as regards the outer. For it was in a mystery as
regards our inner man, so as to signify the death of our soul, that those
words were uttered, not only in the Psalm, but also on the cross: "My
God, my God, why hast Thou forsaken me?" To which words the apostle
agrees, saying, "Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with Him,
that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not
serve sin;" since by the crucifixion of the inner man are understood the
pains of repentance, and a certain wholesome agony of self-control, by
which death the death of ungodliness is destroyed, and in which death
God has left us. And so the body of sin is destroyed through such a cross,
that now we should not yield our members as instruments of
unrighteousness unto sin.14 Because, if even the inner man certainly is
renewed day by day, yet undoubtedly it is old before it is renewed. For
that is done inwardly of which the same apostle speaks: "Put off the old
man, and put on the new;" which he goes on to explain by saying,
"Wherefore, putting away lying, speak every man truth." But where is
lying put away, unless inwardly, that he who speaketh the truth from his
heart may inhabit the holy hill of God? But the resurrection of the body of
the Lord is shown to belong to the mystery of our own inner resurrection,
where, after He had risen, He says to the woman, "Touch me not, for I am
not yet ascended to my Father;" with which mystery the apostle's
words agree, where he says, "If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those
things which are above, where Christ sitteth on the right hand of God; set
your thoughts on things above." For not to touch Christ, unless when
He had ascended to the Father, means not to have thoughts of Christ

after a fleshly manner. Again, the death of the flesh of our Lord contains a
type of the death of our outer man, since it is by such suffering most of all
that He exhorts His servants that they should not fear those who kill the
body, but are not able to kill the soul. Wherefore the apostle says, "That I
may fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh."
And the resurrection of the body of the Lord is found to contain a type of
the resurrection of our outward man, because He says to His disciples,
"Handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me
have." And one of the disciples also, handling His scars, exclaimed, "My
Lord and my God!" And whereas the entire integrity of that flesh was
apparent, this was shown in that which He had said when exhorting His
disciples: "There shall not a hair of your head perish." For how comes it
that first is said, "Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my
Father;" and how comes it that before He ascends to the Father, He
actually is touched by the disciples; unless because in the former the
mystery of the inner man was intimated, in the latter a type was given of
the outer man? Or can any one possibly be so without understanding, and
so turned away from the truth, as to dare to say that He was touched by
men before He ascended, but by women when He had ascended? It was
on account of this type, which went before in the Lord, of our future
resurrection in the body, that the apostle says, "Christ the first-fruits;
afterward they that are Christ's." For it was the resurrection of the body
to which this place refers, on account of which he also says, "Who has
changed our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto His glorious
body." The one death therefore of our Saviour brought salvation to our
double death, and His one resurrection wrought for us two resurrections;
since His body in both cases, that is, both in His death and in His
resurrection, was ministered to us by a kind of healing suitableness, both
as a mystery of the inner man, and as a type of the outer.