name of the person and "to love" is a notional term, as "to speak"
and "to beget."
Reply to Objection 1: Augustine is there speaking of charity as it
means the divine essence, as was said above (here and Question 24,
Article 2, ad 4).
Reply to Objection 2: Although to understand, and to will, and to love
signify actions passing on to their objects, nevertheless they are
actions that remain in the agents, as stated above (Question 14,
Article 4), yet in such a way that in the agent itself they import a
certain relation to their object. Hence, love also in ourselves is
something that abides in the lover, and the word of the heart is
something abiding in the speaker; yet with a relation to the thing
expressed by word, or loved. But in God, in whom there is nothing
accidental, there is more than this; because both Word and Love are
subsistent. Therefore, when we say that the Holy Ghost is the Love
of the Father for the Son, or for something else; we do not mean
anything that passes into another, but only the relation of love to the
beloved; as also in the Word is imported the relation of the Word to
the thing expressed by the Word.
Reply to Objection 3: The Holy Ghost is said to be the bond of the
Father and Son, inasmuch as He is Love; because, since the Father
loves Himself and the Son with one Love, and conversely, there is
expressed in the Holy Ghost, as Love, the relation of the Father to
the Son, and conversely, as that of the lover to the beloved. But from
the fact that the Father and the Son mutually love one another, it
necessarily follows that this mutual Love, the Holy Ghost, proceeds
from both. As regards origin, therefore, the Holy Ghost is not the
medium, but the third person in the Trinity; whereas as regards the
aforesaid relation He is the bond between the two persons, as
proceeding from both.
Reply to Objection 4: As it does not belong to the Son, though He
understands, to produce a word, for it belongs to Him to understand
as the word proceeding; so in like manner, although the Holy Ghost
loves, taking Love as an essential term, still it does not belong to
Him to spirate love, which is to take love as a notional term; because
He loves essentially as love proceeding; but not as the one whence
love proceeds.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the Father and the Son love each other

by the Holy Ghost?
Objection 1: It would seem that the Father and the Son do not love
each other by the Holy Ghost. For Augustine (De Trin. vii, 1) proves
that the Father is not wise by the Wisdom begotten. But as the Son is
Wisdom begotten, so the Holy Ghost is the Love proceeding, as
explained above (Question 27, Article 3). Therefore the Father and
the Son do not love Themselves by the Love proceeding, which is
the Holy Ghost.
Objection 2: Further, the proposition, "The Father and the Son love
each other by the Holy Ghost," this word "love" is to be taken either
essentially or notionally. But it cannot be true if taken essentially,
because in the same way we might say that "the Father understands
by the Son"; nor, again, if it is taken notionally, for then, in like
manner, it might be said that "the Father and the Son spirate by the
Holy Ghost," or that "the Father generates by the Son." Therefore in
no way is this proposition true: "'The Father and the Son love each
other by the Holy Ghost."
Objection 3: Further, by the same love the Father loves the Son, and
Himself, and us. But the Father does not love Himself by the Holy
Ghost; for no notional act is reflected back on the principle of the
act; since it cannot be said that the "Father begets Himself," or that
"He spirates Himself." Therefore, neither can it be said that "He loves
Himself by the Holy Ghost," if "to love" is taken in a notional sense.
Again, the love wherewith He loves us is not the Holy Ghost;
because it imports a relation to creatures, and this belongs to the
essence. Therefore this also is false: "The Father loves the Son by
the Holy Ghost."
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Trin. vi, 5): "The Holy Ghost is
He whereby the Begotten is loved by the one begetting and loves His
Begetter."
I answer that, A difficulty about this question is objected to the effect
that when we say, "the Father loves the Son by the Holy Ghost,"
since the ablative is construed as denoting a cause, it seems to
mean that the Holy Ghost is the principle of love to the Father and
the Son; which cannot be admitted.