SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.167, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether there can be a virtue about games?

Objection 1: It would seem that there cannot be a virtue about
games. For Ambrose says (De Offic. i, 23): "Our Lord said: 'Woe to
you who laugh, for you shall weep.' Wherefore I consider that all, and
not only excessive, games should be avoided." Now that which can
be done virtuously is not to be avoided altogether. Therefore there
cannot be a virtue about games.
Objection 2: Further, "Virtue is that which God forms in us, without
us," as stated above (FS, Question 55, Article 4). Now Chrysostom
says [Hom. vi in Matth.]: "It is not God, but the devil, that is the
author of fun. Listen to what happened to those who played: 'The
people sat down to eat and drink, and they rose up to play.'"
Therefore there can be no virtue about games.
Objection 3: Further, the Philosopher says (Ethic. x, 6) that "playful
actions are not directed to something else." But it is a requisite of
virtue that the agent in choosing should "direct his action to
something else," as the Philosopher states (Ethic. ii, 4). Therefore
there can be no virtue about games.
On the contrary, Augustine says (Music. ii, 15): "I pray thee, spare
thyself at times: for it becomes a wise man sometimes to relax the
high pressure of his attention to work." Now this relaxation of the
mind from work consists in playful words or deeds. Therefore it
becomes a wise and virtuous man to have recourse to such things at
times. Moreover the Philosopher [Ethic. ii, 7; iv, 8] assigns to games
the virtue of eutrapelia, which we may call "pleasantness."
I answer that, Just as man needs bodily rest for the body's
refreshment, because he cannot always be at work, since his power
is finite and equal to a certain fixed amount of labor, so too is it with
his soul, whose power is also finite and equal to a fixed amount of
work. Consequently when he goes beyond his measure in a certain
work, he is oppressed and becomes weary, and all the more since
when the soul works, the body is at work likewise, in so far as the
intellective soul employs forces that operate through bodily organs.
Now sensible goods are connatural to man, and therefore, when the
soul arises above sensibles, through being intent on the operations
of reason, there results in consequence a certain weariness of soul,

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.167, C.3.

whether the operations with which it is occupied be those of the
practical or of the speculative reason. Yet this weariness is greater if
the soul be occupied with the work of contemplation, since thereby it
is raised higher above sensible things; although perhaps certain
outward works of the practical reason entail a greater bodily labor. In
either case, however, one man is more soul-wearied than another,
according as he is more intensely occupied with works of reason.
Now just as weariness of the body is dispelled by resting the body,
so weariness of the soul must needs be remedied by resting the
soul: and the soul's rest is pleasure, as stated above (FS, Question
25, Article 2; FS, Question 31, Article 1, ad 2). Consequently, the
remedy for weariness of soul must needs consist in the application
of some pleasure, by slackening the tension of the reason's study.
Thus in the Conferences of the Fathers xxiv, 21, it is related of
Blessed John the Evangelist, that when some people were
scandalized on finding him playing together with his disciples, he is
said to have told one of them who carried a bow to shoot an arrow.
And when the latter had done this several times, he asked him
whether he could do it indefinitely, and the man answered that if he
continued doing it, the bow would break. Whence the Blessed John
drew the inference that in like manner man's mind would break if its
tension were never relaxed.
Now such like words or deeds wherein nothing further is sought
than the soul's delight, are called playful or humorous. Hence it is
necessary at times to make use of them, in order to give rest, as it
were, to the soul. This is in agreement with the statement of the
Philosopher (Ethic. iv, 8) that "in the intercourse of this life there is a
kind of rest that is associated with games": and consequently it is
sometimes necessary to make use of such things.
Nevertheless it would seem that in this matter there are three points
which require especial caution. The first and chief is that the
pleasure in question should not be sought in indecent or injurious
deeds or words. Wherefore Tully says (De Offic. i, 29) that "one kind
of joke is discourteous, insolent, scandalous, obscene." Another
thing to be observed is that one lose not the balance of one's mind
altogether. Hence Ambrose says (De Offic. i, 20): "We should beware
lest, when we seek relaxation of mind, we destroy all that harmony
which is the concord of good works": and Tully says (De Offic. i, 29),
that, "just as we do not allow children to enjoy absolute freedom in
their games, but only that which is consistent with good behavior, so
our very fun should reflect something of an upright mind." Thirdly,