impression of light on an illuminated object. And since the Divine
essence is of a different mode from any likeness thereof impressed
on the intellect, he (Dionysius) says that the "Divine darkness is
impervious to all illumination," because, to wit, the Divine essence,
which he calls "darkness" on account of its surpassing brightness,
remains undemonstrated by the impression on our intellect, and
consequently is "hidden from all knowledge." Therefore if anyone in
seeing God conceives something in his mind, this is not God but one
of God's effects.
Reply to Objection 5: Although the glory of God surpasses any form
by which our intellect is informed now, it does not surpass the
Divine essence, which will be the form of our intellect in heaven: and
therefore although it is invisible now, it will be visible then.
Reply to Objection 6: Although there can be no proportion between
finite and infinite, since the excess of the infinite over the finite is
indeterminate, there can be proportionateness or a likeness to
proportion between them: for as a finite thing is equal to some finite
thing, so is an infinite thing equal to an infinite thing. Now in order
that a thing be known totally, it is sometimes necessary that there be
proportion between knower and known, because the power of the
knower needs to be adequate to the knowableness of the thing
known, and equality is a kind of proportion. Sometimes, however,
the knowableness of the thing surpasses the power of the knower,
as when we know God, or conversely when He knows creatures: and
then there is no need for proportion between knower and known, but
only for proportionateness; so that, to wit, as the knower is to the
knowable object, so is the knowable object to the fact of its being
known: and this proportionateness suffices for the infinite to be
known by the finite, or conversely.
We may also reply that proportion according to the strict sense in
which it is employed signifies a ratio of quantity to quantity based on
a certain fixed excess or equality; but is further transferred to denote
any ratio of any one thing to another; and in this sense we say that
matter should be proportionate to its form. In this sense nothing
hinders our intellect, although finite, being described as
proportionate to the vision of the Divine essence; but not to the
comprehension thereof, on account of its immensity.
Reply to Objection 7: Likeness and distance are twofold. One is
according to agreement in nature; and thus God is more distant from

the created intellect than the created intelligible is from the sense.
The other is according to proportionateness; and thus it is the other
way about, for sense is not proportionate to the knowledge of the
immaterial, as the intellect is proportionate to the knowledge of any
immaterial object whatsoever. It is this likeness and not the former
that is requisite for knowledge, for it is clear that the intellect
understanding a stone is not like it in its natural being; thus also the
sight apprehends red honey and red gall, though it does not
apprehend sweet honey, for the redness of gall is more becoming to
honey as visible, than the sweetness of honey to honey.
Reply to Objection 8: In the vision wherein God will be seen in His
essence, the Divine essence itself will be the form, as it were, of the
intellect, by which it will understand: nor is it necessary for them to
become one in being, but only to become one as regards the act of
understanding.
Reply to Objection 9: We do not uphold the saying of Avicenna as
regards the point at issue, for in this other philosophers also
disagree with him. Unless perhaps we might say that Avicenna refers
to the knowledge of separate substances, in so far as they are
known by the habits of speculative sciences and the likeness of
other things. Hence he makes this statement in order to prove that in
us knowledge is not a substance but an accident. Nevertheless,
although the Divine essence is more distant, as to the property of its
nature, from our intellect, than is the substance of an angel, it
surpasses it in the point of intelligibility, since it is pure act without
any admixture of potentiality, which is not the case with other
separate substances. Nor will that knowledge whereby we shall see
God in His essence be in the genus of accident as regards that
whereby He will be seen, but only as regards the act of the one who
understands Him, for this act will not be the very substance either of
the person understanding or of the thing understood.
Reply to Objection 1:: A substance that is separate from matter
understands both itself and other things; and in both cases the
authority quoted can be verified. For since the very essence of a
separate substance is of itself intelligible and actual, through being
separate from matter, it is clear that when a separate substance
understands itself, that which understands and that which is
understood are absolutely identical, for it does not understand itself
by an intention abstracted from itself, as we understand material
objects. And this is apparently the meaning of the Philosopher (De