contradiction, the truth being that some incidents have been related by this
writer, others by that; or if not occurring at the same hour one author has related
the earlier event, another the later; but in the present case there is nothing of this
kind, but the multitude of the evidences which I have mentioned proves to those
who pay any attention whatever to the matter, that the paralytic was not the same
man in both instances. And this would be no slight proof to demonstrate that the
evangelists were in harmony with each other and not at variance. For if it were
the same man the discord is great between the two accounts: but if it be a
different one all material for dispute has been destroyed.
Well then let me now state the actual reasons why I affirm that this man is
not the same as that. What are they? The one is cured in Jerusalem, the other in
Capernaum; the one by the pool of water, the other in some house; there is the
evidence from place: the former during the festival: there is the evidence from
the special season: the former had been thirty and eight years suffering from
infirmity: concerning the other the evangelist relates nothing of that kind: there
is the evidence from time: the former was cured on the Sabbath: there is the
evidence from the day: for had this man also been cured on the Sabbath Matthew
would not have passed by the fact in silence nor would the Jews who were
present have held their peace: for they who found fault for some other reason
even when a man was not cured on the Sabbath would have been yet more
violent in their accusation against Christ if they had got an additional handle
from the argument of the special day. Moreover this man was brought to Christ:
to the other Christ Himself came, and there was no man to assist him. "Lord,"
said he, "I have no man:" whereas this man had many who came to his aid, who
also let him down through the roof. And He healed the body of the other man
before his soul: for after he had cured the paralysis He then said "Behold you are
made whole, sin no more:" but not so in this case, but after He had healed his
soul, for He said to him "Son be of good cheer your sins be forgiven you," He
then cured his paralysis. That this man then is not the same as the other has been
clearly demonstrated by these proofs, but it now remains for us to turn to the

beginning of the narrative and see how Christ cured the one and the other, and
why differently in each case: why the one on the Sabbath and the other not on
the Sabbath, why He came Himself to the one but waited for the other to be
brought to Him, why He healed the body of the one and the soul of the other
first. For He does not these things without consideration and purpose seeing that
He is wise and prudent. Let us then give our attention and observe Him as He
performs the cure. For if in the case of physicians when they use the knife or
cautery or operate in any other way upon a maimed and crippled patient, and cut
off a limb, many persons crowd round the invalid and the physician who is doing
these things, much more ought we to act thus in this case, in proportion as the
physician is greater and the malady more severe, being one which cannot be
corrected by human art, but only by divine grace. And in the former case we
have to see the skin being cut, and matter discharging, and gore set in motion,
and to endure much discomfort produced by the spectacle, and great pain and
sorrow not merely from the sight of the wounds, but also from the suffering
undergone by those who are subjected to this burning or cutting: for no one is so
stony-hearted as to stand by those who are suffering these things, and hear them
shrieking, without being himself overcome and agitated, and experiencing much
depression of spirit; but yet we undergo all this owing to our desire to witness
the operation. But in this case nothing of that kind has to be seen, no application
of fire, no plunging in of an instrument, no flowing of blood, no pain or
shrieking of the patient; and the reason of this is, the wisdom of the healer,
which needs none of these external aids, but is absolutely self-sufficient. For it is
enough that He merely utters a command and all distress ceases. And the wonder
is not only that He effects the cure with so much ease, but also without pain,
causing no trouble to those who are being healed.
Seeing then that the marvel is greater and the cure more important, and the
pleasure afforded to the spectators unalloyed by any kind of sorrow, let us now
carefully contemplate Christ in the act of healing. And He entered into a boat
and crossed over and came into His own city: and behold they brought to him a