SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.121, C.7.

the fourth precept pertaining to piety, whereby he pays what is due
to his parents---which duty includes the paying of all that is due for
any special reason---it was necessary in due sequence to give
certain precepts pertaining to justice properly so called, which pays
to all indifferently what is due to them.
Reply to Objection 1: Man is bound towards all persons in general to
inflict injury on no one: hence the negative precepts, which forbid
the doing of those injuries that can be inflicted on one's neighbor,
had to be given a place, as general precepts, among the precepts of
the decalogue. On the other hand, the duties we owe to our neighbor
are paid in different ways to different people: hence it did not
behoove to include affirmative precepts about those duties among
the precepts of the decalogue.
Reply to Objection 2: All other injuries that are inflicted on our
neighbor are reducible to those that are forbidden by these precepts,
as taking precedence of others in point of generality and importance.
For all injuries that are inflicted on the person of our neighbor are
understood to be forbidden under the head of murder as being the
principal of all. Those that are inflicted on a person connected with
one's neighbor, especially by way of lust, are understood to be
forbidden together with adultery: those that come under the head of
damage done to property are understood to be forbidden together
with theft: and those that are comprised under speech, such as
detractions, insults, and so forth, are understood to be forbidden
together with the bearing of false witness, which is more directly
opposed to justice.
Reply to Objection 3: The precepts forbidding concupiscence do not
include the prohibition of first movements of concupiscence, that do
not go farther than the bounds of sensuality. The direct object of
their prohibition is the consent of the will, which is directed to deed
or pleasure.
Reply to Objection 4: Murder in itself is an object not of
concupiscence but of horror, since it has not in itself the aspect of
good. On the other hand, adultery has the aspect of a certain kind of
good, i.e. of something pleasurable, and theft has an aspect of good,
i.e. of something useful: and good of its very nature has the aspect
of something concupiscible. Hence the concupiscence of theft and
adultery had to be forbidden by special precepts, but not the
concupiscence of murder.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.121, C.7.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.122, C.1.

## QUESTION 123 — OF FORTITUDE

Prologue
After considering justice we must in due sequence consider
fortitude. We must (1) consider the virtue itself of fortitude; (2) its
parts; (3) the gift corresponding thereto; (4) the precepts that pertain
to it.
Concerning fortitude three things have to be considered: (1)
Fortitude itself; (2) its principal act, viz. martyrdom; (3) the vices
opposed to fortitude.
Under the first head there are twelve points of inquiry:
(1) Whether fortitude is a virtue?
(2) Whether it is a special virtue?
(3) Whether fortitude is only about fear and daring?
(4) Whether it is only about fear of death?
(5) Whether it is only in warlike matters?
(6) Whether endurance is its chief act?
(7) Whether its action is directed to its own good?
(8) Whether it takes pleasure in its own action?
(9) Whether fortitude deals chiefly with sudden occurrences?
(10) Whether it makes use of anger in its action?
(11) Whether it is a cardinal virtue?