enemies bring it forward. What then does the king? He commands that they
should be brought into the midst, so that he may affright them in every way. But
nothing dismayed them, neither the wrath of the king, nor their being left alone
in the midst of so many, nor the sight of the fire, nor the sound of the trumpet,
nor the whole multitude looking fire at them; for deriding all these things, as if
they were about to be cast into a cool fountain of water, they entered the furnace
uttering that blessed sentence, "We will not serve your gods, nor worship the
golden image which you have set up." [Daniel 3:18]
9. I have not referred to this history without reason, but that you may learn
that whether it be the wrath of a king, or the violence of soldiers, or the envy of
enemies, or captivity, or destitution, or fire, or furnace, or ten thousand terrors,
nothing will avail to put to shame or terrify a righteous man. For if where the
king was godless the youths were not dismayed at the tyrant's wrath, how much
more ought we to be confident, having an emperor who is humane and merciful,
and to express thankfulness to God for this tribulation, knowing from what has
now been said, that tribulations render men more illustrious both in the presence
of God and of man, if they know how to bear them with fortitude! For indeed if
these had not been made slaves, we should not have known their freedom! If
they had not been captives, we should not have learned their nobility of soul! If
they had not been exiles from their country below, we should not have known
the excellency of their citizenship above! If the earthly king had not been angry
with them, we should not have known the favour with which they were regarded
by the heavenly King!
10. Thou too then, if you have Him for your Friend, be not despairing,
although you fall into the furnace: and in like manner if He be angry, think not
you are safe though thou be in Paradise. For Adam indeed was in Paradise, yet,
when he had provoked God, Paradise profited him nothing. These youths were in
the furnace; yet, since they were approved, the furnace injured them not at all.
Adam was in Paradise, but when he was supine, he was supplanted! Job sat
down on the dunghill, yet, since he was vigilant he prevailed! Yet how much

better was Paradise than a dunghill! still the excellency of the place benefitted in
no degree the inhabitant; forasmuch as he had betrayed himself; as likewise
indeed the vileness of the place did to one no injury, who was fortified on every
side with virtue. As to ourselves then, let us fortify our souls; for if the loss of
wealth should threaten us, or even death, and yet no one can rob us of our
religion, we are the happiest of men, Christ commended this when he said, "Be
wise as serpents." [Matthew 10:16] For just as he exposes the whole body in
order that he may save the head, so also do thou. Although it should be
necessary to expose wealth, or the body, or the present life, or all things, for the
purpose of preserving your religion; be not cast down! For if you depart hence in
possession of that, God will restore to you all things with more abundant
splendour, and will raise again your body with greater glory; and instead of
riches, there will be the good things that surpass all power of description. Did
not Job sit naked on a dunghill, sustaining a life more grievous than ten thousand
deaths? Yet since he did not cast away his piety, all his former things came back
to him in greater abundance, soundness and beauty of body; his full band of
children; his possessions; and what was greater than all, the splendid crown of
his patience. For as it happens with trees, should any one pluck away the fruit
and the leaves together; should he even cut off all the branches letting the root
only remain; the tree will rise again entire, with greater beauty, so indeed is it
also with us. If the root of piety remain, although wealth be taken away, although
the body destroyed, all things again revert to us with greater glory than before.
Casting away therefore all anxiety and superfluous care, let us return to
ourselves; and let us adorn the body and the soul with the ornament of virtue;
converting our bodily members into instruments of righteousness and not
instruments of sin.
11. And first of all, let us discipline our tongue to be the minister of the
grace of the Spirit, expelling from the mouth all virulence and malignity, and the
practice of using disgraceful words. For it is in our power to make each one of
our members an instrument of wickedness, or of righteousness. Hear then how