THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.38, C.7.

Objection 5: Further, on Rm. 10:8, "This is the word of faith, which
we preach," the gloss of Augustine says: "Whence this virtue in the
water, that it touches the body and cleanses the heart, save by the
efficacy of the word, not because it is uttered, but because it is
believed?" Whence it is clear that the virtue of baptism depends on
faith. But the form of John's baptism signified the faith in which we
are baptized; for Paul says (Acts 19:4): "John baptized the people
with the baptism of penance, saying: That they should believe in Him
who was to come after him---that is to say, in Jesus." Therefore it
seems that those who had been baptized with John's baptism had no
need to be baptized again with the baptism of Christ.
On the contrary, Augustine says (Super Joan., Tract. v): "Those who
were baptized with John's baptism needed to be baptized with the
baptism of our Lord."
I answer that, According to the opinion of the Master (Sent. iv, D, 2),
"those who had been baptized by John without knowing of the
existence of the Holy Ghost, and who based their hopes on his
baptism, were afterwards baptized with the baptism of Christ: but
those who did not base their hope on John's baptism, and who
believed in the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, were not baptized
afterwards, but received the Holy Ghost by the imposition of hands
made over them by the apostles."
And this, indeed, is true as to the first part, and is confirmed by
many authorities. But as to the second part, the assertion is
altogether unreasonable. First, because John's baptism neither
conferred grace nor imprinted a character, but was merely "in
water," as he says himself (Mt. 3:11). Wherefore the faith or hope
which the person baptized had in Christ could not supply this defect.
Secondly, because, when in a sacrament, that is omitted which
belongs of necessity to the sacrament, not only must the omission
be supplied, but the whole must be entirely renewed. Now, it belongs
of necessity to Christ's baptism that it be given not only in water, but
also in the Holy Ghost, according to Jn. 3:5: "Unless a man be born
of water and the Holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the kingdom of
God." Wherefore in the case of those who had been baptized with
John's baptism in water only, not merely had the omission to be
supplied by giving them the Holy Ghost by the imposition of hands,
but they had to be baptized wholly anew "in water and the Holy
Ghost."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.38, C.7.

Reply to Objection 1: As Augustine says (Super Joan., Tract. v):
"After John, baptism was administered, and the reason why was
because he gave not Christ's baptism, but his own . . . That which
Peter gave . . . and if any were given by Judas, that was Christ's. And
therefore if Judas baptized anyone, yet were they not rebaptized . . .
For the baptism corresponds with him by whose authority it is given,
not with him by whose ministry it is given." For the same reason
those who were baptized by the deacon Philip, who gave the baptism
of Christ, were not baptized again, but received the imposition of
hands by the apostles, just as those who are baptized by priests are
confirmed by bishops.
Reply to Objection 2: As Augustine says to Seleucianus (Ep. cclxv),
"we deem that Christ's disciples were baptized either with John's
baptism, as some maintain, or with Christ's baptism, which is more
probable. For He would not fail to administer baptism so as to have
baptized servants through whom He baptized others, since He did
not fail in His humble service to wash their feet."
Reply to Objection 3: As Chrysostom says (Hom. iv in Matth. [Opus
Imperfectum]): "Since, when John said, 'I ought to be baptized by
Thee,' Christ answered, 'Suffer it to be so now': it follows that
afterwards Christ did baptize John." Moreover, he asserts that "this
is distinctly set down in some of the apocryphal books." At any rate,
it is certain, as Jerome says on Mt. 3:13, that, "as Christ was
baptized in water by John, so had John to be baptized in the Spirit by
Christ."
Reply to Objection 4: The reason why these persons were baptized
after being baptized by John was not only because they knew not of
the Holy Ghost, but also because they had not received the baptism
of Christ.
Reply to Objection 5: As Augustine says (Contra Faust. xix), our
sacraments are signs of present grace, whereas the sacraments of
the Old Law were signs of future grace. Wherefore the very fact that
John baptized in the name of one who was to come, shows that he
did not give the baptism of Christ, which is a sacrament of the New
Law.