from the bishop? For as some most excellent painter from life, having mixed
many colors, if he be about to furnish an original likeness of the royal form,
works with all accuracy, so that all who are copying it, and painting from it, may
have a likeness accurately drawn, so accordingly the blessed Paul, as though
painting some royal likeness, and furnishing an original sketch of it, having
mixed the different colors of virtue, has painted in the features of the office of
bishop complete, in order that each of those who mount to that dignity, looking
thereupon, may administer their own affairs with just such strictness.
Boldly, therefore, would I say that Ignatius took an accurate impression of
the whole of this, in his own soul; and was blameless and without reproach, and
neither self-willed, nor soon angry, nor given to wine, nor a striker, but gentle,
not contentious, no lover of money, just, holy, temperate, holding to the faithful
word which is according to the teaching, sober, sober-minded, orderly, and all
the rest which Paul demanded. "And what is the proof of this?" says one. They
who said these things ordained him, and they who suggest to others with so great
strictness to make proof of those who are about to mount to the throne of this
office, would not themselves have done this negligently. But had they not seen
all this virtue planted in the soul of this martyr would not have entrusted him
with this office. For they knew accurately how great danger besets those who
bring about such ordinations, carelessly and hap-hazard. And Paul again, when
showing this very thing to the same Timothy wrote and says, "Lay hands
suddenly on no man, neither be partaker of other men's sins." [1 Timothy 5:22]
What do you say? Has another sinned, and do I share his blame and his
punishment? Yes, says he, the man who authorizes evil; and just as in the case of
any one entrusting into the hands of a raging and insane person a sharply pointed
sword, with which the madman commits murder, that man who gave the sword
incurs the blame; so any one who gives the authority which arises from this
office to a man living in evil, draws down on his own head all the fire of that
man's sins and audacity. For he who provides the root, this man is the cause of
all that springs from it on every side. Do you see how in the meanwhile a double

crown of the episcopate has appeared, and how the dignity of those who
ordained him has made the office more illustrious, bearing witness to every
exhibition of virtue in him?
3. Do you wish that I should also reveal to you another crown springing
from this very matter? Let us consider the time at which he obtained this dignity.
For it is not the same thing to administer the Church now as then, just as it is not
the same thing to travel along a road well trodden, and prepared, after many
wayfarers; and along one about to be cut for the first time, and containing ruts,
and stones, and full of wild beasts, and which has never yet, received any
traveller. For now, by the grace of God, there is no danger for bishops, but deep
peace on all sides, and we all enjoy a calm, since the Word of piety has been
extended to the ends of the world, and our rulers keep the faith with strictness.
But then there was nothing of this, but wherever any one might look, precipices
and pitfalls, and wars, and fightings, and dangers; both rulers, and kings, and
people and cities and nations, and men at home and abroad, laid snares for the
faithful. And this was not the only serious thing, but also the fact that many of
the believers themselves, inasmuch as they tasted for the first time strange
doctrines, stood in need of great indulgence, and were still in a somewhat feeble
condition and were often upset. And this was a thing which used to grieve the
teachers, no less than the fightings without, nay rather much more. For the
fightings without, and the plottings, afforded much pleasure to them on account
of the hope of the rewards awaiting them. On this account the apostles returned
from the presence of the Sanhedrin rejoicing because they had been beaten;
[Acts 5:41] and Paul cries out, saying: "I rejoice in my sufferings,"
[Colossians 1:24] and he glories in his afflictions everywhere. But the wounds of
those at home, and the falls of the brethren, do not suffer them to breathe again,
but always, like some most heavy yoke, continually oppress and afflict the neck
of their soul. Hear at least how Paul, thus rejoicing in sufferings, is bitterly
pained about these. "For who, says he, is weak, and I am not weak? Who is
offended, and I burn not?" [2 Corinthians 11:29] and again, "I fear lest when I