may clearly see all the wisdom of the lawgiver. What then is the solution?
That great and noble-minded man was well aware of the fact that to be
reconciled quickly with an enemy is a grievous and difficult thing; grievous and
difficult, not on account of its own nature, but of our moral indolence. But he
commanded us not only to be reconciled with our enemy, but also to feed him;
which was far more grievous than the former. For if some are infuriated by the
mere sight of those who have annoyed them, how would they be willing to feed
them when they were hungry? And why do I speak of the sight infuriating them?
If any one makes mention of the persons, and merely introduces their name in
society, it revives the wound in our imagination, and increases the heat of
passion. Paul then being aware of all these things and wishing to make what was
hard and difficult of correction smooth and easy, and to persuade one who could
not endure to see his enemy, to be ready to confer that benefit already mentioned
upon him, added the words about coals of fire, in order that a man prompted by
the hope of vengeance might hasten to do this service to one who had annoyed
him. And just as the fisherman surrounding the hook on all sides with the bait
presents it to the fishes in order that one of them hastening to its accustomed
food may be captured by means of it and easily held fast: even so Paul also
wishing to lead on the man who has been wronged to bestow a benefit on the
man who has wronged him does not present to him the bare hook of spiritual
wisdom, but having covered it as it were with a kind of bait, I mean the "coals of
fire," invites the man who has been insulted, in the hope of inflicting
punishment, to confer this benefit on the man who has annoyed him; but when
he has come he holds him fast in future, and does not let him make off, the very
nature of the deed attaching him to his enemy; and he all but says to him: "if you
are not willing to feed the man who has wronged you for piety's sake: feed him at
least from the hope of punishing him." For he knows that if the man once sets his
hand to the work of conferring this benefit, a starting-point is made and a way of
reconciliation is opened for him. For certainly no one would have the heart to
regard a man continually as his enemy to whom he has given meat and drink,

even if he originally does this in the hope of vengeance. For time as it goes on
relaxes the tension of his anger. As then the fisherman, if he presented the bare
hook would never allure the fish, but when he has covered it gets it unawares
into the mouth of the creature who comes up to it: so also Paul if he had not
advanced the expectation of inflicting punishment would never have persuaded
those who were wronged to undertake to benefit those who had annoyed them.
Wishing then to persuade those who recoiled in disgust, and were paralysed by
the very sight of their enemies, to confer the greatest benefits upon them, he
made mention of the coals of fire, not with a view of thrusting the persons in
question into inexorable punishment, but in order that when he had persuaded
those who were wronged to benefit their enemies in the expectation of punishing
them, he might afterwards in time persuade them to abandon their anger
altogether.
6. Thus then did he encourage the man who has been wronged; but observe
also how he unites again the man who has done the wrong to him who has been
provoked. First of all by the very manner of the benefit: (for there is no one so
degraded and unfeeling as to be unwilling, when he receives meat and drink, to
become the servant and friend of him who does this for him): and in the second
place through the dread of vengeance. For the passage, "by so doing you shall
heap coals of fire on his head" seems indeed to be addressed to the person who
gives the food; but it more especially touches him who has caused the
annoyance, in order that through fear of this punishment he may be deterred
from remaining continually in a state of enmity, and being aware that the
reception of food and drink might do him the greatest mischief if he constantly
retains his animosity, may suppress his anger. For thus he will be able to quench
the coals of fire. Wherefore the proposed punishment and vengeance both
induces the one who has been wronged to benefit him who has annoyed him, and
it deters and checks him who has given the provocation, and impels him to
reconciliation with the man who gives him meat and drink. Paul therefore linked
the two persons by a twofold bond, the one depending on a benefit, the other on