"Days will come, when the bridegroom shall be taken from them, and then
shall they fast." [Matthew 9:15]
For hereby He signifies, that what they did was not of gluttony, but
pertained to some marvellous dispensation. And at the same time He lays
beforehand the foundation of what He was to say touching His passion, in His
controversies with others instructing His disciples, and training them now to be
versed in the things which are deemed sorrowful. Because for themselves
already to have this said to them, would have been grievous and galling, since
we know that afterwards, being uttered, it troubled them; but spoken to others, it
would become rather less intolerable to them.
It being also natural for them to pride themselves on John's calamity, He
from this topic represses likewise such their elation: the doctrine however of His
resurrection He adds not yet, it not being yet time. For so much indeed was
natural, that one supposed to be a man should die, but that other was beyond
nature.
5. Then what He had done before, this He does here again. I mean, that as
He, when they were attempting to prove Him blameable for eating with sinners,
proved to them on the contrary, that His proceeding was not only no blame, but
an absolute praise to Him: so here too, when they wanted to show of Him, that
He knows not how to manage His disciples, He signifies that such language was
the part of men not knowing how to manage their inferences, but finding fault at
random.
"For no man," says He, "puts a piece of new cloth unto an old garment."
He is again establishing His argument by illustrations from common life.
And what He says is like this, "The disciples have not yet become strong, but
still need much condescension. They have not yet been renewed by the Spirit,
and on persons in that state one ought not to lay any burden of injunctions."
And these things He said, setting laws and rules for His own disciples, that
when they should have to receive as disciples those of all sorts that should come
from the whole world, they might deal with them very gently.

"Neither do men put new wine into old bottles."
Do you see His illustrations, how like the Old Testament? The garment?
The wine skins? For Jeremiah too calls the people "a girdle," and makes mention
again of "bottles" and of "wine." [Jeremiah 13:10-12] Thus, the discourse being
about gluttony and a table, He takes His illustrations from the same.
But Luke the same words, a second and a third time and often; not however
in a wearisome kind of way, but sport ively, and do thou now turn from her, now
flatter and court her.
Do you see not the painters, how much they rub out, how much they insert,
when they are making a beautiful portrait? Well then, do not thou prove inferior
to these. For if these, in drawing the likeness of a body, used such great
diligence, how much more were it meet for us, in fashioning a soul, to use every
contrivance. For if you should fashion well the form of this soul, you will not see
the countenance of the body looking unseemly, nor lips stained, nor a mouth like
a bear's mouth dyed with blood, nor eyebrows blackened as with the smut of
some kitchen vessel, nor cheeks whitened with dust like the walls of the tombs.
For all these things are smut, and cinders, and dust, and signals of extreme
deformity.
But stay: I have been led on unobserving, I know not how, into these
expressions; and while admonishing another to teach with gentleness, I have
been myself hurried away into wrath. Let us return therefore again unto the more
gentle way of admonition, and let us bear with all the faults of our wives, that we
may succeed in doing what we would. Do you see not how we bear with the
cries of children, when we would wean them from the breast, how we endure all
for this object only, that we may persuade them to despise their former food?
Thus let us do in this case also, let us bear with all the rest, that we may
accomplish this. For when this has been amended, you will see the other too
proceeding in due order, and you will come again unto the ornaments of gold,
and in the same way wilt reason concerning them likewise, and thus little by
little bringing your wife unto the right rule, you will be a beautiful painter, a