their fasting, himself too, when speaking of the reconciliation, and teaching us
the cause of the reconciliation, speaks to this effect; "And God saw their works."
[Jonah 3:10] What kind of works? That they had fasted? That they had put on
sackcloth? Nothing of the sort: but passing all these points in silence, he adds,
"That they turned every one from their evil ways, and the Lord repented of the
evil that He had said He would do unto them." Do you see, that fasting did not
rescue from this danger, but it was the change of life, which rendered God
propitious and kind to these barbarians?
11. I have said these things, not that we may disparage fasting, but that we
may honour fasting; for the honour of fasting consists not in abstinence from
food, but in withdrawing from sinful practices; since he who limits his fasting
only to an abstinence from meats, is one who especially disparages it. Do you
fast? Give me proof of it by your works! Is it said by what kind of works? If you
see a poor man, take pity on him! If you see in enemy, be reconciled to him! If
you see a friend gaining honour, envy him not! If you see a handsome woman,
pass her by! For let not the mouth only fast, but also the eye, and the ear, and the
feet, and the hands, and all the members of our bodies. Let the hands fast, by
being pure from rapine and avarice. Let the feet fast, by ceasing from running to
the unlawful spectacles. Let the eyes fast, being taught never to fix themselves
rudely upon handsome countenances, or to busy themselves with strange
beauties. For looking is the food of the eyes, but if this be such as is unlawful or
forbidden, it mars the fast; and upsets the whole safety of the soul; but if it be
lawful and safe, it adorns fasting. For it would be among things the most absurd
to abstain from lawful food because of the fast, but with the eyes to touch even
what is forbidden. Do you not eat flesh? Feed not upon lasciviousness by means
of the eyes. Let the ear fast also. The fasting of the ear consists in refusing to
receive evil speakings and calumnies. "You shall not receive a false report," it
says.
12. Let the mouth too fast from disgraceful speeches and railing. For what
does it profit if we abstain from birds and fishes; and yet bite and devour our

brethren? The evil speaker eats the flesh of his brother, and bites the body of his
neighbour. Because of this Paul utters the fearful saying, "If you bite and devour
one another, take heed that you be not consumed one of another."
[Galatians 5:15] You have not fixed your teeth in the flesh, but you have fixed
the slander in the soul, and inflicted the wound of evil suspicion; you have
harmed, in a thousand ways, yourself and him, and many others, for in
slandering a neighbour you have made him who listens to the slander worse; for
should he be a wicked man, he becomes more careless when he finds a partner in
his wickedness; and should he be a just man, he is lifted to arrogance, and puffed
up; being led on by the sin of others to imagine great things concerning himself.
Besides, you have struck at the common welfare of the Church; for all those who
hear not only accuse the supposed sinner, but the reproach is fastened on the
Christian community; neither do you hear the unbelievers saying, "Such a
person is a fornicator, or a libertine;" but instead of the individual who has
sinned, they accuse all Christians. In addition to this, you have caused the glory
of God to be blasphemed; for as His Name is glorified when we have good
report, so when we sin, it is blasphemed and insulted!
13. A fourth reason is, that you have disgraced him who is ill reported; and
hast thus rendered him more shameless than he was, by placing him in a state of
enmity and hostility. Fifthly, you have made yourself liable to chastisement and
vengeance; by involving yourself in matters which in no way concerned you. For
let not any one tell me in reply, "Then I am an evil speaker when I speak falsely,
but if I speak what is true, I cease to be so." Although it be with truth you speak
evil, this also is a crime. For that Pharisee spoke evil of the Publican with truth;
but nevertheless this availed him not. For was not the latter, I ask, a publican and
a sinner? It is manifest to every one that he was a publican. But at the same time
inasmuch as the Pharisee spoke ill of him, he departed from the temple with the
loss of every advantage. Do you wish to correct a brother? Weep; pray unto God;
taking him apart, admonish, counsel, entreat him! So also Paul did, "Lest," says
he, "when I come again, my God will humble me among you, and I shall bewail