FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.49, C.3.

and form which is the shape of an animated being." But this
distinction of the species of quality seems unsuitable. For there are
many shapes, and passion-like qualities, which are not natural but
adventitious: and there are also many dispositions which are not
adventitious but natural, as health, beauty, and the like. Moreover, it
does not suit the order of the species, since that which is the more
natural is always first.
Therefore we must explain otherwise the distinction of dispositions
and habits from other qualities. For quality, properly speaking,
implies a certain mode of substance. Now mode, as Augustine says
(Gen. ad lit. iv, 3), "is that which a measure determines": wherefore it
implies a certain determination according to a certain measure.
Therefore, just as that in accordance with which the material
potentiality [potentia materiae] is determined to its substantial being,
is called quality, which is a difference affecting the substance, so
that, in accordance with the potentiality of the subject is determined
to its accidental being, is called an accidental quality, which is also a
kind of difference, as is clear from the Philosopher (Metaph. v, text.
19).
Now the mode of determination of the subject to accidental being
may be taken in regard to the very nature of the subject, or in regard
to action, and passion resulting from its natural principles, which are
matter and form; or again in regard to quantity. If we take the mode
or determination of the subject in regard to quantity, we shall then
have the fourth species of quality. And because quantity, considered
in itself, is devoid of movement, and does not imply the notion of
good or evil, so it does not concern the fourth species of quality
whether a thing be well or ill disposed, nor quickly or slowly
transitory.
But the mode of determination of the subject, in regard to action or
passion, is considered in the second and third species of quality.
And therefore in both, we take into account whether a thing be done
with ease or difficulty; whether it be transitory or lasting. But in
them, we do not consider anything pertaining to the notion of good
or evil: because movements and passions have not the aspect of an
end, whereas good and evil are said in respect of an end.
On the other hand, the mode or determination of the subject, in
regard to the nature of the thing, belongs to the first species of
quality, which is habit and disposition: for the Philosopher says

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.49, C.3.

(Phys. vii, text. 17), when speaking of habits of the soul and of the
body, that they are "dispositions of the perfect to the best; and by
perfect I mean that which is disposed in accordance with its nature."
And since the form itself and the nature of a thing is the end and the
cause why a thing is made (Phys. ii, text. 25), therefore in the first
species we consider both evil and good, and also changeableness,
whether easy or difficult; inasmuch as a certain nature is the end of
generation and movement. And so the Philosopher (Metaph. v, text.
25) defines habit, a "disposition whereby someone is disposed, well
or ill"; and in Ethic. ii, 4, he says that by "habits we are directed well
or ill in reference to the passions." For when the mode is suitable to
the thing's nature, it has the aspect of good: and when it is
unsuitable, it has the aspect of evil. And since nature is the first
object of consideration in anything, for this reason habit is reckoned
as the first species of quality.
Reply to Objection 1: Disposition implies a certain order, as stated
above (Article 1, ad 3). Wherefore a man is not said to be disposed
by some quality except in relation to something else. And if we add
"well or ill," which belongs to the essential notion of habit, we must
consider the quality's relation to the nature, which is the end. So in
regard to shape, or heat, or cold, a man is not said to be well or ill
disposed, except by reason of a relation to the nature of a thing, with
regard to its suitability or unsuitability. Consequently even shapes
and passion-like qualities, in so far as they are considered to be
suitable or unsuitable to the nature of a thing, belong to habits or
dispositions: for shape and color, according to their suitability to the
nature of thing, concern beauty; while heat and cold, according to
their suitability to the nature of a thing, concern health. And in this
way heat and cold are put, by the Philosopher, in the first species of
quality.
Wherefore it is clear how to answer the second objection: though
some give another solution, as Simplicius says in his Commentary
on the Predicaments.
Reply to Objection 3: This difference, "difficult to change," does not
distinguish habit from the other species of quality, but from
disposition. Now disposition may be taken in two ways; in one way,
as the genus of habit, for disposition is included in the definition of
habit (Metaph. v, text. 25): in another way, according as it is divided
against habit. Again, disposition, properly so called, can be divided
against habit in two ways: first, as perfect and imperfect within the