husband for you. For if the wisdom of a man illuminates his countenance,
[Ecclesiastes 8:1] much more does the virtue of a woman illuminate her face;
and if you consider this to be a great ornament, tell me what will be the
advantage of the pearls in that day? But why is it necessary to speak of that day,
since it is possible to show all this from what happens now. When, then, they
who thought fit to revile the emperor were dragged to the judgment hall, and
were in danger of extreme measures being taken, then the mothers, and the
wives, laying aside their necklaces, and their golden ornaments, and pearls, and
all adornment, and golden raiment, wearing a simple and mean dress, and
besprinkled with ashes, prostrated themselves before the doors of the judgment
hall and thus won over the judges; and if in the case of these earthly courts of
justice, the golden ornaments, and the pearls, and the variegated dress would
have been a snare and a betrayal, but forbearance, and meekness, and ashes, and
tears, and mean garments persuaded the judge, much more would this take place
in the case of that impartial and dread tribunal. For what reason will you be able
to state, what defense, when the Master lays these pearls to your charge, and
brings the poor who have perished with hunger into the midst? On this account
Paul said, "not with braided hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly raiment."
[1 Timothy 2:9] For therein would be a snare. And if we were to enjoy them
continually, yet we shall lay them aside with death. But arising out of virtue
there is all security, and no vicissitude and changeableness, but here it makes us
more secure, and also accompanies us there. Do you wish to possess pearls, and
never to lay aside this wealth? Take off all ornament and place it in the hands of
Christ through the poor. He will keep all your wealth for you, when He shall
raise up your body with much radiancy. Then He shall invest you with better
wealth and greater ornament, since this present is mean and absurd. Consider
then whom you wish to please, and for whose sake you put on this ornament, not
in order that the ropemaker and the coppersmith and the huckster may admire.
Then are you not ashamed, nor do you blush when you show yourself to them?
Doing all on their account whom you do not consider worthy of accosting.

How then will you laugh this fancy to scorn? If you will remember that
word, which you sent forth when thou were initiated, I renounce you, Satan, and
your pomp, and your service. For the frenzy about pearls is a pomp of Satan. For
you received gold not in order that you might bind it on to your body, but in
order that you might release and nourish the poor. Say therefore constantly, I
renounce you, Satan. Nothing is more safe than this word if we shall prove it by
our deeds.
5. This I think it right that you who are about to be initiated should learn.
For this word is a covenant with the Master. And just as we, when we buy
slaves, first ask those who are being sold if they are willing to be our servants:
So also does Christ. When He is about to receive you into service, He first asks
if you wish to leave that cruel and relentless tyrant, and He receives covenants
from you. For his service is not forced upon you. And see the lovingkindness of
God. For we, before we put down the price, ask those who are being sold, and
when we have learned that they are willing, then we put down the price. But
Christ not so, but He even put down the price for us all; his precious blood. For,
He says, you were bought with a price. [1 Corinthians 7:25] Notwithstanding,
not even then does He compel those who are unwilling, to serve him; but except
you have grace, He says, and of your own accord and will determinest to enroll
yourself under my rule, I do not compel, nor force you. And we should not have
chosen to buy wicked slaves. But if we should at any time have so chosen, we
buy them with a perverted choice, and put down a corresponding price for them.
But Christ, buying ungrateful and lawless slaves, put down the price of a servant
of first quality, nay rather much more, and so much greater that neither speech
nor thought can set forth its greatness. For neither giving heaven, nor earth, nor
sea, but giving up that which is more valuable than all these, his own blood, thus
He bought us. And after all these things, he does not require of us witnesses, or
registration, but is content with the single word, if you say it from your heart. "I
renounce you, Satan, and your pomp," has included all. Let us then say this, "I
renounce you, Satan," as men who are about in that world at that day to have that