This course is at least preferable to the other. They ought indeed to be
concerned for the things of God, they ought to preserve their faith. But since
they do not this, it is better to avoid a worse course. God is not dishonored by
their marrying again, and they do not fall into those practices, which have been
censured. From such a widowhood, no good could arise, but good may come out
of this marriage. Hence the women will be able to correct that indolence and
vanity of mind.
But why, since some have fallen away, does he not say that much care is to
be taken of them, that they may not fall into the error he has mentioned? Why
has he commanded them to marry? Because marriage is not forbidden, and it is a
safeguard to them. Wherefore he adds, that they "give none occasion," or handle,
"to the adversary to speak reproachfully. For some are already turned aside
after Satan." Such widows as these then he would have refused, not meaning
that there should be no younger widows, but that there should be no adulteresses,
that none should be idle, busy-bodies, speaking things that they ought not, that
no occasion should be given to the adversary. Had nothing of this kind taken
place, he would not have forbidden them.
Ver. 16. "If any man or woman that believes have widows, let them relieve
them, and let not the Church be charged, that it may relieve them that are
widows indeed."
Observe how again he speaks of those as "widows indeed," who are left
destitute, and have no resource from any other quarter. It was better to have it so.
For thus two great objects were attained. Those had an opportunity of doing
good, while these were honorably maintained, and the Church not burdened.
And he has well said, "If any believer." For it is not fit that believing women
should be maintained by unbelievers, lest they should seem to stand in need of
them. And observe how persuasively he speaks; he has not said, "let them
maintain them expensively," but "let them relieve them." "That the Church," he
says, "may relieve them that are widows indeed." She therefore has the reward of
this help also, for she that helps the Church, helps not her only, but those widows

too whom the Church is thus enabled to maintain more bountifully. "I will
therefore that the younger widows"— do what? Live in luxury and pleasure? By
no means; but— "marry, bear children, guide the house." That he may not be
supposed to encourage them to live luxuriously, he adds, that they give no
occasion to the adversary to speak reproachfully. They ought indeed to have
been superior to the things of this world, but since they are not, let them abide in
them at least upright.
Ver. 17, 18. "Let the elders that rule well be counted worthy of double
honor, especially they who labor in the word and doctrine. For the Scripture
says, You shall not muzzle the ox that treads out the grain. And, The laborer is
worthy of his reward."
The "honor" of which he here speaks is attention to them, and the supply of
their necessities, as is shown by his adding, "You shall not muzzle the ox that
treads out the grain" [Deuteronomy 25:4]; and, "The laborer is worthy of his
reward." [Luke 10:7] So when he says, "Honor widows," he means, "support"
them in all that is necessary. Thus he says, "That it may relieve those that are
widows indeed"; and again, "Honor widows that are widows indeed," that is,
who are in poverty, for the greater their poverty, the more truly are they widows.
He alleges the Law, he alleges the words of Christ, both agreeing herein. For the
Law says, "You shall not muzzle the ox that treads out the grain." See how he
would have the teacher labor! For there is not, indeed there is not, any other
labor such as his. But this is from the Law. But how does he quote from Christ?
"The laborer is worthy of his reward." Let us not then look only to the reward,
but to the terms of the commandment. "The laborer," he says, "is worthy of his
reward." So that if any one lives in sloth and luxury, he is unworthy of it. Unless
he is as the ox treading out the grain, and bearing the yoke, in spite of heat and
thorns, and ceases not till he has carried the grain into the granary, he is not
worthy. Therefore to teachers should be granted a supply of their necessities
without grudging, that they may not faint nor be discouraged, nor by attention to
inferior things deprive themselves of greater; that they may labor for spiritual