Rom. xiii. 4.

benefit of their subjects, and for the preservation of justice; but others, for the purposes of fear and
punishment and rebuke: others, as [the subjects] deserve it, are for deception, disgrace, and pride;
while the just judgment of God, as I have observed already, passes equally upon all. The devil,
however, as he is the apostate angel, can only go to this length, as he did at the beginning, [namely]
to deceive and lead astray the mind of man into disobeying the commandments of God, and gradually
to darken the hearts of those who would endeavour to serve him, to the forgetting of the true God,
but to the adoration of himself as God.
4. Just as if any one, being an apostate, and seizing in a hostile manner another man's territory,
should harass the inhabitants of it, in order that he might claim for himself the glory of a king among
those ignorant of his apostasy and robbery; so likewise also the devil, being one among those angels
who are placed over the spirit of the air, as the Apostle Paul has declared in his Epistle to the
Ephesians, becoming envious of man, was rendered an apostate from the divine law: for envy
is a thing foreign to God. And as his apostasy was exposed by man, and man became the [means
of] searching out his thoughts (et examinatio sententiæ ejus, homo factus est), he has set himself
to this with greater and greater determination, in opposition to man, envying his life, and wishing
to involve him in his own apostate power. The Word of God, however, the Maker of all things,
conquering him by means of human nature, and showing him to be an apostate, has, on the contrary,
put him under the power of man. For He says, "Behold, I confer upon you the power of treading
upon serpents and scorpions, and upon all the power of the enemy," in order that, as he obtained
dominion over man by apostasy, so again his apostasy might be deprived of power by means of
man turning back again to God.

### Chapter XXV.—The fraud, pride, and tyrannical kingdom of Antichrist, as described by
Daniel and Paul.
1. And not only by the particulars already mentioned, but also by means of the events which
shall occur in the time of Antichrist is it shown that he, being an apostate and a robber, is anxious
to be adored as God; and that, although a mere slave, he wishes himself to be proclaimed as a king.
For he (Antichrist) being endued with all the power of the devil, shall come, not as a righteous
king, nor as a legitimate king, [i.e., one] in subjection to God, but an impious, unjust, and lawless
one; as an apostate, iniquitous and murderous; as a robber, concentrating in himself [all] satanic
apostasy, and setting aside idols to persuade [men] that he himself is God, raising up himself as
the only idol, having in himself the multifarious errors of the other idols. This he does, in order that
they who do [now] worship the devil by means of many abominations, may serve himself by this
one idol, of whom the apostle thus speaks in the second Epistle to the Thessalonians: "Unless there