glory," it says, "shall not descend after him." [Psalm 49:17] And with many it
lasts not even to the end of life. But no such thing is to be thought of in that
glory; it abides, and will have no end. For such are the things of God, enduring,
and above all change or end. For the glory of that state is not from without, but
from within. I mean, it consists not in a multitude of servant, or of chariot, nor in
costly garments. Independently of these things, the man himself is clothed with
glory. Here, without these things, the man appears naked. In the baths, we see the
illustrious, the undistinguished, and the base, alike bare. Often have the great
been exposed to danger in public, being left on some occasion by their servants.
But in that world men carry their glory about with them, and the Saints, like the
Angels, wherever they appear, have their glory in themselves. Yea rather as the
sun needs no vestures, and requires no foreign aid, but wherever he appears, his
glory at once shines forth; so shall it then be.
Let us then pursue that glory, than which nothing is more venerable; and
leave the glory of the world, as beyond anything worthless. "Boast not of your
clothing and raiment." [Sirach 11:4] This was the advice given of old to the
simple. Indeed the dancer, the harlot, the player, are arrayed in a gayer and more
costly robe than you. And besides, this boasting were of that, which if but moths
attack, they can rob you of its enjoyment. Do you see what an unstable thing it
is, this glory of the present life? Thou pridest yourself upon that which insects
make and destroy. For Indian insects, it is said, spin those fine threads of which
your robes are made. But rather seek a clothing woven from things above, an
admirable and radiant vesture, raiment of real gold; of gold not dug by
malefactors' hands out of the mine, but the produce of virtue. Let us clothe
ourselves with a robe not the manufacture of poor men or slaves, but wrought by
our Lord Himself. But your garments, you say, are in-wrought with gold! And
what is that to you? He that wrought it, not he that wears it, is the object of
admiration, for there it is really due. It is not the frame on which the garment is
stretched at the fuller's, but the maker of it, that is admired. Yet the block wears
it, and has it bound on itself. And as that wears it, but not for use, even so do

some of these women, for the benefit of the garment, to air it, they say, that it
may not be moth-eaten! Is it not then the extreme of folly to be solicitous about a
thing so worthless, to do anything whatever, to risk your salvation for it, to make
a mock at Hell, to set God at defiance, to overlook Christ hungering? Talk not of
the precious spices of India, Arabia, and Persia, the moist and the dry, the
perfumes and ointments, so costly and so useless. Why, O woman, do you lavish
perfumes upon a body full of impurity within? Why spend on what is offensive,
as if one should waste perfumes upon dirt, or distill balms upon a brick. There is,
if you desire it, a precious ointment and a fragrance, with which you might
anoint your soul; not brought from Arabia, or Ethiopia, nor from Persia, but from
heaven itself; purchased not by gold, but by a virtuous will, and by faith
unfeigned. Buy this perfume, the odor of which is able to fill the world. It was of
this the Apostles savored. "For we are (he says) a sweet savor, to some of death,
to others of life." [2 Corinthians 2:15-16] And what means this? That it is as they
say, that the swine is suffocated by perfumes! But this spiritual fragrance scented
not only the bodies but the garments of the Apostles; and Paul's garments were
so impregnated with it, that they cast out devils. What balmy leaf, what cassia,
what myrrh so sweet or so efficacious as this perfume? For if it put devils to
flight, what could it not effect? With this ointment let us furnish ourselves. And
the grace of the Spirit will provide it through almsgiving. Of these we shall
savor, when we go into the other world. And as here, he that is perfumed with
sweet odors draws upon himself the notice of all, and whether at the bath, or the
assembly, or any other concourse of men, all follow him, and observe him; so, in
that world, when souls come in that are fragrant with this spiritual savor, all arise
and make room. And even here devils and all vices are afraid to approach it, and
cannot endure it, for it chokes them. Let us then not bear about us that perfume
which is a mark of effeminacy, but this, which is a mark of manhood, which is
truly admirable, which fills us with a holy confidence. This is a spice which is
not the produce of the earth, but springs from virtue, which withers not, but
blooms for ever. This is it that renders those who possess it honorable. With this