John 16:24
"Hitherto you have asked nothing."
2. Hence He shows it to be good that He should depart, if hitherto they had
asked nothing, and if then they should receive all things whatsoever they should
ask. "For do not suppose, because I shall no longer be with you, that you are
deserted; My Name shall give you greater boldness." Since then the words
which He had used had been veiled, He says,

John 16:25
"These things have I spoken unto you in proverbs, but the time comes when I
shall no more speak unto you in proverbs."
"There shall be a time when you shall know all things clearly." He speaks of
the time of the Resurrection. "Then,"
"I shall tell you plainly of the Father."
(For He was with them, and talked with them forty days, being assembled
with them, and speaking of the things concerning the kingdom of God [Acts 1:34])— "because now being in fear, you give no heed to My words; but then when
you see Me risen again, and converse with Me, you will be able to learn all
things plainly, for the Father Himself will love you, when your faith in Me has
been made firm."

John 16:26
"And I will not ask the Father."
"Your love for Me suffices to be your advocate."

John 16:27-28
"Because you have loved Me, and have believed that I came out from God. I
came forth from the Father, and have come into the world; again I leave the
world, and go to the Father."
For since His discourse concerning the Resurrection, and together with this,
the hearing that "I came out from God, and there I go," gave them no common
comfort, He continually handles these things. He gave a pledge, in the first
place, that they were right in believing on Him; in the second, that they should
be in safety. When therefore He said, "A little while, and you shall not see Me;
and again a little while, and you shall see Me" [John 16:17], they with reason
did not understand Him. But now it is no longer so. What then is, "You shall not
ask Me"? "You shall not say, 'Show us the Father,' and, 'Where are You going?'
for you shall know all knowledge, and the Father shall be disposed towards you
even as I am." It was this especially which made them breathe again, the
learning that they should be the Father's friends wherefore they say,

John 16:30
"Now we know that You know all things."
Do you see that He made answer to what was secretly harboring in their
minds?
"And needest not that any man should ask You."
That is, "Before hearing, You know the things which made us stumble, and
You have given us rest, since You have said, 'The Father loves you, because you
have loved Me.'" After so many and so great matters, they say, "Now we know."
Do you see in what an imperfect state they were? Then, when, as though
conferring a favor upon Him, they say, "Now we know," He replies, "You still
require many other things to come to perfection; nothing is as yet achieved by
you. You shall presently betray Me to My enemies, and such fear shall seize you,
that you shall not even be able to retire one with another, yet from this I shall
suffer nothing dreadful." Do you see again how con descending His speech is?
And indeed He makes this a charge against them, that they continually needed
condescension. For when they say, "Lo, now You speak plainly, and speakest no
parable" [John 16:29], "and therefore we believe You," He shows them that now,
when they believe, they do not yet believe, neither does He accept their words.
This He says, referring them to another season. But the,