"Now why," says he, "are you puffed up about knowledge? For if you have not
love, you shall even be injured thereby. For what is worse than boasting? But if
the other be added, the first also will be in safety. For although you may know
something more than your neighbor, if you love him you will not set yourself up
but lead him also to the same." Wherefore also having said, "Knowledge puffs
up," he added, "but love edifies." He did not say, "Behaves itself modestly," but
what is much more, and more gainful. For their knowledge was not only puffing
them up but also distracting them. On this account he opposes the one to the
other.
3. And then he adds a third consideration, which was of force to set them
down. What then is this? That although charity be joined with it, yet not even in
that case is this our knowledge perfect. And therefore he adds,

1 Corinthians 8:2
"But if any man think that he knows any thing, he knows nothing yet as he
ought to know." This is a mortal blow. "I dwell not," says he, on the knowledge
being common to all. I say not that by hating your neighbor and by arrogance,
you injure yourself most. But even though you have it by yourself alone, though
you be modest, though you love your brother, even in this case you are imperfect
in regard of knowledge. "For as yet you know nothing as you ought to know,"
Now if we possess as yet exact knowledge of nothing, how is it that some have
rushed on to such a pitch of frenzy as to say that they know God with all
exactness? Whereas, though we had an exact knowledge of all other things, not
even so were it possible to possess this knowledge to such an extent. For how far
He is apart from all things, it is impossible even to say.
And mark how he pulls down their swelling pride: for he said not, "of the
matters before us you have not the proper knowledge," but, "about every thing."
And he did not say, "ye," but, "no one whatever," be it Peter, be it Paul, be it any
one else. For by this he both soothed them and carefully kept them under.

1 Corinthians 8:3
"But if any man love God, the same," he does not say, "knows Him," but, "is
known of Him." For we have not known Him, but He has known us. And
therefore did Christ say, "You have not chosen Me, but I have chosen you." And
Paul elsewhere, "Then shall I know fully, even as also I have been known."
Observe now, I pray, by what means he brings down their high-mindedness.
First, he points out that not they alone knew the things which they knew; for "we
all," he says, have knowledge. Next, that the thing itself was hurtful so long as it
was without love; for "knowledge," says he, "puffs up." Thirdly, that even joined
with love it is not complete nor perfect. "For if any man thinks that he knows any
thing, he knows nothing as yet as he ought to know," so he speaks. In addition to
this, that they have not even this from themselves, but by gift from God. For he
said not, "has known God," but, "is known of Him." Again, that this very thing
comes of love which they have not as they ought. For, "if any man," says he,
"love God, the same is known of Him." Having then so much at large allayed
their irritation, he begins to speak doctrinally, saying thus.