THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.7, C.6.

of the Holy Ghost, in the same respect; for He gives them as God
and receives them as man. Hence Gregory says (Moral. ii) that "the
Holy Ghost never quitted the human nature of Christ, from Whose
Divine nature He proceedeth."
Reply to Objection 3: In Christ there was not only heavenly
knowledge, but also earthly knowledge, as will be said (Question 15,
Article 10). And yet even in heaven the gifts of the Holy Ghost will
still exist, in a certain manner, as was said above (FS, Question 68,
Article 6).

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.7, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether in Christ there was the gift of fear?

Objection 1: It would seem that in Christ there was not the gift of
fear. For hope would seem to be stronger than fear; since the object
of hope is goodness, and of fear, evil. as was said above (FS,
Question 40, Article 1; FS, Question 42, Article 1). But in Christ there
was not the virtue of hope, as was said above (Article 4). Hence,
likewise, there was not the gift of fear in Him.
Objection 2: Further, by the gift of fear we fear either to be separated
from God, which pertains to "chaste" fear---or to be punished by
Him, which pertains to "servile" fear, as Augustine says (In Joan.
Tract. ix). But Christ did not fear being separated from God by sin,
nor being punished by Him on account of a fault, since it was
impossible for Him to sin, as will be said (Question 15, Articles 1,2).
Now fear is not of the impossible. Therefore in Christ there was not
the gift of fear.
Objection 3: Further, it is written (1 Jn. 4:18) that "perfect charity
casteth out fear." But in Christ there was most perfect charity,
according to Eph. 3:19: "The charity of Christ which surpasseth all
knowledge." Therefore in Christ there was not the gift of fear.
On the contrary, It is written (Is. 11:3): "And He shall be filled with the
spirit of the fear of the Lord."
I answer that, As was said above (FS, Question 42, Article 1), fear
regards two objects, one of which is an evil causing terror; the other
is that by whose power an evil can be inflicted, as we fear the king
inasmuch as he has the power of putting to death. Now whoever can
hurt would not be feared unless he had a certain greatness of might,
to which resistance could not easily be offered; for what we easily
repel we do not fear. And hence it is plain that no one is feared
except for some pre-eminence. And in this way it is said that in
Christ there was the fear of God, not indeed as it regards the evil of
separation from God by fault, nor as it regards the evil of
punishment for fault; but inasmuch as it regards the Divine preeminence, on account of which the soul of Christ, led by the Holy
Spirit, was borne towards God in an act of reverence. Hence it is said
(Heb. 5:7) that in all things "he was heard for his reverence." For
Christ as man had this act of reverence towards God in a fuller sense