SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.86, C.2.

moreover, the ministers of the New Testament are of greater dignity
than the ministers of the Old Testament, as the Apostle shows (2
Cor. 3:7,8).
Accordingly it is evident that man's obligation to pay tithes arises
partly from natural law, partly from the institution of the Church;
who, nevertheless, in consideration of the requirements of time and
persons might ordain the payment of some other proportion.
This suffices for the Reply to the First Objection.
Reply to Objection 2: The precept about paying tithes, in so far as it
was a moral precept, was given in the Gospel by our Lord when He
said (Mt. 10:10): "The workman is worthy of his hire," and the
Apostle says the same (1 Cor. 9:4 seqq.). But the fixing of the
particular proportion is left to the ordinance of the Church.
Reply to Objection 3: Before the time of the Old Law the ministry of
the divine worship was not entrusted to any particular person;
although it is stated that the first-born were priests, and that they
received a double portion. For this very reason no particular portion
was directed to be given to the ministers of the divine worship: but
when they met with one, each man of his own accord gave him what
he deemed right. Thus Abraham by a kind of prophetic instinct gave
tithes to Melchisedech, the priest of the Most High God, according to
Gn. 14:20, and again Jacob made a vow to give tithes [Gn. 28:20],
although he appears to have vowed to do so, not by paying them to
ministers, but for the purpose of the divine worship, for instance for
the fulfilling of sacrifices, hence he said significantly: "I will offer
tithes to Thee."
Reply to Objection 4: The second kind of tithe, which was reserved
for the offering of sacrifices, has no place in the New Law, since the
legal victims had ceased. But the third kind of tithe which they had to
eat with the poor, is increased in the New Law, for our Lord
commanded us to give to the poor not merely the tenth part, but all
our surplus, according to Lk. 11:41: "That which remaineth, give
alms." Moreover the tithes that are given to the ministers of the
Church should be dispensed by them for the use of the poor.
Reply to Objection 5: The ministers of the Church ought to be more
solicitous for the increase of spiritual goods in the people, than for

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.86, C.2.

the amassing of temporal goods: and hence the Apostle was
unwilling to make use of the right given him by the Lord of receiving
his livelihood from those to whom he preached the Gospel, lest he
should occasion a hindrance to the Gospel of Christ [1 Cor. 9:12].
Nor did they sin who did not contribute to his upkeep, else the
Apostle would not have omitted to reprove them. In like manner the
ministers of the Church rightly refrain from demanding the Church's
tithes, when they could not demand them without scandal, on
account of their having fallen into desuetude, or for some other
reason. Nevertheless those who do not give tithes in places where
the Church does not demand them are not in a state of damnation,
unless they be obstinate, and unwilling to pay even if tithes were
demanded of them.