not, "your children are dead," but very pathetically, "your memorial is perished
from the earth," "the thing for which your children were desirable." For if, even
now after that the resurrection has been made known children are longed for
because they preserve the memory of the departed; much more then. Wherefore
also her curse becomes from that consideration more bitter. For in that case, he
that cursed, said not, "Let his children be utterly rooted out," but, "his memorial
from the earth." "Your sons and your daughters." Thus whereas she said, "the
memorial," she again accurately makes mention of either sex. "But if you," says
she, "carest not for these, at least consider what is mine." "The pains of my
womb, and labors which I have endured in vain with sorrow." Now what she
means is this: "I, who endured the more, am wronged for your sake, and having
undergone the toils I am deprived of the fruits."
And see how she neither makes express mention of his loss of property, nor
is silent about it and hurries by; but in that point of view in which it also might
be most pathetically narrated, in that she covertly refers to it. For when she says,
"I too am a vagabond and a slave, going about from place to place, from house
to house," she both hints at the loss and indicates her great distress: these
expressions being such as even to enhance that misfortune. "For I come to the
doors of others," says she; "nor do I beg only, but am a wanderer also and serve
a strange and unusual servitude, going round everywhere and carrying about the
tokens of my calamity, and teaching all men of my woes;" which is most piteous
of all, to change house after house. And she stayed not even at these
lamentations, but proceeded to say, "Waiting for the sun when it will set, and I
shall rest from my miseries and the pains that encompass me, by which I am now
straitened." "Thus, that which is sweet to others," says she, "to behold the light,
this to me is grievous: but the night and the darkness is a desirable thing. For
this only gives me rest from my toils, this becomes a comfort to my miseries. But
speak somewhat against the Lord, and die." Perceivest thou here too her crafty
wickedness? How she did not even in the act of advising at once introduce the
deadly counsel, but having first pitifully related her misfortunes and having

drawn out the tragedy at length, she couches in a few words what she would
recommend, and does not even declare it plainly, but throwing a shade over that,
she holds out to him the deliverance which he greatly longed for, and promises
death, the thing which he then most of all desired.
And mark from this also the malice of the devil: that because he knew the
longing of Job towards God, he suffers not his wife to accuse God, lest he should
at once turn away from her as an enemy. For this cause she no where mentions
Him, but the actual calamities she is continually harping on.
And do thou, besides what has been said, add the circumstance that it was a
woman who gave this counsel, a wonderful orator to beguile the heedless. Many
at least even without external accidents have been cast down by the counsel of
woman alone.
6. What then did the blessed saint, and firmer than adamant? Looking
bitterly upon her, by his aspect even before he spoke, he repelled her devices:
since she no doubt expected to excite fountains of tears; but he became fiercer
than a lion, full of wrath and indignation, not on account of his sufferings, but on
account of her diabolical suggestions; and having signified his anger by his looks
in a subdued tone he gives his rebuke; for even in misfortune he kept his selfcommand. And what says he? "Why do you speak as one of the foolish women?"
"I have not so taught you," says he, "I did not so nurture you; and this is why I
do not now recognize even my own consort. For these words are the counsel of a
'foolish woman,' and of one beside herself." Seest thou not here an instance of
wounding in moderation, and inflicting a blow just sufficient to cure the disease?
Then, after the infliction, he brings in advice sufficient on the other hand to
console her, and very rational, thus speaking: "if we have received our good
things at the hand of the Lord, shall we not endure our evils?" "For remember,"
says he, "those former things and make account of the Author of them, and you
will bear even these nobly." Do you see the modesty of the man? That he does
not at all impute his patience to his own courage, but says it was part of the
natural result of what happened. "For in return for what did God give us these