SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.13, C.3.

course, as a horse rushing to the battle," as regards the second.
Reply to Objection 1: The sins of despair and presumption consist,
not in disbelieving in God's justice and mercy, but in contemning
them.
Reply to Objection 2: Obstinacy and impenitence differ not only in
respect of past and future time, but also in respect of certain formal
aspects by reason of the diverse consideration of those things which
may be considered in sin, as explained above.
Reply to Objection 3: Grace and truth were the work of Christ
through the gifts of the Holy Ghost which He gave to men.
Reply to Objection 4: To refuse to obey belongs to obstinacy, while a
feigned repentance belongs to impenitence, and schism to the envy
of a brother's spiritual good, whereby the members of the Church are
united together.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.13, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the sin against the Holy Ghost can be

forgiven?
Objection 1: It would seem that the sin against the Holy Ghost can be
forgiven. For Augustine says (De Verb. Dom., Serm. lxxi): "We
should despair of no man, so long as Our Lord's patience brings him
back to repentance." But if any sin cannot be forgiven, it would be
possible to despair of some sinners. Therefore the sin against the
Holy Ghost can be forgiven.
Objection 2: Further, no sin is forgiven, except through the soul
being healed by God. But "no disease is incurable to an all-powerful
physician," as a gloss says on Ps. 102:3, "Who healeth all thy
diseases." Therefore the sin against the Holy Ghost can be forgiven.
Objection 3: Further, the free-will is indifferent to either good or evil.
Now, so long as man is a wayfarer, he can fall away from any virtue,
since even an angel fell from heaven, wherefore it is written (Job
4:18,19): "In His angels He found wickedness: how much more shall
they that dwell in houses of clay?" Therefore, in like manner, a man
can return from any sin to the state of justice. Therefore the sin
against the Holy Ghost can be forgiven.
On the contrary, It is written (Mt. 12:32): "He that shall speak against
the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world, nor
in the world to come": and Augustine says (De Serm. Dom. in Monte
i, 22) that "so great is the downfall of this sin that it cannot submit to
the humiliation of asking for pardon."
I answer that, According to the various interpretations of the sin
against the Holy Ghost, there are various ways in which it may be
said that it cannot be forgiven. For if by the sin against the Holy
Ghost we understand final impenitence, it is said to be
unpardonable, since in no way is it pardoned: because the mortal sin
wherein a man perseveres until death will not be forgiven in the life
to come, since it was not remitted by repentance in this life.
According to the other two interpretations, it is said to be
unpardonable, not as though it is nowise forgiven, but because,
considered in itself, it deserves not to be pardoned: and this in two
ways. First, as regards the punishment, since he that sins through