but intense humility. As in the case of bodily substances, that which is "broken"
will not rise against that which is "solid," but, how many ills soever it may
suffer, will perish itself rather than attack the other, so too the soul, even if
constantly suffering ill, will choose rather to die, than to avenge itself by attack.
How long shall we be puffed up thus ridiculously? For as we laugh, when
we see children drawing themselves up, and looking haughty, or when we see
them picking up stones and throwing them, thus too the haughtiness of men
belongs to a puerile intellect, and an unformed mind. "Why are earth and ashes
proud?" [Sirach 10:9] Are you highminded, O man? And why? Tell me what is
the gain? Whence are you highminded against those of your own kind? Do you
not share the same nature? The same life? Have you not received like honor
from God? But you are wise? You ought to be thankful, not to be puffed up.
Haughtiness is the first act of ingratitude, for it denies the gift of grace. He that is
puffed up, is puffed up as if he had excelled by his own strength, and he who
thinks he has thus excelled is ungrateful toward Him who bestowed that honor.
Have you any good? Be thankful to Him who gave it. Listen to what Joseph said,
and what Daniel. For when the king of Egypt sent for him, and in the presence of
all his host asked him concerning that matter in which the Egyptians, who were
most learned in these things, had forsaken the field, when he was on the point of
carrying off everything from them, and of appearing wiser than the astrologers,
the enchanters, the magicians, and all the wise men of those times, and that from
captivity and servitude, and he but a youth (and his glory was thus greater, for it
is not the same thing to shine when known, and contrary to expectation, so that
its being unlooked for rendered him the more admirable); what then, when he
came before Pharaoh? Was it "Yea, I know"? But what? When no one urged it on
him, he said from his own excellent spirit, "Do not interpretations belong to
God?" Behold he straightway glorified his Master, therefore he was glorified.
And this also is no small thing. For that God had revealed it to him was a far
greater thing than if he had himself excelled. For he showed that his words were
worthy of credit, and it was a very great proof of his intimacy with God. There is

no one thing so good as to be the intimate friend of God. "For if," says the
Scripture, "he [Abraham] was justified by works, he has whereof to glory, but
not toward God." [Romans 4:2] For if he who has been vouchsafed grace makes
his boast in God, that he is loved of Him, because his sins are forgiven, he too
that works has whereof to boast, but not before God, as the other (for it is a proof
of our excessive weakness); he who has received wisdom of God, how much
more admirable is he? He glorifies God and is glorified of Him, for He says,
"Them that honor Me, I will honor." [1 Samuel 2:30]
Again, listen to him who descended from Joseph, than whom no one was
wiser. "Are you wiser," says he, "than Daniel?" [Ezekiel 28:3] This Daniel then,
when all the wise men that were in Babylon, and the astrologers moreover, the
prophets, the magicians, the enchanters, yea when the whole of their wisdom
was not only coming to be convicted, but to be wholly destroyed (for their being
destroyed was a clear proof that they had deceived before), this Daniel coming
forward, and preparing to solve the king's question, does not take the honor to
himself, but first ascribes the whole to God, and says, "But as for me, O king, it
is not revealed to me for any wisdom that I have beyond all men." [Daniel 2:30]
And "the king worshipped him, and commanded that they should offer an
oblation." [Daniel 2:46] Do you see his humility? Do you see his excellent
spirit? Do you see this habit of lowliness? Listen also to the Apostles, saying at
one time, "Why fasten ye your eyes on us, as though by our own power or
godliness we had made this man to walk? [Acts 3:12] And again, "We are men of
like passions with you." [Acts 14:15] Now if they thus refused the honors paid
them, men who by reason of the humility and power of Christ wrought greater
deeds than Christ (for He says, "He that believes in Me shall do greater works
than those that I do" [John 14:12, abr]), shall not we wretched and miserable
men do so, who cannot even beat away gnats, much less devils? Who have not
power to benefit a single man, much less the whole world, and yet think so much
of ourselves that the Devil himself is not like us?
There is nothing so foreign to a Christian soul as haughtiness. Haughtiness,