ordered. Now the act of the spiritual power is to open heaven, not
absolutely, since it is already open, as stated above (Article 1, ad 1),
but for this or that man; and this cannot be done in an orderly
manner without due consideration of the worthiness of the one to be
admitted to heaven. Hence the aforesaid definition of the key gives
the genus, viz. "power," the subject of the power, viz. the
"ecclesiastical judge," and the act, viz. "of excluding or admitting,"
corresponding to the two acts of a material key which are to open
and shut; the object of which act is referred to in the words "from the
kingdom," and the mode, in the words, "worthy" and "unworthy,"
because account is taken of the worthiness or unworthiness of those
on whom the act is exercised.
Reply to Objection 1: The same power is directed to two things, of
which one is the cause of the other, as heat, in fire, is directed to
make a thing hot and to melt it. And since every grace and remission
in a mystical body comes to it from its head, it seems that it is
essentially the same power whereby a priest can consecrate, and
whereby he can loose and bind, if he has jurisdiction, and that there
is only a logical difference, according as it is referred to different
effects, even as fire in one respect is said to have the power of
heating, and in another, the power of melting. And because the
character of the priestly order is nothing else than the power of
exercising that act to which the priestly order is chiefly ordained (if
we maintain that it is the same as a spiritual power), therefore the
character, the power of consecrating, and the power of the keys are
one and the same essentially, but differ logically.
Reply to Objection 2: All spiritual power is conferred by some kind of
consecration. Therefore the key is given together with the order: yet
the use of the key requires due matter, i.e. a people subject through
jurisdiction, so that until he has jurisdiction, the priest has the keys,
but he cannot exercise the act of the keys. And since the key is
defined from its act, its definition contains a reference to jurisdiction.
Reply to Objection 3: A person may be worthy to have something in
two ways, either so as to have a right to possess it, and thus
whoever is worthy has heaven already opened to him---or so that it is
meet that he should receive it, and thus the power of the keys admits
those who are worthy, but to whom heaven is not yet altogether
opened.
Reply to Objection 4: Even as God hardens not by imparting malice,

but by withholding grace, so a priest is said to exclude, not as
though he placed an obstacle to entrance, but because he does not
remove an obstacle which is there, since he cannot remove it unless
God has already removed it. Hence God is prayed that He may
absolve, so that there may be room for the priest's absolution.
Reply to Objection 5: The priest's act does not bear immediately on
the kingdom, but on the sacraments, by means of which man wins to
the kingdom.