die, and before that time it was not possible, what reward would they have
gained for daring in the face of dangers? For any one might say to them, Because
you are confident of the three years of life, for this reason you throw yourselves
into dangers, knowing that it is not possible for you to pass away. For he, that
expects from each danger that he may come by his death, and knows that he
shall live indeed, if he does not expose himself to peril, but shall die if he
attempts such and such actions, he gives the greatest proof of his zeal, and of his
contempt for the present life. And this I will make plain to you by an example.
Tell me, if the patriarch Abraham, foreknowing that he should not have to
sacrifice his son, had brought him to the place, would he then have had any
reward? And what if Paul, foreknowing that he should not die, had despised
dangers, in what respect would he have been admirable? For so even the most
sluggish would rush into the fire, if he could find any one he could trust to
ensure his safety. But not such were the Three Children. For hear them saying,
"O king, there is a God in heaven, who will deliver us out of your hands, and out
of this furnace; and if not, be it known to you that we do not serve your gods, nor
worship the golden image which you have set up." [Daniel 3:17, Septuagint]
You see how many advantages there are, and yet there are more than these
that arise from not knowing the time of our end. Meanwhile it is sufficient to
learn these. On this account He so comes as a thief in the night; that we may not
abandon ourselves to wickedness, nor to sloth; that He may not take from us our
reward. "For yourselves know perfectly," he says. Why then are you curious, if
you are persuaded? But that the future is uncertain, learn from what Christ has
said. For that on this account He said it, hear what he says, "Watch therefore: for
you know not at what hour" the thief "comes." [Matthew 24:42] On this account
also Paul said,
Ver. 3. "When they are saying peace and safety, then sudden destruction
comes upon them, as travail upon a woman with child; and they shall in nowise
escape."
Here he has glanced at something which he has also said in his second

Epistle. For since they indeed were in affliction, but they that warred on them at
ease and in luxury, and then while he comforted them in their present sufferings
by this mention of the Resurrection, the others insulted them with arguments
taken from their forefathers, and said, When will it happen?— which the
Prophets also said, "Woe unto them that say, Let him make speed, let God hasten
his work, that we may see it: and let the counsel of the Holy One of Israel come,
that we may know it!" [Isaiah 5:19]; and again "Woe unto them that desire the
day of the Lord." [Amos 5:18] He means this day; for he does not speak simply
of persons who desire it, but of those who desire it because they disbelieve it:
and "the day of the Lord," he says, "is darkness, and not light"— see then how
Paul consoles them, as if he had said, Let them not account their being in a
prosperous state, a proof that the Judgment is not coming. For so it is that it will
come.
But it may be worth while to ask, If Antichrist comes, and Elias comes,
how is it "when they say Peace and safety," that then a sudden destruction comes
upon them? For these things do not permit the day to come upon them unawares,
being signs of its coming. But he does not mean this to be the time of Antichrist,
and the whole day, because that will be a sign of the coming of Christ, but
Himself will not have a sign, but will come suddenly and unexpectedly. For
travail, indeed, you say, does not come upon the pregnant woman unexpectedly:
for she knows that after nine months the birth will take place. And yet it is very
uncertain. For some bring forth at the seventh month, and others at the ninth.
And at any rate the day and the hour is uncertain. With respect to this therefore,
Paul speaks thus. And the image is exact. For there are not many sure signs of
travail; many indeed have brought forth in the high roads, or when out of their
houses and abroad, not foreseeing it. And he has not only glanced here at the
uncertainty, but also at the bitterness of the pain. For as she while sporting,
laughing, not looking for anything at all, being suddenly seized with
unspeakable pains, is pierced through with the pangs of labor— so will it be with
those souls, when the Day comes upon them.