intelligible species.
Reply to Objection 1: The thing understood is in the intellect by its
own likeness; and it is in this sense that we say that the thing
actually understood is the intellect in act, because the likeness of the
thing understood is the form of the intellect, as the likeness of a
sensible thing is the form of the sense in act. Hence it does not
follow that the intelligible species abstracted is what is actually
understood; but rather that it is the likeness thereof.
Reply to Objection 2: In these words "the thing actually understood"
there is a double implication---the thing which is understood, and the
fact that it is understood. In like manner the words "abstract
universal" imply two things, the nature of a thing and its abstraction
or universality. Therefore the nature itself to which it occurs to be
understood, abstracted or considered as universal is only in
individuals; but that it is understood, abstracted or considered as
universal is in the intellect. We see something similar to this is in the
senses. For the sight sees the color of the apple apart from its smell.
If therefore it be asked where is the color which is seen apart from
the smell, it is quite clear that the color which is seen is only in the
apple: but that it be perceived apart from the smell, this is owing to
the sight, forasmuch as the faculty of sight receives the likeness of
color and not of smell. In like manner humanity understood is only in
this or that man; but that humanity be apprehended without
conditions of individuality, that is, that it be abstracted and
consequently considered as universal, occurs to humanity inasmuch
as it is brought under the consideration of the intellect, in which
there is a likeness of the specific nature, but not of the principles of
individuality.
Reply to Objection 3: There are two operations in the sensitive part.
One, in regard of impression only, and thus the operation of the
senses takes place by the senses being impressed by the sensible.
The other is formation, inasmuch as the imagination forms for itself
an image of an absent thing, or even of something never seen. Both
of these operations are found in the intellect. For in the first place
there is the passion of the passive intellect as informed by the
intelligible species; and then the passive intellect thus informed
forms a definition, or a division, or a composition, expressed by a
word. Wherefore the concept conveyed by a word is its definition;
and a proposition conveys the intellect's division or composition.
Words do not therefore signify the intelligible species themselves;

but that which the intellect forms for itself for the purpose of judging
of external things.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the more universal is first in our

intellectual cognition?
Objection 1: It would seem that the more universal is not first in our
intellectual cognition. For what is first and more known in its own
nature, is secondarily and less known in relation to ourselves. But
universals come first as regards their nature, because "that is first
which does not involve the existence of its correlative" (Categor. ix).
Therefore the universals are secondarily known as regards our
intellect.
Objection 2: Further, the composition precedes the simple in relation
to us. But universals are the more simple. Therefore they are known
secondarily by us.
Objection 3: Further, the Philosopher says (Phys. i, 1), that the object
defined comes in our knowledge before the parts of its definition.
But the more universal is part of the definition of the less universal,
as "animal" is part of the definition of "man." Therefore the
universals are secondarily known by us.
Objection 4: Further, we know causes and principles by their effects.
But universals are principles. Therefore universals are secondarily
known by us.
On the contrary, "We must proceed from the universal to the singular
and individual" (Phys. i, 1)
I answer that, In our knowledge there are two things to be
considered. First, that intellectual knowledge in some degree arises
from sensible knowledge: and, because sense has singular and
individual things for its object, and intellect has the universal for its
object, it follows that our knowledge of the former comes before our
knowledge of the latter. Secondly, we must consider that our
intellect proceeds from a state of potentiality to a state of actuality;
and every power thus proceeding from potentiality to actuality
comes first to an incomplete act, which is the medium between
potentiality and actuality, before accomplishing the perfect act. The
perfect act of the intellect is complete knowledge, when the object is
distinctly and determinately known; whereas the incomplete act is
imperfect knowledge, when the object is known indistinctly, and as it