man does not love those three syllables which he knows already. But if he
loves this in them, that he knows them to signify something, this is not
the point now in question, for it is not this which he seeks to know. But
we are now asking what it is he loves, in that which he is desirous to
know, but which certainly he does not yet know; and we are therefore
wondering why he loves, since we know most assuredly that nothing can
be loved unless it be known. What then does he love, except that he
knows and perceives in the reason of things what excellence there is in
learning, in which the knowledge of all signs is contained; and what
benefit there is in the being skilled in these, since by them human
fellowship mutually communicates its own perceptions, lest the
assemblies of men should be actually worse than utter solitude, if they
were not to mingle their thoughts by conversing together? The soul, then,
discerns this fitting and serviceable species, and knows it, and loves it;
and he who seeks the meaning of any words of which he is ignorant,
studies to render that species perfect in himself as much as he can: for it
is one thing to behold it in the light of truth, another to desire it as within
his own capacity. For he beholds in the light of truth how great and how
good a thing it is to understand and to speak all tongues of all nations,
and so to hear no tongue and to be heard by none as from a foreigner.
The beauty, then, of this knowledge is already discerned by thought, and
the thing being known is loved; and that thing is so regarded, and so
stimulates the studious zeal of learners, that they are moved with respect
to it, and desire it eagerly in all the labor which they spend upon the
attainment of such a capacity, in order that they may also embrace in
practice that which they know beforehand by reason. And so every one,
the nearer he approaches that capacity in hope, the more fervently
desires it with love; for those branches of learning are studied the more
eagerly, which men do not despair of being able to attain; for when any
one entertains no hope of attaining his end, then he either loves
lukewarmly or does not love at all, howsoever he may see the excellence
of it. Accordingly, because the knowledge of all languages is almost
universally felt to be hopeless, every one studies most to know that of his
own nation; but if he feels that he is not sufficient even to comprehend
this perfectly, yet no one is so indolent in this knowledge as not to wish to
know, when he hears an unknown word, what it is, and to seek and learn
it if he can. And while he is seeking it, certainly he has a studious zeal of

learning, and seems to love a thing he does not know; but the case is
really otherwise. For that species touches the mind, which the mind
knows and thinks, wherein the fitness is clearly visible which accrues
from the associating of minds with one another, in the hearing and
returning of known and spoken words. And this species kindles studious
zeal in him who seeks what indeed he knows not, but gazes upon and
loves the unknown form to which that pertains. If then, for example, any
one were to ask, What is temetum (for I had instanced this word already),
and it were said to him, What does this matter to you? he will answer,
Lest perhaps I hear some one speaking, and understand him not; or
perhaps read the word somewhere, and know not what the writer meant.
Who, pray, would say to such an inquirer, Do not care about
understanding what you hear; do not care about knowing what you read?
For almost every rational soul quickly discerns the beauty of that
knowledge, through which the thoughts of men are mutually made
known by the enunciation of significant words; and it is on account of this
fitness thus known, and because known therefore loved, that such an
unknown word is studiously sought out. When then he hears and learns
that wine was called "temetum" by our forefathers, but that the word is
already quite obsolete in our present usage of language, he will think
perhaps that he has still need of the word on account of this or that book
of those forefathers. But if he holds these also to be superfluous, perhaps
he does now come to think the word not worth remembering, since he
sees it has nothing to do with that species of learning which he knows
with the mind, and gazes upon, and so loves.
3. Wherefore in all cases the love of a studious mind, that is, of one that
wishes to know what it does not know, is not the love of that thing which
it does not know, but of that which it knows; on account of which it
wishes to know what it does not know. Or if it is so inquisitive as to be
carried away, not for any other cause known to it, but by the mere love of
knowing things unknown; then such an inquisitive person is, doubtless,
distinguishable from an ordinary student, yet does not, any more than he,
love things he does not know; nay, on the contrary, he is more fitly said to
hate things he knows not, of which he wishes that there should be none,
in wishing to know everything. But lest any one should lay before us a
more difficult question, by declaring that it is just as impossible for any