Reply to Objection 1: A thing moves or operates for an end in two
ways. First, in moving itself to the end, as man and other rational
creatures; and such things have knowledge of their end, and of the
means to the end. Secondly, a thing is said to move or operate for an
end, as though moved or directed by another thereto, as an arrow
directed to the target by the archer, who knows the end unknown to
the arrow. Wherefore, as the movement of the arrow towards a
definite end shows clearly that it is directed by someone with
knowledge, so the unvarying course of natural things which are
without knowledge, shows clearly that the world is governed by
some reason.
Reply to Objection 2: In all created things there is a stable element,
at least primary matter; and something belonging to movement, if
under movement we include operation. And things need governing
as to both: because even that which is stable, since it is created from
nothing, would return to nothingness were it not sustained by a
governing hand, as will be explained later (Question 104, Article 1).
Reply to Objection 3: The natural necessity inherent in those beings
which are determined to a particular thing, is a kind of impression
from God, directing them to their end; as the necessity whereby an
arrow is moved so as to fly towards a certain point is an impression
from the archer, and not from the arrow. But there is a difference,
inasmuch as that which creatures receive from God is their nature,
while that which natural things receive from man in addition to their
nature is somewhat violent. Wherefore, as the violent necessity in
the movement of the arrow shows the action of the archer, so the
natural necessity of things shows the government of Divine
Providence.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the end of the government of the world is

something outside the world?
Objection 1: It would seem that the end of the government of the
world is not something existing outside the world. For the end of the
government of a thing is that whereto the thing governed is brought.
But that whereto a thing is brought is some good in the thing itself;
thus a sick man is brought back to health, which is something good
in him. Therefore the end of government of things is some good not
outside, but within the things themselves.
Objection 2: Further, the Philosopher says (Ethic. i, 1): "Some ends
are an operation; some are a work"---i.e. produced by an operation.
But nothing can be produced by the whole universe outside itself;
and operation exists in the agent. Therefore nothing extrinsic can be
the end of the government of things.
Objection 3: Further, the good of the multitude seems to consist in
order, and peace which is the "tranquillity of order," as Augustine
says (De Civ. Dei xix, 13). But the world is composed of a multitude
of things. Therefore the end of the government of the world is the
peaceful order in things themselves. Therefore the end of the
government of the world is not an extrinsic good.
On the contrary, It is written (Prov. 16:4): "The Lord hath made all
things for Himself." But God is outside the entire order of the
universe. Therefore the end of all things is something extrinsic to
them.
I answer that, As the end of a thing corresponds to its beginning, it is
not possible to be ignorant of the end of things if we know their
beginning. Therefore, since the beginning of all things is something
outside the universe, namely, God, it is clear from what has been
expounded above (Question 44, Articles 1,2), that we must conclude
that the end of all things is some extrinsic good. This can be proved
by reason. For it is clear that good has the nature of an end;
wherefore, a particular end of anything consists in some particular
good; while the universal end of all things is the Universal Good;
Which is good of Itself by virtue of Its Essence, Which is the very
essence of goodness; whereas a particular good is good by
participation. Now it is manifest that in the whole created universe