appointing a law observable to the outward senses, that all things should continue each in its own
order; and He reigns manifestly over things visible and pertaining to men; and brings in just judgment
and worthy upon all; as David also, clearly pointing to this, says, "Our God shall openly come, and
will not keep silence." Then he shows also the judgment which is brought in by Him, saying,
"A fire shall burn in His sight, and a strong tempest shall rage round about Him. He shall call upon
the heaven from above, and the earth, to judge His people."

### Chapter XIX.—A comparison is instituted between the disobedient and sinning Eve and the
Virgin Mary, her patroness. Various and discordant heresies are mentioned.
1. That the Lord then was manifestly coming to His own things, and was sustaining them by
means of that creation which is supported by Himself, and was making a recapitulation of that
disobedience which had occurred in connection with a tree, through the obedience which was
[exhibited by Himself when He hung] upon a tree, [the effects] also of that deception being done
away with, by which that virgin Eve, who was already espoused to a man, was unhappily
misled,—was happily announced, through means of the truth [spoken] by the angel to the Virgin
Mary, who was [also espoused] to a man. For just as the former was led astray by the word of
an angel, so that she fled from God when she had transgressed His word; so did the latter, by an
angelic communication, receive the glad tidings that she should sustain (portaret) God, being
obedient to His word. And if the former did disobey God, yet the latter was persuaded to be obedient
to God, in order that the Virgin Mary might become the patroness (advocata) of the virgin Eve.
And thus, as the human race fell into bondage to death by means of a virgin, so is it rescued by a
virgin; virginal disobedience having been balanced in the opposite scale by virginal obedience. For
in the same way the sin of the first created man (protoplasti) receives amendment by the correction
of the First-begotten, and the coming of the serpent is conquered by the harmlessness of the dove,
those bonds being unloosed by which we had been fast bound to death.
2. The heretics being all unlearned and ignorant of God's arrangements, and not acquainted
with that dispensation by which He took upon Him human nature (inscii ejus quæ est secundum
hominem dispensationis), inasmuch as they blind themselves with regard to the truth, do in fact
speak against their own salvation. Some of them introduce another Father besides the Creator;
some, again, say that the world and its substance was made by certain angels; certain others
[maintain] that it was widely separated by Horos from him whom they represent as being the

Father—that it sprang forth (floruisse) of itself, and from itself was born. Then, again, others [of
them assert] that it obtained substance in those things which are contained by the Father, from
defect and ignorance; others still, despise the advent of the Lord manifest [to the senses], for they
do not admit His incarnation; while others, ignoring the arrangement [that He should be born] of
a virgin, maintain that He was begotten by Joseph. And still further, some affirm that neither their
soul nor their body can receive eternal life, but merely the inner man. Moreover, they will have it
that this [inner man] is that which is the understanding (sensum) in them, and which they decree
as being the only thing to ascend to "the perfect." Others [maintain], as I have said in the first book,
that while the soul is saved, their body does not participate in the salvation which comes from God;
in which [book] I have also set forward the hypotheses of all these men, and in the second have
pointed out their weakness and inconsistency.