of wickedness. The fox also is crafty, and fraudulent. Emulate not this vice; but
as the bee, in flying over the meadows, does not choose every sort of flower; but
selecting that which is useful, leaves the rest; so also do thou; and while
surveying the whole race of irrational animals, if any thing profitable may be
drawn from these, accept it; the advantages which they have naturally, make it
your business to practise of your own free choice. For in this respect also you
have been honoured of God; that what they have as natural advantages He has
permitted you to achieve of your own free choice, in order that you may also
receive a reward. For good works with them spring not from free will, and
reason, but from nature only. In other words, the bee makes honey, not because it
has learned this by reason and reflection, but because it is instructed by nature.
Because if the work had not been natural, and allotted to the race, some of them
assuredly would have been unskilled in their art; whereas from the time that the
world was first made, even to the present day, no one has observed bees resting
from labour, and not making honey. For such natural characteristics are common
to the whole race. But those things which depend on our free choice are not
common; for labour is necessary that they may be accomplished.
7. Take then all the best things, and clothe yourself with them; for you are
indeed king of the irrationals; but kings, if there be any thing excellent possessed
by their subjects, be it gold or silver, or precious stones, or sumptuous vestments,
usually possess the same in greater abundance. From the creation also, learn to
admire your Lord! And if any of the things you see exceed your comprehension,
and you are not able to find the reason thereof, yet for this glorify the Creator,
that the wisdom of these works surpasses your understanding. Say not,
wherefore is this? Or, to what end? For everything is useful, even if we know not
the reason of it. As therefore, if you go into a surgery, and see many instruments
lying before you, you wonder at the variety of the implements though ignorant of
their use; so also act with respect to the creation. Although you see many of the
animals, and of the herbs, and plants, and other things, of which you know not
the use, admire the variety of these; and feel astonishment for this reason at the

perfect workmanship of God; that He has neither made all things manifest to
you, nor permitted all things to be unknown. For He has not permitted all things
to be unknown, lest you should say, that the things that exist are not of
providence. He has not permitted all things to be known to you, lest the
greatness of your knowledge should excite you to pride. Thus at least it was that
the evil demon precipitated the first man headlong and by means of the hope of
greater knowledge, deprived him of that he already possessed. Therefore also, a
certain wise man exhorts, saying, "Seek not out the things that are too hard for
you; neither search the things that are too deep for you. But what is commanded
you, think thereupon with reverence; for the greater part of His works are done
in secret." And again; "More things are showed unto you than men understand."
But this he speaks for the purpose of consoling the man who is sad and vexed,
because he does not know all things; for even those things he observes, which
you are permitted to know, greatly surpass your understanding; for you could not
have found them by yourself, but you have been taught them of God. Wherefore
be content with the wealth given you, and do not seek more; but for what you
have received give thanks; and do not be angry on account of those things which
you have not received. And, for what you know, give glory, and do not stumble
at those things of which you are ignorant. For God has made both alike
profitably; and has revealed some things, but hidden others, providing for your
safety.
8. One mode, then, of knowing God, is that by the creation, which I have
spoken of, and which might occupy many days. For in order that we might go
over the formation of man only with exactness, (and I speak of exactness such as
is possible to us, not of real exactness; since many as are the reasons we have
already given for the works of creation, many more of these there are, ineffable,
which God who made them knows, for of course we do not know them all); in
order then, I say, that we might take an exact survey of the whole modelling of
man; and that we might discover the skill there is in every member; and examine
the distribution and situation of the sinews, the veins, and the arteries, and the