the same beginning one made the greater, one the less, increase; as might be
expected, in the rewards also, they do not enjoy the same.
But see Him everywhere, not requiring it again immediately. For in the case
of the vineyard, He let it out to husbandmen, and went into a far country; and
here He committed to them the talents, and took His journey, that you might
learn His long-suffering. And to me He seems to say these things, to intimate the
resurrection. But here it is no more a vineyard and husbandmen, but all servants.
For not to rulers only, nor to Jews, but to all, does He address His discourse. And
they who bring a return unto Him confess frankly, both what is their own, and
what their Master's. And the one says, Lord, "You gave me five talents;" and the
other says, "two," indicating that from Him they received the source of their
gain, and they are very thankful, and reckon all to Him.
What then says the Master? "Well done, thou good" (for this is goodness to
look to one's neighbor) "and faithful servant; you were faithful over few things, I
will set you over many things: enter thou into the joy of your Lord,"
[Matthew 25:23] meaning by this expression all blessedness.
But not so that other one, but how? "I knew that you are a hard man,
reaping where you sowed not, and gathering where you did not scatter: and I
was afraid, and hid your talent: lo, there you have that is yours."
[Matthew 25:24-25] What then the Master? "You ought to have put my money to
the exchangers," that is, "that ought to have spoken, to have admonished, to have
advised." But are they disobedient? Yet this is nought to you.
What could be more gentle than this? For men indeed do not so, but him
that has put out the money at usury, even him do they make also responsible to
require it again. But He not so; but, You ought, He says, to have put it out, and to
have committed the requiring of it again to me. And I should have required it
with increase; by increase upon the hearing, meaning the showing forth of the
works. You ought to have done that which is easier, and to have left to me what
is more difficult. Forasmuch then as he did not this, "Take," says He, "the talent
from him, and give it to him that has ten talents. For unto every one that has

shall be given, and he shall have abundance; but from him that has not shall be
taken away even that which he has." [Matthew 25:28-29] What then is this? He
that has a gift of word and teaching to profit thereby, and uses it not, will lose the
gift also; but he that gives diligence, will gain to himself the gift in more
abundance; even as the other loses what he had received. But not to this is the
penalty limited for him that is slothful, but even intolerable is the punishment,
and with the punishment the sentence, which is full of a heavy accusation. For
"cast," says He, "the unprofitable servant into outer darkness: there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth." Do you see how not only the spoiler, and the
covetous, nor only the doer of evil things, but also he that does not good things,
is punished with extreme punishment.
Let us hearken then to these words. As we have opportunity, let us help on
our salvation, let us get oil for our lamps, let us labor to add to our talent. For if
we be backward, and spend our time in sloth here, no one will pity us any more
hereafter, though we should wail ten thousand times. He also that had on the
filthy garments condemned himself, and profited nothing. He also that had the
one talent restored that which was committed to his charge, and yet was
condemned. The virgins again entreated, and came unto Him and knocked, and
all in vain, and without effect.
Knowing then these things, let us contribute alike wealth, and diligence,
and protection, and all things for our neighbor's advantage. For the talents here
are each person's ability, whether in the way of protection, or in money, or in
teaching, or in what thing soever of the kind. Let no man say, I have but one
talent, and can do nothing; for you can even by one approve yourself. For you
are not poorer than that widow; you are not more uninstructed than Peter and
John, who were both "unlearned and ignorant men;" [Acts 4:13] but
nevertheless, since they showed forth a zeal, and did all things for the common
good, they attained to Heaven. For nothing is so pleasing to God, as to live for
the common advantage.
For this end God gave us speech, and hands, and feet, and strength of body,