bystanders despise? Him who insults, or him who being insulted keeps silence?
Passion indeed suggests, that they despise him who is insulted: but let us look
into it now while we are free from that excitement, in order that we may not be
carried away when the time comes. Say, whom do we all condemn? Plainly the
man who insults: and if he be an inferior, we shall say that he is even mad; if an
equal, that he is foolish; if a superior, still we shall not approve of it. For which
man, I ask, is worthy of approval, the man who is excited, who is tossed with a
tempest of passion, who is infuriated like a wild beast, who demeans himself in
this sort against our common nature, or he who lives in a state of calm, in a
haven of repose, and in virtuous equanimity? Is not the one like an angel, the
other not even like a man? For the one cannot even bear his own evils, while the
other bears even those of others also: here, the man cannot even endure himself;
there, he endures another too: the one is in danger of shipwreck, the other sails in
safety, his ship wafted along the favoring gales: for he has not suffered the squall
of passion to catch his sails and overturn the bark of his understanding: but the
breath of a soft and sweet air fanning upon it, the breath of forbearance, wafts it
with much tranquillity into the haven of wise equanimity. And like as when a
ship is in danger of foundèring, the sailors know not what they cast away,
whether what they lay hands upon be their own or other men's property, but they
throw overboard all the contents without discrimination, alike the precious and
what is not such: but when the storm has ceased, then reckoning up all that they
have thrown out, they shed tears, and are not sensible of the calm for the loss of
what they have thrown overboard: so here, when passion blows hard, and the
storm is raised, people in flinging out their words know not how to use order or
fitness; but when the passion has ceased, then recalling to mind what kind of
words they have given utterance to, they consider the loss and feel not the quiet,
when they remember the words by which they have disgraced themselves, and
sustained most grievous loss, not as to money, but as to character for moderation
and gentleness. Anger is a darkness. "The fool," says Scripture, "has said in his
heart, There is no God." [Psalm 13:1] Perhaps also of the angry man it is

suitable to say the same, that the angry man has said, There is no God. For, says
Scripture, "Through the multitude of his anger he will not seek" (after God).
[Psalm 10:4] For let what pious thought will enter in, (passion) thrusts and drives
all out, flings all athwart. (b) When you are told, that he whom you abused
uttered not one bitter word, do you not for this feel more pain than you have
inflicted? (a) If you in your own mind do not feel more pain than he whom you
have abused, abuse still; (but) though there be none to call you to account, the
judgment of your conscience, having taken you privately, shall give you a
thousand lashes, (when you think) how you poured out a flood of railings on one
so meek, and humble, and forbearing. We are forever saying these things, but we
do not see them exhibited in works. You, a human being, insult your fellowman? You, a servant, your fellow-servant? But why do I wonder at this, when
many even insult God? Let this be a consolation to you when suffering insult.
Are you insulted? God also is insulted. Are you reviled? God also was reviled.
Are you treated with scorn? Why, so was our Master also. In these things He
shares with us, but not so in the contrary things. For He never insulted another
unjustly: God forbid! He never reviled, never did a wrong. So that we are those
who share with Him, not ye. For to endure when insulted is God's part: to be
merely abusive, is the part of the devil. See the two sides. "You have a devil"
[John 7:20 and 18:22], Christ was told: He received a blow on the face from the
servant of the high-priest. They who wrongfully insult, are in the same class with
these. For if Peter was even called "Satan" [Matthew 16:23] for one word; much
more shall these men, when they do the works of the Jews, be called, as those
were called, "children of the devil" [John 8:44], because they wrought the works
of the devil. You insult; who are you, I ask (that you do so)? Nay, rather the
reason why you insult, is this, that you are nothing: no one that is human insults.
So that what is said in quarrels, "Who are you?" ought to be put in the contrary
way: "Insult: for you are nothing." Instead of that the phrase is, "Who are you,
that you insult?" "A better man than you," is the answer. And yet it is just the
contrary: but because we put the question amiss, therefore they answer amiss: so