from a change of life, and very likely also of the moral character. "They
appointed two," it is said, "Joseph called Barsabus, who was surnamed Justus,
and Matthias. And they prayed, and said; Thou, Lord, which know the hearts of
all men, show whether of these two you have chosen, that he may take part of
this ministry and Apostleship, from which Judas by transgression fell, that he
might go to his own place." (v. 24-25.) They do well to mention the sin of Judas,
thereby showing that it is a witness they ask to have; not increasing the number,
but not suffering it to be diminished. "And they gave forth their lots" (for the
spirit was not yet sent), "and the lot fell upon Matthias: and he was numbered
with the eleven Apostles." [Acts 1:26]
"Then," it says, returned they unto Jerusalem from the mount called Olivet
(Recapitulation), ["which is near to Jerusalem, at the distance of a sabbath-day's
journey:"] so that there was no long way to go, to be a cause of alarm to them
while yet trembling and fearful. "And when they had come in, they went up into
an upper room." They dared not appear in the town. They also did well to go up
into an upper room, as it became less easy to arrest them at once. "And they
continued," it is said, "with one accord in prayer." Do you see how watchful they
were? "Continuing in prayer," and "with one accord," as it were with one soul,
continuing therein: two things reported in their praise. ["Where they were
abiding," etc., to, "And Mary the Mother of Jesus and His brethren."] Now
Joseph perhaps was dead: for it is not to be supposed that when the brethren had
become believers, Joseph believed not; he who in fact had believed before any.
Certain it is that we nowhere find him looking upon Christ as man merely. As
where His mother said, ["Your father and I did seek you sorrowing." [Luke 2:48]
And upon another occasion, it was said,] "Your mother and your brethren seek
you." [Matthew 13:47] So that Joseph knew this before all others. And to them
[the brethren] Christ said, The world cannot hate you, but Me it hates. [John 7:7]
Again, consider the moderation of James. He it was who received the
Bishopric of Jerusalem, and here he says nothing. Mark also the great
moderation of the other Apostles, how they concede the throne to him, and no

longer dispute with each other. For that Church was as it were in heaven: having
nothing to do with this world's affairs: and resplendent not with wails, no, nor
with numbers, but with the zeal of them that formed the assembly. They were
"about an hundred and twenty," it says. The seventy perhaps whom Christ
Himself had chosen, and other of the more earnest-minded disciples, as Joseph
and Matthias. [Acts 1:14] There were women, he says, many, who followed
Him. [Mark 15:41] ["The number of the names together.] Together " they were
on all occasions.
["Men and brethren," etc.] Here is forethought for providing a teacher; here
was the first who ordained a teacher. He did not say, 'We are sufficient.' So far
was he beyond all vain-glory, and he looked to one thing alone. And yet he had
the same power to ordain as they all collectively. But well might these things be
done in this fashion, through the noble spirit of the man, and because prelacy
then was not an affair of dignity, but of provident care for the governed. This
neither made the elected to become elated, for it was to dangers that they were
called, nor those not elected to make a grievance of it, as if they were disgraced.
But things are not done in this fashion now; nay, quite the contrary.— For
observe, they were an hundred and twenty, and he asks for one out of the whole
body: with good right, as having been put in charge of them: for to him had
Christ said, "And when you are converted, strengthen your brethren." [Luke
22:32]
"For he was numbered with us," ([πρὥτος τοῦ πράγματος αὐθεντει] absent
from A.B.C) says Peter. On this account it behooves to propose another; to be a
witness in his place. And see how he imitates his Master, ever discoursing from
the Scriptures, and saying nothing as yet concerning Christ; namely, that He had
frequently predicted this Himself. Nor does he mention where the Scripture
speaks of the treachery of Judas; for instance, "The mouth of the wicked and the
mouth of the deceitful are opened against me" [Psalm 109:1]; but where it
speaks only of his punishment; for this was most to their advantage. It shows
again the benevolence of the Lord: "For he was numbered with us" ([τοὕτο γὰρ