making man's nature all that enemies could? Or even worse than that, by as
much as the soul is better than the body. Oh, you that were more senseless than
irrational creatures, and more shameless than dogs! For in no case does such
intercourse take place with them, but nature acknowledges her own limits. But
you have even made our race dishonored below things irrational, by such
indignities inflicted upon and by each other. Whence then were these evils born?
Of luxury; of not knowing God. For so soon as any have cast out the fear of
Him, all that is good straightway goes to ruin.
Now, that this may not happen, let us keep clear before our eyes the fear of
God. For nothing, surely nothing, so ruins a man as to slip from this anchor, as
nothing saves so much as continually looking thereto. For if by having a man
before our eyes we feel more backward at doing sins, and often even through
feeling abashed at servants of a better stamp we keep from doing anything amiss,
consider what safety we shall enjoy by having God before our eyes! For in no
case will the Devil attack us when so conditioned, in that he would be laboring
without profit. But should he see us wandering abroad, and going about without
a bridle, by getting a beginning in ourselves he will be able to drive us off
afterwards any whither. And as it happens with thoughtless servants at market,
who leave the needful services which their masters have entrusted to them, and
rivet themselves at a mere haphazard to those who fall in their way, and waste
out their leisure there; this also we undergo when we depart from the
commandments of God. For we presently get standing on, admiring riches, and
beauty of person, and the other things which we have no business with, just as
those servants attend to the beggars that do jugglers' feats, and then, arriving too
late, have to be grievously beaten at home. And many pass the road set before
them through following others, who are behaving in the same unseemly way. But
let not us so do. For we have been sent to dispatch many affairs that are urgent.
And if we leave those, and stand gaping at these useless things, all our time will
be wasted in vain and to no profit, and we shall suffer the extreme of
punishment. For if you wish yourself to be busy, you have whereat you ought to

wonder, and to gape all your days, things which are no subject for laughter, but
for wondering and manifold praises. As he that admires things ridiculous, will
himself often be such, and even worse than he that occasions the laughter. And
that you may not fall into this, spring away from it immediately. For why is it,
pray, that you stand gaping and fluttering at sight of riches? What do you see so
wonderful, and able to fix your eyes upon them? These gold-harnessed horses,
these lackeys, partly savages, and partly eunuchs, and costly raiment, and the
soul that is getting utterly soft in all this, and the haughty brow, and the
bustlings, and the noise? And wherein do these things deserve wonder? What are
they better than the beggars that dance and pipe in the market-place? For these
too being taken with a sore famine of virtue, dance a dance more ridiculous than
theirs, led and carried round at one time to costly tables, at another to the lodging
of prostitute women, and at another to a swarm of flatterers and a host of
hangers-on. But if they do wear gold, this is why they are the most pitiable,
because the things which are nothing to them, are most the subject of their eager
desire. Do not now, I pray, look at their raiment, but open their soul, and
consider if it is not full of countless wounds, and clad with rags, and destitute,
and defenceless! What then is the use of this madness of shows? For it were
much better to be poor and living in virtue, than to be a king with wickedness;
since the poor man in himself enjoys all the delights of the soul, and does not
even perceive his outward poverty for his inward riches. But the king, luxurious
in those things which do not at all belong to him, is punished in those things
which are his most real concern, even the soul, the thoughts, and the conscience,
which are to go away with him to the other world. Since then we know these
things, let us lay aside the gilded raiment, let us take up virtue and the pleasure
which comes thereof. For so, both here and hereafter, shall we come to enjoy
great delights, through the grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ,
through Whom, and with Whom, be glory to the Father, with the Holy Spirit, for
ever and ever. Amen.