FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.77, C.3.

even in particular.
Therefore it seems that the passions cannot draw the reason against
its universal knowledge; because it is impossible for it to have
universal knowledge together with an opposite particular judgment.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (Rm. 7:23): "I see another law in
my members, fighting against the law of my mind, and captivating
me in the law of sin." Now the law that is in the members is
concupiscence, of which he had been speaking previously. Since
then concupiscence is a passion, it seems that a passion draws the
reason counter to its knowledge.
I answer that, As the Philosopher states (Ethic. vii, 2), the opinion of
Socrates was that knowledge can never be overcome by passion;
wherefore he held every virtue to be a kind of knowledge, and every
sin a kind of ignorance. In this he was somewhat right, because,
since the object of the will is a good or an apparent good, it is never
moved to an evil, unless that which is not good appear good in some
respect to the reason; so that the will would never tend to evil,
unless there were ignorance or error in the reason. Hence it is
written (Prov. 14:22): "They err that work evil."
Experience, however, shows that many act contrary to the
knowledge that they have, and this is confirmed by Divine authority,
according to the words of Lk. 12:47: "The servant who knew that the
will of his lord . . . and did not . . . shall be beaten with many stripes,"
and of James 4:17: "To him . . . who knoweth to do good, and doth it
not, to him it is a sin." Consequently he was not altogether right, and
it is necessary, with the Philosopher (Ethic. vii, 3) to make a
distinction. Because, since man is directed to right action by a
twofold knowledge, viz. universal and particular, a defect in either of
them suffices to hinder the rectitude of the will and of the deed, as
stated above (Question 76, Article 1). It may happen, then, that a man
has some knowledge in general, e.g. that no fornication is lawful,
and yet he does not know in particular that this act, which is
fornication, must not be done; and this suffices for the will not to
follow the universal knowledge of the reason. Again, it must be
observed that nothing prevents a thing which is known habitually
from not being considered actually: so that it is possible for a man to
have correct knowledge not only in general but also in particular,
and yet not to consider his knowledge actually: and in such a case it
does not seem difficult for a man to act counter to what he does not

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.77, C.3.

actually consider. Now, that a man sometimes fails to consider in
particular what he knows habitually, may happen through mere lack
of attention: for instance, a man who knows geometry, may not
attend to the consideration of geometrical conclusions, which he is
ready to consider at any moment. Sometimes man fails to consider
actually what he knows habitually, on account of some hindrance
supervening, e.g. some external occupation, or some bodily
infirmity; and, in this way, a man who is in a state of passion, fails to
consider in particular what he knows in general, in so far as the
passions hinder him from considering it. Now it hinders him in three
ways. First, by way of distraction, as explained above (Article 1).
Secondly, by way of opposition, because a passion often inclines to
something contrary to what man knows in general. Thirdly, by way of
bodily transmutation, the result of which is that the reason is
somehow fettered so as not to exercise its act freely; even as sleep
or drunkenness, on account of some change wrought on the body,
fetters the use of reason. That this takes place in the passions is
evident from the fact that sometimes, when the passions are very
intense, man loses the use of reason altogether: for many have gone
out of their minds through excess of love or anger. It is in this way
that passion draws the reason to judge in particular, against the
knowledge which it has in general.
Reply to Objection 1: Universal knowledge, which is most certain,
does not hold the foremost place in action, but rather particular
knowledge, since actions are about singulars: wherefore it is not
astonishing that, in matters of action, passion acts counter to
universal knowledge, if the consideration of particular knowledge be
lacking.
Reply to Objection 2: The fact that something appears good in
particular to the reason, whereas it is not good, is due to a passion:
and yet this particular judgment is contrary to the universal
knowledge of the reason.
Reply to Objection 3: It is impossible for anyone to have an actual
knowledge or true opinion about a universal affirmative proposition,
and at the same time a false opinion about a particular negative
proposition, or vice versa: but it may well happen that a man has
true habitual knowledge about a universal affirmative proposition,
and actually a false opinion about a particular negative: because an
act is directly opposed, not to a habit, but to an act.