for their own safety.
13. But it is now time that we should proceed to lay out before you the
customary table from St. Paul, by handling the subject of this day's reading, and
placing it in view for you all. What then was the text read today? "Charge them
that are rich in this world that they be not high-minded." [1 Timothy 6:17] When
he says, "the rich in this world," he makes it manifest, that there are others who
are rich, that is, in the world to come: such as was that Lazarus, poor as to the
present life, but rich as to the future; not in gold and silver, and such like
perishable and transitory store of wealth; but in those unutterable good things
"which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor has it entered into the heart of man."
[1 Corinthians 2:9] For this is true wealth and opulence, when there is good
unmixed, and not subject to any change. Not such was the case of that rich man
who despised him, but he became the poorest of mankind. Afterwards at least
when he sought to obtain but a drop of water, he did not get possession even of
that, to such extreme poverty was he come. For this reason he calls them rich "in
the present world," to teach you that along with the present life, worldly wealth
is annihilated. It goes no further, neither does it change its place with its
migrating possessors, but it often leaves them before their end; which therefore
he shows by saying, "Neither trust in uncertain riches;" for nothing is so
faithless as wealth; of which I have often said, and will not cease to say, that it is
a runaway, thankless servant, having no fidelity; and should you throw over him
ten thousand chains, he will make off dragging his chains after him. Frequently,
indeed, have those who possessed him shut him up with bars and doors, placing
their slaves round about for guards. But he has over-persuaded these very
servants, and has fled away together with his guards; dragging his keepers after
him like a chain, so little security was there in this custody. What then can be
more faithless than this? What more wretched than men devoted to it? When
men endeavour with all eagerness to collect so frail and fleeting a thing, they do
not hear what the prophet says: "Woe unto them who trust in their power, and
boast themselves in the multitude of their riches." Tell me why is this woe

pronounced?— "He heaps up treasure," says he, "and knows not for whom he
will gather it," — forasmuch as the labor is certain, but the enjoyment uncertain.
Very often you toil and endure trouble for enemies. The inheritance of your
wealth after your decease, coming as it does, in many instances, to those who
have injured you, and plotted against you in a thousand ways, has assigned you
the sins for your part, but the enjoyment to others!
14. But here, it is worthy of enquiry, for what reason he does not say,
"Charge those who are rich in the present world, not to be rich; charge them to
become poor; charge them to get rid of what they have;" but, "charge them, not
to be high-minded." For he knew that the root and foundation of riches is pride;
and that if any man understood how to be unassuming, he would not make much
ado about the matter. Tell me, indeed, for what reason you lead about so many
servants, parasites, and flatterers, and all the other forms of pomp? Not for
necessity, but only for pride; to the end that by these you may seem more
dignified than other men! Besides, he knew that wealth is not forbidden if it be
used for that which is necessary. For as I observed, wine is not a bad thing, but
drunkenness is so. A covetous man is one thing, and a rich man is another thing.
The covetous man is not rich; he is in want of many things, and while he needs
many things, he can never be rich. The covetous man is a keeper, not a master, of
wealth; a slave, not a lord. For he would sooner give any one a portion of his
flesh, than his buried gold. And as though he were ordered and compelled of
some one to touch nothing of these hidden treasures, so with all earnestness he
watches and keeps them, abstaining from his own, as if it were another's. And
certainly, they are not his own. For what he can neither determine to bestow
upon others, nor to distribute to the necessitous, although he may sustain infinite
punishments, how can he possibly account his own? How does he hold
possession of those things, of which he has neither the free use, nor enjoyment?
But besides this—Paul is not accustomed to enjoin everything on every man, but
accommodates himself to the weakness of his hearers, even, indeed, as Christ
also did. For when that rich man came to him, and asked him concerning Life, he