Matt. v. 44.

God, while He revealed God to man. For, in what way could we be partaken of the adoption of
sons, unless we had received from Him through the Son that fellowship which refers to Himself,
unless His Word, having been made flesh, had entered into communion with us? Wherefore also
He passed through every stage of life, restoring to all communion with God. Those, therefore, who
assert that He appeared putatively, and was neither born in the flesh nor truly made man, are as yet
under the old condemnation, holding out patronage to sin; for, by their showing, death has not been
vanquished, which "reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them that had not sinned after the
similitude of Adam's transgression." But the law coming, which was given by Moses, and
testifying of sin that it is a sinner, did truly take away his (death's) kingdom, showing that he was
no king, but a robber; and it revealed him as a murderer. It laid, however, a weighty burden upon
man, who had sin in himself, showing that he was liable to death. For as the law was spiritual, it
merely made sin to stand out in relief, but did not destroy it. For sin had no dominion over the spirit,
but over man. For it behoved Him who was to destroy sin, and redeem man under the power of
death, that He should Himself be made that very same thing which he was, that is, man; who had
been drawn by sin into bondage, but was held by death, so that sin should be destroyed by man,
and man should go forth from death. For as by the disobedience of the one man who was originally
moulded from virgin soil, the many were made sinners, and forfeited life; so was it necessary
that, by the obedience of one man, who was originally born from a virgin, many should be justified
and receive salvation. Thus, then, was the Word of God made man, as also Moses says: "God, true
are His works." But if, not having been made flesh, He did appear as if flesh, His work was not
a true one. But what He did appear, that He also was: God recapitulated in Himself the ancient
formation of man, that He might kill sin, deprive death of its power, and vivify man; and therefore
His works are true.

### Chapter XIX.—Jesus Christ was not a mere man, begotten from Joseph in the ordinary course
of nature, but was very God, begotten of the Father most high, and very man, born of the
Virgin.
1. But again, those who assert that He was simply a mere man, begotten by Joseph, remaining
in the bondage of the old disobedience, are in a state of death having been not as yet joined to the
Word of God the Father, nor receiving liberty through the Son, as He does Himself declare: "If the
preserved by Theodoret. We have followed the latter, which is preferred by all the editors.

Son shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed." But, being ignorant of Him who from the
Virgin is Emmanuel, they are deprived of His gift, which is eternal life; and not receiving the
incorruptible Word, they remain in mortal flesh, and are debtors to death, not obtaining the antidote
of life. To whom the Word says, mentioning His own gift of grace: "I said, Ye are all the sons of
the Highest, and gods; but ye shall die like men." He speaks undoubtedly these words to those
who have not received the gift of adoption, but who despise the incarnation of the pure generation
of the Word of God, defraud human nature of promotion into God, and prove themselves
ungrateful to the Word of God, who became flesh for them. For it was for this end that the Word
of God was made man, and He who was the Son of God became the Son of man, that man, having
been taken into the Word, and receiving the adoption, might become the son of God. For by no
other means could we have attained to incorruptibility and immortality, unless we had been united
to incorruptibility and immortality. But how could we be joined to incorruptibility and immortality,
unless, first, incorruptibility and immortality had become that which we also are, so that the
corruptible might be swallowed up by incorruptibility, and the mortal by immortality, that we might
receive the adoption of sons?
2. For this reason [it is, said], "Who shall declare His generation?" since "He is a man, and
who shall recognise Him?" But he to whom the Father which is in heaven has revealed Him,
knows Him, so that he understands that He who "was not born either by the will of the flesh, or by
the will of man," is the Son of man, this is Christ, the Son of the living God. For I have shown
from the Scriptures, that no one of the sons of Adam is as to everything, and absolutely, called
God, or named Lord. But that He is Himself in His own right, beyond all men who ever lived, God,
and Lord, and King Eternal, and the Incarnate Word, proclaimed by all the prophets, the apostles,