THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.60, C.3.

themselves; but not inasmuch as we are made holy by them.
Therefore they cannot be called sacraments as we understand
sacraments now.
Reply to Objection 2: Some things pertaining to the Old Testament
signified the holiness of Christ considered as holy in Himself. Others
signified His holiness considered as the cause of our holiness; thus
the sacrifice of the Paschal Lamb signified Christ's Sacrifice
whereby we are made holy: and such like are properly styled
sacraments of the Old Law.
Reply to Objection 3: Names are given to things considered in
reference to their end and state of completeness. Now a disposition
is not an end, whereas perfection is. Consequently things that
signify disposition to holiness are not called sacraments, and with
regard to these the objection is verified: only those are called
sacraments which signify the perfection of holiness in man.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.60, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether a sacrament is a sign of one thing only?

Objection 1: It seems that a sacrament is a sign of one thing only.
For that which signifies many things is an ambiguous sign, and
consequently occasions deception: this is clearly seen in equivocal
words. But all deception should be removed from the Christian
religion, according to Col. 2:8: "Beware lest any man cheat you by
philosophy and vain deceit." Therefore it seems that a sacrament is
not a sign of several things.
Objection 2: Further, as stated above (Article 2), a sacrament
signifies a holy thing in so far as it makes man holy. But there is only
one cause of man's holiness, viz. the blood of Christ; according to
Heb. 13:12: "Jesus, that He might sanctify the people by His own
blood, suffered without the gate." Therefore it seems that a
sacrament does not signify several things.
Objection 3: Further, it has been said above (Article 2, ad 3) that a
sacrament signifies properly the very end of sanctification. Now the
end of sanctification is eternal life, according to Rm. 6:22: "You have
your fruit unto sanctification, and the end life everlasting." Therefore
it seems that the sacraments signify one thing only, viz. eternal life.
On the contrary, In the Sacrament of the Altar, two things are
signified, viz. Christ's true body, and Christ's mystical body; as
Augustine says (Liber Sent. Prosper.).
I answer that, As stated above (Article 2) a sacrament properly
speaking is that which is ordained to signify our sanctification. In
which three things may be considered; viz. the very cause of our
sanctification, which is Christ's passion; the form of our
sanctification, which is grace and the virtues; and the ultimate end of
our sanctification, which is eternal life. And all these are signified by
the sacraments. Consequently a sacrament is a sign that is both a
reminder of the past, i.e. the passion of Christ; and an indication of
that which is effected in us by Christ's passion, i.e. grace; and a
prognostic, that is, a foretelling of future glory.
Reply to Objection 1: Then is a sign ambiguous and the occasion of
deception, when it signifies many things not ordained to one
another. But when it signifies many things inasmuch as, through