because the thing they aim at is not glory at all. And therefore their state of mind
is not called glory, but a something void of glory, vaingloriousness, so have all
the ancients named it, and with good reason; inasmuch as it is quite empty, and
contains nothing bright or glorious within it, but as players' masks seem to be
bright and lovely, but are hollow within, (for which cause, though they be more
beautiful than natural faces, yet they never draw any to love them,) even so, or
rather yet more wretchedly, has the applause of the multitude tricked out for us
this passion, dangerous as an antagonist, and cruel as a master. Its countenance
alone is bright, but within it is no more like the mask's mere emptiness, but
crammed with dishonor, and full of savage tyranny. Whence then, it may be
asked, has this passion, so unreasonable, so devoid of pleasure, its birth?
Whence else but from a low, mean soul? It cannot be that one who is captivated
by love of applause should imagine readily anything great or noble; he needs
must be base, mean, dishonorable, little. He who does nothing for virtue's sake,
but to please men worthy of no consideration, and who ever makes account of
their mistaken and erring opinions, how can he be worth anything? Consider; if
any one should ask him, What do you think of the many? He clearly would say,
"that they are thoughtless, and not to be regarded." Then if any one again should
ask him, "Would you choose to be like them?" I do not suppose he could possibly
desire to be like them. Must it not then be excessively ridiculous to seek the
good opinion of those whom you never would choose to resemble?
6. Do you say that they are many and a sort of collective body? This is the
very reason why you ought most to despise them. If when taken singly they are
contemptible, still more will this be the case when they are many; for when they
are assembled together, their individual folly is increased by numbers, and
becomes greater. So that a man might possibly take a single one of them and set
him right, but could not do so with them when together, because then their folly
becomes intense, and they are led like sheep, and follow in every direction the
opinions of one another. Tell me, will you seek to obtain this vulgar glory? Do
not, I beg and entreat you. It turns everything upside down; it is the mother of

avarice, of slander, of false witness, of treacheries; it arms and exasperates those
who have received no injury against those who have inflicted none. He who has
fallen into this disease neither knows friendship nor remembers old
companionship, and knows not how to respect any one at all; he has cast away
from his soul all goodness, and is at war with every one, unstable, without
natural affection.
Again, the passion of anger, tyrannical though it be and hard to bear, still is
not wont always to disturb, but only when it has persons that excite it; but that of
vainglory is ever active, and there is no time, as one may say, when it can cease,
since reason neither hinders nor restrains it, but it is always with us not only
persuading us to sin, but snatching from our hands anything which we may
chance to do aright, or sometimes not allowing us to do right at all. If Paul calls
covetousness idolatry, what ought we to name that which is mother, and root,
and source of it, I mean, vainglory? We cannot possibly find any term such as its
wickedness deserves. Beloved, let us now return to our senses; let us put off this
filthy garment, let us rend and cut it off from us, let us at some time or other
become free with true freedom, and be sensible of the nobility which has been
given to us by God; let us despise vulgar applause. For nothing is so ridiculous
and disgraceful as this passion, nothing so full of shame and dishonor. One may
in many ways see, that to love honor, is dishonor; and that true honor consists in
neglecting honor, in making no account of it, but in saying and doing everything
according to what seems good to God. In this way we shall be able to receive a
reward from Him who sees exactly all our doings, if we are content to have Him
only for a spectator. What need we other eyes, when He who shall confer the
prize is ever beholding our actions? Is it not a strange thing that, whatever a
servant does, he should do to please his master, should seek nothing more than
his master's observation, desire not to attract other eyes (though they be great
men who are looking on) to his conduct, but aim at one thing only, that his
master may observe him; while we who have a Lord so great, seek other
spectators who can nothing profit, but rather hurt us by their observation, and