preference to the uncircumcised. And he does not say, To the uncircumcised, but
goes on to the thing itself, speaking as follows: "Shall not his uncircumcision be
turned into circumcision?" And he does not say "reckoned," but "turned to,"
which was more expressive. As also above he does not say your circumcision is
reckoned uncircumcision, but has been made so.
Ver. 27. "And shall not the uncircumcision which is by nature judge?"
You see, he recognizes two uncircumcisions, one from nature, and the other
from the will. Here, however, he speaks of that from nature, but does not pause
here, but goes on, "if it fulfil the Law, judge you, who by the letter and
circumcision dost transgress the Law?" See his exquisite judgment. He does not
say, that the uncircumcision which is from nature shall judge the circumcision,
but while where the victory had been, he brings in the uncircumcision, yet where
the defeat is, he does not expose the circumcision as defeated; but the Jew
himself who had it, and so by the wording spares offending his hearer. And he
does not say, "you that hast the Law and the circumcision," but yet more mildly,
"you who by the letter and circumcision dost transgress the Law." That is, such
uncircumcision even stands up for the circumcision, for it has been wronged and
comes to the Law's assistance, for it has been insulted, and obtains a notable
triumph. For then is the victory decided, when it is not by Jew that Jew is
judged, but by the uncircumcised; as when he says, "The men of Nineveh shall
rise in judgment against this generation, and shall condemn it." [Matthew 12:41]
It is not then the Law that he dishonors (for he reverences it greatly), but him
that does disgrace to the Law. Next, having settled these grounds clearly, he goes
on confidently to define what the Jew really is; and he shows that it is not the
Jew, nor the circumcision, but he that is no Jew, and uncircumcised, whom he is
rejecting. And he seems indeed to stand up in its behalf, but yet does away with
the opinion regarding it, securing men's concurrence by the conclusion he comes
to. For he shows not only that there is no difference between the Jew and the
uncircumcised, but that the uncircumcised has even the advantage, if he take
heed to himself, and that it is he that is really the Jew; and so he says:

Ver. 12. "For he is not a Jew which is one outwardly."
Here he attacks them as doing all things for show.
Ver. 29. "But he is a Jew which is one inwardly; and circumcision is that of
the heart, in the spirit, and not in the letter."
By saying this he sets aside all things bodily. For the circumcision is
outwardly, and the sabbaths and the sacrifices and purifications: all of which he
hints in a single word, when he says, "For he is not a Jew which is one
outwardly." But since much was made of the circumcision, inasmuch as even the
sabbath gave way to it [John 7:22], he has good reason for aiming more
especially against it. But when he has said "in the spirit" he thereafter paves the
way for the conversation of the Church, and introduces the faith. For it too is in
the heart and spirit and has its praise of God. And how comes he not to show that
the Gentile which does aright is not inferior to the Jew which does aright, but
that the Gentile which does aright is better than the Jew which breaks the Law?
It was that he might make the victory an undoubted one. For when this is agreed
upon, of necessity the circumcision of the flesh is set aside, and the need of a
good life is everywhere demonstrated. For when the Greek is saved without
these, but the Jew with these is yet punished, Judaism stands by doing nothing.
And by Greek he again means not the idolatrous Greek, but the religous and
virtuous, and free from all legal observances.
Chap. iii. ver. 1. "What advantage then has the Jew?"
Since he has set all aside, the hearing, the teaching, the name of the Jew, the
circumcision, and all the other particulars by his saying that "he is not a Jew
which is one outwardly, but he which is one inwardly;" he next sees an objection
which starts up, and against this makes his stand. Now what is this objection? If,
he means, these things are no use, what reason was there for that nation being
called, and the circumcision too being given? What does he then and how does
he solve it? By the same means as he did before: for as there, he told, not of their
praises, but the benefits of God; nor their well doings (for to be called a Jew and
to know His Will and to approve the things which are more excellent, was no