eyes will you look the man in the face who worked with you to that end? What
will you have to plead for your excuse? For he that unwillingly, by compulsion
and not with his own consent, was raised to the office, may have something to
say for himself, though for the most part even such an one has no pardon to
expect, and yet truly he so far has something to plead in excuse. Think how it
fared with Simon Magus. What signifies it that you give not money, if, in place
of money, you pay court, you lay many plans, you set engines to work? "Your
money perish with you!" [Acts 8:20] Thus was it said to him, and thus will it be
said to these: your canvassing perish with you, because you have thought to
purchase the gift of God by human intrigue! But there is none such here? And
God forbid there should be! For it is not that I wish any thing of what I have
been saying to be applicable to you: but just now the connection has led us on to
these topics. In like manner when we talk against covetousness, we are not
preaching at you, no, nor against any one man personally. God grant it may be
the case, that these remedies were prepared by us without necessity. The wish of
the physician is, that after all his pains, his drugs may be thrown away because
not wanted: and this is just what we desire, that our words may not have been
needed, and so have been spoken to the wind, so as to be but words. I am ready
to submit to anything, rather than be reduced to the necessity of using this
language. But if you like, we are ready to leave off; only let our silence be
without bad effects. No one, I imagine, though he were ever so vainglorious,
would wish to make a display of severity, when there is nothing to call for it. I
will leave the teaching to you: for that is the best teaching, which teaches by
actions. For indeed the best physicians, although the sickness of their patients
brings them in fees, would rather their friends were well. And so we too wish all
to be well. [2 Corinthians 13:7] It is not that we desire to be approved, and you
reproved. I would gladly manifest, if it were possible, with my very eyes, the
love which I bear to you: for then no one would be able to reproach me, though
my language were ever so rough. "For speech of friends, yea, were it insult, can
be borne;" more faithful are the wounds of a friend, rather than the ready kisses

of an enemy. [Proverbs 27:6] There nothing I love more than you, no, not even
light itself. I would gladly have my eyes put out ten thousand times over, if it
were possible by this means to convert your souls; so much is your salvation
dearer to me than light itself. For what profit to me in the rays of the sun, when
despondency on your account makes it all thick darkness before my eyes? Light
is good when it shines in cheerfulness, to a sorrowful heart it seems even to be a
trouble. How true this is, may you never learn by experience! However, if it
happen to any of you to fall into sin, just stand by my bedside, when I am laid
down to rest and should be asleep; see whether I am not like a palsied man, like
one beside himself, and, in the language of the prophet, the light of my eyes, it
also is gone from me. [Psalm 38:10] For where is our hope, if you do not make
progress? Where our despondency, if you do excellently? I seem to have wings,
when I hear any thing good of you. "Fulfil ye my joy." [Philippians 2:2] This one
thing is the burden of my prayers, that I long for your advancement. But that in
which I strive with all is this, that I love you, that I am wrapped up in you, that
you are my all, father, mother, brethren, children. Think not then that any thing
that has been said was said in a hostile spirit, nay, it is for your amendment. It is
written "A brother assisted by his brother is as a strong city." [Proverbs 18:19]
Then do not take it in disdain: for neither do I undervalue what you have to say. I
should wish even to be set right by you. For all (Edd. 'all we') you are brethren,
and One is our Master: yet even among brothers it is for one to direct, while the
others obey. Then disdain it not, but let us do all to the glory of God, for to Him
belongs glory for ever and ever. Amen.