SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.72, C.2.

backbiter apparently intends and aims at being believed. It is
therefore evident that backbiting differs from reviling in two points:
first, in the way in which the words are uttered, the reviler speaking
openly against someone, and the backbiter secretly; secondly, as to
the end in view, i.e. as regards the injury inflicted, the reviler injuring
a man's honor, the backbiter injuring his good name.
Reply to Objection 1: In involuntary commutations, to which are
reduced all injuries inflicted on our neighbor, whether by word or by
deed, the kind of sin is differentiated by the circumstances "secretly"
and "openly," because involuntariness itself is diversified by
violence and by ignorance, as stated above (Question 65, Article 4;
FS, Question 6, Articles 5,8).
Reply to Objection 2: The words of a backbiter are said to be secret,
not altogether, but in relation to the person of whom they are said,
because they are uttered in his absence and without his knowledge.
On the other hand, the reviler speaks against a man to his face.
Wherefore if a man speaks ill of another in the presence of several, it
is a case of backbiting if he be absent, but of reviling if he alone be
present: although if a man speak ill of an absent person to one man
alone, he destroys his good name not altogether but partly.
Reply to Objection 3: A man is said to backbite [detrehere] another,
not because he detracts from the truth, but because he lessens his
good name. This is done sometimes directly, sometimes indirectly.
Directly, in four ways: first, by saying that which is false about him;
secondly, by stating his sin to be greater than it is; thirdly, by
revealing something unknown about him; fourthly, by ascribing his
good deeds to a bad intention. Indirectly, this is done either by
gainsaying his good, or by maliciously concealing it, or by
diminishing it.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.72, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether backbiting is a mortal sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that backbiting is not a mortal sin. For no
act of virtue is a mortal sin. Now, to reveal an unknown sin, which
pertains to backbiting, as stated above (Article 1, ad 3), is an act of
the virtue of charity, whereby a man denounces his brother's sin in
order that he may amend: or else it is an act of justice, whereby a
man accuses his brother. Therefore backbiting is not a mortal sin.
Objection 2: Further, a gloss on Prov. 24:21, "Have nothing to do
with detractors," says: "The whole human race is in peril from this
vice." But no mortal sin is to be found in the whole of mankind, since
many refrain from mortal sin: whereas they are venial sins that are
found in all. Therefore backbiting is a venial sin.
Objection 3: Further, Augustine in a homily On the Fire of Purgatory
[Serm. civ in the appendix to St. Augustine's work] reckons it a slight
sin "to speak ill without hesitation or forethought." But this pertains
to backbiting. Therefore backbiting is a venial sin.
On the contrary, It is written (Rm. 1:30): "Backbiters, hateful to God,"
which epithet, according to a gloss, is inserted, "lest it be deemed a
slight sin because it consists in words."
I answer that, As stated above (Question 72, Article 2), sins of word
should be judged chiefly from the intention of the speaker. Now
backbiting by its very nature aims at blackening a man's good name.
Wherefore, properly speaking, to backbite is to speak ill of an absent
person in order to blacken his good name. Now it is a very grave
matter to blacken a man's good name, because of all temporal things
a man's good name seems the most precious, since for lack of it he
is hindered from doing many things well. For this reason it is written
(Ecclus. 41:15): "Take care of a good name, for this shall continue
with thee, more than a thousand treasures precious and great."
Therefore backbiting, properly speaking, is a mortal sin.
Nevertheless it happens sometimes that a man utters words,
whereby someone's good name is tarnished, and yet he does not
intend this, but something else. This is not backbiting strictly and
formally speaking, but only materially and accidentally as it were.
And if such defamatory words be uttered for the sake of some
necessary good, and with attention to the due circumstances, it is