SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.87, C.4.

Reply to Objection 1: Honesty demands that a man should keep any
promise he makes to another man, and this obligation is based on
the natural law. But for a man to be under a civil obligation through a
promise he has made, other conditions are requisite. And although
God needs not our goods, we are under a very great obligation to
Him: so that a vow made to Him is most binding.
Reply to Objection 2: If that which a man has vowed becomes
impossible to him through any cause whatsoever, he must do what
he can, so that he have at least a will ready to do what he can. Hence
if a man has vowed to enter a monastery, he must endeavor to the
best of his power to be received there. And if his intention was
chiefly to bind himself to enter the religious life, so that, in
consequence, he chose this particular form of religious life, or this
place, as being most agreeable to him, he is bound, should he be
unable to be received there, to enter the religious life elsewhere. But
if his principal intention is to bind himself to this particular kind of
religious life, or to this particular place, because the one or the other
pleases him in some special way, he is not bound to enter another
religious house, if they are unwilling to receive him into this
particular one. on the other hand, if he be rendered incapable of
fulfilling his vow through his own fault, he is bound over and above
to do penance for his past fault: thus if a woman has vowed virginity
and is afterwards violated, she is bound not only to observe what is
in her power, namely, perpetual continency, but also to repent of
what she has lost by sinning.
Reply to Objection 3: The obligation of a vow is caused by our own
will and intention, wherefore it is written (Dt. 23:23): "That which is
once gone out of thy lips, thou shalt observe, and shalt do as thou
hast promised to the Lord thy God, and hast spoken with thy own
will and with thy own mouth." Wherefore if in taking a vow, it is one's
intention and will to bind oneself to fulfil it at once, one is bound to
fulfil it immediately. But if one intend to fulfil it at a certain time, or
under a certain condition, one is not bound to immediate fulfilment.
And yet one ought not to delay longer than one intended to bind
oneself, for it is written (Dt. 23:21): "When thou hast made a vow to
the Lord thy God thou shalt not delay to pay it: because the Lord thy
God will require it; and if thou delay, it shall be imputed to thee for a
sin."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.87, C.4.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.87, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether it is expedient to take vows?

Objection 1: It would seem that it is not expedient to take vows. It is
not expedient to anyone to deprive himself of the good that God has
given him. Now one of the greatest goods that God has given man is
liberty whereof he seems to be deprived by the necessity implicated
in a vow. Therefore it would seem inexpedient for man to take vows.
Objection 2: Further, no one should expose himself to danger. But
whoever takes a vow exposes himself to danger, since that which,
before taking a vow, he could omit without danger, becomes a
source of danger to him if he should not fulfil it after taking the vow.
Hence Augustine says (Ep. cxxvii, ad Arment. et Paulin.): "Since thou
hast vowed, thou hast bound thyself, thou canst not do otherwise. If
thou dost not what thou hast vowed thou wilt not be as thou wouldst
have been hadst thou not vowed. For then thou wouldst have been
less great, not less good: whereas now if thou breakest faith with
God (which God forbid) thou art the more unhappy, as thou wouldst
have been happier, hadst thou kept thy vow." Therefore it is not
expedient to take vows.
Objection 3: Further, the Apostle says (1 Cor. 4:16): "Be ye followers
of me, as I also am of Christ." But we do not read that either Christ or
the Apostles took any vows. Therefore it would seem inexpedient to
take vows.
On the contrary, It is written (Ps. 75:12): "Vow ye and pay to the Lord
your God."
I answer that, As stated above (Articles 1,2), a vow is a promise
made to God. Now one makes a promise to a man under one aspect,
and to God under another. Because we promise something to a man
for his own profit; since it profits him that we should be of service to
him, and that we should at first assure him of the future fulfilment of
that service: whereas we make promises to God not for His but for
our own profit. Hence Augustine says (Ep. cxxvii, ad Arment. et
Paulin.): "He is a kind and not a needy exactor, for he does not grow
rich on our payments, but makes those who pay Him grow rich in
Him." And just as what we give God is useful not to Him but to us,
since "what is given Him is added to the giver," as Augustine says
(Ep. cxxvii, ad Arment. et Paulin.), so also a promise whereby we