Illorum; following the Greek form of the comparative degree.

by us. For, though holding wrong opinions, they do in the meanwhile, however, convict themselves,
since they are not of one mind with regard to the same words. But as we follow for our teacher the
one and only true God, and possess His words as the rule of truth, we do all speak alike with regard
to the same things, knowing but one God, the Creator of this universe, who sent the prophets, who
led forth the people from the land of Egypt, who in these last times manifested His own Son, that
He might put the unbelievers to confusion, and search out the fruit of righteousness.

### Chapter XXXVI.—The prophets were sent from one and the same Father from whom the
Son was sent.

1. Which [God] the Lord does not reject, nor does He say that the prophets [spake] from another
god than His Father; nor from any other essence, but from one and the same Father; nor that any
other being made the things in the world, except His own Father, when He speaks as follows in
His teaching: "There was a certain householder, and he planted a vineyard, and hedged it round
about, and digged in it a winepress, and built a tower, and let it out to husbandmen, and went into
a far country: And when the time of the fruit drew near, he sent his servants unto the husbandmen,
that they might receive the fruits of it. And the husbandmen took his servants: they cut one to pieces,
stoned another, and killed another. Again he sent other servants more than the first: and they did
unto them likewise. But last of all he sent unto them his only son, saying, Perchance they will
reverence my son. But when the husbandmen saw the son, they said among themselves, This is the
heir; come, let us kill him, and we shall possess his inheritance. And they caught him, and cast him
out of the vineyard, and slew him. When, therefore, the lord of the vineyard shall come, what will
he do unto these husbandmen? They say unto him, He will miserably destroy these wicked men,
and will let out his vineyard to other husbandmen, who shall render him the fruits in their season."
Again does the Lord say: "Have ye never read, The stone which the builders rejected, the same is
become the head of the corner: this is the Lord's doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes? Therefore
I say unto you, that the kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a nation bringing
forth the fruits thereof." By these words He clearly points out to His disciples one and the same
Householder—that is, one God the Father, who made all things by Himself; while [He shows] that
there are various husbandmen, some obstinate, and proud, and worthless, and slayers of the Lord,
but others who render Him, with all obedience, the fruits in their seasons; and that it is the same
Householder who sends at one time His servants, at another His Son. From that Father, therefore,
from whom the Son was sent to those husbandmen who slew Him, from Him also were the servants
[sent]. But the Son, as coming from the Father with supreme authority (principali auctoritate), used