"Who shall suffer everlasting punishment from the face of the Lord?" [2
Thessalonians 1:9] Do you not hear what Nero's character was, whom Paul even
calls the Mystery of Antichrist? For "the mystery of iniquity," he says, "already
works." [2 Thessalonians 2:7] What then? Is Nero to suffer nothing? Is
Antichrist to suffer nothing? Or the Devil nothing? Then he will always be
Antichrist, and so the Devil. For from mischief they will not leave off, unless
they be punished. "Yea," you say, "but that there is a hell everybody sees. But the
unbelievers only are to fall into it." What is the reason, pray? It is because the
believers acknowledge their Master. And what is this to the purpose? When their
life is impure, they will on this ground be punished more severely than the
unbelievers. "For as many as have sinned without law shall also perish without
law: but as many as have sinned in the law shall be judged by the law." [Romans
2:12] And, "The servant that knew his master's will, and did it not, shall be
beaten with many stripes." [Luke 12:47] But if there is no such thing as giving
an account of one's life, and all this is said in a loose way then neither will the
Devil have vengeance taken upon him. For he too knows God, and far more than
men too, and all the demons know Him, and tremble, and own He is their Judge.
If then there is no giving an account of our life, nor of evil deeds, then will they
also clean escape. These things are not so, surely they are not! Deceive not
yourselves, beloved. For if there is no hell, how are the Apostles to judge the
twelve tribes of Israel? How comes Paul to say, "Do you not know that we shall
judge Angels? How much more things of this life?" [1 Corinthians 6:3] How
came Christ to say, "The men of Nineveh shall arise and condemn this
generation" [Matthew 12:41]; and, "It shall be more tolerable for the land of
Sodom in the day of judgment?" [Matthew 11:24] Why then make merry with
things that are no subjects for merriment? Why deceive yourself and put cheats
upon your reason ([παραλογίζῃ], om. [τὴν ψυχήνσου])? Why fight with the love
of God toward man? For it was through this that He prepared it, and threatened,
that we might not be cast into it, as having by this fear become better. And thus
he that does away with speaking on these subjects does nothing else than thrust

us into it, and drive us there by this deceit. Slacken not the hands of them then
that labor for virtue, nor make the listlessness of them that sleep greater. For if
the many be persuaded that there is no hell, when will they leave off vice? Or
when will right be seen? I do not say between sinners and righteous men, but
between sinners and sinners? For why is it that one is punished here, and another
not punished, though he does the same sins, or even far worse? For if there be no
hell, you will having nothing to say in defence of this to those who make it an
objection. Wherefore my advice is, that we leave off this trifling, and stop the
mouths of those that are gainsayers upon these subjects. For there will be an
exact searching into the smallest things, both in the way of sins and in the way of
good deeds, and we shall be punished for unchaste looks, and for idle words, and
for mere reproachful words, and for drunkenness we shall render an account, as
even for a cup of cold water we shall receive a reward, and a sigh only.
[Ecclesiastes 12:14] For it says, "Set a mark upon the foreheads of the men that
sigh and that cry." [Ezekiel 9:4] How then do you dare to say that He, who with
so great exactness will search into our doings, threatened hell in bare words, and
lightly? Do not, I beseech you, do not with these vain hopes destroy yourself and
those that are persuaded by you! For if you disbelieve our words, make enquiry
of Jews and Gentiles, and all heretics. And all of them as with one mouth will
answer that a judgment there shall be, and a retribution. And are men not
enough? Ask the devils themselves, and you will hear them cry, "Why have you
come there to torment us before the time." [Matthew 8:29] And putting all this
together persuade your soul not to trifle idly, lest by experience thou come to
know there is a hell, but from this you may be sobered, and so able to escape
those tortures, and attain to the good things to come; whereof may we all partake
by the grace and love towards man, etc.