marriage.
Accordingly it is clear from what has been said that consanguinity is
by natural law an impediment to marriage in regard to certain
persons, by Divine law in respect of some, and by human law in
respect of others.
Reply to Objection 1: Although Eve was formed from Adam she was
not Adam's daughter, because she was not formed from him after
the manner in which it is natural for a man to beget his like in
species, but by the Divine operation, since from Adam's rib a horse
might have been formed in the same way as Eve was. Hence the
natural connection between Eve and Adam was not so great as
between daughter and father, nor was Adam the natural principle of
Eve as a father is of his daughter.
Reply to Objection 2: That certain barbarians are united carnally to
their parents does not come from the natural law but from the
passion of concupiscence which has clouded the natural law in
them.
Reply to Objection 3: Union of male and female is said to be of
natural law, because nature has taught this to animals: yet she has
taught this union to various animals in various ways according to
their various conditions. But carnal copulation with parents is
derogatory to the reverence due to them. For just as nature has
instilled into parents solicitude in providing for their offspring, so
has it instilled into the offspring reverence towards their parents: yet
to no kind of animal save man has she instilled a lasting solicitude
for his children or reverence for parents; but to other animals more
or less, according as the offspring is more or less necessary to its
parents, or the parents to their offspring. Hence as the Philosopher
attests (De Animal. ix, 47) concerning the camel and the horse,
among certain animals the son abhors copulation with its mother as
long as he retains knowledge of her and a certain reverence for her.
And since all honest customs of animals are united together in man
naturally, and more perfectly than in other animals, it follows that
man naturally abhors carnal knowledge not only of his mother, but
also of his daughter, which is, however, less against nature, as
stated above.
Moreover consanguinity does not result from carnal procreation in

other animals as in man, as stated above (Article 1, ad 5). Hence the
comparison fails.
Reply to Objection 4: It has been shown how consanguinity between
married persons is contrary to the goods of marriage. Hence the
Objection proceeds from false premises.
Reply to Objection 5: It is not unreasonable for one of two unions to
be hindered by the other, even as where there is identity there is not
likeness. In like manner the tie of consanguinity may hinder the
union of marriage.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the degrees of consanguinity that are an

impediment to marriage could be fixed by the Church?
Objection 1: It would seem that the degrees of consanguinity that are
an impediment to marriage could not be fixed by the Church so as to
reach to the fourth degree. For it is written (Mt. 19:6): "What God
hath joined together let no man put asunder." But God joined those
together who are married within the fourth degree of consanguinity,
since their union is not forbidden by the Divine law. Therefore they
should not be put asunder by a human law.
Objection 2: Further, matrimony is a sacrament as also is baptism.
Now no ordinance of the Church could prevent one who is baptized
from receiving the baptismal character, if he be capable of receiving
it according to the Divine law. Therefore neither can an ordinance of
the Church forbid marriage between those who are not forbidden to
marry by the Divine law.
Objection 3: Further, positive law can neither void nor extend those
things which are natural. Now consanguinity is a natural tie which is
in itself of a nature to impede marriage. Therefore the Church cannot
by its ordinance permit or forbid certain people to marry, any more
than she can make them to be kin or not kin.
Objection 4: Further, an ordinance of positive law should have some
reasonable cause, since it is for this reasonable cause that it
proceeds from the natural law. But the causes that are assigned for
the number of degrees seem altogether unreasonable, since they
bear no relation to their effect; for instance, that consanguinity be an
impediment as far as the fourth degree on account of the four
elements as far as the sixth degree on account of the six ages of the
world, as far as the seventh degree on account of the seven days of
which all time is comprised. Therefore seemingly this prohibition is
of no force.
Objection 5: Further, where the cause is the same there should be
the same effect. Now the causes for which consanguinity is an
impediment to marriage are the good of the offspring, the curbing of
concupiscence, and the extension of friendship, as stated above
(Article 3), which are equally necessary for all time. Therefore the
degrees of consanguinity should have equally impeded marriage at