own body with excess, and waste that of the poor with want; why pamper this
above measure, and stint that too beyond measure? Consider what comes of
food, into what it is changed. Are you not disgusted at its being named? Why
then be eager for such accumulations? The increase of luxury is but the
multiplication of dung! For nature has her limits, and what is beyond these is not
nourishment, but injury, and the increase of ordure. Nourish the body, but do not
destroy it. Food is called nourishment, to show that its design is not to injure the
body, but to nourish it. For this reason perhaps food passes into excrement, that
we may not be lovers of luxury. For if it were not so, if it were not useless and
injurious to the body, we should not cease from devouring one another. If the
belly received as much as it pleased, digested it, and conveyed it to the body, we
should see wars and battles innumerable. Even now when part of our food passes
into ordure, part into blood, part into spurious and useless phlegm, we are
nevertheless so addicted to luxury, that we spend perhaps whole estates on a
meal. What should we not do, if this were not the end of luxury? The more
luxuriously we live, the more noisome are the odors with which we are filled.
The body is like a swollen bottle, running out every way. The eructations are
such as to pain the head of a bystander. From the heat of fermentation within,
vapors are sent forth, as from a furnace, if bystanders are pained, what, think
you, is the brain within continually suffering, assailed by these fumes? To say
nothing of the channels of the heated and obstructed blood, of those reservoirs,
the liver and the spleen, and of the canals by which the fæces are discharged.
The drains in our streets we take care to keep unobstructed. We cleanse our
sewers with poles and drags, that they may not be stopped, or overflow, but the
canals of our bodies we do not keep clear, but obstruct and choke them up, and
when the filth rises to the very throne of the king, I mean the brain, we do not
regard it, treating it not like a worthy king, but like an unclean brute. God has
purposely removed to a distance those unclean members, that we might not
receive offense from them. But we suffer it not to be so, and spoil all by our
excess. And other evils might be mentioned. To obstruct the sewers is to breed a

pestilence; but if a stench from without is pestilential, that which is pent up
within the body, and cannot find a vent, what disorders must it not produce both
to body and soul? Some have strangely complained, wondering why God has
ordained that we should bear a load of ordure with us. But they themselves
increase the load. God designed thus to detach us from luxury, and to persuade
us not to attach ourselves to worldly things. But you are not thus to be persuaded
to cease from gluttony, but though it is but as far as the throat, and as long as the
hour of eating, nay not even so long, that the pleasure abides, you continue in
your indulgence. Is it not true that as soon as it has passed the palate and the
throat, the pleasure ceases? For the sense of it is in the taste, and after that is
gratified, a nausea succeeds, the stomach not digesting the food, or not without
much difficulty. Justly then is it said, that "she that lives in pleasure is dead
while she lives." For the luxurious soul is unable to hear or to see anything. It
becomes weak, ignoble, unmanly, illiberal, cowardly, full of impudence,
servility, ignorance, rage, violence, and all kinds of evil, and destitute of the
opposite virtues. Therefore he says,
Ver. 7. "These things give in charge, that they may be blameless."
He does not leave it to their choice. Command them, he says, not to be
luxurious, assuming it to be confessedly an evil, as not holding it lawful or
admissible for the luxurious to partake of the Holy Mysteries. "These things
command," he says, "that they may be blameless." Thus you see it is reckoned
among sins. For if it were a matter of choice, though it were left undone, we
might still be blameless. Therefore in obedience to Paul, let us command the
luxurious widow not to have place in the list of widows. For if a soldier, who
frequents the bath, the theater, the busy scenes of life, is judged to desert his
duty, much more the widows. Let us then not seek our rest here, that we may
find it hereafter. Let us not live in pleasure here, that we may hereafter enjoy true
pleasure, true delight, which brings no evil with it, but infinite good. Of which
God grant that we may all be partakers, in Jesus Christ, with whom, etc.