SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.75, C.2.

Reply to Objection 4: In the devil both nature and guilt must be
considered. His nature indeed is good and is from God nor is it
lawful to curse it. On the other hand his guilt is deserving of being
cursed, according to Job 3:8, "Let them curse it who curse the day."
Yet when a sinner curses the devil on account of his guilt, for the
same reason he judges himself worthy of being cursed; and in this
sense he is said to curse his own soul.
Reply to Objection 5: Although the sinner's sentiments cannot be
perceived in themselves, they can be perceived through some
manifest sin, which has to be punished. Likewise although it is not
possible to know whom God curses in respect of final reprobation, it
is possible to know who is accursed of God in respect of being guilty
of present sin.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.75, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether it is lawful to curse an irrational

creature?
Objection 1: It would seem that it is unlawful to curse an irrational
creature. Cursing would seem to be lawful chiefly in its relation to
punishment. Now irrational creatures are not competent subjects
either of guilt or of punishment. Therefore it is unlawful to curse
them.
Objection 2: Further, in an irrational creature there is nothing but the
nature which God made. But it is unlawful to curse this even in the
devil, as stated above (Article 1). Therefore it is nowise lawful to
curse an irrational creature.
Objection 3: Further, irrational creatures are either stable, as bodies,
or transient, as the seasons. Now, according to Gregory (Moral. iv,
2), "it is useless to curse what does not exist, and wicked to curse
what exists." Therefore it is nowise lawful to curse an irrational
creature.
On the contrary, our Lord cursed the fig tree, as related in Mt. 21:19;
and Job cursed his day, according to Job 3:1.
I answer that, Benediction and malediction, properly speaking,
regard things to which good or evil may happen, viz. rational
creatures: while good and evil are said to happen to irrational
creatures in relation to the rational creature for whose sake they are.
Now they are related to the rational creature in several ways. First by
way of ministration, in so far as irrational creatures minister to the
needs of man. In this sense the Lord said to man (Gn. 3:17): "Cursed
is the earth in thy work," so that its barrenness would be a
punishment to man. Thus also David cursed the mountains of
Gelboe, according to Gregory's expounding (Moral. iv, 3). Again the
irrational creature is related to the rational creature by way of
signification: and thus our Lord cursed the fig tree in signification of
Judea. Thirdly, the irrational creature is related to rational creatures
as something containing them, namely by way of time or place: and
thus Job cursed the day of his birth, on account of the original sin
which he contracted in birth, and on account of the consequent
penalties. In this sense also we may understand David to have
cursed the mountains of Gelboe, as we read in 2 Kgs. 1:21, namely