8. Again, in theology we treat of the creation of the heavens and the earth, of acts of men, and
many similar things that involve matter and motion. So theology does not seem to abstract from
matter and motion.

On the contrary, the Philosopher says in the Metaphysics that "first philosophy deals with
things that can exist separately," that is, from matter, "and with immobile things." Now first
philosophy is divine science, as he says in the same place. Therefore divine science abstracts
from matter and motion.

Moreover, the most excellent science deals with the most excellent beings. But the most excellent
science is divine science. Therefore, since immaterial and immobile beings are the most excellent,
divine science will treat of them.

Moreover, the Philosopher says in the beginning of the Metaphysics that divine science concerns
first principles and causes. Now these are immaterial and immobile. Therefore things of this sort
are the objects of divine science.

Reply: In order to throw light on this question we must understand what science should be
called divine science. We must realize indeed that if a science considers a subject-genus, it must
investigate the principles of that genus, since science is perfected only through knowledge of
principles, as the Philosopher explains in the beginning of the Physics. Now there are two kinds
of principles. (1) Some are complete natures in themselves and nevertheless they are the
principles of other things, as the heavenly bodies are principles of lower bodies and simple
bodies are principles of mixed bodies. In the sciences, therefore, we study them not only insofar
as they are principles, but also insofar as they are certain things in themselves. And for this
reason they are considered not only in the science of the beings of which they are the principles,
but also in a separate science. Thus there is a branch of natural science treating of heavenly
bodies distinct from that treating of lower bodies, and there is one treating of the elements distinct
from that treating of mixed bodies. (2) There are some principles, however, that are not complete
natures in themselves, but only principles of natures, as unity is the principle of number, point
the principle of line, and form and matter principles of natural bodies. Principles of this sort,
then, are investigated only in the science dealing with the things of which they are principles.

Now just as there are certain common principles of any particular genus extending to all the
principles of that genus, so too all beings, inasmuch as they share in being, have certain
principles that are the principles of all beings. And as Avicenna says," these principles can be

called common in two ways, (1) first, by predication, as when I say that form is common to all
forms because it is predicated of all; (2) second, by causality, as we say that the sun, which is
numerically one, is the principle of all things subject to generation.