things simply, without turning to the phantasms, as is exemplified in
the case of other separate substances. In that case, however, the
union of soul and body would not be for the soul's good, for
evidently it would understand worse in the body than out of it; but
for the good of the body, which would be unreasonable, since matter
exists on account of the form, and not the form for the sake of
matter. But if we admit that the nature of the soul requires it to
understand by turning to the phantasms, it will seem, since death
does not change its nature, that it can then naturally understand
nothing; as the phantasms are wanting to which it may turn.
To solve this difficulty we must consider that as nothing acts except
so far as it is actual, the mode of action in every agent follows from
its mode of existence. Now the soul has one mode of being when in
the body, and another when apart from it, its nature remaining
always the same; but this does not mean that its union with the body
is an accidental thing, for, on the contrary, such union belongs to its
very nature, just as the nature of a light object is not changed, when
it is in its proper place, which is natural to it, and outside its proper
place, which is beside its nature. The soul, therefore, when united to
the body, consistently with that mode of existence, has a mode of
understanding, by turning to corporeal phantasms, which are in
corporeal organs; but when it is separated from the body, it has a
mode of understanding, by turning to simply intelligible objects, as
is proper to other separate substances. Hence it is as natural for the
soul to understand by turning to the phantasms as it is for it to be
joined to the body; but to be separated from the body is not in
accordance with its nature, and likewise to understand without
turning to the phantasms is not natural to it; and hence it is united to
the body in order that it may have an existence and an operation
suitable to its nature. But here again a difficulty arises. For since
nature is always ordered to what is best, and since it is better to
understand by turning to simply intelligible objects than by turning
to the phantasms; God should have ordered the soul's nature so that
the nobler way of understanding would have been natural to it, and it
would not have needed the body for that purpose.
In order to resolve this difficulty we must consider that while it is
true that it is nobler in itself to understand by turning to something
higher than to understand by turning to phantasms, nevertheless
such a mode of understanding was not so perfect as regards what
was possible to the soul. This will appear if we consider that every
intellectual substance possesses intellective power by the influence

of the Divine light, which is one and simple in its first principle, and
the farther off intellectual creatures are from the first principle so
much the more is the light divided and diversified, as is the case with
lines radiating from the centre of a circle. Hence it is that God by His
one Essence understands all things; while the superior intellectual
substances understand by means of a number of species, which
nevertheless are fewer and more universal and bestow a deeper
comprehension of things, because of the efficaciousness of the
intellectual power of such natures: whereas the inferior intellectual
natures possess a greater number of species, which are less
universal, and bestow a lower degree of comprehension, in
proportion as they recede from the intellectual power of the higher
natures. If, therefore, the inferior substances received species in the
same degree of universality as the superior substances, since they
are not so strong in understanding, the knowledge which they would
derive through them would be imperfect, and of a general and
confused nature. We can see this to a certain extent in man, for
those who are of weaker intellect fail to acquire perfect knowledge
through the universal conceptions of those who have a better
understanding, unless things are explained to them singly and in
detail. Now it is clear that in the natural order human souls hold the
lowest place among intellectual substances. But the perfection of the
universe required various grades of being. If, therefore, God had
willed souls to understand in the same way as separate substances,
it would follow that human knowledge, so far from being perfect,
would be confused and general. Therefore to make it possible for
human souls to possess perfect and proper knowledge, they were so
made that their nature required them to be joined to bodies, and thus
to receive the proper and adequate knowledge of sensible things
from the sensible things themselves; thus we see in the case of
uneducated men that they have to be taught by sensible examples.
It is clear then that it was for the soul's good that it was united to a
body, and that it understands by turning to the phantasms.
Nevertheless it is possible for it to exist apart from the body, and
also to understand in another way.
Reply to Objection 1: The Philosopher's words carefully examined
will show that he said this on the previous supposition that
understanding is a movement of body and soul as united, just as
sensation is, for he had not as yet explained the difference between
intellect and sense. We may also say that he is referring to the way
of understanding by turning to phantasms. This is also the meaning