THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.7, C.7.

and beyond all others. And hence Scripture attributes to Him the
fulness of the fear of the Lord.
Reply to Objection 1: The habits of virtues and gifts regard goodness
properly and of themselves; but evil, consequently; since it pertains
to the nature of virtue to render acts good, as is said Ethic. ii, 6. And
hence the nature of the gift of fear regards not that evil which fear is
concerned with, but the pre-eminence of that goodness, viz. of God,
by Whose power evil may be inflicted. on the other hand, hope, as a
virtue, regards not only the author of good, but even the good itself,
as far as it is not yet possessed. And hence to Christ, Who already
possessed the perfect good of beatitude, we do not attribute the
virtue of hope, but we do attribute the gift of fear.
Reply to Objection 2: This reason is based on fear in so far as it
regards the evil object.
Reply to Objection 3: Perfect charity casts out servile fear, which
principally regards punishment. But this kind of fear was not in
Christ.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.7, C.8.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether the gratuitous graces were in Christ?

Objection 1: It would seem that the gratuitous graces were not in
Christ. For whoever has anything in its fulness, to him it does not
pertain to have it by participation. Now Christ has grace in its
fulness, according to Jn. 1:14: "Full of grace and truth." But the
gratuitous graces would seem to be certain participations, bestowed
distributively and particularly upon divers subjects, according to 1
Cor. 12:4: "Now there are diversities of graces." Therefore it would
seem that there were no gratuitous graces in Christ.
Objection 2: Further, what is due to anyone would not seem to be
gratuitously bestowed on him. But it was due to the man Christ that
He should abound in the word of wisdom and knowledge, and to be
mighty in doing wonderful works and the like, all of which pertain to
gratuitous graces: since He is "the power of God and the wisdom of
God," as is written 1 Cor. 1:24. Therefore it was not fitting for Christ
to have the gratuitous graces.
Objection 3: Further, gratuitous graces are ordained to the benefit of
the faithful. But it does not seem that a habit which a man does not
use is for the benefit of others, according to Ecclus. 20:32: "Wisdom
that is hid and treasure that is not seen: what profit is there in them
both?" Now we do not read that Christ made use of these
gratuitously given graces, especially as regards the gift of tongues.
Therefore not all the gratuitous graces were in Christ.
On the contrary, Augustine says (Ep. ad Dardan. cclxxxvii) that "as in
the head are all the senses, so in Christ were all the graces."
I answer that, As was said above (FS, Question 3, Articles 1,4), the
gratuitous graces are ordained for the manifestation of faith and
spiritual doctrine. For it behooves him who teaches to have the
means of making his doctrine clear; otherwise his doctrine would be
useless. Now Christ is the first and chief teacher of spiritual doctrine
and faith, according to Heb. 2:3,4: "Which having begun to be
declared by the Lord was confirmed unto us by them that heard Him,
God also bearing them witness by signs and wonders." Hence it is
clear that all the gratuitous graces were most excellently in Christ, as
in the first and chief teacher of the faith.