THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.16, C.4.

(Retract. i, 19); hence, after the foregoing words (Retract. i, 19), he
adds: "Wherever I have said this," viz. that Christ Jesus is a lordly
man, "I wish it unsaid, having afterwards seen that it ought not to be
said although it may be defended with some reason," i.e. because
one might say that He was called a lordly man by reason of the
human nature, which this word "man" signifies, and not by reason of
the suppositum.
Reply to Objection 2: This one suppositum, which is of the human
and Divine natures, was first of the Divine Nature, i.e. from eternity.
Afterwards in time it was made a suppositum of human nature by the
Incarnation. And for this reason it is said to be "humanized"---not
that it assumed a man, but that it assumed human nature. But the
converse of this is not true, viz. that a suppositum of human nature
assumed the Divine Nature; hence we may not say a "deified" or
"lordly" man.
Reply to Objection 3: This word Divine is wont to be predicated even
of things of which the word God is predicated essentially; thus we
say that "the Divine Essence is God," by reason of identity; and that
"the Essence belongs to God," or is "Divine," on account of the
different way of signifying; and we speak of the "Divine Word,"
though the Word is God. So, too, we say "a Divine Person," just as
we say "the person of Plato," on account of its different mode of
signification. But "lordly" is not predicated of those of which "lord"
is predicated; for we are not wont to call a man who is a lord, lordly;
but whatsoever belongs to a lord is called lordly, as the "lordly will,"
or the "lordly hand," or the "lordly possession." And hence the man
Christ, Who is our Lord, cannot be called lordly; yet His flesh can be
called "lordly flesh" and His passion the "lordly passion."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.16, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether what belongs to the human nature can be

predicated of God?
Objection 1: It would seem that what belongs to the human nature
cannot be said of God. For contrary things cannot be said of the
same. Now, what belongs to human nature is contrary to what is
proper to God, since God is uncreated, immutable, and eternal, and it
belongs to the human nature to be created temporal and mutable.
Therefore what belongs to the human nature cannot be said of God.
Objection 2: Further, to attribute to God what is defective seems to
be derogatory to the Divine honor, and to be a blasphemy. Now what
pertains to the human nature contains a kind of defect, as to suffer,
to die, and the like. Hence it seems that what pertains to the human
nature can nowise be said of God.
Objection 3: Further, to be assumed pertains to the human nature;
yet it does not pertain to God. Therefore what belongs to the human
nature cannot be said of God.
On the contrary, Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii, 4) that "God
assumed the idioms," i.e. the properties, "of flesh, since God is said
to be passible, and the God of glory was crucified."
I answer that, On this question there was a difference of opinion
between Nestorians and Catholics. The Nestorians wished to divide
words predicated of Christ, in this way, viz. that such as pertained to
human nature should not be predicated of God, and that such as
pertained to the Divine Nature should not be predicated of the Man.
Hence Nestorius said: "If anyone attempt to attribute sufferings to
the Word, let him be anathema" [Council of Ephesus, Part I, ch. 29].
But if there are any words applicable to both natures, of them they
predicated what pertained to both natures, as "Christ" or "Lord."
Hence they granted that Christ was born of a Virgin, and that He was
from eternity; but they did not say that God was born of a virgin, or
that the Man was from eternity. Catholics on the other hand
maintained that words which are said of Christ either in His Divine or
in His human nature may be said either of God or of man. Hence
Cyril says [Council of Ephesus, Part I, ch. 26]: "If anyone ascribes to
two persons or substances," i.e. hypostases, "such words as are in
the evangelical and apostolic Scriptures, or have been said of Christ