THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.60, C.6.

the power of God Who sanctifies, it is not for man to decide what
things should be used for his sanctification, but this should be
determined by Divine institution. Therefore in the sacraments of the
New Law, by which man is sanctified according to 1 Cor. 6:11, "You
are washed, you are sanctified," we must use those things which are
determined by Divine institution.
Reply to Objection 1: Though the same thing can be signified by
divers signs, yet to determine which sign must be used belongs to
the signifier. Now it is God Who signifies spiritual things to us by
means of the sensible things in the sacraments, and of similitudes in
the Scriptures. And consequently, just as the Holy Ghost decides by
what similitudes spiritual things are to be signified in certain
passages of Scripture, so also must it be determined by Divine
institution what things are to be employed for the purpose of
signification in this or that sacrament.
Reply to Objection 2: Sensible things are endowed with natural
powers conducive to the health of the body: and therefore if two of
them have the same virtue, it matters not which we use. Yet they are
ordained unto sanctification not through any power that they
possess naturally, but only in virtue of the Divine institution. And
therefore it was necessary that God should determine the sensible
things to be employed in the sacraments.
Reply to Objection 3: As Augustine says (Contra Faust. xix), diverse
sacraments suit different times; just as different times are signified
by different parts of the verb, viz. present, past, and future.
Consequently, just as under the state of the Law of nature man was
moved by inward instinct and without any outward law, to worship
God, so also the sensible things to be employed in the worship of
God were determined by inward instinct. But later on it became
necessary for a law to be given (to man) from without: both because
the Law of nature had become obscured by man's sins; and in order
to signify more expressly the grace of Christ, by which the human
race is sanctified. And hence the need for those things to be
determinate, of which men have to make use in the sacraments. Nor
is the way of salvation narrowed thereby: because the things which
need to be used in the sacraments, are either in everyone's
possession or can be had with little trouble.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.60, C.6.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.60, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether words are required for the signification

of the sacraments?
Objection 1: It seems that words are not required for the signification
of the sacraments. For Augustine says (Contra Faust. xix): "What
else is a corporeal sacrament but a kind of visible word?" Wherefore
to add words to the sensible things in the sacraments seems to be
the same as to add words to words. But this is superfluous.
Therefore words are not required besides the sensible things in the
sacraments .
Objection 2: Further, a sacrament is some one thing, but it does not
seem possible to make one thing of those that belong to different
genera. Since, therefore, sensible things and words are of different
genera, for sensible things are the product of nature, but words, of
reason; it seems that in the sacraments, words are not required
besides sensible things.
Objection 3: Further, the sacraments of the New Law succeed those
of the Old Law: since "the former were instituted when the latter
were abolished," as Augustine says (Contra Faust. xix). But no form
of words was required in the sacraments of the Old Law. Therefore
neither is it required in those of the New Law.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (Eph. 5:25,26): "Christ loved the
Church, and delivered Himself up for it; that He might sanctify it,
cleansing it by the laver of water in the word of life." And Augustine
says (Tract. xxx in Joan.): "The word is added to the element, and
this becomes a sacrament."
I answer that, The sacraments, as stated above (Articles 2,3), are
employed as signs for man's sanctification. Consequently they can
be considered in three ways: and in each way it is fitting for words to
be added to the sensible signs. For in the first place they can be
considered in regard to the cause of sanctification, which is the
Word incarnate: to Whom the sacraments have a certain conformity,
in that the word is joined to the sensible sign, just as in the mystery
of the Incarnation the Word of God is united to sensible flesh.
Secondly, sacraments may be considered on the part of man who is
sanctified, and who is composed of soul and body: to whom the