with darkness; and life with death. Just in the same way is the heavenly kingdom honourable to
those who have known the earthly one. But in proportion as it is more honourable, so much the
more do we prize it; and if we have prized it more, we shall be the more glorious in the presence
of God. The Lord has therefore endured all these things on our behalf, in order that we, having
been instructed by means of them all, may be in all respects circumspect for the time to come, and
that, having been rationally taught to love God, we may continue in His perfect love: for God has
displayed long-suffering in the case of man's apostasy; while man has been instructed by means
of it, as also the prophet says, "Thine own apostasy shall heal thee;" God thus determining all
things beforehand for the bringing of man to perfection, for his edification, and for the revelation
of His dispensations, that goodness may both be made apparent, and righteousness perfected, and
that the Church may be fashioned after the image of His Son, and that man may finally be brought
to maturity at some future time, becoming ripe through such privileges to see and comprehend
God.

### Chapter XXXVIII.—Why man was not made perfect from the beginning.
1. If, however, any one say, "What then? Could not God have exhibited man as perfect from
beginning?" let him know that, inasmuch as God is indeed always the same and unbegotten as
respects Himself, all things are possible to Him. But created things must be inferior to Him who
created them, from the very fact of their later origin; for it was not possible for things recently
created to have been uncreated. But inasmuch as they are not uncreated, for this very reason do
they come short of the perfect. Because, as these things are of later date, so are they infantile; so
are they unaccustomed to, and unexercised in, perfect discipline. For as it certainly is in the power
of a mother to give strong food to her infant, [but she does not do so], as the child is not yet able
to receive more substantial nourishment; so also it was possible for God Himself to have made man
perfect from the first, but man could not receive this [perfection], being as yet an infant. And for
this cause our Lord in these last times, when He had summed up all things into Himself, came to
us, not as He might have come, but as we were capable of beholding Him. He might easily have
come to us in His immortal glory, but in that case we could never have endured the greatness of
the glory; and therefore it was that He, who was the perfect bread of the Father, offered Himself
to us as milk, [because we were] as infants. He did this when He appeared as a man, that we, being
nourished, as it were, from the breast of His flesh, and having, by such a course of milk nourishment,
become accustomed to eat and drink the Word of God, may be able also to contain in ourselves the
Bread of immortality, which is the Spirit of the Father.