visible, as are our thoughts, and memories, and wills, and the whole
incorporeal creature; but there is nothing that is visible that is not also
changeable.

### CHAP. 11.—THE ESSENCE OF GOD NEVER APPEARED IN ITSELF. DIVINE APPEARANCES TO THE FATHERS WROUGHT BY THE MINISTRY OF ANGELS. AN OBJECTION DRAWN FROM THE MODE OF SPEECH REMOVED. THAT THE APPEARING OF GOD TO ABRAHAM HIMSELF, JUST AS THAT TO MOSES, WAS WROUGHT BY ANGELS. THE SAME THING IS PROVED BY THE LAW BEING GIVEN TO MOSES BY ANGELS. WHAT HAS BEEN SAID IN THIS BOOK, AND WHAT REMAINS TO BE SAID IN THE NEXT.

Wherefore the substance, or, if it is better so to say, the essence of God,
wherein we understand, in proportion to our measure, in however small a
degree, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, since it is in no way
changeable, can in no way in its proper self be visible.
22. It is manifest, accordingly, that all those appearances to the fathers,
when God was presented to them according to His own dispensation,
suitable to the times, were wrought through the creature. And if we
cannot discern in what manner He wrought them by ministry of angels,
yet we say that they were wrought by angels; but not from our own power
of discernment, lest we should seem to any one to be wise beyond our
measure, whereas we are wise so as to think soberly, as God hath dealt to
us the measure of faith; and we believe, and therefore speak.3 For the
authority is extant of the divine Scriptures, from which our reason ought
not to turn aside; nor by leaving the solid support of the divine utterance,
to fall headlong over the precipice of its own surmisings, in matters
wherein neither the perceptions of the body rule, nor the clear reason of
the truth shines forth. Now, certainly, it is written most clearly in the
Epistle to the Hebrews, when the dispensation of the New Testament was
to be distinguished from the dispensation of the Old, according to the
fitness of ages and of times, that not only those visible things, but also the
word itself, was wrought by angels. For it is said thus: "But to which of
the angels said He at any time, Sit on my right hand, until I make thine
enemies thy footstool? Are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to
minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation?" Whence it appears

that all those things were not only wrought by angels, but wrought also on
our account, that is, on account of the people of God, to whom is
promised the inheritance of eternal life. As it is written also to the
Corinthians, "Now all these things happened unto them in a figure: and
they are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world
arecome." And then, demonstrating by plain consequence that as at that
time the word was spoken by the angels, so now by the Son; "Therefore,"
he says, "we ought to give the more earnest heed to the things which we
have heard, lest at any time we should let them slip. For if the word
spoken by angels was steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience
received a just recompense of reward; how shall we escape, if we neglect
so great salvation?" And then, as though you asked, What salvation?—in
order to show that he is now speaking of the New Testament, that is, of
the word which was spoken not by angels, but by the Lord, he says,
"Which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed
unto us by them that heard Him; God also bearing them witness, both
with signs and wonders, and with divers miracles, and gifts of the Holy
Ghost, according to His own will.". But some one may say, Why then is it written, "The Lord said to
Moses;" and not, rather, The angel said to Moses? Because, when the
crier proclaims the words of the judge, it is not usually written in the
record, so and so the crier said, but so and so the judge. In like manner
also, when the holy prophet speaks, although we say, The prophet said,
we mean nothing else to be understood than that the Lord said; and if we
were to say, The Lord said, we should not put the prophet aside, but only
intimate who spake by him. And, indeed, these Scriptures often reveal the
angel to be the Lord, of whose speaking it is from time to time said, "the
Lord said," as we have shown already. But on account of those who, since
the Scripture in that place specifies an angel, will have the Son of God
Himself and in Himself to be understood, because He is called an angel
by the prophet, as announcing the will of His Father and of Himself; I
have therefore thought fit to produce a plainer testimony from this
epistle, where it is not said by an angel, but "by angels.". For Stephen, too, in the Acts of the Apostles, relates these things in
that manner in which they are also written in the Old Testament: "Men,