FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.15, C.4.

decision is consent, properly speaking. Consequently, since counsel
is only about the means, consent, properly speaking, is of nothing
else but the means.
Reply to Objection 1: Just as the knowledge of conclusions through
the principles is science, whereas the knowledge of the principles is
not science, but something higher, namely, understanding; so do we
consent to the means on account of the end, in respect of which our
act is not consent but something greater, namely, volition.
Reply to Objection 2: Delight in his act, rather than the act itself, is
the end of the intemperate man, and for sake of this delight he
consents to that act.
Reply to Objection 3: Choice includes something that consent has
not, namely, a certain relation to something to which something else
is preferred: and therefore after consent there still remains a choice.
For it may happen that by aid of counsel several means have been
found conducive to the end, and through each of these meeting with
approval, consent has been given to each: but after approving of
many, we have given our preference to one by choosing it. But if
only one meets with approval, then consent and choice do not differ
in reality, but only in our way of looking at them; so that we call it
consent, according as we approve of doing that thing; but choice
according as we prefer it to those that do not meet with our approval.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.15, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether consent to the act belongs only to the

higher part of the soul?
Objection 1: It would seem that consent to the act does not always
belong to the higher reason. For "delight follows action, and perfects
it, just as beauty perfects youth" [oion tois akmaiois he hora--as
youthful vigor perfects a man in his prime] (Ethic. x, 4). But consent
to delight belongs to the lower reason, as Augustine says (De Trin.
xii, 12). Therefore consent to the act does not belong only to the
higher reason.
Objection 2: Further, an act to which we consent is said to be
voluntary. But it belongs to many powers to produce voluntary acts.
Therefore the higher reason is not alone in consenting to the act.
Objection 3: Further, "the higher reason is that which is intent on the
contemplation and consultation of things eternal," as Augustine
says (De Trin. xii, 7). But man often consents to an act not for
eternal, but for temporal reasons, or even on account of some
passion of the soul. Therefore consent to an act does not belong to
the higher reason alone.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Trin. xii, 12): "It is impossible
for man to make up his mind to commit a sin, unless that mental
faculty which has the sovereign power of urging his members to, or
restraining them from, act, yield to the evil deed and become its
slave."
I answer that, The final decision belongs to him who holds the
highest place, and to whom it belongs to judge of the others; for as
long as judgment about some matter remains to be pronounced, the
final decision has not been given. Now it is evident that it belongs to
the higher reason to judge of all: since it is by the reason that we
judge of sensible things; and of things pertaining to human
principles we judge according to Divine principles, which is the
function of the higher reason. Wherefore as long as a man is
uncertain whether he resists or not, according to Divine principles,
no judgment of the reason can be considered in the light of a final
decision. Now the final decision of what is to be done is consent to
the act. Therefore consent to the act belongs to the higher reason;
but in that sense in which the reason includes the will, as stated