SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.106, C.2.

Reply to Objection 2: No man is excused from ingratitude through
inability to repay, for the very reason that the mere will suffices for
the repayment of the debt of gratitude, as stated above (Question
106, Article 6, ad 1).
Forgetfulness of a favor received amounts to ingratitude, not indeed
the forgetfulness that arises from a natural defect, that is not subject
to the will, but that which arises from negligence. For, as Seneca
observes (De Benef. iii), "when forgetfulness of favors lays hold of a
man, he has apparently given little thought to their repayment."
Reply to Objection 3: The debt of gratitude flows from the debt of
love, and from the latter no man should wish to be free. Hence that
anyone should owe this debt unwillingly seems to arise from lack of
love for his benefactor.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.106, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether ingratitude is a special sin?

Objection 1: It seems that ingratitude is not a special sin. For
whoever sins acts against God his sovereign benefactor. But this
pertains to ingratitude. Therefore ingratitude is not a special sin.
Objection 2: Further, no special sin is contained under different
kinds of sin. But one can be ungrateful by committing different kinds
of sin, for instance by calumny, theft, or something similar
committed against a benefactor. Therefore ingratitude is not a
special sin.
Objection 3: Further, Seneca writes (De Benef. iii): "It is ungrateful to
take no notice of a kindness, it is ungrateful not to repay one, but it
is the height of ingratitude to forget it." Now these do not seem to
belong to the same species of sin. Therefore ingratitude is not a
special sin.
On the contrary, Ingratitude is opposed to gratitude or thankfulness,
which is a special virtue. Therefore it is a special sin.
I answer that, Every vice is denominated from a deficiency of virtue,
because deficiency is more opposed to virtue: thus illiberality is
more opposed to liberality than prodigality is. Now a vice may be
opposed to the virtue of gratitude by way of excess, for instance if
one were to show gratitude for things for which gratitude is not due,
or sooner than it is due, as stated above (Question 106, Article 4).
But still more opposed to gratitude is the vice denoting deficiency of
gratitude, because the virtue of gratitude, as stated above (Question
106, Article 6), inclines to return something more. Wherefore
ingratitude is properly denominated from being a deficiency of
gratitude. Now every deficiency or privation takes its species from
the opposite habit: for blindness and deafness differ according to
the difference of sight and hearing. Therefore just as gratitude or
thankfulness is one special virtue, so also is ingratitude one special
sin.
It has, however, various degrees corresponding in their order to the
things required for gratitude. The first of these is to recognize the
favor received, the second to express one's appreciation and thanks,
and the third to repay the favor at a suitable place and time