volume of water is two cubits, no part of it can be two cubits. Thus in
every composite there is something which is not it itself. But, even if
this could be said of whatever has a form, viz. that it has something
which is not it itself, as in a white object there is something which
does not belong to the essence of white; nevertheless in the form
itself, there is nothing besides itself. And so, since God is absolute
form, or rather absolute being, He can be in no way composite.
Hilary implies this argument, when he says (De Trin. vii): "God, Who
is strength, is not made up of things that are weak; nor is He Who is
light, composed of things that are dim."
Reply to Objection 1: Whatever is from God imitates Him, as caused
things imitate the first cause. But it is of the essence of a thing to be
in some sort composite; because at least its existence differs from
its essence, as will be shown hereafter, (Question 4, Article 3).
Reply to Objection 2: With us composite things are better than
simple things, because the perfections of created goodness cannot
be found in one simple thing, but in many things. But the perfection
of divine goodness is found in one simple thing (Question 4, Article
1 and Question 6, Article 2).

### ARTICLE 8. Whether God enters into the composition of other

things?
Objection 1: It seems that God enters into the composition of other
things, for Dionysius says (Coel. Hier. iv): "The being of all things is
that which is above being---the Godhead." But the being of all things
enters into the composition of everything. Therefore God enters into
the composition of other things.
Objection 2: Further, God is a form; for Augustine says (De Verb.
Dom., Serm. xxxviii) that, "the word of God, which is God, is an
uncreated form." But a form is part of a compound. Therefore God is
part of some compound.
Objection 3: Further, whatever things exist, in no way differing from
each other, are the same. But God and primary matter exist, and in
no way differ from each other. Therefore they are absolutely the
same. But primary matter enters into the composition things.
Therefore also does God. Proof of the minor---whatever things differ,
they differ by some differences, and therefore must be composite.
But God and primary matter are altogether simple. Therefore they
nowise differ from each other.
On the contrary, Dionysius says (Div. Nom. ii): "There can be no
touching Him," i.e. God, "nor any other union with Him by mingling
part with part."
Further, the first cause rules all things without commingling with
them, as the Philosopher says (De Causis).
I answer that, On this point there have been three errors. Some have
affirmed that God is the world-soul, as is clear from Augustine (De
Civ. Dei vii, 6). This is practically the same as the opinion of those
who assert that God is the soul of the highest heaven. Again, others
have said that God is the formal principle of all things; and this was
the theory of the Almaricians. The third error is that of David of
Dinant, who most absurdly taught that God was primary matter. Now
all these contain manifest untruth; since it is not possible for God to
enter into the composition of anything, either as a formal or a
material principle. First, because God is the first efficient cause. Now
the efficient cause is not identical numerically with the form of the