things besides. For behold how many good things spring from hence! He that
gives alms, as he ought to give, learns to despise wealth. He that has learned to
despise wealth has cut up the root of evils. So that he does not do a greater good
than he receives, not merely in that there is a due recompense and a requital for
alms, but also in that his soul becomes philosophic, and elevated, and rich. He
that gives alms is instructed not to admire riches or gold. And this lesson once
fixed in his mind, he has gotten a great step toward mounting to Heaven, and has
cut away ten thousand occasions of strife, and contention, and envy, and
dejection. For you know, you too know, that all things are done for riches, and
unnumbered wars are made for riches. But he that has learned to despise them,
has placed himself in a quiet harbor, he no longer fears damage. For this has
alms taught him. He no longer desires what is his neighbor's; for how should he,
that parts with his own, and gives? He no longer envies the rich man; for how
should he, that is willing to become poor? He clears the eye of his soul. And
these are but here. But hereafter it is not to be told what blessings he shall win.
He shall not abide without with the foolish virgins, but shall enter in with those
that were wise, together with the Bridegroom, having his lamps bright. And
though they have endured hardship in virginity, he that has not so much as tasted
these hardships shall be better than they. Such is the power of Mercy. She brings
in her nurslings with much boldness. For she is known to the porters in Heaven,
that keep the gates of the Bride-Chamber, and not known only, but reverenced;
and those whom she knows to have honored her, she will bring in with much
boldness, and none will gainsay, but all make room. For if she brought God
down to earth, and persuaded him to become man, much more shall she be able
to raise a man to Heaven; for great is her might. If then from mercy and lovingkindness God became man, and He persuaded Himself to become a servant,
much rather will He bring His servants into His own house. Her let us love, on
her let us set our affection, not one day, nor two, but all our life long, that she
may acknowledge us. If she acknowledge us, the Lord will acknowledge us too.
If she disown us, the Lord too will disown us, and will say, "I know you not."

But may it not be ours to hear this voice, but that happy one instead, "Come, you
blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation
of the world." [Matthew 25:34] Which may we all obtain, by His grace and
lovingkindness, in Christ Jesus our Lord, with whom to the Father and the Holy
Ghost, be glory, strength, honor, now and for ever, and world without end.
Amen.

## Homily 1 on Philippians

[Philippians 1:1, 2]
"Paul and Timothy, servants of Christ Jesus, to all the saints in Christ Jesus
which are at Philippi, fellow-Bishops and Deacons: Grace to you, and peace,
from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ."
Here, as writing to those of equal honor, he does not set down his rank of
Teacher, but another, and that a great one. And what is that? He calls himself a
"servant," and not an Apostle. For great truly is this rank too, and the sum of all
good things, to be a servant of Christ, and not merely to be called so. "The
servant of Christ," this is truly a free man in respect to sin, and being a genuine
servant, he is not a servant to any other, since he would not be Christ's servant,
but by halves. And in again writing to the Romans also, he says, "Paul, a servant
of Jesus Christ." [Romans 1:1] But writing to the Corinthians and to Timothy he
calls himself an "Apostle." On what account then is this? Not because they were
superior to Timothy. Far from it. But rather he honors them, and shows them
attention, beyond all others to whom he wrote. For he also bears witness to great
virtue in them. For besides, there indeed he was about to order many things, and
therefore assumed his rank as an Apostle. But here he gives them no injunctions
but such as they could perceive of themselves.
"To the saints in Christ Jesus which are at Philippi." Since it was likely that
the Jews too would call themselves "saints" from the first oracle, when they
were called a "holy people, a people for God's own possession" [Exodus 19:6;
Deuteronomy 7:6, etc.]; for this reason he added, "to the saints in Christ Jesus."
For these alone are holy, and those hence-forward profane. "To the fellowBishops and Deacons." What is this? Were there several Bishops of one city?
Certainly not; but he called the Presbyters so. For then they still interchanged the
titles, and the Bishop was called a Deacon. For this cause in writing to Timothy,