assails himself as though he were his own enemy. And this is no doubt a
terrible delusion, that whereas all will to profit themselves, many do
nothing but that which is most pernicious to themselves. When the poet
was describing a like disease of dumb animals, "May the gods," says he,
"grant better things to the pious, and assign that delusion to enemies.
They were rending with bare teeth their own torn limbs." Since it was a
disease of the body he was speaking of, why has he called it a delusion,
unless because, while nature inclines every animal to take all the care it
can of itself, that disease was such that those animals rent those very
limbs of theirs which they desired should be safe and sound? But when
the mind loves God, and by consequence, as has been said, remembers
and understands Him, then it is rightly enjoined also to love its neighbor
as itself; for it has now come to love itself rightly and not perversely when
it loves God, by partaking of whom that image not only exists, but is also
renewed so as to be no longer old, and restored so as to be no longer
defaced, and beatified so as to be no longer unhappy. For although it so
love itself, that, supposing the alternative to be proposed to it, it would
lose all things which it loves less than itself rather than perish; still, by
abandoning Him who is above it, in dependence upon whom alone it
could guard its own strength, and enjoy Him as its light, to whom it is
sung in the Psalm, "I will guard my strength in dependence upon Thee,"
and again, "Draw near to Him, and be enlightened,"—it has been made so
weak and so dark, that it has fallen away unhappily from itself too, to
those things that are not what itself is, and which are beneath itself, by
affections that it cannot conquer, and delusions from which it sees no way
to return. And hence, when by God's mercy now penitent, it cries out in
the Psalms, "My strength faileth me; as for the light of mine eyes, it also is
gone from me."
19. Yet, in the midst of these evils of weakness and delusion, great as they
are, it could not lose its natural memory, understanding and love of itself.
And therefore what I quoted above can be rightly said, "Although man
walketh in an image, surely he is disquieted in vain: he heapeth up
treasures, and knoweth not who shall gather them." For why does he
heap up treasures, unless because his strength has deserted him, through
which he would have God, and so lack nothing? And why cannot he tell
for whom he shall gather them, unless because the light of his eyes is

taken from him? And so he does not see what the Truth saith, "Thou fool,
this night thy soul shall be required of thee. Then whose shall those
things be which thou hast provided?" Yet because even such a man
walketh in an image, and the man's mind has remembrance,
understanding, and love of itself; if it were made plain to it that it could
not have both, while it was permitted to choose one and lose the other,
viz. either the treasures it has heaped up, or the mind; who is so utterly
without mind, as to prefer to have the treasures rather than the mind?
For treasures commonly are able to subvert the mind, but the mind that
is not subverted by treasures can live more easily and unencumberedly
without any treasures. But who will be able to possess treasures unless it
be by means of the mind? For if an infant, born as rich as you please,
although lord of everything that is rightfully his, yet possesses nothing if
his mind be unconscious, how can any one possibly possess anything
whose mind is wholly lost? But why say of treasures, that anybody, if the
choice be given him, prefers going without them to going without a mind;
when there is no one that prefers, nay, no one that compares them, to
those lights of the body, by which not one man only here and there, as in
the case of gold, but every man, possesses the very heaven? For every one
possesses by the eyes of the body whatever he gladly sees. Who then is
there, who, if he could not keep both, but must lose one, would not rather
lose his treasures than his eyes? And yet if it were put to him on the same
condition, whether he would rather lose eyes than mind, who is there
with a mind that does not see that he would rather lose the former than
the latter? For a mind without the eyes of the flesh is still human, but the
eyes of the flesh without a mind are bestial. And who would not rather be
a man, even though blind in fleshly sight, than a beast that can see?
20. I have said thus much, that even those who are slower of
understanding, to whose eyes or ears this book may come, might be
admonished, however briefly, how greatly even a weak and erring mind
loves itself, in wrongly loving and pursuing things beneath itself. Now it
could not love itself if it were altogether ignorant of itself, i. e. if it did not
remember itself, nor understand itself; by which image of God within
itself it has such power as to be able to cleave to Him whose image it is.
For it is so reckoned in the order, not of place, but of natures, as that
there is none above it save Him. When, finally, it shall altogether cleave to