FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.89, C.4.

into the outward act of sin. This vainglory was followed, in the man,
by the desire to make and experiment, and in the woman, by doubt,
for she gave way to vainglory, merely through hearing the serpent
mention the precept, as though she refused to be held in check by
the precept.
Reply to Objection 3: Mortal sin is opposed to the integrity of the
original state in the fact of its destroying that state: this a venial sin
cannot do. And because the integrity of the primitive state is
incompatible with any inordinateness whatever, the result is that the
first man could not sin venially, before committing a mortal sin.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.89, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether a good or a wicked angel can sin

venially?
Objection 1: It seems that a good or wicked angel can sin venially.
Because man agrees with the angels in the higher part of his soul
which is called the mind, according to Gregory, who says (Hom. xxix
in Evang.) that "man understands in common with the angels." But
man can commit a venial sin in the higher part of his soul. Therefore
an angel can commit a venial sin also.
Objection 2: Further, He that can do more can do less. But an angel
could love a created good more than God, and he did, by sinning
mortally. Therefore he could also love a creature less than God
inordinately, by sinning venially.
Objection 3: Further, wicked angels seem to do things which are
venial sins generically, by provoking men to laughter, and other like
frivolities. Now the circumstance of the person does not make a
mortal sin to be venial as stated above (Article 3), unless there is a
special prohibition, which is not the case in point. Therefore an angel
can sin venially.
On the contrary, The perfection of an angel is greater than that of
man in the primitive state. But man could not sin venially in the
primitive state, and much less, therefore, can an angel.
I answer that, An angel's intellect, as stated above in the FP,
Question 58, Article 3; FP, Question 79, Article 8, is not discursive, i.
e. it does not proceed from principles to conclusions, so as to
understand both separately, as we do. Consequently, whenever the
angelic intellect considers a conclusion, it must, of necessity,
consider it in its principles. Now in matters of appetite, as we have
often stated (Question 8, Article 2; Question 10, Article 1; Question
72, Article 5), ends are like principles, while the means are like
conclusions. Wherefore, an angel's mind is not directed to the
means, except as they stand under the order to the end.
Consequently, from their very nature, they can have no
inordinateness in respect of the means, unless at the same time they
have an inordinateness in respect of the end, and this is a mortal sin.
Now good angels are not moved to the means, except in
subordination to the due end which is God: wherefore all their acts