John 6:58
"This is that bread which came down from heaven; not as your fathers did eat
manna, and are dead; he that eats of this bread shall live for ever."
Continually does He handle the same point, so as to imprint it on the
understanding of the hearers, (for the teaching on these points was a kind of final
teaching,) and to confirm the doctrine of the Resurrection and of eternal life.
Wherefore He mentions the Resurrection since He promises eternal life, showing
that that life is not now, but after the Resurrection. "And whence," says some
one, "are these things clear?" From the Scriptures; to them He everywhere
referrs the Jews, bidding them learn these things from them. And by saying,
"Which gives life to the world," He incites them to jealousy, that from very
vexation that others should enjoy the gift, they may not stay without. And
continually He reminds them of the manna, showing the difference, (between it
and His bread,) and guiding them to the faith; for if He was able to support their
life for forty years without harvest, or grain, or other things in course; much
more now will He be able to do so, as having come for greater ends. Moreover,
if those things were but types, and yet men collected what came down without
sweat or labor; much more shall this be the case, where the difference is great
both in the never dying, and in the enjoying the true life. And rightly has He
spoken often of "life," since this is desired by men, and nothing is so pleasing to
them as not to die. Since even under the old Covenant, this was the promise,
length of life and many days, but now it is not length merely, but life having no
end. He desires at the same time to show, that He now revokes the punishment
caused by sin, annulling that sentence which condemns to death, and bringing in
not life merely, but life eternal, contrariwise to the former things.

John 6:59
"These things said He in the synagogue, as He taught in Capernaum."
2. The place where most of His marvels had been done, so that He ought
there especially to have been listened to. But wherefore taught He in the
synagogue and in the Temple? As well because He desired to catch the greatest
number of them, as because He desired to show that He was not opposed to the
Father.

John 6:60
"But many of the disciples, when they had heard this, said, This is a hard
saying."
What means "hard"? Rough, laborious, troublesome. Yet He said nothing of
this kind, for He spoke not of a mode of life, but of doctrines, continually
handling the faith which is in Him. What then means, "is a hard saying"? Is it
because it promises life and resurrection? Is it because He said that He came
down from heaven? Or that it was impossible for one to be saved who ate not
His flesh? Tell me, are these things "hard"? Who can assert that they are? What
then means "hard"? It means, "difficult to be received," "transcending their
infirmity," "having much terror." For they thought that He uttered words too high
for His real character, and such as were above Himself. Therefore they said,
"Who can hear it?"
Perhaps making excuse for themselves, since they were about to start away.