6. Now we make offering to Him, not as though He stood in need of it, but rendering thanks
for His gift, and thus sanctifying what has been created. For even as God does not need our
possessions, so do we need to offer something to God; as Solomon says: "He that hath pity upon
the poor, lendeth unto the Lord." For God, who stands in need of nothing, takes our good works
to Himself for this purpose, that He may grant us a recompense of His own good things, as our
Lord says: "Come, ye blessed of My Father, receive the kingdom prepared for you. For I was an
hungered, and ye gave Me to eat: I was thirsty, and ye gave Me drink: I was a stranger, and ye took
Me in: naked, and ye clothed Me; sick, and ye visited Me; in prison, and ye came to Me." As,
therefore, He does not stand in need of these [services], yet does desire that we should render them
for our own benefit, lest we be unfruitful; so did the Word give to the people that very precept as
to the making of oblations, although He stood in no need of them, that they might learn to serve
God: thus is it, therefore, also His will that we, too, should offer a gift at the altar, frequently and
without intermission. The altar, then, is in heaven (for towards that place are our prayers and
oblations directed); the temple likewise [is there], as John says in the Apocalypse, "And the temple
of God was opened:" the tabernacle also: "For, behold," He says, "the tabernacle of God, in
which He will dwell with men."

### Chapter XIX.—Earthly things may be the type of heavenly, but the latter cannot be the types
of others still superior and unknown; nor can we, without absolute madness, maintain that
God is known to us only as the type of a still unknown and superior being.

1. Now the gifts, oblations, and all the sacrifices, did the people receive in a figure, as was
shown to Moses in the mount, from one and the same God, whose name is now glorified in the
Church among all nations. But it is congruous that those earthly things, indeed, which are spread
all around us, should be types of the celestial, being [both], however, created by the same God. For
in no other way could He assimilate an image of spiritual things [to suit our comprehension]. But
to allege that those things which are super-celestial and spiritual, and, as far as we are concerned,
invisible and ineffable, are in their turn the types of celestial things and of another Pleroma, and
[to say] that God is the image of another Father, is to play the part both of wanderers from the truth,
and of absolutely foolish and stupid persons. For, as I have repeatedly shown, such persons will
find it necessary to be continually finding out types of types, and images of images, and will never

The text fluctuates between dominationi and donationi.

[be able to] fix their minds on one and the true God. For their imaginations range beyond God, they
having in their hearts surpassed the Master Himself, being indeed in idea elated and exalted above
[Him], but in reality turning away from the true God.
2. To these persons one may with justice say (as Scripture itself suggests), To what distance
above God do ye lift up your imaginations, O ye rashly elated men? Ye have heard "that the heavens
are meted out in the palm of [His] hand:" tell me the measure, and recount the endless multitude
of cubits, explain to me the fulness, the breadth, the length, the height, the beginning and end of
the measurement,—things which the heart of man understands not, neither does it comprehend
them. For the heavenly treasuries are indeed great: God cannot be measured in the heart, and
incomprehensible is He in the mind; He who holds the earth in the hollow of His hand. Who
perceives the measure of His right hand? Who knoweth His finger? Or who doth understand His
hand,—that hand which measures immensity; that hand which, by its own measure, spreads out
the measure of the heavens, and which comprises in its hollow the earth with the abysses; which
contains in itself the breadth, and length, and the deep below, and the height above of the whole
creation; which is seen, which is heard and understood, and which is invisible? And for this reason
God is "above all principality, and power, and dominion, and every name that is named," of all
things which have been created and established. He it is who fills the heavens, and views the abysses,
who is also present with every one of us. For he says, "Am I a God at hand, and not a God afar off?
If any man is hid in secret places, shall I not see him?" For His hand lays hold of all things, and
that it is which illumines the heavens, and lightens also the things which are under the heavens,
and trieth the reins and the hearts, is also present in hidden things, and in our secret [thoughts], and
does openly nourish and preserve us.
3. But if man comprehends not the fulness and the greatness of His hand, how shall any one be
able to understand or know in his heart so great a God? Yet, as if they had now measured and
thoroughly investigated Him, and explored Him on every side, they feign that beyond Him there
exists another Pleroma of Æons, and another Father; certainly not looking up to celestial things,
but truly descending into a profound abyss (Bythus) of madness; maintaining that their Father
extends only to the border of those things which are beyond the Pleroma, but that, on the other
hand, the Demiurge does not reach so far as the Pleroma; and thus they represent neither of them
as being perfect and comprehending all things. For the former will be defective in regard to the
whole world formed outside of the Pleroma, and the latter in respect of that [ideal] world which
was formed within the Pleroma; and [therefore] neither of these can be the God of all. But that no
one can fully declare the goodness of God from the things made by Him, is a point evident to all.