and they had gifts too, some less, and some more. But more abundant than all
was the gift of tongues among them: and this became to them a cause of
division; not from its own nature but from the perverseness of them that had
received it: in that on the one hand the possessors of the greater gifts were lifted
up against them that had the lesser: and these again were grieved, and envied the
owners of the greater. And Paul himself as he proceeds intimates this.
Since then herefrom they were receiving a fatal blow in the dissolution of
their charity, he takes great care to correct it. For this happened indeed in Rome
also, but not in the same way. And this is why in the Epistle to the Romans he
moots it indeed, but obscurely and briefly, saying thus: "For even as we have
many members in one body, and all the members have not the same office; so
we, who are many, are one body in Christ, and severally members one of
another. And having gifts differing according to the grace that was given to us,
whether prophecy, let us prophesy according to the proportion of our faith; or
ministry, let us give ourselves to our ministry; or he that teaches to his
teaching." [Romans 12:4-8] And that the Romans also were falling into
wilfulness hereby, this he intimates in the beginning of that discourse, thus
saying: "For I say through the grace given unto me, to every man that is among
you, not to think of himself more highly than he ought to think; but so to think as
to think soberly, according as God has dealt to each man a measure of faith."
[Romans 12:3] With these, however, (for the disease of division and pride had
not proceeded to any length,) he thus discoursed: but here with great anxiety; for
the distemper had greatly spread.
And this was not the only thing to disturb them, but there were also in the
place many soothsayers, inasmuch as the city was more than usually addicted to
Grecian customs, and this with the rest was tending to offense and disturbance
among them. This is the reason why he begins by first stating the difference
between soothsaying and prophecy. For this cause also they received discerning
of spirits, so as to discern and know which is he that speaks by a pure spirit, and
which by an impure.

For because it was not possible to supply the evidence of the things uttered
from within themselves at the moment; (for prophecy supplies the proof of its
own truth not at the time when it is spoken, but at the time of the event;) and it
was not easy to distinguish the true prophesier from the pretender; (for the devil
himself, accursed as he is, had entered into them that prophesied, [See 1 Kings
22:23.] bringing in false prophets, as if forsooth they also could foretell things to
come) and further, men were easily deceived, because the things spoken could
not for the present be brought to trial, ere yet the events had come to pass
concerning which the prophecy was; (for it was the end that proved the false
prophet and the true:)— in order that the hearers might not be deceived before
the end, he gives them a sign which even before the event served to indicate the
one and the other. And hence taking his order and beginning, he thus goes on
also to the discourse concerning the gifts and corrects the contentiousness that
arose from hence likewise. For the present however he begins the discourse
concerning the soothsayers, thus saying,
2. "Now concerning spiritual gifts, brethren, I would not have you
ignorant;" calling the signs "spiritual," because they are the works of the Spirit
alone, human effort contributing nothing to the working such wonders. And
intending to discourse concerning them, first, as I said, he lays down the
difference between soothsaying and prophecy, thus saying,
"You know that when you were Gentiles, you were led away unto those
dumb idols, howsoever ye might be led." Now what he means is this: "In the
idol-temples," says he, if any were at any time possessed by an unclean spirit and
began to divine, even as one dragged away, so was he drawn by that spirit in
chains: knowing nothing of the things which he utters. For this is peculiar to the
soothsayer, to be beside himself, to be under compulsion, to be pushed, to be
dragged, to be haled as a madman. But the prophet not so, but with sober mind
and composed temper and knowing what he is saying, he utters all things.
Therefore even before the event do thou from this distinguish the soothsayer and
the prophet. And consider how he frees his discourse of all suspicion; calling