compared with him that is fenced in by his virtue, is inferior. Secondly, because
even if he do not fall into poverty, it is impossible that he should be without
trouble. For wealth has many storms and troubles; but not so virtue, but pleasure
only and safety. Yea, and it puts a man out of the reach of them that lay snares
for him, but wealth quite the contrary, rendering him easy to be attacked and
taken. And as among animals, stags and hares are of all most easily taken
through their natural timidity, but the wild boar, and the bull, and the lion, would
not easily fall in the way of the liers-in-wait; just so one may see in the case of
the rich, and of them that live voluntarily in poverty. The one is like the lion and
the bull, the other like the stag and the hare. For whom does not the rich man
fear? Are there not robbers, potentates, enviers, informers? And why speak I of
robbers and informers, in a case where a man suspects his very domestics?
13. And why say I, "when he is alive?" Not even when dead is he freed
from the villainy of the robbers, nor has death power to set him in safety, but the
evil doers despoil him even when dead, so dangerous a thing is wealth. For not
only do they dig into houses, but they even burst open tombs and coffins. What
then can be more wretched than this man, since not even death can furnish him
with this security, but that wretched body, even when deprived of life, is not
freed from the evils of life, those that commit such wickedness hastening to war
even with dust and ashes, and much more grievously than when it was alive? For
then, it might be, entering his storehouse, they would remove his chests, but
abstain from his person, and would not take so much as to strip the body itself
but now the accursed hands of the tombbreakers do not even abstain from these,
but move and turn it about, and with much cruelty insult it. For after it has been
committed to the ground, having stripped it both of its covering of earth and of
that which its grave-clothes constitute, they leave it thus to be cast out.
What foe then so deadly as wealth, which destroys both the soul of the
living, and insults the body of the dead, not suffering it even to lie buried in the
ground, which is common even to the condemned and to them that have been
taken in the vilest crimes? For of them the legislators having exacted the

punishment of death, inquire no further; but of these, wealth even after death
exacts a most bitter punishment, exposing them naked and unburied, a dreadful
and pitiable spectacle: since even those who suffer this after sentence and by the
anger of their judges, do not suffer so grievously as these. For they indeed
remain unburied the first and second day, and so are committed to the ground;
but these, when they have been committed to the ground, are then stripped naked
and insulted. And if the robbers depart without taking the coffin too, there is still
no thanks to their wealth, but in this case also to their poverty. For she it is that
guards it. Whereas most assuredly, had we intruded wealth with even so much as
this, and leaving off to form it of stone, had forged it of gold, we should have
lost this also.
So faithless a thing is wealth; which belongs not so much to them that have
it, as to them that endeavor to seize it. So that it is but a superfluous argument
which aims to show that wealth is irresistible, seeing that not even on the day of
their death do its possessors obtain security. And yet who is not reconciled with
the departed, whether it be wild beast, or demon, or whatever else? The very
sight being enough to bend even one who is altogether iron, and quite past
feeling. Wherefore, you know, when one sees a corpse, though it be an enemy
public or private whom he sees, yet he weeps for him in common with his
dearest friends; and his wrath is extinguished with life, and pity is brought in.
And it would be impossible, in time of mourning and carrying out of burial, to
distinguish an enemy from him who is not such. So greatly do all men revere
their common nature, and the customs which have been introduced respecting it.
But wealth not even on obtaining this, remits her anger against her possessors;
nay, it renders them that have been no way wronged enemies of the dead; if at
least to strip the dead body be an act of persons very bitter and hostile. And
nature for her part reconciles even his enemies to him then: but wealth makes
foes of them that have nothing to accuse him of, and cruelly intreats the body in
its utter desolation. And yet in that case there are many things which might lead
one to pity, the fact of its being a corpse, its inability to move, and tending to