themselves exhibiting the (mercy) shown by words. Or is it, think you, a small
alms, to a lost, castaway soul, a soul in uttermost jeopardy, possessed by a
burning fever ([πυρώσεως]), to be able to rid it of its disease? For example, do
you see one possessed by love of money? Pity the man. Is he in danger of
suffocation? Quench his fire. "What if he will not be persuaded?" Do your part,
and be not remiss. Have you seen him in bonds?— for wealth is indeed bonds.
[Matthew 25:35 ff.] Go to him, visit him, console him, try to release him of his
bonds. If he refuse, he shall bear the blame himself. Have you seen him naked,
and a stranger?— for he is indeed naked, and a stranger to heaven. Bring him to
your own inn, clothe him with the garment of virtue, give him the city which is
in heaven. "What if I myself be naked?" say you. Clothe also yourself first: if you
know that you are naked, assuredly you know that you need to be clothed; if you
know what sort of nakedness this is. What numbers of women now wear silken
apparel but are indeed naked of the garments of virtue! Let their husbands clothe
these women. "But they will not admit those garments; they choose to have
these." Then do this also first: induce them to have a longing for those garments:
show them that they are naked: speak to them of judgment to come: answer me,
what is the clothing we shall need there? But if you will bear with me, I also will
show you this nakedness. He that is naked, when it is cold, shrinks and shudders,
and stands there cowering, and with his arms folded: but in summer heat, not so.
If then I shall prove to you that your rich men, and rich women, the more they
put on, the more naked they are, do not take it amiss. How then, I ask you, when
we raise the subject of hell-fire, and of the torments there? Do not these shrink
and shudder more than those naked ones? Do they not bitterly groan and
condemn themselves? What? When they come to this or that man, and say to
him, Pray for me, do they not speak the same words as those (naked wretches)?
Now indeed, after all that we can say, the nakedness is not yet apparent: but
it will be plain enough there. How, and in what way? When these silken
garments and precious stones shall have perished, and it shall be only by the
garments of virtue and of vice that all men are shown, when the poor shall be

clad with exceeding glory, but the rich, naked and in disgraceful sort, shall be
haled away to their punishments. What more naked (Edd. "more dainty") than
that rich man who arrayed himself in purple? What poorer than Lazarus? Then
which of them uttered the words of beggars? Which of them was in abundance?
Say, if one should deck his house with abundance of tapestry hangings, and
himself sit naked within, what were the benefit? So it is in the case of these
women. Truly, the house of the soul, the body I mean, they hang round with
plenty of garments: but the mistress of the house sits naked within. Lend me the
eyes of the soul, and I will show you the soul's nakedness. For what is the
garment of the soul? Virtue, of course. And what its nakedness? Vice. For just
as, if one were to strip any decent person, that person would be ashamed, and
would shrink and cower out of sight; just so the soul, if we wish to see it, the
soul which has not these garments, blushes for shame. How many women, think
you, at this moment feel ashamed, and would fain sink to the very depth, as if
seeking some sort of curtain, or screen, that they may not hear these words? But
those who have no evil conscience, are exhilarated, rejoice, find delight, and
gayly deck themselves ([ἐ] [γκαλλωπίζονται]) with the things said. Hear
concerning that blessed Thekla, how, that she might see Paul, she gave even her
gold: and you will not give even a farthing that you may see Christ: you admire
what she did, but dost not emulate her. Do you not hear that "Blessed are the
merciful, for they shall obtain mercy?" [Matthew 5:7] What is the gain of your
costly garments? How long shall we continue agape for this attire? Let us put on
the glory of Christ: let us array ourselves with that beauty, that both here we may
be praised, and there attain unto the eternal good things, by the grace and mercy
of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom, to the Father and the Holy Ghost together,
be glory, dominion, honor, now and ever, world without end. Amen.