death after receiving the sentence of his damnation. Therefore
neither will there be any return from bodily death to bodily life, and
so there will be no resurrection.
On the contrary, It is written (Job 19:25-26): "I know that my
Redeemer liveth, and in the last day I shall rise out of the earth, and I
shall be clothed again with my skin," etc. Therefore there will be a
resurrection of the body.
Further, the gift of Christ is greater than the sin of Adam, as appears
from Rm. 5:15. Now death was brought in by sin, for if sin had not
been, there had been no death. Therefore by the gift of Christ man
will be restored from death to life.
Further, the members should be conformed to the head. Now our
Head lives and will live eternally in body and soul, since "Christ
rising again from the dead dieth now no more" (Rm. 6:8). Therefore
men who are His members will live in body and soul; and
consequently there must needs be a resurrection of the body.
I answer that, According to the various opinions about man's last
end there have been various opinions holding or denying the
resurrection. For man's last end which all men desire naturally is
happiness. Some have held that man is able to attain this end in this
life: wherefore they had no need to admit another life after this,
wherein man would be able to attain to his perfection: and so they
denied the resurrection.
This opinion is confuted with sufficient probability by the
changeableness of fortune, the weakness of the human body, the
imperfection and instability of knowledge and virtue, all of which are
hindrances to the perfection of happiness, as Augustine argues at
the end of De Civ. Dei (xxii, 22).
Hence others maintained that after this there is another life wherein,
after death, man lives according to the soul only, and they held that
such a life sufficed to satisfy the natural desire to obtain happiness:
wherefore Porphyrius said as Augustine states (De Civ. De. xxii, 26):
"The soul, to be happy, must avoid all bodies": and consequently
these did not hold the resurrection.
This opinion was based by various people on various false

foundations. For certain heretics asserted that all bodily things are
from the evil principle, but that spiritual things are from the good
principle: and from this it follows that the soul cannot reach the
height of its perfection unless it be separated from the body, since
the latter withdraws it from its principle, the participation of which
makes it happy. Hence all those heretical sects that hold corporeal
things to have been created or fashioned by the devil deny the
resurrection of the body. The falsehood of this principle has been
shown at the beginning of the Second Book (Sent. ii, D, 4, qu. 1,
Article 3; [FP, Question 49, Article 3]).
Others said that the entire nature of man is seated in the soul, so
that the soul makes use of the body as an instrument, or as a sailor
uses his ship: wherefore according to this opinion, it follows that if
happiness is attained by the soul alone, man would not be balked in
his natural desire for happiness, and so there is no need to hold the
resurrection. But the Philosopher sufficiently destroys this
foundation (De Anima ii, 2), where he shows that the soul is united to
the body as form to matter. Hence it is clear that if man cannot be
happy in this life, we must of necessity hold the resurrection.
Reply to Objection 1: The heavens will never be broken as to their
substance, but as to the effect of their power whereby their
movement is the cause of generation and corruption of lower things:
for this reason the Apostle says (1 Cor. 7:31): "The fashion of this
world passeth away."
Reply to Objection 2: Abraham's soul, properly speaking, is not
Abraham himself, but a part of him (and the same as regards the
others). Hence life in Abraham's soul does not suffice to make
Abraham a living being, or to make the God of Abraham the God of a
living man. But there needs to be life in the whole composite, i.e. the
soul and body: and although this life were not actually when these
words were uttered, it was in each part as ordained to the
resurrection. Wherefore our Lord proves the resurrection with the
greatest subtlety and efficacy.
Reply to Objection 3: The soul is compared to the body, not only as a
worker to the instrument with which he works, but also as form to
matter: wherefore the work belongs to the composite and not to the
soul alone, as the Philosopher shows (De Anima i, 4). And since to
the worker is due the reward of the work, it behooves man himself,
who is composed of soul and body, to receive the reward of his