B. 1. According to the above exposition, nothing belonging to intellect will remain
multiplied as men are multiplied except only the phantasm, or impression in phantasy;
and this very phantasm will not be multiplied as it is actually understood, because, as so
understood, it is in the potential intellect, and has undergone abstraction of material
conditions under the operation of the active intellect; whereas the phantasm, as a
potential term of intelligence, does not transcend the grade of the sentient soul.
B. 2. Still the objection holds, that this man will not be differentiated from that except by
the sentient soul; and the awkward consequence follows that this man and that together
do not make a plurality of men.
B. 3. Nothing attains its species by what it is potentially, but by what it is actually.
But the impression in phantasy, as multiplied in this man and that, has only a potentially
intelligible being. Therefore that impression, as so multiplied, does not put any given
individual in the species of `intelligent animal,' which is the definition of `man.' Thus it
remains true that the specific ratio of `man' is not multiplied in individual men.
B. 4. It is the first and not the second perfection that gives the species to every
living thing. But the impression in phantasy is a second perfection; and therefore not
from that multiplied impression has man his species.
B. 6. That which puts a man in the species of man must be something abiding in the
same individual as long as he remains: otherwise the individual would not be always of
one and the same species, but now of one species and now of another. But the
impressions of phantasy do not remain always the same in the same man; but new
impressions come, and previous impressions perish. Therefore the individual man does
not attain his species by any such impression: nor is it anything in the phantasy that
conjoins him with the formal principle of his species, which is the potential intellect.
C. But if it is said that the individual does not receive his species by the phantasms
themselves, but by the faculties in which the phantasms are, namely, the phantasy, the
memory, and the vis cogitativa which is proper to man, and which in the De anima, III, v,
Aristotle calls the `passive intellect,' the same awkward consequences still follow.
C. 1. Since the vis cogitativa operates only upon particulars, the impressions of which it
puts apart and puts together; and further, since it has a bodily organ through
which it acts, it does not transcend the rank of the sentient soul. But in virtue of his
sentient soul, as such, man is not a man, but an animal. It still therefore remains true
that the element, supposed to be multiplied in us, belongs to man only in his animal
capacity.
C. 2. The cogitative faculty, since it acts through an organ, is not the faculty whereby
we understand. But the principle whereby we understand is the principle whereby man
is man. Therefore no individual is man by virtue of the cogitative faculty: nor does man
by that faculty essentially differ from dumb animals, as the Commentator pretends.