SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.60, C.4.

called "letting" or "hiring." Thirdly, a man transfers his thing with the
intention of recovering it, not for the purpose of its use, but that it
may be kept safe, as in a "deposit," or under some obligation, as
when a man pledges his property, or when one man stands security
for another. In all these actions, whether voluntary or involuntary,
the mean is taken in the same way according to the equality of
repayment. Hence all these actions belong to the one same species
of justice, namely commutative justice. And this suffices for the
Replies to the Objections.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.60, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the just is absolutely the same as

retaliation?
Objection 1: It would seem that the just is absolutely the same as
retaliation. For the judgment of God is absolutely just. Now the
judgment of God is such that a man has to suffer in proportion with
his deeds, according to Mt. 7:2: "With what measure you judge, you
shall be judged: and with what measure you mete, it shall be
measured to you again." Therefore the just is absolutely the same as
retaliation.
Objection 2: Further, in either kind of justice something is given to
someone according to a kind of equality. In distributive justice this
equality regards personal dignity, which would seem to depend
chiefly on what a person has done for the good of the community;
while in commutative justice it regards the thing in which a person
has suffered loss. Now in respect of either equality there is
retaliation in respect of the deed committed. Therefore it would seem
that the just is absolutely the same as retaliation.
Objection 3: Further, the chief argument against retaliation is based
on the difference between the voluntary and the involuntary; for he
who does an injury involuntarily is less severely punished. Now
voluntary and involuntary taken in relation to ourselves, do not
diversify the mean of justice since this is the real mean and does not
depend on us. Therefore it would seem that the just is absolutely the
same as retaliation.
On the contrary, The Philosopher proves (Ethic. v, 5) that the just is
not always the same as retaliation.
I answer that, Retaliation [contrapassum] denotes equal passion
repaid for previous action; and the expression applies most properly
to injurious passions and actions, whereby a man harms the person
of his neighbor; for instance if a man strike, that he be struck back.
This kind of just is laid down in the Law (Ex. 21:23,24): "He shall
render life for life, eye for eye," etc. And since also to take away what
belongs to another is to do an unjust thing, it follows that secondly
retaliation consists in this also, that whosoever causes loss to
another, should suffer loss in his belongings. This just loss is also
found in the Law (Ex. 22:1): "If any man steal an ox or a sheep, and