no heed to the things which are spoken to you? This will be honor to us, this the
admirable service, which is profitable both to you and to us, if you hear us. Hear
also Paul saying, "I knew not, brethren, that he was High Priest." [Acts 23:5]
Hear also Christ saying, "All whatsoever they bid you observe" [Matthew 23:3],
that "observe and do." Thou despisest not me, but the Priesthood; when you see
me stripped of this, then despise me; then no more will I endure to impose
commands. But so long as we sit upon this throne, so long as we have the first
place, we have both the dignity and the power, even though we are unworthy. If
the throne of Moses was of such reverence, that for its sake they were to be
heard, much more the throne of Christ. It, we have received by succession; from
it we speak; since the time that Christ has vested in us the ministry of
reconciliation.
Ambassadors, whatever be their sort, because of the dignity of an embassy,
enjoy much honor. For observe; they go alone into the heart of the land of
barbarians, through the midst of so many enemies; and because the law of
embassy is of mighty power, all honor them; all look towards them with respect,
all send them forth with safety. And we now have received a word of embassy,
and we have come from God, for this is the dignity of the Episcopate. We have
come to you on an embassy, requesting you to put an end to the war, and we say
on what terms; not promising to give cities, nor so and so many measures of
grain, nor slaves, nor gold; but the kingdom of heaven, eternal life, society with
Christ, the other good things, which neither are we able to tell you, so long as we
are in this flesh, and the present life. Ambassadors then we are, and we wish to
enjoy honor, not for our own sakes, far be it, for we know its worthlessness, but
for yours; that you may hear with earnestness the things we say; that you may be
profited, that not with listlessness or indifference ye may attend to what is
spoken. See ye not ambassadors, how all pay court to them? We are God's
ambassadors to men; but, if this offend you, not we, but the Episcopate itself, not
this man or that, but the Bishop. Let no one hear me, but the dignity. Let us then
do everything according to the will of God, that we may live to the glory of God,

and be counted worthy of the good things promised to those that love Him,
through the grace and lovingkindness, etc. etc.

## Homily 4 on Colossians

[Colossians 1:21, 22]
" And you, being in time past, enemies and alienated in your mind, in your
evil works, yet now has He reconciled in the body of His flesh through death, to
present you holy and without blemish and unreprovable before Him."
Here he goes to show that He reconciled those even who were unworthy of
reconciliation. For by the saying that they were under the power of darkness, he
shows the calamity in which they were. [Colossians 1:13] But lest, on hearing of
"the power of darkness," you should consider it Necessity, he adds, "And you
that were alienated," so that though it appear to be the same thing that he says,
yet it is not so; for it is not the same thing to deliver out of the evils him that
through necessity came to suffer, and him that of his own will endures. For the
former indeed is worthy to be pitied, but the latter hated. But nevertheless, he
says, you that are not against your wills, nor from compulsion, but with your
wills, and wishes, sprang away from Him, and are unworthy of it, He has
reconciled. And seeing he had made mention of the "things in the heavens," he
shows, that all the enmity had its origin from hence, not thence. For they indeed
were long ago desirous, and God also, but you were not willing.
And throughout he is showing that the Angels had no power in the
successive times, forasmuch as men continued enemies; they could neither
persuade them, nor, if persuaded, could they deliver them from the devil. For
neither would persuading them be any gain, except he that held them were
bound; nor would binding him have been of any service, except they whom he
detained were willing to return. But both of these were needed, and they could
do neither of them, but Christ did both. So that even more marvelous than
loosing death, is the persuading them. For the former was wholly of Himself,
and the power lay wholly in Himself, but of the latter, not in Himself alone, but