SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.94, C.3.

written (Ps. 39:5): "Who hath not regard to vanities and lying follies."
Now it is vain to seek knowledge of the future, when one tries to get
it from a source whence it cannot be foreknown. Therefore it is
manifest that divination is a species of superstition.
Reply to Objection 1: Divination is a kind of curiosity with regard to
the end in view, which is foreknowledge of the future; but it is a kind
of superstition as regards the mode of operation.
Reply to Objection 2: This kind of divination pertains to the worship
of the demons, inasmuch as one enters into a compact, tacit or
express with the demons.
Reply to Objection 3: In the New Law man's mind is restrained from
solicitude about temporal things: wherefore the New Law contains
no institution for the foreknowledge of future events in temporal
matters. On the other hand in the Old Law, which contained earthly
promises, there were consultations about the future in connection
with religious matters. Hence where it is written (Is. 8:19): "And when
they shall say to you: Seek of pythons and of diviners, who mutter in
their enchantments," it is added by way of answer: "Should not the
people seek of their God, a vision for the living and the dead? "
In the New Testament, however, there were some possessed of the
spirit of prophecy, who foretold many things about future events.
In the New Testament, however, there were some possessed of the
spirit of prophecy, who foretold many things about future events.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.94, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether we ought to distinguish several species

of divination?
Objection 1: It would seem that we should not distinguish several
species of divination. Where the formality of sin is the same, there
are not seemingly several species of sin. Now there is one formality
of sin in all divinations, since they consist in entering into compact
with the demons in order to know the future. Therefore there are not
several species of divination.
Objection 2: Further, a human act takes it species from its end, as
stated above (FS, Question 1, Article 3; FS, Question 18, Article 6).
But all divination is directed to one end, namely, the foretelling of the
future. Therefore all divinations are of one species.
Objection 3: Further, signs do not vary the species of a sin, for
whether one detracts by word writing or gestures, it is the same
species of sin. Now divinations seem to differ merely according to
the various signs whence the foreknowledge of the future is derived.
Therefore there are not several species of divination.
On the contrary, Isidore enumerates various species of divination
(Etym. viii, 9).
I answer that, As stated above (Article 2), all divinations seek to
acquire foreknowledge of future events, by means of some counsel
and help of a demon, who is either expressly called upon to give his
help, or else thrusts himself in secretly, in order to foretell certain
future things unknown to men, but known to him in such manners as
have been explained in the FP, Question 57, Article 3. When demons
are expressly invoked, they are wont to foretell the future in many
ways. Sometimes they offer themselves to human sight and hearing
by mock apparitions in order to foretell the future: and this species
is called "prestigiation" because man's eyes are blindfolded
[praestringuntur]. Sometimes they make use of dreams, and this is
called "divination by dreams": sometimes they employ apparitions
or utterances of the dead, and this species is called "necromancy,"
for as Isidore observes (Etym. viii) in Greek, nekron "means dead
and manteia divination, because after certain incantations and the
sprinkling of blood, the dead seem to come to life, to divine and to
answer questions." Sometimes they foretell the future through living