hinted at the intensity of the penalty: as if he had said, "But himself shall remain
forever in punishment." He then makes an inference, saying,

1 Corinthians 3:16
7. "Do you not know that you are the Temple of God?" For since he had
discoursed in the section before, concerning those who were dividing the
Church, he thenceforward attacks him also who had been guilty of uncleanness;
not indeed as yet in plain terms but in a general way; hinting at his corrupt mode
of life and enhancing the sin, by the Gift which had been already given to him.
Then also he puts all the rest to shame, arguing from these very blessings which
they had already: for this is what he is ever doing, either from the future or from
the past, whether grievous or encouraging. First, from things future; "For the day
shall declare it, because it is revealed by fire." Again, from things already come
to pass; "Do you not know that you are the Temple of God, and the Spirit of God
dwells in you?"

1 Corinthians 3:17
"If any man destroy the Temple of God, him will God destroy." Do you mark
the sweeping vehemence of his words? However, so long as the person is
unknown, what is spoken is not so invidious, all dividing among themselves the
fear of rebuke.
"Him will God destroy," that is, will cause him to perish. And this is not the
word of one denouncing a curse, but of one that prophesies.
"For the Temple of God is holy:" but he that has committed fornication is
profane.
Then, in order that he might not seem to spend his earnestness upon that
one, in saying, "for the Temple of God is holy," he adds, "which you are."

1 Corinthians 3:18
8. "Let no man deceive himself." This also is in reference to that person, as
thinking himself to be somewhat and flattering himself on wisdom. But that he
might not seem to press on him at great length in a mere digression; he first
throws him into a kind of agony and delivers him over unto fear, and then brings
back his discourse to the common fault, saying, If any man among you seems to
be wise in this world, let him become a fool, that he may become ([γένηται] .
rec. vers. "be.") wise. And this he does afterwards with great boldness of speech,
as having sufficiently beaten them down , and shaken with that fear the mind not
of that unclean person only, but of all the hearers also: so accurately does he
measure the reach of what he has to say. For what if a man be rich, what if he be
noble; he is viler than all the vile, when made captive by sin. For as if a man
were a king and enslaved to barbarians, he is of all men most wretched, so also is
it in regard to sin: since sin is a barbarian, and the soul which has been once
taken captive she knows not how to spare, but plays the tyrant to the ruin of all
those who admit her.
9. For nothing is so inconsiderate as sin: nothing so senseless, so utterly
foolish and outrageous. All is overturned and confounded and destroyed by it,
wheresoever it may alight. Unsightly to behold, disgusting and grievous. And
should a painter draw her picture , he would not, methinks, err in fashioning her
after this sort. A woman with the form of a beast, savage, breathing flames,
hideous, black; such as the heathen poets depict their Scyllas. For with ten
thousand hands she lays hold of our thoughts, and comes on unexpected, and
tears everything in pieces, like those dogs that bite slily.
But rather, what need of the painter's art, when we should rather bring
forward those who are made after sin's likeness?
Whom then will you that we should portray first? The covetous and