3. For, when they tell us that all moist substance proceeded from the tears of Achamoth, all
lucid substance from her smile, all solid substance from her sadness, all mobile substance from her
terror, and that thus they have sublime knowledge on account of which they are superior to
others,—how can these things fail to be regarded as worthy of contempt, and truly ridiculous? They
do not believe that God (being powerful, and rich in all resources) created matter itself, inasmuch
as they know not how much a spiritual and divine essence can accomplish. But they do believe that
their Mother, whom they style a female from a female, produced from her passions aforesaid the
so vast material substance of creation. They inquire, too, whence the substance of creation was
supplied to the Creator; but they do not inquire whence [were supplied] to their Mother (whom
they call the Enthymesis and impulse of the Æon that went astray) so great an amount of tears, or
perspiration, or sadness, or that which produced the remainder of matter.
4. For, to attribute the substance of created things to the power and will of Him who is God of
all, is worthy both of credit and acceptance. It is also agreeable [to reason], and there may be well
said regarding such a belief, that "the things which are impossible with men are possible with
God." While men, indeed, cannot make anything out of nothing, but only out of matter already
existing, yet God is in this point pre-eminently superior to men, that He Himself called into being
the substance of His creation, when previously it had no existence. But the assertion that matter
was produced from the Enthymesis of an Æon going astray, and that the Æon [referred to] was far
separated from her Enthymesis, and that, again, her passion and feeling, apart from herself, became
matter—is incredible, infatuated, impossible, and untenable.

### Chapter XI.—The heretics, from their disbelief of the truth, have fallen into an abyss of error:
reasons for investigating their systems.
1. They do not believe that He, who is God above all, formed by His Word, in His own territory,
as He Himself pleased, the various and diversified [works of creation which exist], inasmuch as
He is the former of all things, like a wise architect, and a most powerful monarch. But they believe
that angels, or some power separate from God, and who was ignorant of Him, formed this universe.
By this course, therefore, not yielding credit to the truth, but wallowing in falsehood, they have
lost the bread of true life, and have fallen into vacuity and an abyss of shadow. They are like the
dog of Æsop, which dropped the bread, and made an attempt at seizing its shadow, thus losing the
[real] food. It is easy to prove from the very words of the Lord, that He acknowledges one Father
and Creator of the world, and Fashioner of man, who was proclaimed by the law and the prophets,
while He knows no other, and that this One is really God over all; and that He teaches that that