FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.71, C.5.

virtues, then it is possible for some virtues to be destroyed by one
sinful act. For every mortal sin is contrary to charity, which is the
root of all the infused virtues, as virtues; and consequently, charity
being banished by one act of mortal sin, it follows that all the infused
virtues are expelled "as virtues." And I say on account of faith and
hope, whose habits remain unquickened after mortal sin, so that
they are no longer virtues. On the other hand, since venial sin is
neither contrary to charity, nor banishes it, as a consequence,
neither does it expel the other virtues. As to the acquired virtues,
they are not destroyed by one act of any kind of sin.
Accordingly, mortal sin is incompatible with the infused virtues, but
is consistent with acquired virtue: while venial sin is compatible with
virtues, whether infused or acquired.
Reply to Objection 1: Sin is contrary to virtue, not by reason of itself,
but by reason of its act. Hence sin is incompatible with the act, but
not with the habit, of virtue.
Reply to Objection 2: Vice is directly contrary to virtue, even as sin
to virtuous act: and so vice excludes virtue, just as sin excludes acts
of virtue.
Reply to Objection 3: The natural powers act of necessity, and hence
so long as the power is unimpaired, no sin can be found in the act.
On the other hand, the virtues of the soul do not produce their acts
of necessity; hence the comparison fails.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.71, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether every sin includes an action?

Objection 1: It would seem that every sin includes an action. For as
merit is compared with virtue, even so is sin compared with vice.
Now there can be no merit without an action. Neither, therefore, can
there be sin without action.
Objection 2: Further, Augustine says (De Lib. Arb. iii, 18) [De Vera
Relig. xiv.]: So "true is it that every sin is voluntary, that, unless it be
voluntary, it is no sin at all." Now nothing can be voluntary, save
through an act of the will. Therefore every sin implies an act.
Objection 3: Further, if sin could be without act, it would follow that a
man sins as soon as he ceases doing what he ought. Now he who
never does something that he ought to do, ceases continually doing
what he ought. Therefore it would follow that he sins continually; and
this is untrue. Therefore there is no sin without an act.
On the contrary, It is written (James 4:17): "To him . . . who knoweth
to do good, and doth it not, to him it is a sin." Now "not to do" does
not imply an act. Therefore sin can be without act.
I answer that, The reason for urging this question has reference to
the sin of omission, about which there have been various opinions.
For some say that in every sin of omission there is some act, either
interior or exterior---interior, as when a man wills "not to go to
church," when he is bound to go---exterior, as when a man, at the
very hour that he is bound to go to church (or even before), occupies
himself in such a way that he is hindered from going. This seems, in
a way, to amount to the same as the first, for whoever wills one thing
that is incompatible with this other, wills, consequently, to go
without this other: unless, perchance, it does not occur to him, that
what he wishes to do, will hinder him from that which he is bound to
do, in which case he might be deemed guilty of negligence. On the
other hand, others say, that a sin of omission does not necessarily
suppose an act: for the mere fact of not doing what one is bound to
do is a sin.
Now each of these opinions has some truth in it. For if in the sin of
omission we look merely at that in which the essence of the sin
consists, the sin of omission will be sometimes with an interior act,