SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.107, C.2.

I answer that, Vengeance consists in the infliction of a penal evil on
one who has sinned. Accordingly, in the matter of vengeance, we
must consider the mind of the avenger. For if his intention is
directed chiefly to the evil of the person on whom he takes
vengeance and rests there, then his vengeance is altogether
unlawful: because to take pleasure in another's evil belongs to
hatred, which is contrary to the charity whereby we are bound to
love all men. Nor is it an excuse that he intends the evil of one who
has unjustly inflicted evil on him, as neither is a man excused for
hating one that hates him: for a man may not sin against another just
because the latter has already sinned against him, since this is to be
overcome by evil, which was forbidden by the Apostle, who says
(Rm. 12:21): "Be not overcome by evil, but overcome evil by good."
If, however, the avenger's intention be directed chiefly to some good,
to be obtained by means of the punishment of the person who has
sinned (for instance that the sinner may amend, or at least that he
may be restrained and others be not disturbed, that justice may be
upheld, and God honored), then vengeance may be lawful, provided
other due circumstances be observed.
Reply to Objection 1: He who takes vengeance on the wicked in
keeping with his rank and position does not usurp what belongs to
God but makes use of the power granted him by God. For it is written
(Rm. 13:4) of the earthly prince that "he is God's minister, an avenger
to execute wrath upon him that doeth evil." If, however, a man takes
vengeance outside the order of divine appointment, he usurps what
is God's and therefore sins.
Reply to Objection 2: The good bear with the wicked by enduring
patiently, and in due manner, the wrongs they themselves receive
from them: but they do not bear with them as to endure the wrongs
they inflict on God and their neighbor. For Chrysostom [Opus
Imperfectum, Hom. v in Matth.] says: "It is praiseworthy to be patient
under our own wrongs, but to overlook God's wrongs is most
wicked."
Reply to Objection 3: The law of the Gospel is the law of love, and
therefore those who do good out of love, and who alone properly
belong to the Gospel, ought not to be terrorized by means of
punishment, but only those who are not moved by love to do good,
and who, though they belong to the Church outwardly, do not belong
to it in merit.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.107, C.2.

Reply to Objection 4: Sometimes a wrong done to a person reflects
on God and the Church: and then it is the duty of that person to
avenge the wrong. For example, Elias made fire descend on those
who were come to seize him (4 Kgs. 1); likewise Eliseus cursed the
boys that mocked him (4 Kgs. 2); and Pope Sylverius
excommunicated those who sent him into exile (XXIII, Q. iv, Cap.
Guilisarius). But in so far as the wrong inflicted on a man affects his
person, he should bear it patiently if this be expedient. For these
precepts of patience are to be understood as referring to
preparedness of the mind, as Augustine states (De Serm. Dom. in
Monte i).
Reply to Objection 5: When the whole multitude sins, vengeance
must be taken on them, either in respect of the whole multitude--thus the Egyptians were drowned in the Red Sea while they were
pursuing the children of Israel (Ex. 14), and the people of Sodom
were entirely destroyed (Gn. 19)---or as regards part of the multitude,
as may be seen in the punishment of those who worshipped the calf.
Sometimes, however, if there is hope of many making amends, the
severity of vengeance should be brought to bear on a few of the
principals, whose punishment fills the rest with fear; thus the Lord
(Num 25) commanded the princes of the people to be hanged for the
sin of the multitude.
On the other hand, if it is not the whole but only a part of the
multitude that has sinned, then if the guilty can be separated from
the innocent, vengeance should be wrought on them: provided,
however, that this can be done without scandal to others; else the
multitude should be spared and severity foregone. The same applies
to the sovereign, whom the multitude follow. For his sin should be
borne with, if it cannot be punished without scandal to the multitude:
unless indeed his sin were such, that it would do more harm to the
multitude, either spiritually or temporally, than would the scandal
that was feared to arise from his punishment.