any one, that he may not spend his breath and get laughed at. If therefore he who
is about to strive before men, uses such forethought, much more will it befit us
to be continually thoughtful, and careful, since our whole life is a contest. Let
every night then be a vigil, and let us be careful that when we go out in the day
we do not make ourselves ridiculous. And would it were only making ourselves
ridiculous. But now the Judge of the contest is seated on the right hand of the
Father, hearkening diligently that we utter not any false note, anything out of
tune. For He is not the Judge of actions only, but of words also. Let us keep our
vigil, beloved; we also have those that are eager for our success, if we will. Near
each one of us Angels are sitting; and yet we snore through the whole night. And
would it were only this. But many do even many licentious things, some indeed
going to the very brothels, and others making their own houses places of
whoredom by taking courtesans there. Yes most certainly. For is it not so? They
care well for their contest. Others are drunken and speak amiss; others make an
uproar. Others keep evil vigil through the night weaving, and worse than those
who sleep, schemes of deceit; others by calculating usury; others by bruising
themselves with cares, and doing anything rather than what is suited to the
contest. Wherefore, I exhort you, let us lay aside all [other] things, and look to
one only, how we may obtain the prize, [how we may] be crowned with the
Chaplet; let us do all by which we shall be able to attain to the promised
blessings. Which may we all attain in Christ Jesus our Lord, with whom to the
Father and also to the Holy Ghost be glory, might, honor, now and for ever and
world without end. Amen.

## Homily 15 on Hebrews

Hebrews 9:1-5
" Then verily the first [covenant] had also ordinances of divine service, and
a worldly Sanctuary. For there was a tabernacle made; the first, wherein was the
Candlestick, and the Table, and the Show-bread, which is called the Sanctuary.
And after the second veil, the tabernacle which is called the Holiest of all; which
had the golden censer and the Ark of the Covenant overlaid round about with
gold: wherein was the golden pot that had manna, and Aaron's rod that budded,
and the tables of the covenant: and over it the Cherubim of glory, shadowing the
Mercy-seat: of which we cannot now speak particularly."
1. He has shown from the Priest, from the Priesthood, from the Covenant,
that that [dispensation] was to have an end. From this point he shows it from the
fashion of the tabernacle itself. How? This, he says, [was] the "Holy" and the
"Holy of Holies." The holy place then is a symbol of the former period (for there
all things are done by means of sacrifices); but the Holy of Holies of this that is
now present.
And by the Holy of Holies he means Heaven; and by the veil, Heaven, and
the Flesh "enters into that within the veil": that is to say, "through the veil of His
flesh." [ Supra, 6:19; Hebrews 10:20]
And it were well to speak of this passage, taking it up from the beginning.
What then does he say? "Then verily the first had also" (the first what? "The
Covenant"). "Ordinances of Divine service." What are "ordinances"? symbols or
rights. Then; as (he means) it has not now. He shows that it had already given
place, for (he says) it had at that time; so that now, although it stood, it is not.
"And the worldly Sanctuary." He calls it "worldly," inasmuch as it was
permitted to all to tread it, and in the same house the place was manifest where