you have also the things which are his. I trust ye may be able to understand what
is said: for the thought is a subtle one, and I wish to stop the mouth of the Jews.
Now exert your minds I pray: for whether one hears, or forbears to hear I
shall dig and till the soil. "Hearken O daughter, and behold, forget also your own
people, and your father's house, and the king shall desire your beauty." By
beauty in this passage the Jew understands sensible beauty; not spiritual but
corporeal.
17. Attend, and let us learn what corporeal, and what spiritual beauty are.
There is soul and body: they are two substances: there is a beauty of body, and
there is a beauty of soul. What is beauty of body? An extended eyebrow, a merry
glance, a blushing cheek, ruddy lips, a straight neck, long wavy hair, tapering
fingers, upright stature, a fair blooming complexion. Does this bodily beauty
come from nature, or from choice? Confessedly it comes from nature. Attend
that you may learn the conception of philosophers. This beauty whether of the
countenance, of the eye, of the hair, of the brow, does it come from nature, or
from choice? It is obvious that it comes from nature. For the ungraceful woman,
even if she cultivate beauty in countless ways, cannot become graceful in body:
for natural conditions are fixed, and confined by limits which they cannot pass
over. Therefore the beautiful woman is always beautiful, even if she has no taste
for beauty: and the ungraceful cannot make herself graceful, nor the graceful
ungraceful. Wherefore? Because these things come from nature. Well! You have
seen corporeal beauty. Now let us turn inwards to the soul: let the handmaid
approach the mistress! let us turn I say to the soul. Look upon that beauty, or
rather listen to it: for you can not see it since it is invisible— Listen to that
beauty. What then is beauty of soul? Temperance, mildness, almsgiving, love,
brotherly kindness, tender affection, obedience to God, the fulfilment of the law,
righteousness, contrition of heart. These things are the beauty of the soul. These
things then are not the results of nature, but of moral disposition. And he who
does not possess these things is able to receive them, and he who has them, if he
becomes careless, loses them. For as in the case of the body I was saying that she

who is ungraceful cannot become graceful; so in the case of the soul I say the
contrary that the graceless soul can become full of grace. For what was more
graceless than the soul of Paul when he was a blasphemer and insulter: what
more full of grace when he said "I have fought the good fight, I have finished the
course, I have kept the faith." [2 Timothy 4:7] What was more graceless than the
soul of the robber? What more full of grace when he heard the words "Verily I
say unto you today shall you be with me in paradise?" [Luke 23:43] What was
more graceless than the publican when he practised extortion? But what more
full of grace when he declared his resolution. [Luke 19:8] Do you see that you
can not alter grace of body, for it is the result not of moral disposition, but of
nature. But grace of soul is supplied out of our own moral choice. You have now
received the definition. Of what kind are they? That the beauty of the soul
proceeds from obedience to God. For if the graceless soul obeys God it puts off
its ungracefulness, and becomes full of grace. "Saul! Saul!" it was said, "why do
you persecute me?" and he replied "and who are You Lord?" "I am Jesus."
[Acts 9:4-5] And he obeyed, and his obedience made the graceless soul full of
grace. Again, He says to the publican "come follow me" [Matthew 9:9] and the
publican rose up and became an apostle: and the graceless soul became full of
grace. Whence? By obedience. Again He says to the fishermen "Come ye after
me and I will make you to become fishers of men:" [Matthew 4:19] and by their
obedience their minds became full of grace. Let us see then what kind of beauty
He is speaking of here. "Hearken O daughter and behold, and forget your own
people and your father's house, and the king shall desire your beauty." What
kind of beauty will he desire? The spiritual kind. How so? Because she is to "
forget" He says "hearken and forget." These are acts of moral choice.
"Hearken!" he said: an ungraceful one hears and her ungracefulness being that of
the body is not removed. To the sinful woman He has said "Hearken," and if she
will obey she sees what manner of beauty is bestowed upon her. Since then the
ungracefulness of the bride was not physical, but moral (for she did not obey
God but transgressed) therefore he leads her to another remedy. You became