For these latter were no less at mutual variance, always, through love of rule and
vain glory contradicting one another's opinions, and bent upon making some new
discovery in addition to all that was before. And the cause of this was, their
having begun to trust themselves to reasonings.
They had written accordingly to him by the hand of Fortunatus and
Stephanas and Achaicus, by whom also he himself writes; and this he has
indicated in the end of the Epistle: not however upon all these subjects, but about
marriage and virginity; wherefore also he said, (ch. vii. 1.) 'Now concerning the
things whereof ye wrote' etc. And he proceeds to give injunctions, both on the
points about which they had written, and those about which they had not written;
having learnt with accuracy all their failings. Timothy, too, he sends with the
letters, knowing that letters indeed have great force, yet that not a little would be
added to them by the presence of the disciple also.
Now whereas those who had divided the Church among themselves, from a
feeling of shame lest they should seem to have done so for ambition's sake,
contrived cloaks for what had happened, their teaching (forsooth) more perfect
doctrines, and being wiser than all others; Paul sets himself first against the
disease itself, plucking up the root of the evils, and its offshoot, the spirit of
separation. And he uses great boldness of speech: for these were his own
disciples, more than all others. Wherefore he saith (ch. ix. 2.) 'If to others I be
not an Apostle, yet at least I am unto you; for the seal of my apostleship are ye.'
Moreover they were in a weaker condition (to say the least of it) than the others.
Wherefore he says, (ch. iii. 1, 2. oude for oute). 'For I have not spoken unto you
as unto spiritual; for hitherto you were not able, neither yet even now are ye
able.' (This he says, that they might not suppose that he speaks thus in regard of
the time past alone.)
However, it was utterly improbable that all should have been corrupted;
rather there were some among them who were very holy. And this he signified in
the middle of the Epistle, where he says, (ch. iv. 3, 6.) 'To me it is a very small
thing that I should be judged of you:' and adds, 'these things I have in a figure

transferred unto myself and Apollos.'
Since then from arrogance all these evils were springing, and from men's
thinking that they knew something out of the common, this he purges away first
of all, and in beginning says,

## Homily 1 on First Corinthians

1 Corinthians 1:1-3
Paul, called to be an Apostle of Jesus Christ, through the will of God, and
Sosthenes our brother, unto the Church of God which is at Corinth, even them
that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be Saints, with all that call upon the
name of our Lord Jesus Christ in every place, their Lord and ours: Grace unto
you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
1. See how immediately, from the very beginning, he casts down their
pride, and dashes to the ground all their fond imagination, in that he speaks of
himself as "called." For what I have learned, says he, I discovered not myself,
nor acquired by my own wisdom, but while I was persecuting and laying waste
the Church I was called. Now here of Him that calls is everything: of him that is
called, nothing, (so to speak,) but only to obey.
"Of Jesus Christ." Your teacher is Christ; and do you register the names of
men, as patrons of your doctrine?
"Through the will of God." For it was God who willed that you should be
saved in this way. We ourselves have wrought no good thing, but by the will of
God we have attained to this salvation; and because it seemed good to him, we
were called, not because we were worthy.
"And Sosthenes our brother." Another instance of his modesty; he puts in
the same rank with himself one inferior to Apollos; for great was the interval
between Paul and Sosthenes. Now if where the interval was so wide he stations
with himself one far beneath him, what can they have to say who despise their
equals?
"Unto the Church of God." Not "of this or of that man," but of God.
"Which is at Corinth." Do you see how at each word he puts down their