THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.17, C.3.

the being whereby Socrates is white is distinct from the being
whereby he is a musician. But the being which belongs to the very
hypostasis or person in itself cannot possibly be multiplied in one
hypostasis or person, since it is impossible that there should not be
one being for one thing.
If, therefore, the human nature accrued to the Son of God, not
hypostatically or personally, but accidentally, as some maintained, it
would be necessary to assert two beings in Christ---one, inasmuch
as He is God---the other, inasmuch as He is Man; even as in Socrates
we place one being inasmuch as he is white, and another inasmuch
as he is a man, since "being white" does not pertain to the personal
being of Socrates. But being possessed of a head, being corporeal,
being animated---all these pertain to the one person of Socrates, and
hence there arises from these only the one being of Socrates. And if
it so happened that after the person of Socrates was constituted
there accrued to him hands or feet or eyes, as happened to him who
was born blind, no new being would be thereby added to Socrates,
but only a relation to these, i.e. inasmuch as he would be said to be,
not only with reference to what he had previously, but also with
reference to what accrued to him afterwards. And thus, since the
human nature is united to the Son of God, hypostatically or
personally as was said above (Question 2, Articles 5,6), and not
accidentally, it follows that by the human nature there accrued to
Him no new personal being, but only a new relation of the preexisting personal being to the human nature, in such a way that the
Person is said to subsist not merely in the Divine, but also in the
human nature.
Reply to Objection 1: Being is consequent upon nature, not as upon
that which has being, but as upon that whereby a thing is: whereas it
is consequent upon person or hypostasis, as upon that which has
being. Hence it has unity from the unity of hypostasis, rather than
duality from the duality of the nature.
Reply to Objection 2: The eternal being of the Son of God, which is
the Divine Nature, becomes the being of man, inasmuch as the
human nature is assumed by the Son of God to unity of Person.
Reply to Objection 3: As was said in the FP, Question 50, Article 2,
ad 3; FP, Question 75, Article 5, ad 4, since the Divine Person is the
same as the Nature, there is no distinction in the Divine Persons
between the being of the Person and the being of the Nature, and,

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.17, C.3.

consequently, the three Persons have only one being. But they
would have a triple being if the being of the Person were distinct in
them from the being of the Nature.
Reply to Objection 4: In Christ the soul gives being to the body,
inasmuch as it makes it actually animated, which is to give it the
complement of its nature and species. But if we consider the body
perfected by the soul, without the hypostasis having both---this
whole, composed of soul and body, as signified by the word
"humanity," does not signify "what is," but "whereby it is." Hence
being belongs to the subsisting person, inasmuch as it has a relation
to such a nature, and of this relation the soul is the cause, inasmuch
as it perfects human nature by informing the body.