this is not the case.
Objection 1:: Further, the common good is greater than the good of
the individual. Now if a man die in a just war in order to save his
country, an aureole is not due to him. Therefore even though he be
put to death in order to keep the faith that is in himself, no aureole is
due to him: and consequently the same conclusion follows as above.
Objection 1:: Further, all merit proceeds from the free will. Yet the
Church celebrates the martyrdom of some who had not the use of
the free will. Therefore they did not merit an aureole: and
consequently an aureole is not due to all martyrs.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Sancta Virgin. xlvi): "No one,
methinks, would dare prefer virginity to martyrdom." Now an aureole
is due to virginity, and consequently also to martyrdom.
Further, the crown is due to one who has striven. But in martyrdom
the strife presents a special difficulty. Therefore a special aureole is
due thereto.
I answer that, Just as in the spirit there is a conflict with the internal
concupiscences, so is there in man a conflict with the passion that is
inflicted from without. Wherefore, just as a special crown, which we
call an aureole, is due to the most perfect victory whereby we
triumph over the concupiscences of the flesh, in a word to virginity,
so too an aureole is due to the most perfect victory that is won
against external assaults. Now the most perfect victory over passion
caused from without is considered from two points of view. First
from the greatness of the passion. Now among all passions inflicted
from without, death holds the first place, just as sexual
concupiscences are chief among internal passions. Consequently,
when a man conquers death and things directed to death, his is a
most perfect victory. Secondly, the perfection of victory is
considered from the point of view of the motive of conflict, when, to
wit, a man strives for the most honorable cause; which is Christ
Himself. Both these things are to be found in martyrdom, which is
death suffered for Christ's sake: for "it is not the pain but the cause
that makes the martyr," as Augustine says (Contra Crescon. iii).
Consequently an aureole is due to martyrdom as well as to virginity.
Reply to Objection 1: To suffer death for Christ's sake, is absolutely

speaking, a work of supererogation; since every one is not bound to
confess his faith in the face of a persecutor: yet in certain cases it is
necessary for salvation, when, to wit, a person is seized by a
persecutor and interrogated as to his faith which he is then bound to
confess. Nor does it follow that he does not merit an aureole. For an
aureole is due to a work of supererogation, not as such, but as
having a certain perfection. Wherefore so long as this perfection
remains, even though the supererogation cease, one merits the
aureole.
Reply to Objection 2: A reward is due to martyrdom, not in respect of
the exterior infliction, but because it is suffered voluntarily: since we
merit only through that which is in us. And the more that which one
suffers voluntarily is difficult and naturally repugnant to the will the
more is the will that suffers it for Christ's sake shown to be firmly
established in Christ, and consequently a higher reward is due to
him.
Reply to Objection 3: There are certain acts which, in their very
selves, contain intense pleasure or difficulty: and in such the act
always adds to the character of merit or demerit, for as much as in
the performance of the act the will, on account of the aforesaid
intensity, must needs undergo an alteration from the state in which it
was before. Consequently, other things being equal, one who
performs an act of lust sins more than one who merely consents in
the act, because in the very act the will is increased. In like manner
since in the act of suffering martyrdom there is a very great
difficulty, the will to suffer martyrdom does not reach the degree of
merit due to actual martyrdom by reason of its difficulty: although,
indeed it may possibly attain to a higher reward, if we consider the
root of merit since the will of one man to suffer martyrdom may
possibly proceed from a greater charity than another man's act of
martyrdom. Hence one who is willing to be a martyr may by his will
merit an essential reward equal to or greater than that which is due
to an actual martyr. But the aureole is due to the difficulty inherent to
the conflict itself of martyrdom: wherefore it is not due to those who
are martyrs only in will.
Reply to Objection 4: Just as pleasures of touch, which are the
matter of temperance, hold the chief place among all pleasures both
internal and external, so pains of touch surpass all other pains.
Consequently an aureole is due to the difficulty of suffering pains of
touch, for instance, from blows and so forth, rather than to the