THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.10, C.4.

capacity, attains to, but does not comprehend, what is simply infinite
in essence, as stated above (Article 1). But the infinite in potentiality
which is in creatures can be comprehended by the soul of Christ,
since it is compared to that soul according to its essence, in which
respect it is not infinite. For even our intellect understands a
universal---for example, the nature of a genus or species, which in a
manner has infinity, inasmuch as it can be predicated of an infinite
number.
Reply to Objection 3: That which is infinite in every way can be but
one. Hence the Philosopher says (De Coel. i, 2,3,) that, since bodies
have dimensions in every part, there cannot be several infinite
bodies. Yet if anything were infinite in one way only, nothing would
hinder the existence of several such infinite things; as if we were to
suppose several lines of infinite length drawn on a surface of finite
breadth. Hence, because infinitude is not a substance, but is
accidental to things that are said to be infinite, as the Philosopher
says (Phys. iii, 37,38); as the infinite is multiplied by different
subjects, so, too, a property of the infinite must be multiplied, in
such a way that it belongs to each of them according to that
particular subject. Now it is a property of the infinite that nothing is
greater than it. Hence, if we take one infinite line, there is nothing
greater in it than the infinite; so, too, if we take any one of other
infinite lines, it is plain that each has infinite parts. Therefore of
necessity in this particular line there is nothing greater than all these
infinite parts; yet in another or a third line there will be more infinite
parts besides these. We observe this in numbers also, for the
species of even numbers are infinite, and likewise the species of odd
numbers are infinite; yet there are more even and odd numbers than
even. And thus it must be said that nothing is greater than the simply
and in every way infinite; but than the infinite which is limited in
some respect, nothing is greater in that order; yet we may suppose
something greater outside that order. In this way, therefore, there are
infinite things in the potentiality of the creature, and yet there are
more in the power of God than in the potentiality of the creature. So,
too, the soul of Christ knows infinite things by the knowledge of
simple intelligence; yet God knows more by this manner of
knowledge or understanding.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.10, C.4.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.10, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the soul of Christ sees the Word or the

Divine Essence more clearly than does any other creature?
Objection 1: It would seem that the soul of Christ does not see the
Word more perfectly than does any other creature. For the perfection
of knowledge depends upon the medium of knowing; as the
knowledge we have by means of a demonstrative syllogism is more
perfect than that which we have by means of a probable syllogism.
But all the blessed see the Word immediately in the Divine Essence
Itself, as was said in the FP, Question 12, Article 2. Therefore the
soul of Christ does not see the Word more perfectly than any other
creature.
Objection 2: Further, the perfection of vision does not exceed the
power of seeing. But the rational power of a soul such as is the soul
of Christ is below the intellective power of an angel, as is plain from
Dionysius (Coel. Hier. iv). Therefore the soul of Christ did not see the
Word more perfectly than the angels.
Objection 3: Further, God sees His Word infinitely more perfectly
than does the soul of Christ. Hence there are infinite possible
mediate degrees between the manner in which God sees His Word,
and the manner in which the soul of Christ sees the Word. Therefore
we cannot assert that the soul of Christ sees the Word or the Divine
Essence more perfectly than does every other creature.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (Eph. 1:20,21) that God set Christ
"on His right hand in the heavenly places, above all principality and
power and virtue and dominion and every name that is named not
only in this world, but also in that which is to come." But in that
heavenly glory the higher anyone is the more perfectly does he know
God. Therefore the soul of Christ sees God more perfectly than does
any other creature.
I answer that, The vision of the Divine Essence is granted to all the
blessed by a partaking of the Divine light which is shed upon them
from the fountain of the Word of God, according to Ecclus. 1:5: "The
Word of God on high is the fountain of Wisdom." Now the soul of
Christ, since it is united to the Word in person, is more closely joined
to the Word of God than any other creature. Hence it more fully
receives the light in which God is seen by the Word Himself than any