SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.121, C.5.

rest on the Sabbath day, but the reader or teacher of the Divine law
does not cease from his work. Yet he profanes not the Sabbath, even
as the priests in the temple break the Sabbath, and are without
blame." On the other hand, those works that are called servile in the
first or second way are contrary to the observance of the Sabbath, in
so far as they hinder man from applying himself to Divine things.
And since man is hindered from applying himself to Divine things
rather by sinful than by lawful albeit corporal works, it follows that to
sin on a feast day is more against this precept than to do some other
but lawful bodily work. Hence Augustine says (De decem chord. iii):
"It would be better if the Jew did some useful work on his farm than
spent his time seditiously in the theatre: and their womenfolk would
do better to be making linen on the Sabbath than to be dancing
lewdly all day in their feasts of the new moon." It is not, however,
against this precept to sin venially on the Sabbath, because venial
sin does not destroy holiness.
Again, corporal works, not pertaining to the spiritual worship of God,
are said to be servile in so far as they belong properly to servants;
while they are not said to be servile, in so far as they are common to
those who serve and those who are free. Moreover, everyone, be he
servant or free, is bound to provide necessaries both for himself and
for his neighbor, chiefly in respect of things pertaining to the wellbeing of the body, according to Prov. 24:11, "Deliver them that are
led to death": secondarily as regards avoiding damage to one's
property, according to Dt. 22:1, "Thou shalt not pass by if thou seest
thy brother's ox or his sheep go astray, but thou shalt bring them
back to thy brother." Hence a corporal work pertaining to the
preservation of one's own bodily well-being does not profane the
Sabbath: for it is not against the observance of the Sabbath to eat
and do such things as preserve the health of the body. For this
reason the Machabees did not profane the Sabbath when they fought
in self-defense on the Sabbath day (1 Macc. 2), nor Elias when he
fled from the face of Jezabel on the Sabbath. For this same reason
our Lord (Mt. 12:3) excused His disciples for plucking the ears of
corn on account of the need which they suffered. In like manner a
bodily work that is directed to the bodily well-being of another is not
contrary to the observance of the Sabbath: wherefore it is written
(Jn. 7:23): "Are you angry at Me because I have healed the whole
man on the Sabbath day?" And again, a bodily work that is done to
avoid an imminent damage to some external thing does not profane
the Sabbath, wherefore our Lord says (Mt. 12:11): "What man shall
there be among you, that hath one sheep, and if the same fall into a