without excuse. See how many witnesses he brings forward, the elders, the highpriest, and those in the city. Observe his defence, how it is not of cowardly fear
(for himself, that he pleads), no, but for teaching and indoctrination. For had not
the hearers been stones, they would have felt the force of what he was saying.
For up to this point he had themselves as witnesses: the rest, however, was
without witnesses: "From whom also I received letters unto the brethren, and
went to Damascus, to bring them which were there bound unto Jerusalem, for to
be punished. And it came to pass, that, as I made my journey, and had come near
unto Damascus about noon, suddenly there shone from heaven a great light
round about me. And I fell unto the ground, and heard a voice saying unto me,
Saul, Saul, why do you persecute Me? And I answered, Who are Thou, Lord?
And he said unto me, I am Jesus of Nazareth, Whom you persecute." (v. 6, 7, 8.)
Why then, these very things ought to have been held worthy of credit, from those
that went before: otherwise he would not have undergone such a revolution.
How if he is only making a fine story of it, say you? Answer me, Why did he
suddenly fling away all this zeal? Because he looked for honor? And yet he got
just the contrary. But an easy life, perhaps? No, nor that either. Well but
something else? Why it is not in the power of thought to invent any other object.
So then, leaving it to themselves to draw the inference, he narrates the facts. "As
I came near," he says, "unto Damascus, about noonday." See how great was the
excess of the light. What if he is only making a fine story, say you? Those who
were with him are witnesses, who led him by the hand, who saw the light. "And
they that were with me saw indeed the light, and were afraid; but they heard not
the voice of Him that spoke to me." [Acts 22:9] But in another place he says,
"Hearing the voice, but seeing no man." [Acts 9:7] It is not at variance: no, there
were two voices, that of Paul and the Lord's voice: in that place, the writer
means Paul's voice (Hom. xix. p. 124, note 2); as in fact (Paul) here adds, "The
voice of Him that spoke unto me. Seeing no man:" he does not say, that they did
not see the light: but, "no man," that is, "none speaking." And good reason that it
should be so, since it behooved him alone to have that voice vouchsafed unto

him. For if indeed they also had heard it, (the miracle) would not have been so
great. Since persons of grosser minds are persuaded more by sight, those saw the
light, and were afraid. In fact, neither did the light take so much effect on them,
as it did on him: for it even blinded his eyes: by that which befell him, (God)
gave them also an opportunity of recovering their sight, if they had the mind. It
seems to me at least, that their not believing was providentially ordered, that
they might be unexceptionable witnesses. "And he said unto me" it says, "I am
Jesus of Nazareth, Whom you persecute." [comp. Acts 9:5] Well is the name of
the city (Nazareth) also added, that they might recognize (the Person): moreover,
the Apostles also spoke thus. [ch. 2:22; 4:10; 10:38] And Himself bore witness,
that they were persecuting Him. "And they that were with me saw indeed the
light, and were afraid, but they heard not the voice of Him that spoke to me. And
I said, What shall I do, Lord? And the Lord said unto me, Arise, and go into
Damascus; and there it shall be told you of all things which are appointed for
you to do. And when I could not see for the glory of that light, being led by the
hand of them that were with me, I came into Damascus. And one Ananias, a
devout man according to the law, having a good report of all the Jews which
dwelt there, came unto me, and stood, and said unto me, Brother Saul, receive
your sight. And the same hour I looked up upon him. Enter into the city," it says,
"and there it shall be spoken to you of all that is appointed for you to do." [Acts
22:10-13] Lo! Again another witness. And see how unexceptionable he makes
him also. "And one Ananias," he says, "a devout man according to the law,"— so
far is it from being anything alien!— "having a good report of all the Jews that
dwelt" (there). "And I in the same hour received sight." Then follows the
testimony borne by the facts. Observe how it is interwoven, of persons and facts;
and the persons, both of their own and of aliens: the priests, the elders, and his
fellow-travellers: the facts, what he did and what was done to him: and facts bear
witness to facts, not persons only. Then Ananias, an alien; then the fact itself, the
recovery of sight; then a great prophecy. "And he said, The God of our fathers
has chosen you, that you should know His will, and see That Just One." [Acts