"those who are sent on the external ministry of our salvation can
always assist and see the face of the Father." Yet not all the angels
can perceive the secrets of the Divine mysteries in the clearness
itself of the Divine Essence; but only the superior angels who
announce them to the inferior: and in that respect only the superior
angels belonging to the highest hierarchy are said to assist, whose
special prerogative it is to be enlightened immediately by God.
From this may be deduced the reply to the first and second
objections, which are based on the first mode of assisting.
Reply to Objection 3: Satan is not described as having assisted, but
as present among the assistants; for, as Gregory says (Moral. ii),
"though he has lost beatitude, still he has retained a nature like to
the angels."
Reply to Objection 4: All the assistants see some things immediately
in the glory of the Divine Essence; and so it may be said that it is the
prerogative of the whole of the highest hierarchy to be immediately
enlightened by God; while the higher ones among them see more
than is seen by the inferior; some of whom enlighten others: as also
among those who assist the king, one knows more of the king's
secrets than another.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether all the angels of the second hierarchy are

sent?
Objection 1: It would seem that all the angels of the second
hierarchy are sent. For all the angels either assist, or minister,
according to Dan. 7:10. But the angels of the second hierarchy do
not assist; for they are enlightened by the angels of the first
hierarchy, as Dionysius says (Coel. Hier. viii). Therefore all the
angels of the second hierarchy are sent in ministry.
Objection 2: Further, Gregory says (Moral. xvii) that "there are more
who minister than who assist." This would not be the case if the
angels of the second hierarchy were not sent in ministry. Therefore
all the angels of the second hierarchy are sent to minister.
On the contrary, Dionysius says (Coel. Hier. viii) that the
"Dominations are above all subjection." But to be sent implies
subjection. Therefore the dominations are not sent to minister.
I answer that, As above stated (Article 1), to be sent to external
ministry properly belongs to an angel according as he acts by Divine
command in respect of any corporeal creature; which is part of the
execution of the Divine ministry. Now the angelic properties are
manifested by their names, as Dionysius says (Coel. Hier. vii); and
therefore the angels of those orders are sent to external ministry
whose names signify some kind of administration. But the name
"dominations" does not signify any such administration, but only
disposition and command in administering. On the other hand, the
names of the inferior orders imply administration, for the "Angels"
and "Archangels" are so called from "announcing"; the "Virtues"
and "Powers" are so called in respect of some act; and it is right that
the "Prince," according to what Gregory says (Hom. xxxiv in Evang.),
"be first among the workers." Hence it belongs to these five orders
to be sent to external ministry; not to the four superior orders.
Reply to Objection 1: The Dominations are reckoned among the
ministering angels, not as exercising but as disposing and
commanding what is to be done by others; thus an architect does
not put his hands to the production of his art, but only disposes and
orders what others are to do.