He now call upon, but him that was pained He brings to this one. For because
this who has done the wrong would not easily come to make excuse, out of
shame, and confusion of face, He draws that other to him, and not merely so, but
in such way as also to correct what has been done. And He says not, "Accuse,"
nor "Charge him," nor "Demand satisfaction, and an account," but, "Tell him of
his fault," says He. For he is held in a kind of stupor through anger and shame
with which he is intoxicated; and thou, who art in health, must go your way to
him that is ill, and make the tribunal private, and the remedy such as may be
readily received. For to say, "Tell him of his fault," is nothing else than "Remind
him of his error," tell him what you have suffered at his hand, which very thing,
if it be done as it ought, is the part of one making excuse for him, and drawing
him over earnestly to a reconciliation.
What then, if he should disobey, and be disposed to abide in hardness?
"Take with yourself yet one or two, that in the mouth of two witnesses every word
may be established." For the more he is shameless, and bold, the more ought we
to be active for his cure, not in anger and indignation. For the physician in like
manner, when he sees the malady obstinate, does not give up nor grow impatient,
but then makes the more preparation; which He commands us to do in this case
too.
For since you appeared to be too weak alone, make yourself more powerful
by this addition. For surely the two are sufficient to convict him that has sinned.
Do you see how He seeks not the good of him that has been pained only, but of
him also that has given the pain. For the person injured is this one who is taken
captive by his passion, he it is that is diseased, and weak, and infirm. Wherefore
He often sends the other to this one, now alone, and now with others; but if he
continue in it, even with the church. For, "Tell it," says He, "to the Church."
[Matthew 18:17] For if He were seeking this one's advantage only, He would not
have commanded to pardon, seventy times seven, one repenting. He would not
so often have set so many over him to correct his passion; but if he had remained
incorrigible after the first conference would have let him be; but now once, and

twice, and thrice, He commands to attempt his cure, and now alone and now
with two, now with more.
Wherefore, with respect to them that are without He says no such thing, but,
"If any one smite you," He says, "on your right cheek, turn to him the other
also," [Matthew 5:39] but here not in such wise. For what Paul means, saying,
"What have I to do to judge them also that are without?" [1 Corinthians 5:12]
but the brethren he commands both to tell of their faults, and to avoid them, and
to cut them off, not being obedient, that they may be ashamed; this Himself also
does here, making these laws about the brethren; and He sets three over him for
teachers and judges, to teach him the things that are done at the time of his
drunkenness. For though it be himself that has said and done all those
unreasonable things, yet he will need others to teach him this, like as the drunken
man. For anger and sin is a more frantic thing than any drunkenness, and puts
the soul in greater distraction.
Who, for instance, was wiser than David? Yet for all that, when he had
sinned he perceived it not, his lust keeping in subjection all his reasoning
powers, and like some smoke filling his soul. Therefore he stood in need of a
lantern from the prophet, and of words calling to his mind what he had done.
Wherefore here also He brings these to him that has sinned, to reason with him
about the things he had done.
2. But for what reason does He command this one to tell him of his fault,
and not another? Because this man he would endure more quietly, this, who has
been wronged, who has been pained, who has been despitefully used. For one
does not bear in the same way being told by another of one's fault concerning
him that has been insulted, as by the insulted person himself, especially when
this person is alone convicting him. For when he who should demand justice
against him, even this one appears to be caring for his salvation, this will have
more power than anything in the world to shame him.
Do you see how this is done not for the sake of just punishment, but of
amendment? Therefore He does not at once command to take with him the two,