Hebrews 10:36
[Hebrews 10:36] "For" (he says) "you have need of patience, that after you
have done the will of God, you might receive the promise." You have need of one
thing only, to bear with the delay; not that you should fight again. You are at the
very crown (he means); you have borne all the combats of bonds, of afflictions;
your goods have been spoiled. What then? Henceforward you are standing to be
crowned: endure this only, the delay of the crown. O the greatness of the
consolation! It is as if one should speak to an athlete who had overthrown all,
and had no antagonist, and then was to be crowned, and yet endured not that
time, during which the president of the games comes, and places the crown
[upon him]; and he impatient, should wish to go out, and escape as though he
could not bear the thirst and the heat.

Hebrews 10:37
He then also hinting this, what does he say? [Hebrews 10:37] "Yet a little
while and He that shall come will come, and will not tarry." For lest they should
say, And when will He come? He comforts them from the Scriptures. For thus
also when he says in another place, "Now is our salvation nearer" [Romans
13:11], he comforts them because the remaining time is short. And this he says
not of himself but from the Scriptures. But if from that time it was said, "Yet a
little while, and He that shall come will come, and will not tarry," it is plain that
now He is nearer. Wherefore also waiting is no small reward.

Hebrews 10:38
[Hebrews 10:38] "Now the just" (he says) "shall live by faith, but if any man
draw back, My soul shall have no pleasure in him." This is a great
encouragement when one shows that they have succeeded in the whole matter
and are losing it through a little indolence. [Hebrews 10:39] "But we are not of
them that draw back unto perdition, but of them that believe to the saving of the
soul."

Hebrews 11:1-2
4. "Now faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not
seen. For by it the elders obtained a good report." O what an expression has he
used, in saying, "an evidence of things not seen." For [we say] there is
"evidence," in the case of things that are very plain. Faith then is the seeing
things not plain (he means), and brings what are not seen to the same full
assurance with what are seen. So then neither is it possible to disbelieve in things
which are seen, nor, on the other hand can there be faith unless a man be more
fully assured with respect to things invisible, than he is with respect to things
that are most clearly seen. For since the objects of hope seem to be unsubstantial,
Faith gives them substantiality, or rather, does not give it, but is itself their
substance. For instance, the Resurrection has not come, nor does it exist
substantially, but hope makes it substantial in our soul. This is [the meaning of]
"the substance of things."
If therefore it is an "evidence of things not seen," why forsooth do you wish
to see them, so as to fall away from faith, and from being just? Since "the just
shall live by faith," whereas ye, if you wish to see these things, are no longer
faithful. You have labored (he says), you have struggled: I too allow this,
nevertheless, wait; for this is Faith: do not seek the whole "here."
5. These things were indeed said to the Hebrews, but they are a general
exhortation also to many of those who are here assembled. How and in what
way? To the faint-hearted; to the mean-spirited. For when they see the wicked
prospering, and themselves faring ill, they are troubled, they bear it impatiently:
while they long for the chastisement, and the inflicting vengeance on others;
while they wait for the rewards of their own sufferings. "For yet a little time, and
He that shall come will come."
Let us then say this to the slothful: Doubtless there will be punishment;