"consist" in one who was not? So that the things also done through Angels are of
Him.
"And He is the head of the body, the Church."
Then having spoken of His dignity, he afterwards speaks of His love to man
also. "He is," says he, "the Head of the body, the Church." And he said not "of
the fullness," (although this too is signified,) out of a wish to show His great
friendliness to us, in that He who is thus above, and above all, connected
Himself with those below. For everywhere He is first; above first; in the Church
first, for He is the Head; in the Resurrection first. That is,
Ver. 18. "That He might have the preëminence." So that in generation also
He is first. And this is what Paul is chiefly endeavoring to show. For if this be
made good, that He was before all the Angels; then there is brought in along
with it this also as a consequence, that He did their works by commanding them.
And what is indeed wonderful, he makes a point to show that He is first in the
later generation. Although elsewhere he calls Adam first [1 Corinthians 15:45],
as in truth he is; but here he takes the Church for the whole race of mankind. For
He is first of the Church; and first of men after the flesh, like as of the Creation.
And therefore he here uses the word "firstborn."
What is in this place the meaning of "the Firstborn"? Who was created first,
or rose before all; as in the former place it means, Who was before all things.
And here indeed he uses the word "firstfruits," saying, "Who is the Firstfruits,
the Firstborn from the dead, that in all things He might have the preëminence,"
showing that the rest also are such as He; but in the former place it is not the
"Firstfruits" of creation. And it is there, "The Image of the invisible God," and
then, "Firstborn."
Ver. 19, 20. "For it was the good pleasure of the Father, that in Him should
all the fullness dwell. And having made peace through the Blood of His Cross,
through Him to reconcile all things unto Himself, whether things upon the earth,
or things in the heavens."
Whatsoever things are of the Father, these he says are of the Son also, and

that with more of intensity, because that He both became "dead" for, and united
Himself to us. He said, "Firstfruits," as of fruits. He said not "Resurrection," but
"Firstfruits," showing that He has sanctified us all, and offered us, as it were, a
sacrifice. The term "fullness" some use of the Godhead, like as John said, "Of
His fullness have all we received." That is, whatever was the Son, the whole Son
dwelt there, not a sort of energy, but a Substance.
He has no cause to assign but the will of God: for this is the import of, "it
was the good pleasure...in Him. And...through Him to reconcile all things unto
Himself." Lest you should think that He undertook the office of a minister only,
he says, "unto Himself." [2 Corinthians 5:18] And yet he elsewhere says, that He
reconciled us to God, as in the Epistle he wrote to the Corinthians. And he well
said, "Through Him to make an end of reconciling"; for they were already
reconciled; but completely, he says, and in such sort, as no more to be at enmity
with Him. How? For not only the reconciliation was set forth, but also the
manner of the reconciliation. "Having made peace through the Blood of His
Cross." The word "reconcile," shows the enmity; the words "having made
peace," the war. "Through the Blood of His Cross, through Himself, whether
things upon the earth, or things in the heavens." A great thing indeed it is to
reconcile; but that this should be through Himself too, is a greater thing; and a
greater still—how through Himself? Through His Blood. Through His Blood;
and he said not simply His Blood, but what is yet greater, through the Cross. So
that the marvels are five: He reconciled us; to God; through Himself; through
Death; through the Cross. Admirable again! How he has mixed them up! For lest
you should think that it is one thing merely, or that the Cross is anything of itself,
he says "through Himself." How well he knows that this was a great thing.
Because not by speaking words, but by giving Himself up for the reconciliation,
He so wrought everything.
But what is "things in the heavens"? For with reason indeed is it said, "the
things upon the earth," for those were filled with enmity, and manifoldly
divided, and each one of us was utterly at variance with himself, and with the