SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.170, C.7.

I answer that, As may be gathered from what has been said (Articles
1,3,5), prophecy is a kind of knowledge impressed under the form of
teaching on the prophet's intellect, by Divine revelation. Now the
truth of knowledge is the same in disciple and teacher since the
knowledge of the disciple is a likeness of the knowledge of the
teacher, even as in natural things the form of the thing generated is a
likeness of the form of the generator. Jerome speaks in this sense
when he says [Comment. in Daniel ii, 10] that "prophecy is the seal
of the Divine foreknowledge." Consequently the same truth must
needs be in prophetic knowledge and utterances, as in the Divine
knowledge, under which nothing false can possibly come, as stated
in the FP, Question 16, Article 8. Therefore nothing false can come
under prophecy.
Reply to Objection 1: As stated in the FP, Question 14, Article 13 the
certitude of the Divine foreknowledge does not exclude the
contingency of future singular events, because that knowledge
regards the future as present and already determinate to one thing.
Wherefore prophecy also, which is an "impressed likeness" or "seal
of the Divine foreknowledge," does not by its unchangeable truth
exclude the contingency of future things.
Reply to Objection 2: The Divine foreknowledge regards future
things in two ways. First, as they are in themselves, in so far, to wit,
as it sees them in their presentiality: secondly, as in their causes,
inasmuch as it sees the order of causes in relation to their effects.
And though future contingencies, considered as in themselves, are
determinate to one thing, yet, considered as in their causes, they are
not so determined but that they can happen otherwise. Again,
though this twofold knowledge is always united in the Divine
intellect, it is not always united in the prophetic revelation, because
an imprint made by an active cause is not always on a par with the
virtue of that cause. Hence sometimes the prophetic revelation is an
imprinted likeness of the Divine foreknowledge, in so far as the latter
regards future contingencies in themselves: and such things happen
in the same way as foretold, for example this saying of Is. 7:14:
"Behold a virgin shall conceive." Sometimes, however, the prophetic
revelation is an imprinted likeness of the Divine foreknowledge as
knowing the order of causes to effects; and then at times the event is
otherwise than foretold. Yet the prophecy does not cover a
falsehood, for the meaning of the prophecy is that inferior causes,
whether they be natural causes or human acts, are so disposed as to
lead to such a result. In this way we are to understand the saying of

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.170, C.7.

Is. 38:1: "Thou shalt die, and not live"; in other words, "The
disposition of thy body has a tendency to death": and the saying of
Jonas 3:4, "Yet forty days, and Nineveh shall be destroyed," that is
to say, "Its merits demand that it should be destroyed." God is said
"to repent," metaphorically, inasmuch as He bears Himself after the
manner of one who repents, by "changing His sentence, although He
changes not His counsel" [FP, Question 19, Article 7, ad 2].
Reply to Objection 3: Since the same truth of prophecy is the same
as the truth of Divine foreknowledge, as stated above, the
conditional proposition: "If this was prophesied, it will be," is true in
the same way as the proposition: "If this was foreknown, it will be":
for in both cases it is impossible for the antecedent not to be. Hence
the consequent is necessary, considered, not as something future in
our regard, but as being present to the Divine foreknowledge, as
stated in the FP, Question 14, Article 13, ad 2.