desires, let us use this; or whether again labors and distresses, upon this let us
repose. Of all the other armor, this is the safeguard; if we have not this, they will
be quickly pierced through. "Withal," says he, "taking up the shield of faith."
What is the meaning of "withal"? It means both "in truth," and "in
righteousness," and "in the preparation of the gospel"; that is to say, all these
have need of the aid of faith.
And therefore he adds further, "and take the helmet of salvation"; that is to
say, finally by this shall you be able to be in security. To receive the helmet of
salvation is to escape the peril. For as the helmet covers the head perfectly in
every part, and suffers it not to sustain any injury, but preserves it, so also does
faith supply alike the place of a shield, and of a helmet to preserve us. For if we
quench his darts, quickly shall we receive also those saving thoughts that suffer
not our governing principle to sustain any harm; for if these, the thoughts that
are adverse to our salvation, are quenched, those which are not so, but which
contribute to our salvation, and inspire us with good hopes, will be generated
within us, and will rest upon our governing principle, as a helmet does upon the
head.
And not only this, but we shall take also "the sword of the Spirit," and thus
not only ward off his missiles, but smite the devil himself. For a soul that does
not despair of herself, and is proof against those fiery darts, will stand with all
intrepidity to face the enemy, and will cleave open his breastplate with this very
sword with which Paul also burst through it, and "brought into captivity his
devices" [2 Corinthians 10:5]; he will cut off and behead the serpent.
"Which is the word of God."
By the "word of God" in this place, he means on the one hand the ordinance
of God, or the word of command; or on the other that it is in the Name of Christ.
For if we keep his commandments, by these we shall kill and slay the dragon
himself, "the crooked serpent." [Isaiah 27:1] And as he said, "You shall be able
to quench the fiery darts of the evil one"; that he might not puff them up, he
shows them, that above all things they stand in need of God; for what does he

say?
"With all prayer and supplication," he says, these things shall be done, and
you shall accomplish all by praying. But when you draw near, never ask for
yourself only: thus shall you have God favorable to you.
"With all prayer and supplication, praying at all seasons in the Spirit, and
watching thereunto in all perseverance for all the saints." Limit it not, I say, to
certain times of the day, for hear what he is saying; approach at all times; "pray,"
says he, "without ceasing." [1 Thessalonians 5:17] Have you never heard of that
widow, how by her importunity she prevailed? [Luke 18:1-7] Have you never
heard of that friend, who at midnight shamed his friend into yielding by his
perseverance? [Luke 11:5-8] Have you not heard of the Syrophœnician woman
[Mark 7:25-30], how by the constancy of her entreaty she called forth the Lord's
compassion? These all of them gained their object by their importunity.
"Praying at all seasons," says he, "in the Spirit."
That is to say, let us seek for the things which are according to God, nothing
of this world, nothing pertaining to this life.
Therefore, is there need not only that we "pray without ceasing," but also,
that we should do so "watching—and watching," says he, "thereunto." Whether
he is here speaking of vigils; or of the wakefulness of the soul, I admit both
meanings. Do you see how that Canaanitish woman watched unto prayer? And
though the Lord gave her no answer, nay, even shook her off, and called her a
dog, she said, "Yea, Lord: for even the dogs eat of the crumbs which fall from
their masters' table" [Matthew 15:27], and desisted not until she obtained her
request. How, too, did that widow cry, and persist so long, until she was able to
shame into yielding that ruler, that neither feared God, nor regarded man [Luke
18:1-7]? And how, again, did the friend persist, remaining before the door in the
dead of night, till he shamed the other into yielding by his importunity, and made
him arise. [Luke 11:5-8] This is to be watchful.
Would you understand what watchfulness in prayer is? Go to Hannah,
hearken to her very words, "Adonai Eloi Sabaoth." [1 Samuel 1:11] Nay, rather,