THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.66, C.10.

neither can carnal generation. Hence Augustine says on Jn. 3:4:
"'Can he enter a second time into his mother's womb and be born
again': So thou," says he, "must understand the birth of the Spirit, as
Nicodemus understood the birth of the flesh . . . . As there is no
return to the womb, so neither is there to Baptism."
Secondly, because "we are baptized in Christ's death," by which we
die unto sin and rise again unto "newness of life" (cf. Rm. 6:3,4).
Now "Christ died" but "once" (Rm. 6:10). Wherefore neither should
Baptism be reiterated. For this reason (Heb. 6:6) is it said against
some who wished to be baptized again: "Crucifying again to
themselves the Son of God"; on which the gloss observes: "Christ's
one death hallowed the one Baptism."
Thirdly, because Baptism imprints a character, which is indelible,
and is conferred with a certain consecration. Wherefore, just as
other consecrations are not reiterated in the Church, so neither is
Baptism. This is the view expressed by Augustine, who says (Contra
Epist. Parmen. ii) that "the military character is not renewed": and
that "the sacrament of Christ is not less enduring than this bodily
mark, since we see that not even apostates are deprived of Baptism,
since when they repent and return they are not baptized anew."
Fourthly, because Baptism is conferred principally as a remedy
against original sin. Wherefore, just as original sin is not renewed,
so neither is Baptism reiterated, for as it is written (Rm. 5:18), "as by
the offense of one, unto all men to condemnation, so also by the
justice of one, unto all men to justification of life."
Reply to Objection 1: Baptism derives its efficacy from Christ's
Passion, as stated above (Article 2, ad 1). Wherefore, just as
subsequent sins do not cancel the virtue of Christ's Passion, so
neither do they cancel Baptism, so as to call for its repetition. on the
other hand the sin which hindered the effect of Baptism is blotted
out on being submitted to Penance.
Reply to Objection 2: As Augustine says on Jn. 1:33: "'And I knew
Him not': Behold; after John had baptized, Baptism was
administered; after a murderer has baptized, it is not administered:
because John gave his own Baptism; the murderer, Christ's; for that
sacrament is so sacred, that not even a murderer's administration
contaminates it."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.66, C.10.

Reply to Objection 3: The Paulianists and Cataphrygians used not to
baptize in the name of the Trinity. Wherefore Gregory, writing to the
Bishop Quiricus, says: "Those heretics who are not baptized in the
name of the Trinity, such as the Bonosians and Cataphrygians" (who
were of the same mind as the Paulianists), "since the former believe
not that Christ is God" (holding Him to be a mere man), "while the
latter," i.e. the Cataphrygians, "are so perverse as to deem a mere
man," viz. Montanus, "to be the Holy Ghost: all these are baptized
when they come to holy Church, for the baptism which they received
while in that state of error was no Baptism at all, not being conferred
in the name of the Trinity." On the other hand, as set down in De
Eccles. Dogm. xxii: "Those heretics who have been baptized in the
confession of the name of the Trinity are to be received as already
baptized when they come to the Catholic Faith."
Reply to Objection 4: According to the Decretal of Alexander III:
"Those about whose Baptism there is a doubt are to be baptized with
these words prefixed to the form: 'If thou art baptized, I do not
rebaptize thee; but if thou art not baptized, I baptize thee,' etc.: for
that does not appear to be repeated, which is not known to have
been done."
Reply to Objection 5: Both sacraments, viz. Baptism and the
Eucharist, are a representation of our Lord's death and Passion, but
not in the same way. For Baptism is a commemoration of Christ's
death in so far as man dies with Christ, that he may be born again
into a new life. But the Eucharist is a commemoration of Christ's
death, in so far as the suffering Christ Himself is offered to us as the
Paschal banquet, according to 1 Cor. 5:7,8: "Christ our pasch is
sacrificed; therefore let us feast." And forasmuch as man is born
once, whereas he eats many times, so is Baptism given once, but the
Eucharist frequently.