of poor men and beggars? For this cause then, He not only commands to make
no display, but even to take pains to be concealed: it not being at all the same,
not to strive for publicity, and to strive for concealment.
3. "And when you pray," says He, "you shall not be as the hypocrites, for
they love to pray standing in the synagogues, and in the corners of the streets.
Verily I say unto you, they have their reward."
"But you, when you pray, enter into your closet, and when you have shut
your door, pray to your Father which is in secret."
These too again He calls "hypocrites," and very fitly; for while they are
feigning to pray to God, they are looking round after men; wearing the garb not
of suppliants, but of ridiculous persons. For he, who is to do a suppliant's office,
letting go all other, looks to him alone, who has power to grant his request. But if
you leave this one, and go about wandering and casting around your eyes
everywhere, you will depart with empty hands. For this was your own will.
Wherefore He said not, "such shall not receive a reward," but, "they have it out:"
that is, they shall indeed receive one, but from those of whom they themselves
desire to have it. For God wills not this: He rather for His part was willing to
bestow on men the recompence that comes from Himself; but they seeking that
which is from men, can be no longer justly entitled to receive from Him, for
whom they have done nothing.
But mark, I pray you, the lovingkindness of God, in that He promises to
bestow on us a reward, even for those good things which we ask of Him.
Having then discredited them, who order not this duty as they ought, both
from the place and from their disposition of mind, and having shown that they
are very ridiculous: He introduces the best manner of prayer, and again gives the
reward, saying, "Enter into your closet."
"What then," it may be said, "ought we not to pray in church?" Indeed we
ought by all means, but in such a spirit as this. Because everywhere God seeks
the intention of all that is done. Since even if you should enter into your closet,
and having shut the door, should do it for display, the doors will do you no good.

It is worth observing in this case also, how exact the definition, which He
made when He said, "That they may appear unto men." So that even if you shut
the doors, this He desires you duly to perform, rather than the shutting of the
doors, even to shut the doors of the mind. For as in everything it is good to be
freed from vainglory, so most especially in prayer. For if even without this, we
wander and are distracted, when shall we attend unto the things which we are
saying, should we enter in having this disease also? And if we who pray and
beseech attend not, how do we expect God to attend?
4. But yet some there are, who after such and so earnest charges, behave
themselves so unseemly in prayer, that even when their person is concealed, they
make themselves manifest to all by their voice, crying out disorderly, and
rendering themselves objects of ridicule both by gesture and voice. Do you see
not that even in a market place, should any one come up doing like this, and
begging clamorously, he wilt drive away him whom he is petitioning; but if
quietly, and with the proper gesture, then he rather wins over him that can grant
the favor?
Let us not then make our prayer by the gesture of our body, nor by the
loudness of our voice, but by the earnestness of our mind: neither with noise and
clamor and for display, so as even to disturb those that are near us, but with all
modesty, and with contrition in the mind, and with inward tears.
But are you pained in mind, and canst not help crying aloud? Yet surely it is
the part of one exceedingly pained to pray and entreat even as I have said. Since
Moses too was pained, and prayed in this way and was heard; for this cause also
God said unto him, "Wherefore do you cry unto me." [Exodus 14:15] And
Hannah too again, her voice not being heard, accomplished all she wished,
forasmuch as her heart cried out. [1 Samuel 1:13] But Abel prayed not only
when silent, but even when dying, and his blood sent forth a cry more clear than
a trumpet. [Genesis 4:10]
Do thou also then groan, even as that holy one, I forbid it not. "Rend," as
the prophet commanded, [Joel 2:13] "your heart, and not your garments." Out of