It is clear, then, that mathematical inquiry, is easier and more certain than physical and
theological, and much more so than that of the other sciences that are practical, and for this
reason it is said especially to proceed according to the mode of learning. This is what Ptolemy
asserts in the beginning of the Almagest: "Let us call the other two kinds of theoretical
knowledge opinion rather than science: theology because of its obscurity and
incomprehensibility, physics because of the instability and obscurity of matter. The mathematical
type of investigation alone will give the inquirer firm and unshaken certainty through
demonstrations carried out by unquestionable methods."

Replies to Opposing Arguments.

Reply to 1. Although we learn in all the sciences, nevertheless, as we have said, we do so with
greater ease and certitude in mathematics.

Reply to 2. Natural things come under the senses; but because of their instability when they
begin to exist in reality they do not have the great certitude of the objects of mathematics. These
latter are not subject to change; and yet they exist in sensible matter, and as such they can come
under the senses and imagination.

Reply to 3. In learning we begin with what is easier, unless necessity dictates otherwise. For
sometimes in learning it is necessary to start, not with what is easier, but with that on which the
knowledge of subsequent matters depends. That is why in acquiring knowledge we must begin
with logic, not because it is easier than other sciences (for it involves the greatest difficulty,
concerned as it is with second intentions), but because the sciences depend on it inasmuch as it
teaches the method of proceeding in all the sciences. And, as the Metaphysics says, we must
know the method of science before science itself.

Reply to 4. The method of the sciences is taken from the powers of the soul because of the way
in which these powers operate. So the methods of the sciences do not correspond to the soul's
powers, but rather to the ways in which these powers can operate, and these are diversified not
only according to the powers, but also according to their objects. So it is not necessary that the
method of every science be named after a power of the soul. However, we can say that just as the
method of physics is taken from reason inasmuch as it gets its objects from the senses, and the
method of divine science is taken from the intellect inasmuch as it understands something purely
and simply (nude), so also the method of mathematics can be taken from reason inasmuch as it
obtains its objects from the imagination.

To the third question (c) I reply that just as we attribute the rational method to natural
philosophy because it adheres most closely to the method of reason, so we attribute the
intellectual method to divine science because it adheres most closely to the method of intellect.
Now reason differs from intellect as multitude does from unity. Thus Boethius says that
reasoning is related to understanding as time to eternity and as a circle to its center. For it is
distinctive of reason to disperse itself in the consideration of many things, and then to gather one
simple truth from them. Thus Dionysius says, "Souls have the power of reasoning in that they
approach the truth of things from various angles, and in this respect they are inferior to the
angels; but inasmuch as they gather a multiplicity into unity they are in a way equal to the
angels." Conversely, intellect first contemplates a truth one and undivided and in that truth
comprehends a whole multitude, as God, by knowing his essence, knows all things. Thus
Dionysius says: "Angelic minds have the power of intellect in that they understand divine truths