resulting to us from it. For as His Body, by being buried in the earth, brought
forth as the fruit of it the salvation of the world; thus ours also, being buried in
baptism, bore as fruit righteousness, sanctification, adoption, countless blessings.
And it will bear also hereafter the gift of the resurrection. Since then we were
buried in water, He in earth, and we in regard to sin, He in regard to His Body,
this is why he did not say, "we were planted together in His Death," but "in the
likeness of His Death." For both the one and the other is death, but not that of the
same subject. If then he says, "we have been planted together in His Death, we
shall be in that of His Resurrection," speaking here of the Resurrection which
(Gr. be of His Resurrection) is to come. For since when he was upon the subject
of the Death before, and said, "Do you not know, brethren, that so many of us as
were baptized into Christ were baptized into His Death?" he had not made any
clear statement about the Resurrection, but only about the way of life after
baptism, bidding men walk in newness of life; therefore he here resumes the
same subject, and proceeds to foretell to us clearly that Resurrection. And that
you may know that he is not speaking of that resulting from baptism, but about
the other, after saying, "for if we were planted together in the likeness of His
Death," he does not say that we shall be in the likeness of His Resurrection, but
we shall belong to the Resurrection. For to prevent your saying, and how, if we
did not die as He died, are we to rise as He rose? When he mentioned the Death,
he did not say, "planted together in the Death," but, "in the likeness of His
Death." But when he mentioned the Resurrection, he did not say, "in the likeness
of the Resurrection," but we shall be "of the Resurrection" itself. And he does
not say, We have been made, but we shall be, by this word again plainly meaning
that Resurrection which has not yet taken place, but will hereafter. Then with a
view to give credibility to what he says, he points out another Resurrection
which is brought about here before that one, that from that which is present you
may believe also that which is to come. For after saying, "we shall be planted
together in the Resurrection," he adds,
Ver. 6. "Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with Him, that the body

of sin might be destroyed."
So putting together both the cause and the demonstration of the
Resurrection which is to come. And he does not say is crucified, but is crucified
with Him, so bringing baptism near to the Cross. And on this score also it was
that he said above, "We have been planted together in the likeness of His Death
that the body of sin might be destroyed," not giving that name to this body of
ours, but to all iniquity. For as he calls the whole sum of wickedness the old
man, thus again the wickedness which is made up of the different parts of
iniquity he calls the body of that man. And that what I am saying is not mere
guesswork, hearken to Paul's own interpretation of this very thing in what comes
next. For after saying, "that the body of sin might be destroyed," he adds, "that
henceforth we should not serve sin." For the way in which I would have it dead
is not so that you should be destroyed and die, but so that you sin not. And as he
goes on he makes this still clearer.
Ver. 7. "For he that is dead," he says, "is freed (Gr. justified) from sin."
This he says of every man, that as he that is dead is henceforth freed from
sinning, lying as a dead body, so must he that has come up from baptism, since
he has died there once for all, remain ever dead to sin. If then you have died in
baptism, remain dead, for any one that dies can sin no more; but if you sin, you
mar God's gift. After requiring of us then heroism (Gr. philosophy) of this
degree, he presently brings in the crown also, in these words.
Ver. 8. "Now if we be dead with Christ."
And indeed even before the crown, this is in itself the greater crown, the
partaking with our Master. But he says, I give even another reward. Of what kind
is it? It is life eternal. For "we believe," he says, "that we shall also live with
Him." And whence is this clear?
Ver. 9. "That Christ being raised from the dead, dies no more."
And notice again his undauntedness, and how he makes the thing good
from opposite grounds. Since then it was likely that some would feel perplexed
at the Cross and the Death, he shows that this very thing is a ground for feeling