health. Even so God when we fall into the very extremity of madness, says and
does everything, not by way of avenging Himself on account of our former
deeds; but because He wishes to release us from our disorder; and by means of
right reason it is quite possible to be convinced of this.
5. Now if any one should dispute with us concerning these things we will
confirm them out of the divine oracles. For who, I ask, became more depraved
than the king of the Babylonians, who after having received such great
experience of God's power as to make obeisance to His prophet, and command
offerings and incense to be sacrificed to Him was again carried away to his
former pride, and cast bound into the furnace those who did not honour himself
before God. Nevertheless this man who was so cruel and impious, and rather a
beast than a human being, God invited to repentance, and granted him several
opportunities of conversion, first of all the miracle which took place in the
furnace, and after that the vision which the king saw but which Daniel
interpreted, a vision sufficient to bend even a heart of stone; and in addition to
these things after the exhortation derived from events the prophet also himself
advised him, saying "Therefore, O king, let my counsel please you, and redeem
your sins by alms, and your iniquities by showing mercy to the poor; it may be
that long suffering will be shown to your offense." [Daniel 4:27] What do you
say O wise and blessed man? After so great a fall is there again a way of return?
And after so great a disease is health possible? And after so great a madness is
there again a hope of soundness of mind? The king has deprived himself
beforehand of all hope, first of all by having ignored Him who created him; and
conducted him to this honour, although he had many evidences of His power and
forethought to recount which occurred both in his own case and in the case of his
forefathers; but after this again when he had received distinct tokens of God's
wisdom and foreknowledge, and had seen magic, and astronomy and the theatre
of the whole satanic system of jugglery overthrown, he exhibited deeds yet
worse than the former. For things which the wise magi, the Gazarenes, could not
explain, but confessed that they were beyond human nature, these a captive

youth having caused to be solved for him, so moved him by that miracle that he
not only himself believed, but also became to the whole world a clear herald and
teacher of this doctrine. [Daniel ii] Wherefore if even before having received
such a token it was unpardonable in him to ignore God, much more so was it
after that miracle, and his confession, and the teaching which was extended to
others. For if he had not honestly believed that He was the only true God he
would not have shown such honour to His servant, or have laid down such laws
for others. But yet after making this kind of confession, he again lapsed into
idolatry, and he who once fell on his face and made obeisance to the servant of
God, broke out into such a pitch of madness, as to cast into the furnace the
servants of God who did not make obeisance to himself. What then? Did God
visit the apostate, as he deserved to be visited? No! He supplied him with greater
tokens of His own power, drawing him back again after so great a display of
arrogance to his former condition; and, what is yet more wonderful, that owing
to the abundance of the miracles he might not again disbelieve what was done,
the subject upon which He wrought the sign was none other than the furnace
which the king himself kindled for the children whom he bound and cast therein.
Even to extinguish the flame would have been a wonderful and strange thing;
but the benign Deity in order to inspire him with greater fear, and increase his
dismay, and undo all his hardness of heart, did what was greater and stranger
than this. For, permitting the furnace to be kindled to as high a pitch as he
desired, He then exhibited his own peculiar power, not by putting down the
devices of his enemies, but by frustrating them when they were set on foot. And,
to prevent any one who saw them survive the flame from supposing that it was a
vision, He suffered those who cast them in to be burned, thus proving that the
thing seen was really fire; for otherwise it would not have devoured naphtha and
tow, and fagots and such a large number of bodies; but nothing is stronger than
His command; but the nature of all existing things obeys Him who brought them
into being out of nothing; which was just what He manifested at that time; for
the flame having received perishable bodies, held aloof from them as if they had