exhort them to become Christians, flying to their kinsmen and ancestors and
house, and saying, "All my relations and friends and companions are faithful
Christians." What is that to you, thou wretched and miserable? This very thing
will be especially your ruin, that you did not respect the number of those around
you, and run to the truth. Others again who are believers but live a careless life,
when exhorted to virtue make the very same defense, and say, "my father and my
grandfather and my great-grandfather were very pious and good men." But this
will assuredly most condemn you, that being descended from such men, you
have acted unworthily of the root from whence you are sprung. For hear what
the Prophet says to the Jews, "Israel served for a wife, and for a wife he kept
(sheep)" [Hosea 12:12]; and again Christ, "Your father Abraham rejoiced to see
My day, and he saw it, and was glad." [John 8:56] And everywhere they bring
forward to them the righteous acts of their fathers, not only to praise them, but
also to make the charge against their descendants more heavy. Knowing then
this, let us use every means that we may be saved by our own works, lest having
deceived ourselves by vain trusting on others, we learn that we have been
deceived when the knowledge of it will profit us nothing. "In the grave," says
David, "who shall give you thanks?" [Psalm 6:5] Let us then repent here, that we
may obtain the everlasting goods, which may God grant we all do, through the
grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom to the Father and
the Holy Ghost be glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

Homily 22 on the Gospel of John
John 2:4
"Woman, what have I to do with you? My hour is not yet come."
1. In preaching the word there is some toil, and this Paul declares when he
says, "Let the elders that rule well be counted worthy of double honor, especially
they who labor in the word and doctrine." [1 Timothy 5:17] Yet it is in your
power to make this labor light or heavy; for if you reject our words, or if without
actually rejecting them you do not show them forth in your works, our toil will
be heavy, because we labor uselessly and in vain: while if you heed them and
give proof of it by your works, we shall not even feel the toil, because the fruit
produced by our labor will not suffer the greatness of that labor to appear. So
that if you would rouse our zeal, and not quench or weaken it, show us, I
beseech you, your fruit, that we may behold the fields waving with grain, and
being supported by hopes of an abundant crop, and reckoning up your riches,
may not be slothful in carrying on this good traffic.
It is no slight question which is proposed to us also today. For first, when
the mother of Jesus says, "They have no wine," Christ replies, "Woman, what
have I to do with you? Mine, hour is not yet come." And then, having thus
spoken, He did as His mother had said; an action which needs enquiry no less
than the words. Let us then, after calling upon Him who wrought the miracle,
proceed to the explanation.
The words are not used in this place only, but in others also; for the same
Evangelist says, "They could not lay hands on Him, because His hour was not
yet come" [John 8:20]; and again, "No man laid hands on Him, because His hour
was not yet come" [John 7:30]; and again, "The hour has come, glorify Your
Son." [John 17:1] What then do the words mean? I have brought together more