with Angels, and do you revile? Are you counted worthy the Lord's kiss, and do
you revile? Hath God graced your mouth with so many and great things, with
hymns angelic, with food, not angelic, no, but more than angelic, with His own
kiss, with His own embrace, and do you revile? Oh, no, I implore you. Vast are
the evils of which this is the source; far be it from a Christian soul. Do I not
convince you as I am speaking, do I not shame you? Then does it now become
my duty to alarm you. For hear what Christ says: "Whosoever shall say to his
brother, You fool, shall be in danger of the hell of fire." [Matthew 5:22] Now if
that which is lightest of all leads to hell, of what shall not he be worthy, who
utters presumptuous words? Let us discipline our mouth to silence. Great is the
advantage from this, great the mischief from ill language. We must not spend our
riches here. Let us put door and bolt upon them. Let us devour ourselves alive if
ever a vexatious word slip out of our mouth. Let us entreat God, let us entreat
him whom we have reviled. Let us not think it beneath us to do so. It is ourselves
we have wounded, not him. Let us apply the remedy, prayer, and reconciliation
with him whom we have reviled. If in our words we are to take such forethought,
much more let us impose laws upon ourselves in our deeds. Yea, and if we have
friends, whoever they may be, and they should speak evil to any man or revile
him, demand of them and exact satisfaction. Let us by all means learn that such
conduct is even sin; for if we learn this, we shall soon depart from it.
Now the God of peace keep both your mind and your tongue, and fence you
with a sure fence, even His fear, through Jesus Christ our Lord, with whom to
the Father, together with the Holy Spirit, be glory forever. Amen.

## Homily 15 on Ephesians

Ephesians 4:31
"Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and railing, be put
away from you, with all malice."
As bees will never settle down in an unclean vessel—and this is the reason
why those who are skilled in these matters sprinkle the spot with perfumes, and
scented ointments, and sweet odors; and the wicker baskets also, in which they
will have to settle as soon as they come out of the hives they sprinkle with
fragrant wines, and all other sweets, that there may be no noisome smell to
annoy them, and drive them away again—so in truth is it also with the Holy
Spirit. Our soul is a sort of vessel or basket, capable of receiving the swarms of
spiritual gifts; but if there shall be within it gall, and "bitterness, and wrath," the
swarms will fly away. Hence this blessed and wise husbandman well and
thoroughly cleanses our vessels, withholding neither knife nor any other
instrument of iron, and invites us to this spiritual swarm; and as he gathers it, he
cleanses us with prayers, and labors, and all the rest. Mark then how he cleanses
out our heart. He has banished lying, he has banished anger. Now, again, he is
pointing out how that evil may be yet more entirely eradicated; if we be not, says
he, "bitter" in spirit. For it is as is wont to happen with our bile, if there chance
to be but little of it, there will be but little disturbance if the receptacle should
burst: but if ever the strength and acridness of this quality becomes excessive,
the vessel which before held it, containing it no longer, is as if it were eaten
through by a scorching fire, and it is no longer able to hold it and contain it
within its appointed bounds, but, rent asunder by its intense sharpness, it lets it
escape and injure the whole body. And it is like some very fierce and frightful
wild beast, that has been brought into a city; as long as it is confined in the cages
made for it, however it may rage, however it may roar, it will be unable to do