fact that eternity has no "before" and "after"; but that time has both,
together with innovation and veteration; and that aeviternity has
"before" and "after" without innovation and veteration. This theory,
however, involves a contradiction; which manifestly appears if
innovation and veteration be referred to the measure itself. For since
"before" and "after" of duration cannot exist together, if aeviternity
has "before" and "after," it must follow that with the receding of the
first part of aeviternity, the after part of aeviternity must newly
appear; and thus innovation would occur in aeviternity itself, as it
does in time. And if they be referred to the things measured, even
then an incongruity would follow. For a thing which exists in time
grows old with time, because it has a changeable existence, and
from the changeableness of a thing measured, there follows "before"
and "after" in the measure, as is clear from Phys. iv. Therefore the
fact that an aeviternal thing is neither inveterate, nor subject to
innovation, comes from its changelessness; and consequently its
measure does not contain "before" and "after." We say then that
since eternity is the measure of a permanent being, in so far as
anything recedes from permanence of being, it recedes from
eternity. Now some things recede from permanence of being, so that
their being is subject to change, or consists in change; and these
things are measured by time, as are all movements, and also the
being of all things corruptible. But others recede less from
permanence of being, forasmuch as their being neither consists in
change, nor is the subject of change; nevertheless they have change
annexed to them either actually or potentially. This appears in the
heavenly bodies, the substantial being of which is unchangeable;
and yet with unchangeable being they have changeableness of
place. The same applies to the angels, who have an unchangeable
being as regards their nature with changeableness as regards
choice; moreover they have changeableness of intelligence, of
affections and of places in their own degree. Therefore these are
measured by aeviternity which is a mean between eternity and time.
But the being that is measured by eternity is not changeable, nor is it
annexed to change. In this way time has "before" and "after";
aeviternity in itself has no "before" and "after," which can, however,
be annexed to it; while eternity has neither "before" nor "after," nor
is it compatible with such at all.
Reply to Objection 1: Spiritual creatures as regards successive
affections and intelligences are measured by time. Hence also
Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. viii, 20,22,23) that to be moved through
time, is to be moved by affections. But as regards their nature they

are measured by aeviternity; whereas as regards the vision of glory,
they have a share of eternity.
Reply to Objection 2: Aeviternity is simultaneously whole; yet it is
not eternity, because "before" and "after" are compatible with it.
Reply to Objection 3: In the very being of an angel considered
absolutely, there is no difference of past and future, but only as
regards accidental change. Now to say that an angel was, or is, or
will be, is to be taken in a different sense according to the
acceptation of our intellect, which apprehends the angelic existence
by comparison with different parts of time. But when we say that an
angel is, or was, we suppose something, which being supposed, its
opposite is not subject to the divine power. Whereas when we say he
will be, we do not as yet suppose anything. Hence, since the
existence and non-existence of an angel considered absolutely is
subject to the divine power, God can make the existence of an angel
not future; but He cannot cause him not to be while he is, or not to
have been, after he has been.
Reply to Objection 4: The duration of aeviternity is infinite,
forasmuch as it is not finished by time. Hence, there is no
incongruity in saying that a creature is infinite, inasmuch as it is not
ended by any other creature.