adequately and with beauty the essential content of the Gospel, surely this message will speak to
the deepest yearnings of people’s hearts: “The missionary is convinced that, through the working
of the Spirit, there already exists in individuals and peoples an expectation, even if an unconscious
one, of knowing the truth about God, about man, and about how we are to be set free from sin and
death. The missionary’s enthusiasm in proclaiming Christ comes from the conviction that he is
responding to that expectation”. Enthusiasm for evangelization is based on this conviction.
We have a treasure of life and love which cannot deceive, and a message which cannot mislead
or disappoint. It penetrates to the depths of our hearts, sustaining and ennobling us. It is a truth
which is never out of date because it reaches that part of us which nothing else can reach. Our
infinite sadness can only be cured by an infinite love.

266. But this conviction has to be sustained by our own constantly renewed experience of
savouring Christ’s friendship and his message. It is impossible to persevere in a fervent
evangelization unless we are convinced from personal experience that it is not the same thing to
have known Jesus as not to have known him, not the same thing to walk with him as to walk
blindly, not the same thing to hear his word as not to know it, and not the same thing to
contemplate him, to worship him, to find our peace in him, as not to. It is not the same thing to try
to build the world with his Gospel as to try to do so by our own lights. We know well that with
Jesus life becomes richer and that with him it is easier to find meaning in everything. This is why
we evangelize. A true missionary, who never ceases to be a disciple, knows that Jesus walks with
him, speaks to him, breathes with him, works with him. He senses Jesus alive with him in the
midst of the missionary enterprise. Unless we see him present at the heart of our missionary
commitment, our enthusiasm soon wanes and we are no longer sure of what it is that we are
handing on; we lack vigour and passion. A person who is not convinced, enthusiastic, certain and
in love, will convince nobody.

267. In union with Jesus, we seek what he seeks and we love what he loves. In the end, what we
are seeking is the glory of the Father; we live and act “for the praise of his glorious grace” (Eph
1:6). If we wish to commit ourselves fully and perseveringly, we need to leave behind every other
motivation. This is our definitive, deepest and greatest motivation, the ultimate reason and
meaning behind all we do: the glory of the Father which Jesus sought at every moment of his life.
As the Son, he rejoices eternally to be “close to the Father’s heart” (Jn 1:18). If we are
missionaries, it is primarily because Jesus told us that “by this my Father is glorified, that you bear
much fruit” (Jn 15:8). Beyond all our own preferences and interests, our knowledge and
motivations, we evangelize for the greater glory of the Father who loves us.