they may instruct you. It is true, according to Paul's law, [1 Corinthians 14:3435] you ought to be the teachers. But since that order is reversed by sin, and the
body has come to be above, and the head beneath, let us even take this way.
But if you are ashamed to have a woman for your teacher, fly from sin, and
you will quickly be able to mount up on the throne which God has given you.
Since so long as you sin the Scripture sends you not to a woman only, but even
to things irrational, and those of the viler sort; yea, it is not ashamed to send you
who art honored with reason, as a disciple to the ant. [Proverbs 6:6] Plainly this
is no charge against the Scripture, but against them that so betray their own
nobility of race. This then we will do likewise; and for the present we will
commit you to your wife; but if you despise her, we will send you away to the
school of the very brutes, and will point out to you how many birds, fishes, fourfooted beasts, and creeping things are found more honorable, and chaster than
you.
If now you are ashamed, and dost blush at the comparison, mount up to
your own nobility, and fly the sea of hell, and the flood of fire, I mean the pool in
the theatre. For this pool introduces to that sea, and kindles that abyss of flame.
Since if "he that looks on a woman to lust after her has already committed
adultery," [Matthew 5:28] he who is forced even to see her naked, how does he
not become ten thousandfold a captive? The flood in the days of Noah did not so
utterly destroy the race of men as these swimming women drown all that are
there with great disgrace. For as to that rain, though it wrought indeed a death of
the body, yet did it repress the wickedness of the soul; but this has the contrary
effect; while the bodies remain, it destroys the soul. And ye, when there is a
question of precedence, claim to take place of the whole word, forasmuch as our
city first crowned itself with the name of Christian; but in the competition of
chastity, you are not ashamed to be behind the rudest cities.
8. "Well," says one, "and what do you require us to do? To occupy the
mountains, and become monks?" Why it is this which makes me sigh, that you
think them alone to be properly concerned with decency and chastity; and yet

assuredly Christ made His laws common to all. Thus, when He says, "if any one
look on a woman to lust after her," He speaks not to the solitary, but to him also
that has a wife; since in fact that mount was at that time filled with all kinds of
persons of that description. Form then in your mind an image of that
amphitheatre, and hate this, which is the devil's. Neither condemn the severity of
my speech. For I neither "forbid to marry," [1 Timothy 4:2] nor hinder your
taking pleasure; but I would have this be done in chastity, not with shame, and
reproach, and imputations without end. I do not make it a law that you are to
occupy the mountains and the deserts, but to be good and considerate and chaste,
dwelling in the midst of the city. For in fact all our laws are common to the
monks also, except marriage; yea rather, even with respect to this, Paul
commands us to put ourselves altogether on a level with them; saying, "For the
fashion of this world passes away:" that "they that have wives be as though they
had none."
"Wherefore" (so he speaks) "I do not bid you take possession of the summits
of the mountains; it is true I could wish it, since the cities imitate the things that
were done in Sodom; nevertheless, I do not enforce this. Abide, having house
and children and wife; only do not insult your wife, nor put your children to
shame, neither bring into your house the infection from the theatre." Do you not
hear Paul saying, "The husband has not power of his own body, but the wife,"
[1 Corinthians 7:4] and setting down laws common to both? But you, if your
wife be continually thrusting herself into a public assembly, art severe in
blaming her; but yourself, spending whole days on public shows, you do not
account worthy of blame. Yea, touching your wife's modesty you are so strict as
even to go beyond necessity or measure, and not to allow her so much as
indispensable absences; but to yourself you deem all things lawful. Yet Paul
allows you not, who gives the wife likewise the same authority, for thus he
speaks: "Let the husband render unto the wife due honor." What sort of honor
then is this, when you insult her in the chiefest things, and givest up her body to
harlots (for your body is hers); when you bring tumults and wars into your