bent upon showing that they have the very same things which Christ has; and
through all his Epistles, the tenor is this, to show that in all things they are
partakers with Him. Therefore he uses the terms, Head, and Body, and does
everything to convey this to them.
If therefore we shall then be manifested, let us not grieve, when we enjoy
not honor: if this life be not life, but it be hidden, we ought to live this life as
though dead. "Then shall you also," he says, "with Him be manifested in glory."
"In glory," he said, not merely "manifested." For the pearl too is hidden so long
as it is within the oyster. If then we be treated with insult, let us not grieve; or
whatever it be we suffer; for this life is not our life, we are strangers and
sojourners. "For you died," he says. Who is so witless, as for a corpse, dead and
buried, either to buy servants, or build houses, or prepare costly raiment? None.
Neither then do ye; but as we seek one thing only, namely, that we be not in a
naked state, so here too let us seek one thing and no more. Our first man is
buried: buried not in earth, but in water; not death-destroyed, but buried by
death's destroyer, not by the law of nature, but by the governing command that is
stronger than nature. For what has been done by nature, may perchance be
undone; but what has been done by His command, never. Nothing is more
blessed than this burial, whereat all are rejoicing, both Angels, and men, and the
Lord of Angels. At this burial, no need is there of vestments, nor of coffin, nor of
anything else of that kind. Would you see the symbol of this? I will show you a
pool wherein the one was buried, the other raised; in the Red Sea the Egyptians
were sunk beneath it, but the Israelites went up from out of it; in the same act he
buries the one, generates the other.
Marvel not that generation and destruction take place in Baptism; for, tell
me, dissolving and cementing, are they not opposite? It is evident to all. Such is
the effect of fire; for fire dissolves and destroys wax, but it cements together
metallic earth, and works it into gold. So in truth here also, the force of the fire,
having obliterated the statue of wax, has displayed a golden one in its stead; for
in truth before the Bath we were of clay, but after it of gold. Whence is this

evident? Hear him saying, "The first man is of the earth, earthy, the second man
is the Lord from heaven." [1 Corinthians 15:47] I spoke of a difference as great
as that between clay and gold; but greater still do I find the difference between
heavenly and earthy; not so widely do clay and gold differ, as do things earthy
and heavenly. Waxen we were, and clay-formed. For the flame of lust did much
more melt us, than fire does wax, and any chance temptation did far rather
shatter us than a stone does things of clay. And, if you will, let us give an outline
of the former life, and see whether all was not earth and water, and full of
fluctuation and dust, and instability, and flowing away.
And if you will, let us scrutinize not the former things, but the present, and
see whether we shall not find everything that is, mere dust and water. For what
will you tell me of? Authority and power? For nothing in this present life is
thought to be more enviable than these. But sooner may one find the dust when
on the air stationary, than these things; especially now. For to whom are they not
under subjection? To those who are lovers of them; to eunuchs; to those who will
do anything for the sake of money; to the passions of the populace; to the wrath
of the more powerful. He who was yesterday up high on his tribunal, who had
his heralds shouting with thrilling voice, and many to run before, and haughtily
clear the way for him through the forum, is today mean and low, and of all those
things bereft and bare, like dust blast-driven, like a stream that has passed by.
And like as the dust is raised by our feet, so truly are magistracies also produced
by those who are engaged about money, and in the whole of life have the rank
and condition of feet; and like as the dust when it is raised occupies a large
portion of the air, though itself be but a small body, so too does power; and like
as the dust blinds the eyes, so too does the pride of power bedim the eyes of the
understanding.
But what? Will you that we examine that object of many prayers, wealth?
Come, let us examine it in its several parts. It has luxury, it has honors, it has
power. First then, if you will, let us examine luxury. Is it not dust? Yea, rather, it
goes by swifter than dust, for the pleasure of luxurious living reaches only to the