SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.24, C.8.

man, to hold the first place. Wherefore, since they know not
themselves aright, they do not love themselves aright, but love what
they think themselves to be. But the good know themselves truly,
and therefore truly love themselves.
The Philosopher proves this from five things that are proper to
friendship. For in the first place, every friend wishes his friend to be
and to live; secondly, he desires good things for him; thirdly, he
does good things to him; fourthly, he takes pleasure in his company;
fifthly, he is of one mind with him, rejoicing and sorrowing in almost
the same things. In this way the good love themselves, as to the
inward man, because they wish the preservation thereof in its
integrity, they desire good things for him, namely spiritual goods,
indeed they do their best to obtain them, and they take pleasure in
entering into their own hearts, because they find there good
thoughts in the present, the memory of past good, and the hope of
future good, all of which are sources of pleasure. Likewise they
experience no clashing of wills, since their whole soul tends to one
thing.
On the other hand, the wicked have no wish to be preserved in the
integrity of the inward man, nor do they desire spiritual goods for
him, nor do they work for that end, nor do they take pleasure in their
own company by entering into their own hearts, because whatever
they find there, present, past and future, is evil and horrible; nor do
they agree with themselves, on account of the gnawings of
conscience, according to Ps. 49:21: "I will reprove thee and set
before thy face."
In the same manner it may be shown that the wicked love
themselves, as regards the corruption of the outward man, whereas
the good do not love themselves thus.
Reply to Objection 1: The love of self which is the principle of sin is
that which is proper to the wicked, and reaches "to the contempt of
God," as stated in the passage quoted, because the wicked so desire
external goods as to despise spiritual goods.
Reply to Objection 2: Although natural love is not altogether forfeited
by wicked men, yet it is perverted in them, as explained above.
Reply to Objection 3: The wicked have some share of self-love, in so

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.24, C.8.

far as they think themselves good. Yet such love of self is not true
but apparent: and even this is not possible in those who are very
wicked.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.24, C.9.

### ARTICLE 8. Whether charity requires that we should love our

enemies?
Objection 1: It would seem that charity does not require us to love
our enemies. For Augustine says (Enchiridion lxxiii) that "this great
good," namely, the love of our enemies, is "not so universal in its
application, as the object of our petition when we say: Forgive us our
trespasses." Now no one is forgiven sin without he have charity,
because, according to Prov. 10:12, "charity covereth all sins."
Therefore charity does not require that we should love our enemies.
Objection 2: Further, charity does not do away with nature. Now
everything, even an irrational being, naturally hates its contrary, as a
lamb hates a wolf, and water fire. Therefore charity does not make us
love our enemies.
Objection 3: Further, charity "doth nothing perversely" (1 Cor. 13:4).
Now it seems perverse to love one's enemies, as it would be to hate
one's friends: hence Joab upbraided David by saying (2 Kgs. 19:6):
"Thou lovest them that hate thee, and thou hatest them that love
thee." Therefore charity does not make us love our enemies.
On the contrary, Our Lord said (Mt. 4:44): "Love your enemies."
I answer that, Love of one's enemies may be understood in three
ways. First, as though we were to love our enemies as such: this is
perverse, and contrary to charity, since it implies love of that which
is evil in another.
Secondly love of one's enemies may mean that we love them as to
their nature, but in general: and in this sense charity requires that we
should love our enemies, namely, that in loving God and our
neighbor, we should not exclude our enemies from the love given to
our neighbor in general.
Thirdly, love of one's enemies may be considered as specially
directed to them, namely, that we should have a special movement of
love towards our enemies. Charity does not require this absolutely,
because it does not require that we should have a special movement
of love to every individual man, since this would be impossible.
Nevertheless charity does require this, in respect of our being