THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.42, C.2.

is written Rm. 13:1: "Those things which are of God are well ordered
". Now the right order demanded that the doctrine of Christ should
be made known first to the Jews, who, by believing in and
worshiping one God, were nearer to God, and that it should be
transmitted through them to the Gentiles: just as in the heavenly
hierarchy the Divine enlightenment comes to the lower angels
through the higher. Hence on Mt. 15:24, "I was not sent but to the
sheep that are lost in the house of Israel," Jerome says: "He does
not mean by this that He was not sent to the Gentiles, but that He
was sent to the Jews first." And so we read (Is. 66:19): "I will send of
them that shall be saved," i.e. of the Jews, "to the Gentiles . . . and
they shall declare My glory unto the Gentiles."
Thirdly, in order to deprive the Jews of ground for quibbling. Hence
on Mt. 10:5, "Go ye not into the way of the Gentiles." Jerome says: "It
behooved Christ's coming to be announced to the Jews first, lest
they should have a valid excuse, and say that they had rejected our
Lord because He had sent His apostles to the Gentiles and
Samaritans."
Fourthly, because it was through the triumph of the cross that Christ
merited power and lordship over the Gentiles. Hence it is written
(Apoc. 2:26,28): "He that shall overcome . . . I will give him power
over the nations . . . as I also have received of My Father"; and that
because He became "obedient unto the death of the cross, God hath
exalted Him . . . that in the name of Jesus every knee should
bow . . ." and that "every tongue should confess Him" (Phil. 2:8-11).
Consequently He did not wish His doctrine to be preached to the
Gentiles before His Passion: it was after His Passion that He said to
His disciples (Mt. 28:19): "Going, teach ye all nations." For this
reason it was that when, shortly before His Passion, certain Gentiles
wished to see Jesus, He said: "Unless the grain of wheat falling into
the ground dieth, itself remaineth alone: but if it die it bringeth forth
much fruit" (Jn. 12:20-25); and as Augustine says, commenting on
this passage: "He called Himself the grain of wheat that must be
mortified by the unbelief of the Jews, multiplied by the faith of the
nations."
Reply to Objection 1: Christ was given to be the light and salvation
of the Gentiles through His disciples, whom He sent to preach to
them.
Reply to Objection 2: It is a sign, not of lesser, but of greater power

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.42, C.2.

to do something by means of others rather than by oneself. And thus
the Divine power of Christ was specially shown in this, that He
bestowed on the teaching of His disciples such a power that they
converted the Gentiles to Christ, although these had heard nothing
of Him.
Now the power of Christ's teaching is to be considered in the
miracles by which He confirmed His doctrine, in the efficacy of His
persuasion, and in the authority of His words, for He spoke as being
Himself above the Law when He said: "But I say to you" (Mt.
5:22,28,32,34,39,44); and, again, in the force of His righteousness
shown in His sinless manner of life.
Reply to Objection 3: Just as it was unfitting that Christ should at the
outset make His doctrine known to the Gentiles equally with the
Jews, in order that He might appear as being sent to the Jews, as to
the first-born people; so neither was it fitting for Him to neglect the
Gentiles altogether, lest they should be deprived of the hope of
salvation. For this reason certain individual Gentiles were admitted,
on account of the excellence of their faith and devotedness.