THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.36, C.8.

because its movement was not continuous, but when the Magi had
to continue their journey the star moved on; when they had to stop
the star stood still; as happened to the pillar of a cloud in the desert.
Fifthly, because it indicated the virginal Birth, not by remaining aloft,
but by coming down below. For it is written (Mt. 2:9) that "the star
which they had seen in the east went before them, until it came and
stood over where the child was." Whence it is evident that the words
of the Magi, "We have seen His star in the east," are to be taken as
meaning, not that when they were in the east the star appeared over
the country of Judea, but that when they saw the star it was in the
east, and that it preceded them into Judea (although this is
considered doubtful by some). But it could not have indicated the
house distinctly, unless it were near the earth. And, as he
[Chrysostom] observes, this does not seem fitting to a star, but "of
some power endowed with reason." Consequently "it seems that this
was some invisible force made visible under the form of a star."
Wherefore some say that, as the Holy Ghost, after our Lord's
Baptism, came down on Him under the form of a dove, so did He
appear to the Magi under the form of a star. While others say that the
angel who, under a human form, appeared to the shepherds, under
the form of a star, appeared to the Magi. But it seems more probable
that it was a newly created star, not in the heavens, but in the air
near the earth, and that its movement varied according to God's will.
Wherefore Pope Leo says in a sermon on the Epiphany (xxxi): "A
star of unusual brightness appeared to the three Magi in the east,
which, through being more brilliant and more beautiful than the other
stars, drew men's gaze and attention: so that they understood at
once that such an unwonted event could not be devoid of purpose."
Reply to Objection 1: In Holy Scripture the air is sometimes called
the heavens---for instance, "The birds of the heavens and the fishes
of the sea."
Reply to Objection 2: The angels of heaven, by reason of their very
office, come down to us, being "sent to minister." But the stars of
heaven do not change their position. Wherefore there is no
comparison.
Reply to Objection 3: As the star did not follow the course of the
heavenly stars, so neither did it follow the course of the comets,
which neither appear during the daytime nor vary their customary
course. Nevertheless in its signification it has something in common

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.36, C.8.

with the comets. Because the heavenly kingdom of Christ "shall
break in pieces, and shall consume all the kingdoms" of the earth,
"and itself shall stand for ever" (Dan. 2:44).

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.36, C.9.