why do I weary myself in vain, and talk uselessly, if you are to remain in the
same state, if the Church services work no good in you? Nay, you will say, we
pray. And what of that? "Not every one that says unto Me, Lord, Lord, shall
enter into the Kingdom of heaven; but he that does the will of My Father which
is in heaven." [Matthew 7:21] Many a time have I determined to hold my peace,
seeing no benefit accruing to you from my words; or perhaps there does accrue
some, but I, through insatiableness and strong desire, am affected in the same
way as those that are mad after riches. For just as they, however much they may
get, think they have nothing; so I, because I ardently desire your salvation, until I
see you to have made good progress, think nothing done, because of my
exceeding eager desire that you should arrive at the very summit. I would that
this were the case, and that my eagerness were in fault, not your sloth: but I fear
I conjecture but too rightly. For you must needs be persuaded, that if any benefit
had arisen in all this length of time, we ought ere now to have done speaking. In
such case, there were no need to you of words, since both in those already
spoken there had been enough said for you, and you would be yourselves able to
correct others. But the fact, that there is still a necessity of our discoursing to
you, only shows, that matters with you are not in a state of high perfection. Then
what would we have to be brought about? For one must not merely find fault. I
beseech and entreat you not to think it enough to have invaded the Church, but
that you also withdraw hence, having taken somewhat, some medicine, for the
curing of your own maladies: and, if not from us, at any rate from the Scriptures,
you have the remedies suitable for each. For instance, is any passionate? Let him
attend to the Scripture-readings, and he will of a surety find such either in
history or exhortation. In exhortation, when it is said, "The sway of his fury is his
destruction" [Sirach 1:22]; and, "A passionate man is not seemly" [Proverbs
11:25]; and such like: and again, "A man full of words shall not prosper" [Psalm
140:11]; and Christ again, "He that is angry with his brother without a cause"
[Matthew 5:22]; and again the Prophet, "Be angry, and sin not" [Psalm 4:4]; and,
"Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce." [Genesis 49:7] And in histories, as

when you hear of Pharaoh filled with much wrath, and the Assyrian. Again, is
any one taken captive by love of money? Let him hear, that "There is not a more
wicked thing than a covetous man: for this man sets even his own soul for sale"
[Sirach 9:9]; and how Christ says, "You cannot serve God and mammon"
[Matthew 6:24]; and the Apostle, that "the love of money is a root of all evils" [1
Timothy 6:10]; and the Prophet, "If riches flow in, set not your heart upon them"
[Psalm 62:10]; and many other like sayings. And from the histories you hear of
Gehazi, Judas, the chief scribes, and that "gifts blind the eyes of the wise."
[Deuteronomy 16:19] Is another proud? Let him hear that "God resists the
proud" [James 4:6]; and, "Pride is the beginning of sin" [Sirach 10:14] and,
"Every one that has a high heart, is impure before the Lord." [Proverbs 16:5]
And in the histories, the devil, and all the rest. In a word, since it is impossible to
recount all, let each choose out from the Divine Scriptures the remedies for his
own hurts.
So wash out, if not the whole at once, a part at any rate, part today, and part
tomorrow, and then the whole. And with regard to repentance too, and
confession, and almsgiving, and justice also, and temperance, and all other
things, you will find many examples. "For all these things," says the Apostle,
"were written for our admonition." [1 Corinthians 10:11] If then Scripture in all
its discoursing is for our admonition, let us attend to it as we ought. Why do we
deceive ourselves in vain? I fear it may be said of us also, that "our days have
fallen short in vanity, and our years with haste." [Psalm 77:33] Who from
hearing us has given up the theatres? Who has given up his covetousness? Who
has become more ready for almsgiving? I would wish to know this, not for the
sake of vainglory, but that I may be inspirited to more zeal, seeing the fruit of my
labors to be clearly evident. But as things now are, how shall I put my hand to
the work, when I see that for all the rain of doctrine pouring down upon you
shower after shower, still our crops remain at the same measure, and the plants
have waxed none the higher? Anon the time of threshing is at hand (and) He
with the fan. I fear me, lest it be all stubble: I fear, lest we be all cast into the