18. Unfortunately these advocates of novelty easily pass from despising scholastic theology to the
neglect of and even contempt for the Teaching Authority of the Church itself, which gives such
authoritative approval to scholastic theology. This Teaching Authority is represented by them as a
hindrance to progress and an obstacle in the way of science. Some non-Catholics consider it as an
unjust restraint preventing some more qualified theologians from reforming their subject. And
although this sacred Office of Teacher in matters of faith and morals must be the proximate and
universal criterion of truth for all theologians, since to it has been entrusted by Christ Our Lord the
whole deposit of faith - Sacred Scripture and divine Tradition - to be preserved, guarded and
interpreted, still the duty that is incumbent on the faithful to flee also those errors which more or less
approach heresy, and accordingly "to keep also the constitutions and decrees by which such evil
opinions are proscribed and forbidden by the Holy See," is sometimes as little known as if it did not
exist. What is expounded in the Encyclical Letters of the Roman Pontiffs concerning the nature and
constitution of the Church, is deliberately and habitually neglected by some with the idea of giving force to a certain vague notion which they profess to have found in the ancient Fathers, especially the
Greeks. The Popes, they assert, do not wish to pass judgment on what is a matter of dispute among
theologians, so recourse must be had to the early sources, and the recent constitutions and decrees
of the Teaching Church must be explained from the writings of the ancients.

19. Although these things seem well said, still they are not free form error. It is true that Popes
generally leave theologians free in those matters which are disputed in various ways by men of very
high authority in this field; but history teaches that many matters that formerly were open to
discussion, no longer now admit of discussion.

20. Nor must it be thought that what is expounded in Encyclical Letters does not of itself demand
consent, since in writing such Letters the Popes do not exercise the supreme power of their Teaching
Authority. For these matters are taught with the ordinary teaching authority, of which it is true to say:
"He who heareth you, heareth me"; and generally what is expounded and inculcated in Encyclical
Letters already for other reasons appertains to Catholic doctrine. But if the Supreme Pontiffs in their
official documents purposely pass judgment on a matter up to that time under dispute, it is obvious
that that matter, according to the mind and will of the Pontiffs, cannot be any longer considered a
question open to discussion among theologians.

21. It is also true that theologians must always return to the sources of divine revelation: for it
belongs to them to point out how the doctrine of the living Teaching Authority is to be found either
explicitly or implicitly in the Scriptures and in Tradition. Besides, each source of divinely revealed
doctrine contains so many rich treasures of truth, that they can really never be exhausted. Hence it is
that theology through the study of its sacred sources remains ever fresh; on the other hand,
speculation which neglects a deeper search into the deposit of faith, proves sterile, as we know from
experience. But for this reason even positive theology cannot be on a par with merely historical
science. For, together with the sources of positive theology God has given to His Church a living
Teaching Authority to elucidate and explain what is contained in the deposit of faith only obscurely
and implicitly. This deposit of faith our Divine Redeemer has given for authentic interpretation not to
each of the faithful, not even to theologians, but only to the Teaching Authority of the Church. But if
the Church does exercise this function of teaching, as she often has through the centuries, either in
the ordinary or in the extraordinary way, it is clear how false is a procedure which would attempt to
explain what is clear by means of what is obscure. Indeed, the very opposite procedure must be used.
Hence Our Predecessor of immortal memory, Pius IX, teaching that the most noble office of theology
is to show how a doctrine defined by the Church is contained in the sources of revelation, added these
words, and with very good reason: "in that sense in which it has been defined by the Church."