for pardon, who, when so easy a road has been cut for us unto life, rush down
precipices, and travel along an unprofitable path, depriving ourselves of all
things both here and hereafter, when we might enjoy both in security? If then we
did not so before, let us at least stop now; and coming to ourselves, let us rightly
dispose of things present, that we may easily receive those which are to come,
through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom to the
Father and the Holy Ghost be glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

Homily 40 on the Gospel of John
John 5:31-32
"If I bear witness of Myself, My witness is not true; there is another that bears
witness of Me, and I know that the witness which he witnesses of Me is true."
1. If any one unpracticed in the art undertake to work a mine, he will get no
gold, but confounding all aimlessly and together, will undergo a labor
unprofitable and pernicious: so also they who understand not the method of Holy
Scripture, nor search out its peculiarities and laws, but go over all its points
carelessly and in one manner, will mix the gold with earth, and never discover
the treasure which is laid up in it. I say this now because the passage before us
contains much gold, not indeed manifest to view, but covered over with much
obscurity, and therefore by digging and purifying we must arrive at the
legitimate sense. For who would not at once be troubled at hearing Christ say, "If
I testify of Myself, My witness is not true"; inasmuch as He often appears to have
testified of Himself? For instance, conversing with the Samaritan woman He
said, "I Am that speak unto you": and in like manner to the blind man, "It is He
that talks with you" [John 9:37]; and rebuking the Jews, "You say, you
blaspheme, because I said I am the Son of God." [John 10:36] And in many
other places besides He does this. If now all these assertions be false, what hope
of salvation shall we have? And where shall we find truth when Truth Itself
declares, "My witness is not true"? Nor does this appear to be the only
contradiction; there is another not less than this. He says farther on, "Though I
bear witness of Myself, yet My witness is true" [John 8:14]; which then, tell me,
am I to receive, and which deem a falsehood? If we take them out thus [from the
context] simply as they are said, without carefully considering the person to
whom nor the cause for which they are said, nor any other like circumstances,

they will both be falsehoods. For if His witness be "not true," then this assertion
is not true either, not merely the second, but the first also. What then is the
meaning? We need great watchfulness, or rather the grace of God, that we rest
not in the mere words; for thus the heretics err, because they enquire not into the
object of the speaker nor the disposition of the hearers. If we add not these and
other points besides, as times and places and the opinions of the listeners, many
absurd consequences will follow.
What then is the meaning? The Jews were about to object to Him, "If you
bear witness concerning yourself, your witness is not true" [John 8:13]: therefore
He spoke these words in anticipation; as though He had said, "You will surely say
to Me, we believe you not; for no one that witnesses of himself is readily held
trustworthy among men." So that the "is not true" must not be read absolutely,
but with reference to their suspicions, as though He had said, "to you it is not
true"; and so He uttered the words not looking to His own dignity, but to their
secret thoughts. When He says, "My witness is not true," He rebukes their
opinion of Him, and the objection about to be urged by them against Him; but
when He says, "Though I bear witness of Myself, My witness is true" [John
8:14], He declares the very nature of the thing itself, namely, that as God they
ought to deem Him trustworthy even when speaking of Himself. For since He
had spoken of the resurrection of the dead, and of the judgment, and that he that
believes in Him is not judged, but comes unto life, and that He shall sit to require
account of all men, and that He has the same Authority and Power with the
Father; and since He was about again otherwise to prove these things, He
necessarily put their objection first. "I told you," He says, "that 'as the Father
raises the dead and quickens them, so the Son quickens whom He will'; I told
you that 'the Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment unto the
Son'; I told you that men must 'honor the Son as they honor the Father'; I told
you that 'he that honors not the Son honors not the Father'; I told you that 'he
that hears My words and believes them shall not see death, but has passed from
death unto life' [John 5:24; not exactly quoted]; that My voice shall raise the