"whereupon" means "for this cause." It was needful that the symbol of the
Testament should be also that of death.

Hebrews 9:19-20
For why (tell me) is the book of the testament sprinkled? "For" (he says)
"when Moses had spoken every precept to all the people according to the law, he
took the blood of calves, with water, and scarlet wool, and hyssop, and sprinkled
both the book itself and all the people, saying, This is the blood of the testament,
which God has enjoined unto you." Tell me then why is the book of the
testament sprinkled, and also the people, except on account of the precious
blood, figured from the first? Why "with hyssop"? It is close and retentive. And
why the "water"? It shows forth also the cleansing by water. And why the
"wool"? This also [was used], that the blood might be retained. In this place
blood and water show forth the same thing, for baptism is His passion.

Hebrews 9:21-22
4. "Moreover he sprinkled with blood both the tabernacle and all the
vessels of the ministry. And almost all things are by the law purged with blood,
and without shedding of blood is no remission." Why the "almost"? Why did he
qualify it? Because those [ordinances] were not a perfect purification, nor a
perfect remission, but half-complete and in a very small degree. But in this case
He says, "This is the blood of the New Testament, which is shed for you, for the
remission of sins." [Matthew 26:28]
Where then is "the book"? He purified their minds. They themselves then
were the books of the New Testament. But where are "the vessels of the
ministry"? They are themselves. And where is "the tabernacle"? Again, they are;
for "I will dwell in them," He says, "and walk in them." [2 Corinthians 6:16]
5. But they were not sprinkled with "scarlet wool," nor yet "with hyssop."
Why was this? Because the cleansing was not bodily but spiritual, and the blood
was spiritual. How? It flowed not from the body of irrational animals, but from
the Body prepared by the Spirit. With this blood not Moses but Christ sprinkled
us, through the word which was spoken; "This is the blood of the New Testament,
for the remission of sins." This word, instead of hyssop, having been dipped in
the blood, sprinkles all. And there indeed the body was cleansed outwardly, for
the purifying was bodily; but here, since the purifying is spiritual, it enters into
the soul, and cleanses it, not being simply sprinkled over, but gushing forth in
our souls. The initiated understand what is said. And in their case indeed one
sprinkled just the surface; but he who was sprinkled washed it off again; for
surely he did not go about continually stained with blood. But in the case of the
soul it is not so, but the blood is mixed with its very substance, making it
vigorous and pure, and leading it to the very unapproachable beauty.
6. Henceforward then he shows that His death is the cause not only of