suppositum of human nature this word man may be truly and
properly predicated of this word "God," as it stands for the Person of
the Son of God.
Reply to Objection 1: When different forms cannot come together in
one suppositum, the proposition is necessarily in remote matter, the
subject signifying one form and the predicate another. But when two
forms can come together in one suppositum, the matter is not
remote, but natural or contingent, as when I say: "Something white is
musical." Now the Divine and human natures, although most widely
apart, nevertheless come together by the mystery of the Incarnation
in one suppositum, in which neither exists accidentally, but [both]
essentially. Hence this proposition is neither in remote nor in
contingent, but in natural matter; and man is not predicated of God
accidentally, but essentially, as being predicated of its hypostasis--not, indeed, by reason of the form signified by this word "God," but
by reason of the suppositum, which is a hypostasis of human nature.
Reply to Objection 2: The three Divine Persons agree in one Nature,
and are distinguished in suppositum; and hence they are not
predicated one of another. But in the mystery of the Incarnation the
natures, being distinct, are not predicated one of the other, in the
abstract. For the Divine Nature is not the human nature. But because
they agree in suppositum, they are predicated of each other in the
concrete.
Reply to Objection 3: "Soul" and "flesh" are taken in the abstract,
even as Godhead and manhood; but in the concrete we say
"animate" and "carnal" or "corporeal," as, on the other hand, "God"
and "man." Hence in both cases the abstract is not predicated of the
abstract, but only the concrete of the concrete.
Reply to Objection 4: This word "man" is predicated of God, because
of the union in person, and this union implies a relation. Hence it
does not follow the rule of those words which are absolutely
predicated of God from eternity.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.16, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether this is true: "Man is God"?

Objection 1: It would seem that this is false: "Man is God." For God
is an incommunicable name; hence (Wis. 13:10; 14:21) idolaters are
rebuked for giving the name of God, which is incommunicable, to
wood and stones. Hence with equal reason does it seem
unbecoming that this word "God" should be predicated of man.
Objection 2: Further, whatever is predicated of the predicate may be
predicated of the subject. But this is true: "God is the Father," or
"God is the Trinity." Therefore, if it is true that "Man is God," it
seems that this also is true: "Man is the Father," or "Man is the
Trinity." But these are false. Therefore the first is false.
Objection 3: Further, it is written (Ps. 80:10): "There shall be no new
God in thee." But man is something new; for Christ was not always
man. Therefore this is false: "Man is God."
On the contrary, It is written (Rm. 9:5): "Of whom is Christ according
to the flesh, Who is over all things, God blessed for ever." Now
Christ, according to the flesh, is man. Therefore this is true: "Man is
God."
I answer that, Granted the reality of both natures, i.e. Divine and
human, and of the union in person and hypostasis, this is true and
proper: "Man is God," even as this: "God is man." For this word
"man" may stand for any hypostasis of human nature; and thus it
may stand for the Person of the Son of God, Whom we say is a
hypostasis of human nature. Now it is manifest that the word "God"
is truly and properly predicated of the Person of the Son of God, as
was said in the FP, Question 39, Article 4. Hence it remains that this
is true and proper: "Man is God."
Reply to Objection 1: Idolaters attributed the name of the Deity to
stones and wood, considered in their own nature, because they
thought there was something divine in them. But we do not attribute
the name of the Deity to the man in His human nature, but in the
eternal suppositum, which by union is a suppositum of human
nature, as stated above.
Reply to Objection 2: This word "Father" is predicated of this word