FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.14, C.6.

take their reason from the end; and consequently the order of
reasoning about actions is contrary to the order of actions.
Reply to Objection 2: Reason begins with that which is first
according to reason; but not always with that which is first in point
of time.
Reply to Objection 3: We should not want to know whether
something to be done for an end be possible, if it were not suitable
for gaining that end. Hence we must first inquire whether it be
conducive to the end, before considering whether it be possible.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.14, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether the process of counsel is indefinite?

Objection 1: It would seem that the process of counsel is indefinite.
For counsel is an inquiry about the particular things with which
action is concerned. But singulars are infinite. Therefore the process
of counsel is indefinite.
Objection 2: Further, the inquiry of counsel has to consider not only
what is to be done, but how to avoid obstacles. But every human
action can be hindered, and an obstacle can be removed by some
human reason. Therefore the inquiry about removing obstacles can
go on indefinitely.
Objection 3: Further, the inquiry of demonstrative science does not
go on indefinitely, because one can come to principles that are selfevident, which are absolutely certain. But such like certainty is not to
be had in contingent singulars, which are variable and uncertain.
Therefore the inquiry of counsel goes on indefinitely.
On the contrary, "No one is moved to that which he cannot possibly
reach" (De Coelo i, 7). But it is impossible to pass through the
infinite. If therefore the inquiry of counsel is infinite, no one would
begin to take counsel. Which is clearly untrue.
I answer that, The inquiry of counsel is actually finite on both sides,
on that of its principle and on that of its term. For a twofold principle
is available in the inquiry of counsel. One is proper to it, and belongs
to the very genus of things pertaining to operation: this is the end
which is not the matter of counsel, but is taken for granted as its
principle, as stated above (Article 2). The other principle is taken
from another genus, so to speak; thus in demonstrative sciences
one science postulates certain things from another, without
inquiring into them. Now these principles which are taken for
granted in the inquiry of counsel are any facts received through the
senses---for instance, that this is bread or iron: and also any general
statements known either through speculative or through practical
science; for instance, that adultery is forbidden by God, or that man
cannot live without suitable nourishment. Of such things counsel
makes no inquiry. But the term of inquiry is that which we are able to
do at once. For just as the end is considered in the light of a
principle, so the means are considered in the light of a conclusion.