THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.14, C.2.

defects of body.
On the contrary, It is written (Heb. 2:18): "For in that, wherein He
Himself hath suffered and been tempted, He is able to succor them
also that are tempted." Now He came to succor us. hence David said
of Him (Ps. 120:1): "I have lifted up my eyes to the mountains, from
whence help shall come to me." Therefore it was fitting for the Son of
God to assume flesh subject to human infirmities, in order to suffer
and be tempted in it and so bring succor to us.
I answer that, It was fitting for the body assumed by the Son of God
to be subject to human infirmities and defects; and especially for
three reasons. First, because it was in order to satisfy for the sin of
the human race that the Son of God, having taken flesh, came into
the world. Now one satisfies for another's sin by taking on himself
the punishment due to the sin of the other. But these bodily defects,
to wit, death, hunger, thirst, and the like, are the punishment of sin,
which was brought into the world by Adam, according to Rm. 5:12:
"By one man sin entered into this world, and by sin death." Hence it
was useful for the end of the Incarnation that He should assume
these penalties in our flesh and in our stead, according to Is. 53:4,
"Surely He hath borne our infirmities." Secondly, in order to cause
belief in the Incarnation. For since human nature is known to men
only as it is subject to these defects, if the Son of God had assumed
human nature without these defects, He would not have seemed to
be true man, nor to have true, but imaginary, flesh, as the
Manicheans held. And so, as is said, Phil. 2:7: "He . . . emptied
Himself, taking the form of a servant, being made in the likeness of
men, and in habit found as a man." Hence, Thomas, by the sight of
His wounds, was recalled to the faith, as related Jn. 20:26. Thirdly, in
order to show us an example of patience by valiantly bearing up
against human passibility and defects. Hence it is said (Heb. 12:3)
that He "endured such opposition from sinners against Himself, that
you be not wearied. fainting in your minds."
Reply to Objection 1: The penalties one suffers for another's sin are
the matter, as it were, of the satisfaction for that sin; but the principle
is the habit of soul, whereby one is inclined to wish to satisfy for
another, and from which the satisfaction has its efficacy, for
satisfaction would not be efficacious unless it proceeded from
charity, as will be explained (XP, Question 14, Article 2). Hence, it
behooved the soul of Christ to be perfect as regards the habit of
knowledge and virtue, in order to have the power of satisfying; but

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.14, C.2.

His body was subject to infirmities, that the matter of satisfaction
should not be wanting.
Reply to Objection 2: From the natural relationship which is between
the soul and the body, glory flows into the body from the soul's
glory. Yet this natural relationship in Christ was subject to the will of
His Godhead, and thereby it came to pass that the beatitude
remained in the soul, and did not flow into the body; but the flesh
suffered what belongs to a passible nature; thus Damascene says
(De Fide Orth. iii, 15) that, "it was by the consent of the Divine will
that the flesh was allowed to suffer and do what belonged to it."
Reply to Objection 3: Punishment always follows sin actual or
original, sometimes of the one punished, sometimes of the one for
whom he who suffers the punishment satisfies. And so it was with
Christ, according to Is. 53:5: "He was wounded for our iniquities, He
was bruised for our sins."
Reply to Objection 4: The infirmity assumed by Christ did not
impede, but greatly furthered the end of the Incarnation, as above
stated. And although these infirmities concealed His Godhead, they
made known His Manhood, which is the way of coming to the
Godhead, according to Rm. 5:1,2: "By Jesus Christ we have access
to God." Moreover, the ancient Fathers did not desire bodily strength
in Christ, but spiritual strength, wherewith He vanquished the devil
and healed human weakness.