Fidelity to the Gospel, lest we run in vain

193. We incarnate the duty of hearing the cry of the poor when we are deeply moved by the
suffering of others. Let us listen to what God’s word teaches us about mercy, and allow that word
to resound in the life of the Church. The Gospel tells us: “Blessed are the merciful, because they
shall obtain mercy” (Mt 5:7). The apostle James teaches that our mercy to others will vindicate us
on the day of God’s judgment: “So speak
and so act as those who are to be judged under the law of liberty. For judgment is without mercy
to one who has shown no mercy, yet mercy triumphs over judgment” (Jas 2:12-13). Here James is
faithful to the finest tradition of post-exilic Jewish spirituality, which attributed a particular salutary
value to mercy: “Break off your sins by practising righteousness, and your iniquities by showing
mercy to the oppressed, that there may perhaps be a lengthening of your tranquillity” (Dan 4:27).
The wisdom literature sees almsgiving as a concrete exercise of mercy towards those in need:
“Almsgiving delivers from death, and it will purge away every sin” (Tob 12:9). The idea is

expressed even more graphically by Sirach: “Water extinguishes blazing fire: so almsgiving atones
for sin” (Sir 3:30). The same synthesis appears in the New Testament: “Maintain constant love for
one another, for love covers a multitude of sins” (1 Pet 4:8). This truth greatly influenced the
thinking of the Fathers of the Church and helped create a prophetic, counter-cultural resistance to
the self-centred hedonism of paganism. We can recall a single example: “If we were in peril from
fire, we would certainly run to water in order to extinguish the fire… in the same way, if a spark of
sin flares up from our straw, and we are troubled on that account, whenever we have an
opportunity to perform a work of mercy, we should rejoice, as if a fountain opened before so that
the fire might be extinguished”.

194. This message is so clear and direct, so simple and eloquent, that no ecclesial interpretation
has the right to relativize it. The Church’s reflection on these texts ought not to obscure or weaken
their force, but urge us to accept their exhortations with courage and zeal. Why complicate
something so simple? Conceptual tools exist to heighten contact with the realities they seek to
explain, not to distance us from them. This is especially the case with those biblical exhortations
which summon us so forcefully to brotherly love, to humble and generous service, to justice and
mercy towards the poor. Jesus taught us this way of looking at others by his words and his
actions. So why cloud something so clear? We should not be concerned simply about falling into
doctrinal error, but about remaining faithful to this light-filled path of life and wisdom. For
“defenders of orthodoxy are sometimes accused of passivity, indulgence, or culpable complicity
regarding the intolerable situations of injustice and the political regimes which prolong them”.