FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.100, C.12.

### ARTICLE 11. Whether it is right to distinguish other moral

precepts of the law besides the decalogue?
Objection 1: It would seem that it is wrong to distinguish other moral
precepts of the law besides the decalogue. Because, as Our Lord
declared (Mt. 22:40), "on these two commandments" of charity
"dependeth the whole law and the prophets." But these two
commandments are explained by the ten commandments of the
decalogue. Therefore there is no need for other moral precepts.
Objection 2: Further, the moral precepts are distinct from the judicial
and ceremonial precepts, as stated above (Question 99, Articles 3,4).
But the determinations of the general moral precepts belong to the
judicial and ceremonial precepts: and the general moral precepts are
contained in the decalogue, or are even presupposed to the
decalogue, as stated above (Article 3). Therefore it was unsuitable to
lay down other moral precepts besides the decalogue.
Objection 3: Further, the moral precepts are about the acts of all the
virtues, as stated above (Article 2). Therefore, as the Law contains,
besides the decalogue, moral precepts pertaining to religion,
liberality, mercy, and chastity; so there should have been added
some precepts pertaining to the other virtues, for instance, fortitude,
sobriety, and so forth. And yet such is not the case. It is therefore
unbecoming to distinguish other moral precepts in the Law besides
those of the decalogue.
On the contrary, It is written (Ps. 18:8): "The law of the Lord is
unspotted, converting souls." But man is preserved from the stain of
sin, and his soul is converted to God by other moral precepts
besides those of the decalogue. Therefore it was right for the Law to
include other moral precepts.
I answer that, As is evident from what has been stated (Question 99,
Articles 3,4), the judicial and ceremonial precepts derive their force
from their institution alone: since before they were instituted, it
seemed of no consequence whether things were done in this or that
way. But the moral precepts derive their efficacy from the very
dictate of natural reason, even if they were never included in the
Law. Now of these there are three grades: for some are most certain,
and so evident as to need no promulgation; such as the

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.100, C.12.

commandments of the love of God and our neighbor, and others like
these, as stated above (Article 3), which are, as it were, the ends of
the commandments; wherefore no man can have an erroneous
judgment about them. Some precepts are more detailed, the reason
of which even an uneducated man can easily grasp; and yet they
need to be promulgated, because human judgment, in a few
instances, happens to be led astray concerning them: these are the
precepts of the decalogue. Again, there are some precepts the
reason of which is not so evident to everyone, but only the wise;
these are moral precepts added to the decalogue, and given to the
people by God through Moses and Aaron.
But since the things that are evident are the principles whereby we
know those that are not evident, these other moral precepts added to
the decalogue are reducible to the precepts of the decalogue, as so
many corollaries. Thus the first commandment of the decalogue
forbids the worship of strange gods: and to this are added other
precepts forbidding things relating to worship of idols: thus it is
written (Dt. 18:10,11): "Neither let there be found among you anyone
that shall expiate his son or daughter, making them to pass through
the fire: . . . neither let there by any wizard nor charmer, nor anyone
that consulteth pythonic spirits, or fortune-tellers, or that seeketh the
truth from the dead." The second commandment forbids perjury. To
this is added the prohibition of blasphemy (Lev. 24:15, seqq) and the
prohibition of false doctrine (Dt. 13). To the third commandment are
added all the ceremonial precepts. To the fourth commandment
prescribing the honor due to parents, is added the precept about
honoring the aged, according to Lev. 19:32: "Rise up before the
hoary head, and honor the person of the aged man"; and likewise all
the precepts prescribing the reverence to be observed towards our
betters, or kindliness towards our equals or inferiors. To the fifth
commandment, which forbids murder, is added the prohibition of
hatred and of any kind of violence inflicted on our neighbor,
according to Lev. 19:16: "Thou shalt not stand against the blood of
thy neighbor": likewise the prohibition against hating one's brother
(Lev. 19:17): "Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thy heart." To the
sixth commandment which forbids adultery, is added the prohibition
about whoredom, according to Dt. 23:17: "There shall be no whore
among the daughters of Israel, nor whoremonger among the sons of
Israel"; and the prohibition against unnatural sins, according to Lev.
28:22,23: "Thou shalt not lie with mankind . . . thou shalt not copulate
with any beast." To the seventh commandment which prohibits theft,
is added the precept forbidding usury, according to Dt. 23:19: "Thou