in his power, so has the man a partner, that is, his wife. Ought the Church to
provide for her widows and virgins? So there are in a family servants, and
daughters, to be provided for. And, in fact, it is easier to rule the house; therefore
he asks, "if a man know not how to rule his own house, how shall he take care of
the Church of God?"
Ver. 6. "Not a novice." He does not say, not a young man, but not a new
convert. For he had said, "I have planted, Apollos watered, but God gave the
increase." [1 Corinthians 3:6] Wishing them to point out such an one, he used
this word. For, otherwise, what hindered him from saying, "Not a young man"?
For if youth only was an objection, why did he himself appoint Timothy, a young
man? (and this he proves by saying to him, "Let no man despise your youth.") [1
Timothy 4:12] Because he was aware of his great virtue, and his great strictness
of life. Knowing which he writes, "From a child you have learned the holy
Scriptures." [2 Timothy 3:15] And that he practiced intense fasting is proved by
the words, "Use a little wine for your frequent infirmities"; which he wrote to
him among other things, as, if he had not known of such good works of his, he
would not have written, nor given any such charge to his disciple. But as there
were many then who came over from the Heathen, and were baptized, he says,
"Do not immediately advance to a station of dignity a novice, that is, one of
these new converts." For, if before he had well been a disciple, he should at once
be made a Teacher, he would be lifted up into insolence. If before he had learned
to be under rule, he should be appointed one of the rulers, he would be puffed
up: therefore he adds, "Lest being lifted up with pride, he fall into the
condemnation of the devil," that is, into the same condemnation which Satan
incurred by his pride.
Ver. 7. "Moreover he must have a good report of them which are without;
lest he fall into reproach and the snare of the devil."
This is rightly said, as he was certain to be reproached by them, and for the
same reason perhaps he said, "the husband of one wife," though elsewhere he
says, "I would that all men were even as I myself!" [1 Corinthians 7:7], that is,

practicing continency. That he may not therefore confine them within too narrow
a limit, by requiring an over-strict conversation, he is satisfied to prescribe
moderate virtue. For it was necessary to appoint one to preside in every city, as
he writes to Titus, "That you should ordain elders in every city, as I had
appointed you." [Titus 1:5] But what if he should have a good report, and fair
reputation, and not be worthy of it? In the first place this would not easily
happen. It is much for good men to obtain a good report among their enemies.
But, in fact, he has not left this to stand by itself; a good report "also," he says,
that is, besides other qualities. What then, if they should speak evil of him
without a cause from envy, especially as they were Heathens? This was not to be
expected. For even they will reverence a man of blameless life. Why then does
he say, speaking of himself, "Through evil report and good report"? [2
Corinthians 6:6] Because it was not his life that they assailed, but his preaching.
Therefore he says, "through evil report." They were slandered as deceivers and
impostors, on account of their preaching, and this because they could not attack
their moral characters and lives. For why did no one say of the Apostles, that
they were fornicators, unclean, or covetous persons, but that they were
deceivers, which relates to their preaching only? Must it not be that their lives
were irreproachable? It is manifest.
Therefore so let us too live, and no enemy, no unbeliever, will be able to
speak evil of us. For he whose life is virtuous, is revered even by them. For truth
stops the mouths even of enemies.
But how does he "fall into a snare"? By falling often into the same sins, as
those who are without. For if he be such a character, the evil one soon lays
another snare for him, and they soon effect his destruction. But if he should have
a good report from his enemies, much more will he have it from his friends. For
that it is not likely that he, whose life is blameless, should be ill-reported of, we
may infer from the words of Christ; "Let your light so shine before men, that
they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in Heaven."
[440 v. 16] But what if one be falsely accused, and from peculiar circumstances