own domestics.
10. And let not any one suppose that I subject all to the aforesaid charges:
for there are some, yea many, who are superior to these entanglements, and
exceed in number those who have been caught by them. Nor would I indeed
make the priesthood responsible for these evils: far be such madness from me.
For men of understanding do not say that the sword is to blame for murder, nor
wine for drunkenness, nor strength for outrage, nor courage for foolhardiness,
but they lay the blame on those who make an improper use of the gifts which
have been bestowed upon them by God, and punish them accordingly. Certainly,
at least, the priesthood may justly accuse us if we do not rightly handle it. For it
is not itself a cause of the evils already mentioned, but we, who as far as lies in
our power have defiled it with so many pollutions, by entrusting it to
commonplace men who readily accept what is offered them, without having first
acquired a knowledge of their own souls, or considered the gravity of the office,
and when they have entered on the work, being blinded by inexperience,
overwhelm with innumerable evils the people who have been committed to their
care. This is the very thing which was very nearly happening in my case, had not
God speedily delivered me from those dangers, mercifully sparing his Church
and my own soul. For, tell me, whence do you think such great troubles are
generated in the Churches? I, for my part, believe the only source of them to be
the inconsiderate and random way in which prelates are chosen and appointed.
For the head ought to be the strongest part, that it may be able to regulate and
control the evil exhalations which arise from the rest of the body below; but
when it happens to be weak in itself, and unable to repel those pestiferous
attacks, it becomes feebler itself than it really is, and ruins the rest of the body as
well. And to prevent this now coming to pass, God kept me in the position of the
feet, which was the rank originally assigned to me. For there are very many other
qualities, Basil, besides those already mentioned, which the priest ought to have,
but which I do not possess; and, above all, this one:— his soul ought to be
thoroughly purged from any lust after the office: for if he happens to have a

natural inclination for this dignity, as soon as he attains it a stronger flame is
kindled, and the man being taken completely captive will endure innumerable
evils in order to keep a secure hold upon it, even to the extent of using flattery, or
submitting to something base and ignoble, or expending large sums of money.
For I will not now speak of the murders with which some have filled the
Churches, or the desolation which they have brought upon cities in contending
for the dignity, lest some persons should think what I say incredible. But I am of
opinion one ought to exercise so much caution in the matter, as to shun the
burden of the office, and when one has entered upon it, not to wait for the
judgment of others should any fault be committed which warrants deposition,
but to anticipate it by ejecting oneself from the dignity; for thus one might
probably win mercy for himself from God: but to cling to it in defiance of
propriety is to deprive oneself of all forgiveness, or rather to kindle the wrath of
God, by adding a second error more offensive than the first.
11. But no one will always endure the strain; for fearful, truly fearful is the
eager desire after this honor. And in saying this I am not in opposition to the
blessed Paul, but in complete harmony with his words. For what says he? "If any
man desires the office of a bishop, he desires a good work." [1 Timothy 3:1]
Now I have not said that it is a terrible thing to desire the work, but only the
authority and power. And this desire I think one ought to expel from the soul
with all possible earnestness, not permitting it at the outset to be possessed by
such a feeling, so that one may be able to do everything with freedom. For he
who does not desire to be exhibited in possession of this authority, does not fear
to be deposed from it, and not fearing this will be able to do everything with the
freedom which becomes Christian men: whereas they who fear and tremble lest
they should be deposed undergo a bitter servitude, filled with all kinds of evils,
and are often compelled to offend against both God and man. Now the soul
ought not to be affected in this way; but as in warfare we see those soldiers who
are noble-spirited fight willingly and fall bravely, so they who have attained to
this stewardship should be contented to be consecrated to the dignity or removed