## Homily 25 on Matthew

Matt. VII. 28.
"And it came to pass, when Jesus had ended these sayings, the people were
astonished at His doctrine."
Yet was it rather natural for them to grieve at the unpleasantness of His
sayings, and to shudder at the loftiness of His injunctions; but now so great was
the power of the Teacher, that many of them were even caught thereby, and
thrown into very great admiration, and persuaded by reason of the sweetness of
His sayings, not even when He ceased to speak, to depart from Him at all
afterwards. For neither did the hearers depart, He having come down from the
mountain, but even then the whole auditory followed Him; so great a love for
His sayings had He instilled into them.
But they were astonished most of all at His authority. For not with reference
to another, like the prophet and Moses, did He say what He said; but everywhere
indicating Himself to be the person that had the power of deciding. For so, when
setting forth His laws, He still kept adding, "But I say unto you." And in
reminding them of that day, He declared Himself to be the judge, both by the
punishments, and by the honors.
And yet it was likely that this too would disturb them. For if, when they
saw Him by His works showing forth His authority, the scribes were for stoning
and persecuting Him; while there were words only to prove this, how was it
other than likely for them to be offended? And especially when at first setting
out these things were said, and before He had given proof of His own power?
But however, they felt nothing of this; for when the heart and mind is candid, it
is easily persuaded by the words of the truth. And this is just why one sort, even
when the miracles were proclaiming His power, were offended; while the other
on hearing mere words were persuaded and followed Him. This, I would add, the

evangelist too is intimating, when he says, "great multitudes followed Him,"
[Matthew 8:1] not any of the rulers, nor of the scribes, but as many as were free
from vice, and had their judgment uncorrupted. And throughout the whole
gospel you see that such clave unto Him. For both while He spoke, they used to
listen in silence, not making any intrusion, nor breaking in upon the connection
of His sayings, nor tempting Him, and desiring to find a handle like the
Pharisees; and after His exhortation they followed Him again, marvelling.
But do thou mark, I pray you, the Lord's consideration, how He varies the
mode of profiting His hearers, after miracles entering on words, and again from
the instruction by His words passing to miracles. Thus, both before they went up
into the mountain, He healed many, preparing the way for His sayings; and after
finishing that long discourse to the people, He comes again to miracles,
confirming what had been said by what was done. And so, because He was
teaching as "one having authority," lest His so teaching should be thought
boasting and arrogant, He does the very same in His works also, as having
authority to heal; that they might no more be perplexed at seeing Him teach in
this way, when He was working His miracles also in the same.
2. "For when He had come down from the mountain, there came a leper,
saying, Lord, if You will, You can make me clean." Great was the understanding
and the faith of him who so drew near. For he did not interrupt the teaching, nor
break through the auditory, but awaited the proper time, and approaches Him
"when He has come down." And not at random, but with much earnestness, and
at His knees, he beseeches Him, as another evangelist says, and with the genuine
faith and right opinion about him. For neither did he say, "If Thou request it of
God," nor, "If Thou pray," but, "If You will, You can make me clean." Nor did he
say, "Lord, cleanse me," but leaves all to Him, and makes His recovery depend
on Him, and testifies that all the authority is His.
"What then," says one, "if the leper's opinion was mistaken?" It were meet
to do away with it, and to reprove, and set it right. Did He then so do? By no
means; but quite on the contrary, He establishes and confirms what had been