to share with his bearers the proceeds of his begging, if he had been able to
manage for himself), this holds still more in the present case. And how should he
have feigned in behalf of those who had given him no alms? But the man was
grateful, even after his recovery. And thus on either side his faith is shown, both
by his thankfulness, and by the recent event.
He was so well known to all, that "they recognized him. And all the people,"
it says, "saw him walking and praising God; and they recognized ([ἐ]
[πεγίνωσκον]) that it was he which sat for alms at the Beautiful gate of the
temple." [Acts 3:9] It is well said, "they recognized," inasmuch as he was one
unknown now by reason of what had happened: for we use this term with regard
to objects, which we find a difficulty in recognizing. ["And they were filled with
wonder and amazement at that which had happened unto him."] Needs must it
be believed that the name of Christ remits sins, seeing it produces even such
effects as this. ("And as he held Peter and John, all the people came together at
the porch that is called Solomon's, greatly wondering." [Acts 3:11] From his
good feelings and love towards the Apostles, the lame man would not leave
them; perhaps he was thanking them openly, and praising them. "And all the
people," it is said, "ran together unto them. And when Peter saw them, he
answered." [Acts 3:12] Again it is he who acts, and addresses the people.
And in the former instance, it was the circumstance of the tongues that
aroused them to hearing, now it was this miracle; then, he took occasion to speak
from their accusations now, from their supposition. Let us then consider, in what
this address differs from the former, and in what it agrees with that. The former
was held in a house, before any one has come over, and before they themselves
have wrought anything; this, when all are wondering, and the healed man is
standing by; when none doubt, as in the other case where some said "These men
are full of new wine." [Acts 12:13] At the one, he was surrounded by all the
Apostles as he spoke; but at this, he has John alone; for by this time he is bold,
and become more energetic. Such is the nature of virtue; once started, it
advances, and never stops. Observe also how it was divinely ordered, that the

miracle should take place in the temple, that others also might wax bold, while
the Apostles work not in holes ([εἰς καταδύσεις]) and corners, and in secret:
though not in the interior of the temple either, where the greater number were.
How then, I pray you, was it believed? The man himself who was healed
proclaimed the benefit. For there was no reason why he should lie, nor why he
should have joined a different set of people. Either then it was because of the
spaciousness of the place, that he there wrought the miracle, or because the spot
was retired. And observe the event. They went up for one object, and they
accomplished another. Thus also did Cornelius: he prayed and fasted * * *. But
hitherto they always call Him, "of Nazareth." "In the name of Jesus Christ of
Nazareth," said Peter, walk. For in the first instance, the thing required was, that
He should be believed in.
Let us not, I pray you, give over at the beginning of the story: and if one has
named some particular achievement of virtue, and then has dropped it for awhile,
let us begin over again. If we get into the right mood ([ἐ] [ν ἕξει]), we shall soon
arrive at the end, soon reach the summit. For earnestness, it is said, begets
earnestness, and dulness begets dulness. He who has effected some little
reformation, thereby receives encouragement to approach greater things, and
thence again to go on something more than that; and just as it is with fire, the
more wood it lays hold on, the more vehement it becomes, so likewise zeal, the
more pious reflections it kindles, the more effectually is it armed against their
opposites. As, for example: There are set in us, like so many thorns, perjury,
falsehood hypocrisy, deceit, dishonesty, abusiveness, scoffing, buffoonery,
indecency, scurrility; again under another head, covetousness, rapacity, injustice,
calumny, insidiousness; again, wicked lust, uncleanness, lewdness, fornication,
adultery; again, envy, emulation, anger, wrath, rancor, revenge, blasphemy, and
numberless others. If we effect a reformation in the first instances, not only in
them will the success have been achieved, but through them in the following
cases also. For reason has then gained more strength to overthrow those other
vices. For instance, if he, who has frequently sworn, once extirpates that satanic