ministry. I address all generally, do you each individual privately and let each
charge himself with the salvation of his neighbors. For that it becomes one to
preside over those of his household in these matters, hear where Paul sends
women for instruction; "And if they would learn anything, let them ask their own
husbands at home" [1 Corinthians 14:35]; and he does not lead them to the
Teacher. For as in the schools of learning, there are teachers even among the
disciples, so also in the Church. For he wishes the Teacher not to be troubled by
all. Wherefore? Because then there will be great advantages, not only that the
labor will be light to the Teacher, but that each of the disciples also, having taken
pains, is soon able to become a teacher, making this his concern.
For see how great a service the wife contributes. She keeps the house, and
takes care of all things in the house, she presides over her handmaids, she clothes
them with her own hands, she causes you to be called the father of children, she
delivers you from brothels, she aids you to live chastely, she puts a stop to the
strong desire of nature. And do thou also benefit her. How? In spiritual things
stretch forth your hand. Whatever useful things you have heard, these, like the
swallows, bearing off in your mouth, carry away and place them in the mouth of
the mother and the young ones. For how is it not absurd, in other things to think
yourself worthy of the preeminence, and to occupy the place of the head, but in
teaching to quit your station. The ruler ought not to excel the ruled in honors, so
much as in virtues. For this is the duty of a ruler, for the other is the part of the
ruled, but this is the achievement of the ruler himself. If you enjoy much honor,
it is nothing to you, for you received it from others. If you shine in much virtue,
this is all your own.
You are the head of the woman, let then the head regulate the rest of the
body. Do you not see that it is not so much above the rest of the body in
situation, as in forethought, directing like a steersman the whole of it? For in the
head are the eyes both of the body, and of the soul. Hence flows to them both the
faculty of seeing, and the power of directing. And the rest of the body is
appointed for service, but this is set to command. All the senses have thence

their origin and their source. Thence are sent forth the organs of speech, the
power of seeing, and of smelling, and all touch. For thence is derived the root of
the nerves and of the bones. Do you see not that it is superior in forethought
more than in honor? So let us rule the women; let us surpass them, not by
seeking greater honor from them, but by their being more benefited by us.
I have shown that they afford us no little benefit, but if we are willing to
make them a return in spiritual things, we surpass them. For it is not possible in
bodily things to offer an equivalent. For what? Do you contribute much wealth?
But it is she who preserves it, and this care of hers is an equivalent, and thus
there is need of her, because many, who had great possessions, have lost all
because they had not one to take care of them. But as for the children, you both
communicate, and the benefit from each is equal. She indeed in these things
rather has the more laborious service, always bearing the offspring, and being
afflicted with the pains of childbirth; so that in spiritual things only will you be
able to surpass her.
Let us not therefore regard how we shall have wealth, but how we shall
present with confidence to God the souls with which we are entrusted. For by
regulating them we shall also most highly benefit ourselves. For he who teaches
another, although he does nothing else, yet in speaking is affected with
compunction, when he sees himself responsible for those things, on account of
which he reproves others. Since therefore we benefit both ourselves and them,
and through them the household, and this is preëminently pleasing to God; let us
not be weary of taking care both of our own souls and of those who minister to
us, that for all we may receive a recompense, and with much riches may arrive at
the holy City our mother, the Jerusalem that is above, from which God grant that
we may never fall, but that having shone in the most excellent course of life, we
may be thought worthy with much confidence to see our Lord Jesus Christ; with
whom to the Father, together with the Holy Ghost, be glory, power, and honor,
now and ever, and world without end. Amen.