recovered the sight of the eyes within, have beheld the ineffable Mysteries, and
have been called to such honor, how ought we, I say, to exhibit all boldness of
speech towards those who attempt to accuse, and who say anything against the
Christians, and to stop their mouths, and not to acquiesce without an effort. And
we shall be able to do this, if we are bold, and give heed to the Scriptures, and
hear them not carelessly. For if one should come in here regularly, even though
he read not at home, if he attends to what is said here, one year even is sufficient
to make him well versed in them; because we do not today read one kind of
Scriptures, and tomorrow another, but always and continually the same. Still
such is the wretched disposition of the many, that after so much reading, they do
not even know the names of the Books, and are not ashamed nor tremble at
entering so carelessly into a place where they may hear God's word. Yet if a
harper, or dancer, or stage-player call the city, they all run eagerly, and feel
obliged to him for the call, and spend the half of an entire day in attending to
him alone; but when God speaks to us by Prophets and Apostles, we yawn, we
scratch ourselves, we are drowsy. And in summer, the heat seems too great, and
we betake ourselves to the market place; and again, in winter, the rain and mire
are a hindrance, and we sit at home; yet at horse races, though there is no roof
over them to keep off the wet, the greater number, while heavy rains are falling,
and the wind is dashing the water into their faces, stand like madmen, caring not
for cold, and wet, and mud, and length of way, and nothing either keeps them at
home, or prevents their going there. But here, where there are roofs over head,
and where the warmth is admirable, they hold back instead of running together;
and this too, when the gain is that of their own souls. How is this tolerable, tell
me? Thus it happens, that while we are more skilled than any in those matters, in
things necessary we are more ignorant than children. If a man call you a
charioteer, or a dancer, you say that you have been insulted, and use every means
to wipe off the affront; but if he draw you to be a spectator of the action, you do
not start away, and the art whose name you shun, you almost in every case
pursue. But where you ought to have both the action and the name, both to be

and to be called a Christian, you do not even know what kind of thing the action
is. What can be worse than this folly? These things I have desired continually to
say to you, but I fear lest I gain hatred in vain and unprofitably. For I perceive
that not only the young are mad, but the old also; about whom I am especially
ashamed, when I see a man venerable from his white hairs, disgracing those
white hairs, and drawing a child after him. What is worse than this mockery?
What more shameful than this conduct? The child is taught by the father to act
unseemly.
5. Do the words sting? This is what I desire, that you should suffer the pain
caused by the words, in order to be delivered from the disgrace caused by the
actions. For there are some too far colder than these, who are not even ashamed
at the things spoken of, nay, who even put together a long argument in defense of
the action. If you ask them who was Amos or Obadiah, or what is the number of
the Prophets or Apostles, they cannot even open their mouth but for horses and
charioteers, they compose excuses more cleverly than sophists or rhetoricians,
and after all this, they say, "What is the harm? What is the loss?" This is what I
groan for, that you do not so much as know that the action is a loss, nor have a
sense of its evils. God has given to you an appointed space of life for serving
Him, and do you while you spend it vainly, and at random, and on nothing
useful, still ask, "What loss is there?" If you have spent a little money to no
purpose, you call it a loss: when you spend whole days of yours upon the devil's
pageants, do you think that you are doing nothing wrong? You ought to spend all
your life in supplications and prayers, whereas you waste your life and substance
heedlessly, and to your own hurt, on shouts, and uproar, and shameful words,
and fighting, and unseasonable pleasure, and actions performed by trickery, and
after all this you ask, "What is the loss?" not knowing you should be lavish of
anything rather than time. Gold, if you shall have spent, you may get again; but
if you lose time, you shall hardly recover that. Little is dealt out to us in this
present life; if therefore we employ it not as we ought, what shall we say when
we depart "there"? For tell me, if you had commanded one of your sons to learn