SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.63, C.5.

Testament.
Reply to Objection 1: God works in all things without exception
whatever is right, yet in each one according to its mode. Wherefore
everyone should imitate God in that which is specially becoming to
him. Hence, though God slays evildoers even corporally, it does not
follow that all should imitate Him in this. As regards Peter, he did not
put Ananias and Saphira to death by his own authority or with his
own hand, but published their death sentence pronounced by God.
The Priests or Levites of the Old Testament were the ministers of the
Old Law, which appointed corporal penalties, so that it was fitting for
them to slay with their own hands.
Reply to Objection 2: The ministry of clerics is concerned with better
things than corporal slayings, namely with things pertaining to
spiritual welfare, and so it is not fitting for them to meddle with minor
matters.
Reply to Objection 3: Ecclesiastical prelates accept the office of
earthly princes, not that they may inflict capital punishment
themselves, but that this may be carried into effect by others in
virtue of their authority.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.63, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether it is lawful to kill oneself?

Objection 1: It would seem lawful for a man to kill himself. For
murder is a sin in so far as it is contrary to justice. But no man can
do an injustice to himself, as is proved in Ethic. v, 11. Therefore no
man sins by killing himself.
Objection 2: Further, it is lawful, for one who exercises public
authority, to kill evil-doers. Now he who exercises public authority is
sometimes an evil-doer. Therefore he may lawfully kill himself.
Objection 3: Further, it is lawful for a man to suffer spontaneously a
lesser danger that he may avoid a greater: thus it is lawful for a man
to cut off a decayed limb even from himself, that he may save his
whole body. Now sometimes a man, by killing himself, avoids a
greater evil, for example an unhappy life, or the shame of sin.
Therefore a man may kill himself.
Objection 4: Further, Samson killed himself, as related in Judges 16,
and yet he is numbered among the saints (Heb. 11). Therefore it is
lawful for a man to kill himself.
Objection 5: Further, it is related (2 Mach. 14:42) that a certain Razias
killed himself, "choosing to die nobly rather than to fall into the
hands of the wicked, and to suffer abuses unbecoming his noble
birth." Now nothing that is done nobly and bravely is unlawful.
Therefore suicide is not unlawful.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Civ. Dei i, 20): "Hence it follows
that the words 'Thou shalt not kill' refer to the killing of a man---not
another man; therefore, not even thyself. For he who kills himself,
kills nothing else than a man."
I answer that, It is altogether unlawful to kill oneself, for three
reasons. First, because everything naturally loves itself, the result
being that everything naturally keeps itself in being, and resists
corruptions so far as it can. Wherefore suicide is contrary to the
inclination of nature, and to charity whereby every man should love
himself. Hence suicide is always a mortal sin, as being contrary to
the natural law and to charity. Secondly, because every part, as
such, belongs to the whole. Now every man is part of the community,