SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.174, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Did Paul know whether his soul were separated

from his body?
Objection 1: It would seem that Paul was not ignorant whether his
soul were separated from his body. For he says (2 Cor. 12:2): "I know
a man in Christ rapt even to the third heaven." Now man denotes
something composed of soul and body; and rapture differs from
death. Seemingly therefore he knew that his soul was not separated
from his body by death, which is the more probable seeing that this
is the common opinion of the Doctors.
Objection 2: Further, it appears from the same words of the Apostle
that he knew whither he was rapt, since it was "to the third heaven."
Now this shows that he knew whether he was in the body or not, for
if he knew the third heaven to be something corporeal, he must have
known that his soul was not separated from his body, since a
corporeal thing cannot be an object of sight save through the body.
Therefore it would seem that he was not ignorant whether his soul
were separated from his body.
Objection 3: Further, Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. xii, 28) that "when
in rapture, he saw God with the same vision as the saints see Him in
heaven." Now from the very fact that the saints see God, they know
whether their soul is separated from their body. Therefore Paul too
knew this.
On the contrary, It is written (2 Cor. 12:3): "Whether in the body, or
out of the body, I know not, God knoweth."
I answer that, The true answer to this question must be gathered
from the Apostle's very words, whereby he says he knew something,
namely that he was "rapt even to the third heaven," and that
something he knew not, namely "whether" he were "in the body or
out of the body." This may be understood in two ways. First, the
words "whether in the body or out of the body" may refer not to the
very being of the man who was rapt (as though he knew not whether
his soul were in his body or not), but to the mode of rapture, so that
he ignored whether his body besides his soul, or, on the other hand,
his soul alone, were rapt to the third heaven. Thus Ezechiel is stated
(Ezech. 8:3) to have been "brought in the vision of God into
Jerusalem." This was the explanation of a certain Jew according to

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.174, C.7.

Jerome (Prolog. super Daniel.), where he says that "lastly our
Apostle" (thus said the Jew) "durst not assert that he was rapt in his
body, but said: 'Whether in the body or out of the body, I know not.'"
Augustine, however, disapproves of this explanation (Gen. ad lit. xii,
3 seqq.) for this reason that the Apostle states that he knew he was
rapt even to the third heaven. Wherefore he knew it to be really the
third heaven to which he was rapt, and not an imaginary likeness of
the third heaven: otherwise if he gave the name of third heaven to an
imaginary third heaven, in the same way he might state that he was
rapt in the body, meaning, by body, an image of his body, such as
appears in one's dreams. Now if he knew it to be really the third
heaven, it follows that either he knew it to be something spiritual and
incorporeal, and then his body could not be rapt thither; or he knew
it to be something corporeal, and then his soul could not be rapt
thither without his body, unless it were separated from his body.
Consequently we must explain the matter otherwise, by saying that
the Apostle knew himself to be rapt both in soul and body, but that
he ignored how his soul stood in relation to his body, to wit, whether
it were accompanied by his body or not.
Here we find a diversity of opinions. For some say that the Apostle
knew his soul to be united to his body as its form, but ignored
whether it were abstracted from its senses, or again whether it were
abstracted from the operations of the vegetative soul. But he could
not but know that it was abstracted from the senses, seeing that he
knew himself to be rapt; and as to his being abstracted from the
operation of the vegetative soul, this was not of such importance as
to require him to be so careful in mentioning it. It follows, then, that
the Apostle ignored whether his soul were united to his body as its
form, or separated from it by death. Some, however, granting this
say that the Apostle did not consider the matter while he was in
rapture, because he was wholly intent upon God, but that afterwards
he questioned the point, when taking cognizance of what he had
seen. But this also is contrary to the Apostle's words, for he there
distinguishes between the past and what happened subsequently,
since he states that at the present time he knows that he was rapt
"fourteen years ago," and that at the present time he knows not
"whether he was in the body or out of the body."
Consequently we must assert that both before and after he ignored
whether his soul were separated from his body. Wherefore
Augustine (Gen. ad lit. xii, 5), after discussing the question at length,