John 6:5
"Whence shall we have so many loaves, that these may eat?"
So in the Old [Testament] He spoke to Moses, for He wrought not the sign
until He had asked him, "What is that in your hand?" Because things coming to
pass unexpectedly and all at once, are wont to throw us into forgetfulness of
things previous, therefore He first involved him in a confession of present
circumstances, that when the astonishment should have come upon him, he
might be unable afterwards to drive away the remembrance of what he had
confessed, and thus might learn by comparison the greatness of the miracle,
which in fact takes place in this instance; for Philip being asked, replied,

John 6:7
"Two hundred pennyworth of bread is not sufficient for them, that every one of
them may take a little. And this He said to prove him: for He Himself knew what
He would do."
2. What means, "to prove him"? Did not He know what would be said by
him? We cannot assert that. What then is the meaning of the expression? We
may discover it from the Old [Testament]. For there too it is said, "And it came
to pass after these things that God did tempt Abraham, and said unto him, Take
your beloved son whom you love" [Genesis 22:1-2]; yet it does not appear in that
place either, that when He says this He waited to see the end of the trial, whether
Abraham would obey or not, (how could He, who knows all things before they
come into existence? but the words in both cases are spoken after the manner of
men. For as when (the Psalmist ) says that He "searches the hearts of men," he
means not a search of ignorance but of exact knowledge, just so when the
Evangelist says that He proved (Philip), he means only that He knew exactly.
And perhaps one might say another thing, that as He once made Abraham more
approved, so also did He this man, bringing him by this question to an exact
knowledge of the miracle. The Evangelist therefore, that you may not stop at the
feebleness of the expression, and so form an improper opinion of what was said,
adds, "He Himself knew what He would do."
Moreover we must observe this, that when there is any wrong suspicion, the
writer straightway very carefully corrects it. As then in this place that the hearers
might not form any such suspicion, he adds the corrective, saying, "For He
Himself knew what He would do": so also in that other place, when He says, that
"the Jews persecuted Him, because He not only had broken the Sabbath, but said
also that God was His Father, making Himself equal with God," had there not
been the assertion of Christ Himself confirmed by His works, he would there
also have subjoined this correction. For if even in words which Christ speaks the

Evangelist is careful that none should have suspicions, much more in cases
where others were speaking of Him would he have looked closely, had he
perceived that an improper opinion prevailed concerning Him. But he did not so,
for he knew that this was His meaning, and immovable decree. Therefore after
saying, "making Himself equal with God," he used not any such correction; for
the matter spoken of was not an erroneous fancy of theirs, but His own assertion
ratified by His works. Philip then having been questioned,
Ver. 8, 9 . "Andrew, Simon's brother, said, There is a lad here, which has
five barley loaves, and two small fishes: but what are they among so many?"
Andrew is higher minded than Philip, yet had not he attained to everything.
Yet I do not think that he spoke without an object, but as having heard of the
miracles of the Prophets, and how Elisha wrought a sign with the loaves [2
Kings 4:43]; on this account he mounted to a certain height, but could not attain
to the very top.
Let us learn then, we who give ourselves to luxury, what was the fare of
those great and admirable men; and in quality and quantity let us behold and
imitate the thriftiness of their table.
What follows also expresses great weakness. For after saying, "has five
barley loaves," he adds, "but what are they among so many?" He supposed that
the Worker of the miracle would make less out of less, and more out of more.
But this was not the case, for it was alike easy to Him to cause bread to spring
forth from more and from less, since He needed no subject-matter. But in order
that the creation might not seem foreign to His Wisdom, as afterwards slanderers
and those affected with the disease of Marcion said, He used the creation itself as
a groundwork for His marvels.
When both the disciples had owned themselves at a loss, then He wrought
the miracle; for thus they profited the more, having first confessed the difficulty
of the matter, that when it should come to pass, they might understand the power
of God. And because a miracle was about to be wrought, which had also been
performed by the Prophets, although not in an equal degree, and because He