SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.77, C.2.

of thy people that is poor, that dwelleth with thee, thou shalt not be
hard upon them as an extortioner, nor oppress them with usuries."
I answer that, To take usury for money lent is unjust in itself,
because this is to sell what does not exist, and this evidently leads
to inequality which is contrary to justice. In order to make this
evident, we must observe that there are certain things the use of
which consists in their consumption: thus we consume wine when
we use it for drink and we consume wheat when we use it for food.
Wherefore in such like things the use of the thing must not be
reckoned apart from the thing itself, and whoever is granted the use
of the thing, is granted the thing itself and for this reason, to lend
things of this kin is to transfer the ownership. Accordingly if a man
wanted to sell wine separately from the use of the wine, he would be
selling the same thing twice, or he would be selling what does not
exist, wherefore he would evidently commit a sin of injustice. In like
manner he commits an injustice who lends wine or wheat, and asks
for double payment, viz. one, the return of the thing in equal
measure, the other, the price of the use, which is called usury.
On the other hand, there are things the use of which does not
consist in their consumption: thus to use a house is to dwell in it,
not to destroy it. Wherefore in such things both may be granted: for
instance, one man may hand over to another the ownership of his
house while reserving to himself the use of it for a time, or vice
versa, he may grant the use of the house, while retaining the
ownership. For this reason a man may lawfully make a charge for the
use of his house, and, besides this, revendicate the house from the
person to whom he has granted its use, as happens in renting and
letting a house.
Now money, according to the Philosopher (Ethic. v, 5; Polit. i, 3) was
invented chiefly for the purpose of exchange: and consequently the
proper and principal use of money is its consumption or alienation
whereby it is sunk in exchange. Hence it is by its very nature
unlawful to take payment for the use of money lent, which payment
is known as usury: and just as a man is bound to restore other illgotten goods, so is he bound to restore the money which he has
taken in usury.
Reply to Objection 1: In this passage usury must be taken
figuratively for the increase of spiritual goods which God exacts
from us, for He wishes us ever to advance in the goods which we

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.77, C.2.

receive from Him: and this is for our own profit not for His.
Reply to Objection 2: The Jews were forbidden to take usury from
their brethren, i.e. from other Jews. By this we are given to
understand that to take usury from any man is evil simply, because
we ought to treat every man as our neighbor and brother, especially
in the state of the Gospel, whereto all are called. Hence it is said
without any distinction in Ps. 14:5: "He that hath not put out his
money to usury," and (Ezech. 18:8): "Who hath not taken usury."
They were permitted, however, to take usury from foreigners, not as
though it were lawful, but in order to avoid a greater evil, lest, to wit,
through avarice to which they were prone according to Is. 56:11, they
should take usury from the Jews who were worshippers of God.
Where we find it promised to them as a reward, "Thou shalt fenerate
to many nations," etc., fenerating is to be taken in a broad sense for
lending, as in Ecclus. 29:10, where we read: "Many have refused to
fenerate, not out of wickedness," i.e. they would not lend.
Accordingly the Jews are promised in reward an abundance of
wealth, so that they would be able to lend to others.
Reply to Objection 3: Human laws leave certain things unpunished,
on account of the condition of those who are imperfect, and who
would be deprived of many advantages, if all sins were strictly
forbidden and punishments appointed for them. Wherefore human
law has permitted usury, not that it looks upon usury as harmonizing
with justice, but lest the advantage of many should be hindered.
Hence it is that in civil law [Inst. II, iv, de Usufructu] it is stated that
"those things according to natural reason and civil law which are
consumed by being used, do not admit of usufruct," and that "the
senate did not (nor could it) appoint a usufruct to such things, but
established a quasi-usufruct," namely by permitting usury. Moreover
the Philosopher, led by natural reason, says (Polit. i, 3) that "to make
money by usury is exceedingly unnatural."
Reply to Objection 4: A man is not always bound to lend, and for this
reason it is placed among the counsels. Yet it is a matter of precept
not to seek profit by lending: although it may be called a matter of
counsel in comparison with the maxims of the Pharisees, who
deemed some kinds of usury to be lawful, just as love of one's
enemies is a matter of counsel. Or again, He speaks here not of the
hope of usurious gain, but of the hope which is put in man. For we
ought not to lend or do any good deed through hope in man, but only