sign of piety: that being of so many nations they should have left country, and
home, and relations, and be abiding there. For, it says, There were dwelling at
Jerusalem Jews, devout men, out of every nation under heaven. Now when this
was noised abroad, the multitude came together, and were confounded. [Acts
2:6] Since the event had taken place in a house, of course they came together
from without. The multitude was confounded: was all in commotion. They
marvelled; "Because that every man heard them speak in his own language. And
they were amazed," it says, "and marvelled, saying one to another, Behold, are
not all these which speak Galileans?" [Acts 2:7-13] They immediately turned
their eyes towards the Apostles. "And how" (it follows) "hear we every man in
our own tongue, wherein we were born? Parthians, and Medes, and Elamites,
and the dwellers in Mesopotamia, and in Judea, and Cappadocia, in Pontus, and
Asia, Phrygia, and Pamphylia, in Egypt, and in the parts of Libya about
Cyrene:" mark how they run from east to west: "and strangers of Rome, Jews
and proselytes, Cretes and Arabians, we do hear them speak in our tongues the
wonderful works of God. And, they were all amazed, and were in doubt, saying
one to another, What means this? Others mocking said, These men are full of
new wine." O the excessive folly! O the excessive malignity! Why it was not
even the season for that; for it was Pentecost. For this was what made it worse:
that when those were confessing— men that were Jews, that were Romans, that
were proselytes, yea perhaps that had crucified Him— yet these, after so great
signs, say, "They are full of new wine!"
But let us look over what has been said from the beginning.
(Recapitulation.) "And when the day of Pentecost," etc. "It filled," he says, "the
house." That wind [πνοὴ] was a very pool of water. This betokened the
copiousness, as the fire did the vehemence. This nowhere happened in the case
of the Prophets: for to uninebriated souls such accesses are not attended with
much disturbance; but "when they have well drunken," then indeed it is as here,
but with the Prophets it is otherwise. [Ezekiel 3:3] The roll of a book is given
him, and Ezekiel ate what he was about to utter. "And it became in his mouth," it

is said, "as honey for sweetness." (And again the hand of God touches the tongue
of another Prophet; but here it is the Holy Ghost Himself: [Jeremiah 1:9] so
equal is He in honor with the Father and the Son.) And again, on the other hand,
Ezekiel calls it "Lamentations, and mourning, and woe." [Ezekiel 2:10] To them
it might well be in the form of a book; for they still needed similitudes. Those
had to deal with only one nation, and with their own people; but these with the
whole world, and with men whom they never knew. Also Elisha receives the
grace through the medium of a mantle [2 Kings 13]; another by oil, as David [1
Samuel 16:13]; and Moses by fire, as we read of him at the bush. [Exodus 3:2]
But in the present case it is not so; for the fire itself sat upon them. (But
wherefore did the fire not appear so as to fill the house? Because they would
have been terrified.) But the story shows, that it is the same here as there. For
you are not to stop at this, that "there appeared unto them cloven tongues," but
note that they were "of fire." Such a fire as this is able to kindle infinite fuel.
Also, it is well said, Cloven, for they were from one root; that you may learn,
that it was an operation sent from the Comforter.
But observe how those men also were first shown to be worthy, and then
received the Spirit as worthy. Thus, for instance, David: what he did among the
sheepfolds, the same he did after his victory and trophy; that it might be shown
how simple and absolute was his faith. Again, see Moses despising royalty, and
forsaking all, and after forty years taking the lead of the people [Exodus 2:11];
and Samuel occupied there in the temple [1 Samuel 3:3]; Elisha leaving all [1
Kings 19:21]; Ezekiel again, made manifest by what happened thereafter. In this
manner, you see, did these also leave all that they had. They learned also what
human infirmity is, by what they suffered; they learned that it was not in vain
they had done these good works. [1 Samuel 9 and 11:6] Even Saul, having first
obtained witness that he was good, thereafter received the Spirit. But in the same
manner as here did none of them receive. Thus Moses was the greatest of the
Prophets, yet he, when others were to receive the Spirit, himself suffered
diminution. But here it is not so; but just as fire kindles as many flames as it will,