nature, and applicable to them all. Then I have pointed out the truth, and shown the preaching
of the Church, which the prophets proclaimed (as I have already demonstrated), but which Christ
brought to perfection, and the apostles have handed down, from whom the Church, receiving [these
truths], and throughout all the world alone preserving them in their integrity (bene), has transmitted
them to her sons. Then also—having disposed of all questions which the heretics propose to us,
and having explained the doctrine of the apostles, and clearly set forth many of those things which
were said and done by the Lord in parables—I shall endeavour, in this the fifth book of the entire
work which treats of the exposure and refutation of knowledge falsely so called, to exhibit proofs
from the rest of the Lord's doctrine and the apostolical epistles: [thus] complying with thy demand,
as thou didst request of me (since indeed I have been assigned a place in the ministry of the word);
and, labouring by every means in my power to furnish thee with large assistance against the
contradictions of the heretics, as also to reclaim the wanderers and convert them to the Church of
God, to confirm at the same time the minds of the neophytes, that they may preserve stedfast the
faith which they have received, guarded by the Church in its integrity, in order that they be in no
way perverted by those who endeavour to teach them false doctrines, and lead them away from the
truth. It will be incumbent upon thee, however, and all who may happen to read this writing, to
peruse with great attention what I have already said, that thou mayest obtain a knowledge of the
subjects against which I am contending. For it is thus that thou wilt both controvert them in a
legitimate manner, and wilt be prepared to receive the proofs brought forward against them, casting
away their doctrines as filth by means of the celestial faith; but following the only true and stedfast
Teacher, the Word of God, our Lord Jesus Christ, who did, through His transcendent love, become
what we are, that He might bring us to be even what He is Himself.

### Chapter I.—Christ alone is able to teach divine things, and to redeem us: He, the same, took
flesh of the Virgin Mary, not merely in appearance, but actually, by the operation of the Holy
Spirit, in order to renovate us. Strictures on the conceits of Valentinus and Ebion.
1. For in no other way could we have learned the things of God, unless our Master, existing as
the Word, had become man. For no other being had the power of revealing to us the things of the
Father, except His own proper Word. For what other person "knew the mind of the Lord," or who
else "has become His counsellor?" Again, we could have learned in no other way than by seeing
our Teacher, and hearing His voice with our own ears, that, having become imitators of His works
as well as doers of His words, we may have communion with Him, receiving increase from the
perfect One, and from Him who is prior to all creation. We —who were but lately created by the