SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.187, C.3.

directed to the perfection of charity, which extends to the love of
God and of our neighbor. Now the contemplative life which seeks to
devote itself to God alone belongs directly to the love of God, while
the active life, which ministers to our neighbor's needs, belongs
directly to the love of one's neighbor. And just as out of charity we
love our neighbor for God's sake, so the services we render our
neighbor redound to God, according to Mt. 25:40, "What you have
done to one of these My least brethren, you did it to Me."
Consequently those services which we render our neighbor, in so far
as we refer them to God, are described as sacrifices, according to
Heb. 13:16, "Do not forget to do good and to impart, for by such
sacrifices God's favor is obtained." And since it belongs properly to
religion to offer sacrifice to God, as stated above (Question 81,
Article 1, ad 1; Article 4, ad 1), it follows that certain religious orders
are fittingly directed to the works of the active life. Wherefore in the
Conferences of the Fathers (Coll. xiv, 4) the Abbot Nesteros in
distinguishing the various aims of religious orders says: "Some
direct their intention exclusively to the hidden life of the desert and
purity of heart; some are occupied with the instruction of the
brethren and the care of the monasteries; while others delight in the
service of the guesthouse," i.e. in hospitality.
Reply to Objection 1: Service and subjection rendered to God are not
precluded by the works of the active life, whereby a man serves his
neighbor for God's sake, as stated in the Article. Nor do these works
preclude singularity of life; not that they involve man's living apart
from his fellow-men, but in the sense that each man individually
devotes himself to things pertaining to the service of God; and since
religious occupy themselves with the works of the active life for
God's sake, it follows that their action results from their
contemplation of divine things. Hence they are not entirely deprived
of the fruit of the contemplative life.
Reply to Objection 2: The same judgment applies to monks and to all
other religious, as regards things common to all religious orders: for
instance as regards their devoting themselves wholly to the divine
service, their observance of the essential vows of religion, and their
refraining from worldly business. But it does not follow that this
likeness extends to other things that are proper to the monastic
profession, and are directed especially to the contemplative life.
Hence in the aforesaid Decretal, De Postulando, it is not simply
stated that "the same judgment applies to canons regular" as "to
monks," but that it applies "in matters already mentioned," namely

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.187, C.3.