Reply to Objection 2: Because we know and name God from
creatures, the names we attribute to God signify what belongs to
material creatures, of which the knowledge is natural to us. And
because in creatures of this kind what is perfect and subsistent is
compound; whereas their form is not a complete subsisting thing,
but rather is that whereby a thing is; hence it follows that all names
used by us to signify a complete subsisting thing must have a
concrete meaning as applicable to compound things; whereas
names given to signify simple forms, signify a thing not as
subsisting, but as that whereby a thing is; as, for instance,
whiteness signifies that whereby a thing is white. And as God is
simple, and subsisting, we attribute to Him abstract names to signify
His simplicity, and concrete names to signify His substance and
perfection, although both these kinds of names fail to express His
mode of being, forasmuch as our intellect does not know Him in this
life as He is.
Reply to Objection 3: To signify substance with quality is to signify
the "suppositum" with a nature or determined form in which it
subsists. Hence, as some things are said of God in a concrete sense,
to signify His subsistence and perfection, so likewise nouns are
applied to God signifying substance with quality. Further, verbs and
participles which signify time, are applied to Him because His
eternity includes all time. For as we can apprehend and signify
simple subsistences only by way of compound things, so we can
understand and express simple eternity only by way of temporal
things, because our intellect has a natural affinity to compound and
temporal things. But demonstrative pronouns are applied to God as
describing what is understood, not what is sensed. For we can only
describe Him as far as we understand Him. Thus, according as
nouns, participles and demonstrative pronouns are applicable to
God, so far can He be signified by relative pronouns.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether any name can be applied to God

substantially?
Objection 1: It seems that no name can be applied to God
substantially. For Damascene says (De Fide Orth. i, 9): "Everything
said of God signifies not His substance, but rather shows forth what
He is not; or expresses some relation, or something following from
His nature or operation."
Objection 2: Further, Dionysius says (Div. Nom. i): "You will find a
chorus of holy doctors addressed to the end of distinguishing
clearly and praiseworthily the divine processions in the
denomination of God." Thus the names applied by the holy doctors
in praising God are distinguished according to the divine
processions themselves. But what expresses the procession of
anything, does not signify its essence. Therefore the names applied
to God are not said of Him substantially.
Objection 3: Further, a thing is named by us according as we
understand it. But God is not understood by us in this life in His
substance. Therefore neither is any name we can use applied
substantially to God.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Trin. vi): "The being of God is
the being strong, or the being wise, or whatever else we may say of
that simplicity whereby His substance is signified." Therefore all
names of this kind signify the divine substance.
I answer that, Negative names applied to God, or signifying His
relation to creatures manifestly do not at all signify His substance,
but rather express the distance of the creature from Him, or His
relation to something else, or rather, the relation of creatures to
Himself.
But as regards absolute and affirmative names of God, as "good,"
"wise," and the like, various and many opinions have been given. For
some have said that all such names, although they are applied to
God affirmatively, nevertheless have been brought into use more to
express some remotion from God, rather than to express anything
that exists positively in Him. Hence they assert that when we say that
God lives, we mean that God is not like an inanimate thing; and the