FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.85, C.6.

original justice did. Wherefore actual sin does not cause those
defects, as original sin does.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.85, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether death and other defects are natural to

man?
Objection 1: It would seem that death and such like defects are
natural to man. For "the corruptible and the incorruptible differ
generically" (Metaph. x, text. 26). But man is of the same genus as
other animals which are naturally corruptible. Therefore man is
naturally corruptible.
Objection 2: Further, whatever is composed of contraries is naturally
corruptible, as having within itself the cause of corruption. But such
is the human body. Therefore it is naturally corruptible.
Objection 3: Further, a hot thing naturally consumes moisture. Now
human life is preserved by hot and moist elements. Since therefore
the vital functions are fulfilled by the action of natural heat, as stated
in De Anima ii, text. 50, it seems that death and such like defects are
natural to man.
On the contrary, (1) God made in man whatever is natural to him.
Now "God made not death" (Wis. 1:13). Therefore death is not
natural to man.
(2) Further, that which is natural cannot be called either a
punishment or an evil: since what is natural to a thing is suitable to
it. But death and such like defects are the punishment of original sin,
as stated above (Article 5). Therefore they are not natural to man.
(3) Further, matter is proportionate to form, and everything to its end.
Now man's end is everlasting happiness, as stated above (Question
2, Article 7; Question 5, Articles 3,4): and the form of the human
body is the rational soul, as was proved in the FP, Question 75,
Article 6. Therefore the human body is naturally incorruptible.
I answer that, We may speak of any corruptible thing in two ways;
first, in respect of its universal nature, secondly, as regards its
particular nature. A thing's particular nature is its own power of
action and self-preservation. And in respect of this nature, every
corruption and defect is contrary to nature, as stated in De Coelo ii,
text. 37, since this power tends to the being and preservation of the
thing to which it belongs.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.85, C.7.

On the other hand, the universal nature is an active force in some
universal principle of nature, for instance in some heavenly body; or
again belonging to some superior substance, in which sense God is
said by some to be "the Nature Who makes nature." This force
intends the good and the preservation of the universe, for which
alternate generation and corruption in things are requisite: and in
this respect corruption and defect in things are natural, not indeed
as regards the inclination of the form which is the principle of being
and perfection, but as regards the inclination of matter which is
allotted proportionately to its particular form according to the
discretion of the universal agent. And although every form intends
perpetual being as far as it can, yet no form of a corruptible being
can achieve its own perpetuity, except the rational soul; for the
reason that the latter is not entirely subject to matter, as other forms
are; indeed it has an immaterial operation of its own, as stated in the
FP, Question 75, Article 2. Consequently as regards his form,
incorruption is more natural to man than to other corruptible things.
But since that very form has a matter composed of contraries, from
the inclination of that matter there results corruptibility in the whole.
In this respect man is naturally corruptible as regards the nature of
his matter left to itself, but not as regards the nature of his form.
The first three objections argue on the side of the matter; while the
other three argue on the side of the form. Wherefore in order to solve
them, we must observe that the form of man which is the rational
soul, in respect of its incorruptibility is adapted to its end, which is
everlasting happiness: whereas the human body, which is
corruptible, considered in respect of its nature, is, in a way, adapted
to its form, and, in another way, it is not. For we may note a twofold
condition in any matter, one which the agent chooses, and another
which is not chosen by the agent, and is a natural condition of
matter. Thus, a smith in order to make a knife, chooses a matter both
hard and flexible, which can be sharpened so as to be useful for
cutting, and in respect of this condition iron is a matter adapted for a
knife: but that iron be breakable and inclined to rust, results from the
natural disposition of iron, nor does the workman choose this in the
iron, indeed he would do without it if he could: wherefore this
disposition of matter is not adapted to the workman's intention, nor
to the purpose of his art. In like manner the human body is the
matter chosen by nature in respect of its being of a mixed
temperament, in order that it may be most suitable as an organ of
touch and of the other sensitive and motive powers. Whereas the