Isaac, as Jacob, or anyone else who, if present, could be pointed out with
the finger: so will the same reason reach these too. For as Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob are called three individuals, so are they called three
men, and three souls. Why then are both the Father and the Son and the
Holy Spirit, if we are to reason about them also according to genus and
species and individual, not so called three essences, as they are called
three substances or persons? But this, as I said, I pass over: but I do
affirm, that if essence is a genus, then a single essence has no species; just
as, because animal is a genus, a single animal has no species. Therefore
the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are not three species of one essence. But
if essence is a species, as man is a species, but those are three which we
call substances or persons, then they have the same species in common,
in such way as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob have in common the species
which is called man; not as man is subdivided into Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, so can one man also be subdivided into several single men; for this
is altogether impossible, since one man is already a single man. Why then
is one essence subdivided into three substances or persons? For if essence
is a species, as man is, then one essence is as one man is: or do we, as we
say that any three human beings of the same sex, of the same constitution
of body, of the same mind, are one nature,—for they are three human
beings, but one nature,—so also say in the Trinity three substances one
essence, or three persons one substance or essence? But this is somehow
a parallel case, since the ancients also who spoke Latin, before they had
these terms, which have not long come into use, that is, essence or
substance, used for them to say nature. We do not therefore use these
terms according to genus or species, but as if according to a matter that is
common and the same. Just as if three statues were made of the same
gold, we should say three statues one gold, yet should neither call the gold
genus, and the statues species; nor the gold species, and the statues
individuals. For no species goes beyond its own individuals, so as to
comprehend anything external to them. For when I define what man is,
which is a specific name, every several man that exists is contained in the
same individual definition, neither does anything belong to it which is not
a man. But when I define gold, not statues alone, if they be gold, but rings
also, and anything else that is made of gold, will belong to gold; and even
if nothing were made of it, it would still be called gold; since, even if there
were no gold statues, there will not therefore be no statues at all. Likewise

no species goes beyond the definition of its genus. For when I define
animal, since horse is a species of this genus, every horse is an animal;
but every statue is not gold. So, although in the case of three golden
statues we should rightly say three statues, one gold; yet we do not so say
it, as to understand gold to be the genus, and the statues to be species.
Therefore neither do we so call the Trinity three persons or substances,
one essence and one God, as though three somethings subsisted out of
one matter ; although whatever that is, it is
unfolded in these three. For there is nothing else of that essence besides
the Trinity. Yet we say three persons of the same essence, or three
persons one essence; but we do not say three persons out of the same
essence, as though therein essence were one thing, and person another,
as we can say three statues out of the same gold; for there it is one thing
to be gold, another to be statues. And when we say three men one nature,
or three men of the same nature, they also can be called three men out of
the same nature, since out of the same nature there can be also three
other such men. But in that essence of the Trinity, in no way can any
other person whatever exist out of the same essence. Further, in these
things, one man is not as much as three men together; and two men are
something more than one man: and in equal statues, three together
amount to more of gold than each singly, and one amounts to less of gold
than two. But in God it is not so; for the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Spirit together is not a greater essence than the Father alone or the Son
alone; but these three substances or persons, if they must be so called,
together are equal to each singly: which the natural man does not
comprehend. For he cannot think except under the conditions of bulk and
space, either small or great, since phantasms or as it were images of
bodies flit about in his mind.
12. And until he be purged from this uncleanness, let him believe in the
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, one God, alone, great, omnipotent, good,
just, merciful, Creator of all things visible and invisible, and whatsoever
can be worthily and truly said of Him in proportion to human capacity.
And when he is told that the Father only is God, let him not separate from
Him the Son or the Holy Spirit; for together with Him He is the only God,
together with whom also He is one God; because, when we are told that
the Son also is the only God, we must needs take it without any