punishment which he remits, while he binds as to the punishment
which remains. This he does in two ways---first as regards the
quantity of the punishment considered in general, and thus he does
not bind save by not loosing, and declaring the penitent to be bound,
secondly, as regards this or that particular punishment, and thus he
binds to punishment by imposing it.
Reply to Objection 1: The remainder of the punishment to which the
priest binds the penitent, is the medicine which cleanses the latter
from the blemish of sin.
Reply to Objection 2: Not only sin, but also punishment is an
obstacle to heaven: and how the latter is enjoined by the priest, has
been said in the article.
Reply to Objection 3: Even the Passion of Christ binds us to some
punishment whereby we are conformed to Him.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the priest can bind and loose according

to his own judgment?
Objection 1: It seems that the priest can bind and loose according to
his own judgment. For Jerome [Can. 86, Mensuram, De Poenit. Dist.
i] says: "The canons do not fix the length of time for doing penance
so precisely as to say how each sin is to be amended, but leave the
decision of this matter to the judgment of a discreet priest."
Therefore it seems that he can bind and loose according to his own
judgment.
Objection 2: Further, "The Lord commended the unjust steward,
forasmuch as he had done wisely" (Lk. 16:5), because he had
allowed a liberal discount to his master's debtors. But God is more
inclined to mercy than any temporal lord. Therefore it seems that the
more punishment the priest remits, the more he is to be commended.
Objection 3: Further, Christ's every action is our instruction. Now on
some sinners He imposed no punishment, but only amendment of
life, as in the case of the adulterous woman (Jn. 8). Therefore it
seems that the priest also, who is the vicar of Christ, can, according
to his own judgment, remit the punishment, either wholly or in part.
On the contrary, Gregory VII [Act. Concil. Rom. v, Can. 5] says: "We
declare it a mock penance if it is not imposed according to the
authority of the holy fathers in proportion to the sin." Therefore it
seems that it does not altogether depend on the priest's judgment.
Further, the act of the keys requires discretion. Now if the priest
could remit and impose as much as he liked of a penance, he would
have no need of discretion, because there would be no room for
indiscretion. Therefore it does not altogether depend on the priest's
judgment.
I answer that, In using the keys, the priest acts as the instrument and
minister of God. Now no instrument can have an efficacious act,
except in so far as it is moved by the principal agent. Wherefore,
Dionysius says (Hier. Eccl. cap. ult.) that "priests should use their
hierarchical powers, according as they are moved by God." A sign of
this is that before the power of the keys was conferred on Peter (Mt.
16:19) mention is made of the revelation vouchsafed to him of the