SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.77, C.2.

through hope in God.
Reply to Objection 5: He that is not bound to lend, may accept
repayment for what he has done, but he must not exact more. Now
he is repaid according to equality of justice if he is repaid as much
as he lent. Wherefore if he exacts more for the usufruct of a thing
which has no other use but the consumption of its substance, he
exacts a price of something non-existent: and so his exaction is
unjust.
Reply to Objection 6: The principal use of a silver vessel is not its
consumption, and so one may lawfully sell its use while retaining
one's ownership of it. On the other hand the principal use of silver
money is sinking it in exchange, so that it is not lawful to sell its use
and at the same time expect the restitution of the amount lent. It
must be observed, however, that the secondary use of silver vessels
may be an exchange, and such use may not be lawfully sold. In like
manner there may be some secondary use of silver money; for
instance, a man might lend coins for show, or to be used as security.
Reply to Objection 7: He who gives usury does not give it voluntarily
simply, but under a certain necessity, in so far as he needs to borrow
money which the owner is unwilling to lend without usury.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.77, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether it is lawful to ask for any other kind of

consideration for money lent?
Objection 1: It would seem that one may ask for some other kind of
consideration for money lent. For everyone may lawfully seek to
indemnify himself. Now sometimes a man suffers loss through
lending money. Therefore he may lawfully ask for or even exact
something else besides the money lent.
Objection 2: Further, as stated in Ethic. v, 5, one is in duty bound by
a point of honor, to repay anyone who has done us a favor. Now to
lend money to one who is in straits is to do him a favor for which he
should be grateful. Therefore the recipient of a loan, is bound by a
natural debt to repay something. Now it does not seem unlawful to
bind oneself to an obligation of the natural law. Therefore it is not
unlawful, in lending money to anyone, to demand some sort of
compensation as condition of the loan.
Objection 3: Further, just as there is real remuneration, so is there
verbal remuneration, and remuneration by service, as a gloss says
on Is. 33:15, "Blessed is he that shaketh his hands from all bribes."
Now it is lawful to accept service or praise from one to whom one
has lent money. Therefore in like manner it is lawful to accept any
other kind of remuneration.
Objection 4: Further, seemingly the relation of gift to gift is the same
as of loan to loan. But it is lawful to accept money for money given.
Therefore it is lawful to accept repayment by loan in return for a loan
granted.
Objection 5: Further, the lender, by transferring his ownership of a
sum of money removes the money further from himself than he who
entrusts it to a merchant or craftsman. Now it is lawful to receive
interest for money entrusted to a merchant or craftsman. Therefore it
is also lawful to receive interest for money lent.
Objection 6: Further, a man may accept a pledge for money lent, the
use of which pledge he might sell for a price: as when a man
mortgages his land or the house wherein he dwells. Therefore it is
lawful to receive interest for money lent.