FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.1, C.2.

execution, yet it is first in the order of the agent's intention. And it is
this way that it is a cause.
Reply to Objection 2: If any human action be the last end, it must be
voluntary, else it would not be human, as stated above. Now an
action is voluntary in one of two ways: first, because it is
commanded by the will, e.g. to walk, or to speak; secondly, because
it is elicited by the will, for instance the very act of willing. Now it is
impossible for the very act elicited by the will to be the last end. For
the object of the will is the end, just as the object of sight is color:
wherefore just as the first visible cannot be the act of seeing,
because every act of seeing is directed to a visible object; so the
first appetible, i.e. the end, cannot be the very act of willing.
Consequently it follows that if a human action be the last end, it
must be an action commanded by the will: so that there, some action
of man, at least the act of willing, is for the end. Therefore whatever a
man does, it is true to say that man acts for an end, even when he
does that action in which the last end consists.
Reply to Objection 3: Such like actions are not properly human
actions; since they do not proceed from deliberation of the reason,
which is the proper principle of human actions. Therefore they have
indeed an imaginary end, but not one that is fixed by reason.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.1, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether it is proper to the rational nature to act

for an end?
Objection 1: It would seem that it is proper to the rational nature to
act for an end. For man, to whom it belongs to act for an end, never
acts for an unknown end. On the other hand, there are many things
that have no knowledge of an end; either because they are altogether
without knowledge, as insensible creatures: or because they do not
apprehend the idea of an end as such, as irrational animals.
Therefore it seems proper to the rational nature to act for an end.
Objection 2: Further, to act for an end is to order one's action to an
end. But this is the work of reason. Therefore it does not belong to
things that lack reason.
Objection 3: Further, the good and the end is the object of the will.
But "the will is in the reason" (De Anima iii, 9). Therefore to act for an
end belongs to none but a rational nature.
On the contrary, The Philosopher proves (Phys. ii, 5) that "not only
mind but also nature acts for an end."
I answer that, Every agent, of necessity, acts for an end. For if, in a
number of causes ordained to one another, the first be removed, the
others must, of necessity, be removed also. Now the first of all
causes is the final cause. The reason of which is that matter does
not receive form, save in so far as it is moved by an agent; for
nothing reduces itself from potentiality to act. But an agent does not
move except out of intention for an end. For if the agent were not
determinate to some particular effect, it would not do one thing
rather than another: consequently in order that it produce a
determinate effect, it must, of necessity, be determined to some
certain one, which has the nature of an end. And just as this
determination is effected, in the rational nature, by the "rational
appetite," which is called the will; so, in other things, it is caused by
their natural inclination, which is called the "natural appetite."
Nevertheless it must be observed that a thing tends to an end, by its
action or movement, in two ways: first, as a thing, moving itself to
the end, as man; secondly, as a thing moved by another to the end,
as an arrow tends to a determinate end through being moved by the