sharest not salt only, but words and deeds, and comings in and goings out, with
him, do you not love? Nay: those that live impurely lavish even whole estates on
their strumpets; and thou who hast a worthy love, are you so cold, and weak, and
unmanly, as not to be willing to love, even when it costs you nothing? 'And
who,' one asks, 'would be so vile, who such a wild beast, as to turn away from
and to hate him that loves him?' Thou dost well indeed to disbelieve it, because
of the unnaturalness of the thing; but if I shall show that there are many such
persons, how shall we then bear the shame? For when you speak ill of him
whom you love, when you hear another speak ill of him and you defend him not,
when you grudge that he should be well accounted of, what sort of affection is
this? And yet it is not sufficient proof of love, not grudging, nor yet again not
being at enmity or war with, but only supporting and advancing him that loves
you: but when a man does and says everything to pull down his neighbor even,
what can be more wretched than such a spirit? Yesterday and the day before his
friend, you both conversed and ate with him: then because all at once you saw
your own member highly thought of, casting off the mask of friendship, you put
on that of enmity, or rather of madness. For glaring madness it is, to be annoyed
at the goodness of neighbors; for this is the act of mad and rabid dogs. For like
them, these also fly at all men's faces, exasperated with envy. Better to have a
serpent twining about one's entrails than envy crawling in us. For that it is often
possible to vomit up by means of medicines, or by food to quiet: but envy twines
not in entrails but harbors in the bosom of the soul, and is a passion hard to be
effaced. And indeed if such a serpent were within one, it would not touch men's
bodies so long as it had a supply of food; but envy, even though thou spread for
it ever so endless a banquet, devours the soul itself, gnawing on every side,
tearing, tugging, and it is not possible to find any palliative whereby to make it
quit its madness, save one only, the adversity of the prosperous; so is it
appeased, nay rather, not so even. For even should this man suffer adversity, yet
still he sees some other prosperous, and is possessed by the same pangs, and
everywhere are wounds, everywhere blows. For it is not possible to live in the

world and not see persons well reputed of. And such is the extravagance of this
distemper, that even if one should shut its victim up at home, he envies the men
of old who are dead.
Now, that men of the world should feel in this way, is indeed a grievous
thing, yet it is not so very dreadful; but that those who are freed from the
turmoils of busy life should be possessed by this distemper,— this is most
grievous of all. And I could have wished indeed to be silent: and if silence took
away too the disgrace of those doings, it were a gain to say nothing: if however,
though I should hold my peace the doings will cry out more loudly than my
tongue, no harm will accrue from my words, because of their parading these
evils before us, but possibly some gain and advantage. For this distemper has
infected even the Church, it has turned everything topsy-turvy, and dissevered
the connection of the body, and we stand opposed to each other, and envy
supplies us arms. Therefore great is the disruption. For if when all build up, it is
a great thing if our disciples stand; when all at once are pulling down, what will
the end be?
4. What doest thou, O man? You think to pull down your neighbor's; but
before his you pull down your own. Do you see not them that are gardeners, that
are husbandmen, how they all concur in one object? One has dug the soil,
another planted, a third carefully covered the roots, another waters what is
planted, another hedges it round and fortifies it, another drives off the cattle; and
all look to one end, the safety of the plant. Here, however, it is not so: but I plant
indeed myself, and another shakes and disturbs [the plant.] At least, allow it to
get nicely fixed, that it may be strong enough to resist the assault. Thou
destroyest not my work, but abandonest your own. I planted, you ought to have
watered. If then thou shake it, you have torn it up by the roots, and hast not
wherein to display your watering. But you see the planter highly esteemed. Fear
not: neither am I anything, nor thou. "For neither is he that plants nor he that
waters any thing;" [1 Corinthians 3:7] one's is the work, God's. So it is with Him
you fight and warrest, in plucking up what is planted.