can this be worthy of God? When man has found his servant offending, he
forgives it, and thinks him worthy of pardon and does God punish eternally?
And when we speak of the Laver, and of the remission of sins through it, this too
they say is unworthy of God, that he who has committed offenses without
number should have his sins remitted. What perverseness of mind is this, what a
spirit of contention does it manifest! Surely if forgiveness is an evil, punishment
is a good; but if punishment is an evil, remission of it is a good. I speak
according to their notions, for according to ours, both are good. This I shall show
at another time, for the present would not suffice for a matter so deep, and which
requires to be elaborately argued. I must lay it before your Charity at a fitting
season. At present let us proceed with our proposed subject. "This is a faithful
saying," he says. But why is it to be believed?
This appears both from what precedes and from what follows. Observe how
he prepares us for this assertion, and how he then dwells upon it. For he has
previously declared that He showed mercy to me "a blasphemer and a
persecutor"; this was in the way of preparation. And not only did He show
mercy, but "He accounted me faithful." So far should we be, he means, from
disbelieving that He showed mercy. For no one, who should see a prisoner
admitted into a palace, could doubt whether he obtained mercy. And this was
visibly the situation of Paul, for he makes himself the example. Nor is he
ashamed to call himself a sinner, but rather delights in it, as he thus can best
demonstrate the miracle of God's regard for him, and that He had thought him
worthy of such extraordinary kindness.
But how is it, that he here calls himself a sinner, nay, the chief of sinners,
whereas he elsewhere asserts that he was "touching the righteousness which is in
the law blameless"? [Philippians 3:6] Because with respect to the righteousness
which God has wrought, the justification which is really sought, even those who
are righteous in the law are sinners, "for all have sinned, and come short of the
glory of God." [Romans 3:23] Therefore he does not say righteousness simply,
but "the righteousness which is in the law." As a man that has acquired wealth,

with respect to himself appears rich, but upon a comparison with the treasures of
kings is very poor and the chief of the poor; so it is in this case. Compared with
Angels, even righteous men are sinners; and if Paul, who wrought the
righteousness that is in the law, was the chief of sinners, what other man can be
called righteous? For he says not this to condemn his own life as impure, let not
this be imagined; but comparing his own legal righteousness with the
righteousness of God, he shows it to be nothing worth, and not only so, but he
proves those who possess it to be sinners.
Ver. 16. "Howbeit for this cause I obtained mercy, that in me first Jesus
Christ might show forth all longsuffering, for a pattern to them which should
hereafter believe in Him to life everlasting."
See how he further humbles and depreciates himself, by naming a fresh and
less creditable reason. For that he obtained mercy on account of his ignorance,
does not so much imply that he who obtained mercy was a sinner, or under deep
condemnation; but to say that he obtained mercy in order that no sinner hereafter
might despair of finding mercy, but that each might feel sure of obtaining the
like favor, this is an excess of humiliation, such that even in calling himself the
chief of sinners, "a blasphemer and a persecutor, and one not meet to be called
an Apostle," he had said nothing like it. This will appear by an example. Suppose
a populous city, all whose inhabitants were wicked, some more so, and some
less, but all deserving of condemnation; and let one among that multitude be
more deserving of punishment than all the rest, and guilty of every kind of
wickedness. If it were declared that the king was willing to pardon all, it would
not be so readily believed, as if they were to see this most wicked wretch
actually pardoned. There could then be no longer any doubt. This is what Paul
says, that God, willing to give men full assurance that He pardons all their
transgressions, chose, as the object of His mercy, him who was more a sinner
than any; for when I obtained mercy, he argues, there could be no doubt of
others: as familiarly speaking we might say, "If God pardons such an one, he
will never punish anybody"; and thus he shows that he himself, though unworthy