## CHAPTER LXXXI--Some Points of Reply to Difficulties on the Resurrection
IN the first creation of human nature God endowed the human body with an attribute
over and above what was due to it by the natural principles of its constitution, namely,
with a certain imperishability, to adapt it to its form, that as the life of the soul is
perpetual, so the body might perpetually live by the soul. Granting that this
imperishability was not natural in regard of the active principle, still it may be
called natural in regard of the end, taking the end of matter to be proportioned to its
natural form. When then, contrary to the order of its nature, the soul turned away from
God, there was withdrawn from the body that God-given constitution which made it
proportionate to the soul; and death ensued. Considering then how human nature
actually was constituted to begin with, we may say that death is something which has
accidentally supervened upon man through sin. This accident has been removed by
Christ, who by the merit of His passion and death has destroyed death. Consequently
that same divine power, which originally endowed the body with incorruption, will restore
the body again from death to life.
None of the essential elements in man is altogether annihilated in death. The rational
soul, the `form' of man, remains after death. The matter also remains, which was
subject to that form. So by the union of numerically the same soul with numerically the
same matter, numerically the same man will be restored.
What does not bar numerical unity in a man while he lives on uninterruptedly, clearly
can be no bar to the identity of the risen man with the man that was. In a man's body
while he lives, there are not always the same parts in respect of matter, but only in
respect of species. In respect of matter there is a flux and reflux of parts: still that fact
does not bar the man's numerical unity from the beginning to the end of his life. We
have an example in a fire, which, while it goes on burning, is called numerically one,
because its species remains, though the wood is burnt out and fresh wood supplied. So
it is in the human body: for the form and species (kind) of the several parts continues
unbroken throughout life, but the matter of the parts is dissolved by the natural heat,
and new matter accrues by nourishment. But the man is not numerically different by the
difference of his component parts at different ages, although it is true that the material
composition of the man at one stage of his life is not his material composition at
another. So then, for numerically the same man to rise again, it is not requisite for all the
material that ever entered into his composition throughout the whole course of his life to
be gathered together and resumed, but just so much of it as suffices to make up his
proper bulk and stature. We may expect that to be resumed by preference, which was
more perfect in the species and form of humanity. If anything was wanting to his
due stature, either through untimely death or mutilation, divine power will supply that
from elsewhere. Nor will this supplementary matter mar the personal identity of the risen
body: for even in the workmanship of nature addition is made from without to the stature
of a boy without prejudice to his identity: for the boy and the adult is numerically the
same man.