THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.44, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether Christ worked miracles fittingly on men?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ worked miracles unfittingly on
men. For in man the soul is of more import than the body. Now Christ
worked many miracles on bodies, but we do not read of His working
any miracles on souls: for neither did He convert any unbelievers to
the faith mightily, but by persuading and convincing them with
outward miracles, nor is it related of Him that He made wise men out
of fools. Therefore it seems that He worked miracles on men in an
unfitting manner.
Objection 2: Further, as stated above (Question 43, Article 2), Christ
worked miracles by Divine power: to which it is proper to work
suddenly, perfectly, and without any assistance. Now Christ did not
always heal men suddenly as to their bodies: for it is written (Mk.
8:22-25) that, "taking the blind man by the hand, He led him out of
the town; and, spitting upon his eyes, laying His hands on him, He
asked him if he saw anything. And, looking up, he said: I see men as
it were trees walking. After that again He laid His hands upon his
eyes, and he began to see, and was restored, so that he saw all
things clearly." It is clear from this that He did not heal him suddenly,
but at first imperfectly, and by means of His spittle. Therefore it
seems that He worked miracles on men unfittingly.
Objection 3: Further, there is no need to remove at the same time
things which do not follow from one another. Now bodily ailments
are not always the result of sin, as appears from our Lord's words
(Jn. 9:3): "Neither hath this man sinned, nor his parents, that he
should be born blind." It was unseemly, therefore, for Him to forgive
the sins of those who sought the healing of the body, as He is
related to have done in the case of the man sick of the palsy (Mt.
9:2): the more that the healing of the body, being of less account
than the forgiveness of sins, does not seem a sufficient argument for
the power of forgiving sins.
Objection 4: Further, Christ's miracles were worked in order to
confirm His doctrine, and witness to His Godhead, as stated above
(Question 43, Article 4). Now no man should hinder the purpose of
his own work. Therefore it seems unfitting that Christ commanded
those who had been healed miraculously to tell no one, as appears
from Mt. 9:30 and Mk. 8:26: the more so, since He commanded

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.44, C.4.

others to proclaim the miracles worked on them; thus it is related
(Mk. 5:19) that, after delivering a man from the demons, He said to
him: "Go into thy house to thy friends, and tell them, how great
things the Lord hath done for thee."
On the contrary, It is written (Mk. 7:37): "He hath done all things well:
He hath made both the deaf to hear and the dumb to speak."
I answer that, The means should be proportionate to the end. Now
Christ came into the world and taught in order to save man,
according to Jn. 3:17: "For God sent not His Son into the world to
judge the world, but that the world may be saved by Him." Therefore
it was fitting that Christ, by miraculously healing men in particular,
should prove Himself to be the universal and spiritual Saviour of all.
Reply to Objection 1: The means are distinct from the end. Now the
end for which Christ's miracles were worked was the health of the
rational part, which is healed by the light of wisdom, and the gift of
righteousness: the former of which presupposes the latter, since, as
it is written (Wis. 1:4): "Wisdom will not enter into a malicious soul,
nor dwell in a body subject to sins." Now it was unfitting that man
should be made righteous unless he willed: for this would be both
against the nature of righteousness, which implies rectitude of the
will, and contrary to the very nature of man, which requires to be led
to good by the free-will, not by force. Christ, therefore, justified man
inwardly by the Divine power, but not against man's will. Nor did this
pertain to His miracles, but to the end of His miracles. In like manner
by the Divine power He infused wisdom into the simple minds of His
disciples: hence He said to them (Lk. 21:15): "I will give you a mouth
and wisdom" which "all your adversaries will not be able to resist
and gainsay." And this, in so far as the enlightenment was inward, is
not to be reckoned as a miracle, but only as regards the outward
action---namely, in so far as men saw that those who had been
unlettered and simple spoke with such wisdom and constancy.
Wherefore it is written (Acts 4:13) that the Jews, "seeing the
constancy of Peter and of John, understanding that they were
illiterate and ignorant men . . . wondered."---And though such like
spiritual effects are different from visible miracles, yet do they testify
to Christ's doctrine and power, according to Heb. 2:4: "God also
bearing them witness by signs and wonders and divers miracles,
and distributions of the Holy Ghost."
Nevertheless Christ did work some miracles on the soul of man,