His head, but even heaven itself being folded up.
For as it is with the judges; when they judge publicly, the attendants
drawing back the curtains show them to all; even so then likewise all men shall
see Him sitting, and all the human race shall stand by, and He will make answers
to them by Himself; and to some He will say, "Come, you blessed of my Father;
for I was an hungered, and you gave me meat;" [Matthew 25:34-35] to others,
"Well done, thou good and faithful servant, you have been faithful over a few
things, I will set you over many things." [Matthew 25:23]
And again passing an opposite sentence, to some He will answer, "Depart
into the everlasting fire, that is prepared for the devil and his angels,"
[Matthew 25:41] and to others, "O thou wicked and slothful servants."
[Matthew 25:26] And some He will "cut asunder," and "deliver to the
tormentors;" but others He will command to "be bound hand and foot, and cast
into outer darkness." [Matthew 22:13] And after the axe the furnace will follow;
and all out of the net, that is cast away, will fall therein.
"Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun;" [Matthew 13:43] or rather
more than the sun. But so much is said, not because their light is to be so much
and no more, but since we know no other star brighter than this, He chose by the
known example to set forth the future brightness of the saints.
Since on the mount too, when He says, "He did shine as the sun," for the
same cause did He so speak. For that the comparison did not come up to His
light, the apostles showed by falling down. For had the brightness not been
unalloyed, but comparable to the sun; they would not have fallen, but would
easily have borne it.
The righteous therefore will shine as the sun, and more than the sun in that
time; but the sinners shall suffer all extremities. Then will there be no need of
records, proofs, witnesses. For He who judges is Himself all, both witness, and
proof, and judge. For He knows all things exactly; "For all things are naked and
opened unto His eyes." [Hebrews 4:13]
No man will there appear rich or poor, mighty or weak, wise or unwise,

bond or free; but these masks will be dashed in pieces, and the inquiry will be
into their works only. For if in our courts, when any one is tried for usurpation,
or murder, whatever he may be, whether governor, or consul, or what you will,
all these dignities fleet away, and he that is convicted suffers the utmost penalty;
much more will it be so there.
8. Therefore that this may not be so, let us lay aside our filthy garments, let
us put on the armor of light, and the glory of God will wrap us around. For what
is even grievous in the injunctions? Or what is there not easy? Hear, for instance,
the prophet speaking, and then you shall know the easiness thereof. "Neither
though thou bow as a collar your neck, and strew beneath you sackcloth and
ashes, not even so shall you call a fast acceptable; but loose every bond of
iniquity, unloose the twisted knots of oppressive bargains." [Isaiah 58:6]
See a prophet's wisdom, how stating first whatever was irksome, and
removing it, he exhorts them to obtain salvation by the duties that are easy;
signifying, that God needs not toils, but obedience.
Then implying that virtue is easy, but vice grievous and galling, he makes it
out by the bare names; "For," says he, "vice is a bond," and "a twisted knot," but
virtue is a disengagement and release from all these.
"Tear in sunder every unjust compact;" thus calling men's bills about the
interest due to them, and the sums they have lent.
"Set at liberty them that are bruised;" them that are afflicted. For such a
being is the debtor; when he sees his creditor, his mind is broken, and he fears
him more than a wild beast.
"Bring in the poor that are cast out to your house; if you see one naked,
clothe him, and them that belong to your seed you shall not overlook."
[Isaiah 58:7]
Now in our late discourse which we made unto you when declaring the
rewards, we showed the wealth arising from these acts; but now let us see if any
of the injunctions be grievous, and transcending our nature. Nay, nothing of the
kind shall we discover, but quite the contrary; that while these courses are very