upon those who are subject to them, rousing them to a like fervor,
and cleansing them wholly by their heat. Thirdly we consider in fire
the quality of clarity, or brightness; which signifies that these angels
have in themselves an inextinguishable light, and that they also
perfectly enlighten others.
In the same way the name "Cherubim" comes from a certain excess
of knowledge; hence it is interpreted "fulness of knowledge," which
Dionysius (Coel. Hier. vii) expounds in regard to four things: the
perfect vision of God; the full reception of the Divine Light; their
contemplation in God of the beauty of the Divine order; and in regard
to the fact that possessing this knowledge fully, they pour it forth
copiously upon others.
Reply to Objection 6: The order of the "Thrones" excels the inferior
orders as having an immediate knowledge of the types of the Divine
works; whereas the "Cherubim" have the excellence of knowledge
and the "Seraphim" the excellence of ardor. And although these two
excellent attributes include the third, yet the gift belonging to the
"Thrones" does not include the other two; and so the order of the
"Thrones" is distinguished from the orders of the "Cherubim" and
the "Seraphim." For it is a common rule in all things that the
excellence of the inferior is contained in the superior, but not
conversely. But Dionysius (Coel. Hier. vii) explains the name
"Thrones" by its relation to material seats, in which we may consider
four things. First, the site; because seats are raised above the earth,
and to the angels who are called "Thrones" are raised up to the
immediate knowledge of the types of things in God. Secondly,
because in material seats is displayed strength, forasmuch as a
person sits firmly on them. But here the reverse is the case; for the
angels themselves are made firm by God. Thirdly, because the seat
receives him who sits thereon, and he can be carried thereupon; and
so the angels receive God in themselves, and in a certain way bear
Him to the inferior creatures. Fourthly, because in its shape, a seat is
open on one side to receive the sitter; and thus are the angels
promptly open to receive God and to serve Him.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether the grades of the orders are properly

assigned?
Objection 1: It would seem that the grades of the orders are not
properly assigned. For the order of prelates is the highest. But the
names of "Dominations," "Principalities," and "Powers" of
themselves imply prelacy. Therefore these orders ought not to be
supreme.
Objection 2: Further, the nearer an order is to God, the higher it is.
But the order of "Thrones" is the nearest to God; for nothing is
nearer to the sitter than the seat. Therefore the order of the
"Thrones" is the highest.
Objection 3: Further, knowledge comes before love, and intellect is
higher than will. Therefore the order of "Cherubim" seems to be
higher than the "Seraphim."
Objection 4: Further, Gregory (Hom. xxiv in Evang.) places the
"Principalities" above the "Powers." These therefore are not placed
immediately above the Archangels, as Dionysius says (Coel. Hier.
ix).
On the contrary, Dionysius (Coel. Hier. vii), places in the highest
hierarchy the "Seraphim" as the first, the "Cherubim" as the middle,
the "Thrones" as the last; in the middle hierarchy he places the
"Dominations," as the first, the "Virtues" in the middle, the "Powers"
last; in the lowest hierarchy the "Principalities" first, then the
"Archangels," and lastly the "Angels."
I answer that, The grades of the angelic orders are assigned by
Gregory (Hom. xxiv in Ev.) and Dionysius (Coel. Hier. vii), who agree
as regards all except the "Principalities" and "Virtues." For
Dionysius places the "Virtues" beneath the "Dominations," and
above the "Powers"; the "Principalities" beneath the "Powers" and
above the "Archangels." Gregory, however, places the
"Principalities" between the "Dominations" and the "Powers"; and
the "Virtues" between the "Powers" and the "Archangels." Each of
these placings may claim authority from the words of the Apostle,
who (Eph. 1:20,21) enumerates the middle orders, beginning from
the lowest saying that "God set Him," i.e. Christ, "on His right hand