lamps, had oil, but not in abundance. Why, you ought, even did you give from
your own, not to be so miserly, but now when you give what is your Lord's, why
do you count every little? Will ye that I tell you the cause of this inhumanity?
When men get together their wealth through greediness, these same are slow to
give alms; for one who has learned so to gain, knows not how to spend. For how
can a man prepared for rapine adapt himself to its contrary? He who takes from
others, how shall he be able to give up his own to another? A dog accustomed to
feed on flesh cannot guard the flock; therefore the shepherds kill such. That this
be not our fate, let us refrain from such feasting. For these men too feed on flesh,
when they bring on death by hunger. Do you see not how God has allowed to us
all things in common? If amid riches He has suffered men to be poor, it is for the
consolation of the rich, that they may be able by showing mercy towards them to
put off their sins. But thou even in this hast been cruel and inhuman; whence it is
evident, that if you had received this same power in greater things, you would
have committed ten thousand murders, and wouldest have debarred men from
light, and from life altogether. That this might not take place, necessity has cut
short insatiableness in such matters.
If you are pained when you hear these things, much more I when I see them
taking place. How long shall you be rich, and that man poor? Till evening, but
no farther; for so short is life, and all things so near their end, and all things
henceforth so stand at the door, that the whole must be deemed but a little hour.
What need have you of bursting storehouses, of a multitude of domestics and
house-keepers? Why have you not ten thousand proclaimers of your almsdoing?
The storehouse utters no voice, yet will it bring upon you many robbers; but the
storehouses of the poor will go up to God Himself, and will make your present
life sweet, and put away all your sins, and you shall gain glory from God, and
honor from men. Why then grudgest you yourself such good things? For you
will not do so much good to the poor, as to yourself, when you benefit them. You
will right their present state; but for yourself you will lay up beforehand the
glory and confidence which shall be hereafter. And this may we all obtain, by the

grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom with the Father and
the Holy Ghost be the glory and the might for ever. Amen.

Homily 78 on the Gospel of John
John 16:4-6
"These things I said not unto you at the beginning, because I was with you.
But now I go My way to Him that sent Me; and none of you asks Me, Where are
You going? But because I have said these things unto you, sorrow has filled your
heart."
1. Great is the tyranny of despondency, and much courage do we need so as
to stand manfully against the feeling, and after gathering from it what is useful,
to let the superfluous go. It has somewhat useful; for when we ourselves or
others sin, then only is it good to grieve; but when we fall into human
vicissitudes, then despondency is useless. And now when it has overthrown the
disciples who were not yet perfect, see how Christ raises them again by His
rebuke. They who before this had asked Him ten thousand questions, (for Peter
said, "Where are You going?" [ c. xiii. 36 ]; and Thomas, "We know not whither
You go, and how can we know the way?" [100:xiv. 5 and 8]; and Philip, "Show us
Your Father";) these men, I say, now hearing, "they will put you out of the
synagogues," and "will hate you," and "whosoever kills you will think that he
does God service," were so cast down as to be struck dumb, so that they spoke
nothing to Him. This then He makes a reproach to them, and says, "These things
I said not unto you at the beginning, because I was with you; but now I go unto
Him that sent Me, and none of you asks Me, Where are You going? But because I
have said these things unto you, sorrow has filled your heart." For a dreadful
thing is immoderate sorrow, dreadful and effective of death. Wherefore Paul
said, "Lest perhaps such a one should be swallowed up by overmuch sorrow." [2
Corinthians 2:7]
"And these things," says He, "I told you not at the beginning." Why did He