to say these things? For this defense would be a most heavy accusation against
you. How? And in what way? Because while throwing the whole blame upon the
traitor (for they say, "See thou to that"), being able to have set themselves free
from this murder of Christ, they left the traitor, and even pressed the crime
further, adding the cross to the betrayal. For what hindered them, when they said
to him, "See thou to that," themselves to forbear the criminal act? But now they
even do the contrary, adding to it the murder and in every thing, both by what
they do, and by what they say, entangling themselves in inevitable ills. For
indeed after these things, when Pilate left it to them, they choose the robber to be
released rather than Jesus; but Him that had done no wrong, but had even
conferred on them so many benefits, they slew.
3. What then did that man? When he saw that he was laboring to no profit,
and that they would not consent to receive the pieces of silver, "he cast them
down in the temple, and went and hanged himself. And the chief priests took the
pieces of silver, and said, it is not lawful for to put them into the treasury,
because it is the price of blood. And they took counsel, and bought with them the
potter's field to bury strangers in. Wherefore that field was called, the field of
blood, unto this day. Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremy the
prophet, saying, and they took the thirty pieces of silver, the price of Him that
was valued, and gave them for the potter's field, as the Lord appointed me."
Do you see them again self-condemned by their conscience? For because
they knew that they had been buying the murder, they put them not into the
treasury, but bought a field to bury strangers in. And this also became a witness
against them, and a proof of their treason. For the name of the place more clearly
than a trumpet proclaimed their blood- guiltiness. Neither did they it at random,
but having taking counsel, and in every case in like manner, so that no one
should be clear of the deed, but all guilty. But these things the prophecy foretold
from of old. Do you see not the apostles only, but the prophets also declaring
exactly those things which were matters of reproach, and every way proclaiming
the passion, and indicating it beforehand?

This was the case with the Jews without their being conscious of it. For if
they had cast it into the treasury, the thing would not have been so clearly
discovered; but now having bought a piece of ground, they made it all manifest
even to subsequent generations.
Hear ye as many as think to do good works out of murders, and take a
reward for the lives of men. These almsgiving are Judaical, or rather they are
Satanical. For there are, there are now also they, that take by violence countless
things belonging to others, and think that an excuse is made for all if they cast in
some ten or a hundred gold pieces.
Touching whom also the prophet says, "You covered my altar with tears."
[Malachi 2:13] Christ is not willing to be fed by covetousness, He accepts not
this food. Why do you insult your Lord, offering Him unclean things? It is better
to leave men to pine with hunger, than to feed them from these sources. That was
the conduct of a cruel man, this of one both cruel and insolent. It is better to give
nothing, than to give the things of one set of persons to others. For tell me, if you
saw any two persons, one naked, one having a garment, and then having stripped
the one that had the garment, thou were to clothe the naked, would you not have
committed an injustice? It is surely plain to every one. But if when you have
given all that you have taken to another, you have committed an injustice, and
not shown mercy; when you give not even a small portion of what you rob, and
callest the deed alms, what manner of punishment will you not undergo? For if
men offering lame brutes were blamed, what favor will you obtain doing things
more grievous? For if the chief, making restitution to the owner himself, still
does an injustice, and so does an injustice, as by adding fourfold scarcely to do
away the charge against himself, and this under the old covenant; [Exodus 22:1]
he that is not stealing, but taking by violence, and not even giving to him that is
robbed, but instead of him to another; nor yet giving fourfold, but not so much as
the half; and moreover not living under the old dispensation, but under the new;
consider how much fire he is heaping together upon his own head. And if he do
not as yet suffer his punishment, for this self-same thing I say bewail him, for he