SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.27, C.3.

us or in our neighbor, whom we love as ourselves.
Reply to Objection 1: Our neighbor does not weep save on account
of some evil. Now every evil implies lack of participation in the
sovereign good: hence charity makes us weep with our neighbor in
so far as he is hindered from participating in the Divine good.
Reply to Objection 2: Our sins divide between us and God, according
to Is. 59:2; wherefore this is the reason why we grieve for our past
sins, or for those of others, in so far as they hinder us from
participating in the Divine good.
Reply to Objection 3: Although in this unhappy abode we participate,
after a fashion, in the Divine good, by knowledge and love, yet the
unhappiness of this life is an obstacle to a perfect participation in
the Divine good: hence this very sorrow, whereby a man grieves for
the delay of glory, is connected with the hindrance to a participation
of the Divine good.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.27, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the spiritual joy which proceeds from

charity, can be filled?
Objection 1: It would seem that the spiritual joy which proceeds from
charity cannot be filled. For the more we rejoice in God, the more is
our joy in Him filled. But we can never rejoice in Him as much as it is
meet that we should rejoice in God, since His goodness which is
infinite, surpasses the creature's joy which is finite. Therefore joy in
God can never be filled.
Objection 2: Further, that which is filled cannot be increased. But the
joy, even of the blessed, can be increased, since one's joy is greater
than another's. Therefore joy in God cannot be filled in a creature.
Objection 3: Further, comprehension seems to be nothing else than
the fulness of knowledge. Now, just as the cognitive power of a
creature is finite, so is its appetitive power. Since therefore God
cannot be comprehended by any creature, it seems that no
creature's joy in God can be filled.
On the contrary, Our Lord said to His disciples (Jn. 15:11): "That My
joy may be in you, and your joy may be filled."
I answer that, Fulness of joy can be understood in two ways; first, on
the part of the thing rejoiced in, so that one rejoice in it as much as it
is meet that one should rejoice in it, and thus God's joy alone in
Himself is filled, because it is infinite; and this is condignly due to
the infinite goodness of God: but the joy of any creature must needs
be finite. Secondly, fulness of joy may be understood on the part of
the one who rejoices. Now joy is compared to desire, as rest to
movement, as stated above (FS, Question 25, Articles 1,2), when we
were treating of the passions: and rest is full when there is no more
movement. Hence joy is full, when there remains nothing to be
desired. But as long as we are in this world, the movement of desire
does not cease in us, because it still remains possible for us to
approach nearer to God by grace, as was shown above (Question 24,
Articles 4,7). When once, however, perfect happiness has been
attained, nothing will remain to be desired, because then there will
be full enjoyment of God, wherein man will obtain whatever he had
desired, even with regard to other goods, according to Ps. 102:5:
"Who satisfieth thy desire with good things." Hence desire will be at