He, by suffering, not by doing, evil: for this is the certain and splendid victory.
Wherefore also Paul goes on to say, Now then it is altogether a defect in
([ἥττημα] rec. vers. "a fault.") you that you have lawsuits one with another. And,
"Wherefore do ye not rather take wrong?" For that the injured person
overcomes, rather than he who cannot endure being injured, this I will make
evident to you. He that cannot endure injury, though he force the other into court
and gain the verdict, yet is he then most of all defeated. For that which he would
not, he has suffered; in that the adversary has compelled him both to feel pain
and to go to law. For what is it to the point that you have prevailed? And what,
that you have recovered all the money? You have in the meanwhile borne what
you did not desire, having been compelled to decide the matter by law. But if
you endure the injustice, you overcome; deprived indeed of the money, but not at
all of the victory which is annexed to such self-command. For the other had no
power to oblige you to do what you did not like.
And to show that this is true; tell me, which conquered at the dunghill?
Which was defeated? Job who was stripped of all, or the devil who stripped him
of all? Evidently the devil who stripped him of all. Whom do we admire for the
victory, the devil that smote, or Job that was smitten? Clearly, Job. And yet he
could not retain his perishing wealth nor save his children. Why speak I of riches
and children? He could not insure to himself bodily health. Yet nevertheless this
is the conqueror, he that lost all that he had. His riches indeed he could not keep;
but his piety he kept with all strictness. "But his children when perishing he
could not help." And what then? Since what happened both made them more
glorious, and besides in this way he protected himself against the despiteful
usage. Now had he not have suffered ill and been wronged of the devil, he would
not have gained that signal victory. Had it been an evil thing to suffer wrong,
God would not have enjoined it upon us: for God enjoins not evil things. What,
know ye not that He is the God of Glory? That it could not be His will to
encompass us with shame and ridicule and loss, but to introduce ([προξενῆσαι])
us to the contrary of these? Therefore He commands us to suffer wrong, and

does all to withdraw us from worldly things, and to convince us what is glory,
and what shame; what loss, and what gain.
"But it is hard to suffer wrong and be spitefully entreated." Nay, O man, it is
not, it is not hard. How long will your heart be fluttering about things present?
For God, you may be sure, would not have commanded this, had it been hard.
Just consider. The wrong-doer goes his way with the money, but with an evil
conscience besides: the receiver of the wrong, defrauded indeed of some money,
but enriched with confidence towards God; an acquisition more valuable than
countless treasures.
11. Knowing these things, therefore, let us of our free choice go on strict
principles, and not be like the unwise, who think that they are then not wronged,
when their suffering wrong is the result of a trial. But, quite on the contrary, that
is the greatest harm; and so in every case when we exercise self-restraint in these
matters, not willingly, but after being worsted in that other quarter. For it is no
advantage that a man defeated in a trial endures it; for it becomes thenceforth a
matter of necessity. What then is the splendid victory? When you look down on
it: when you refuse to go to law.
"How say you? Have I been stripped of every thing," says one, "and do you
bid me keep silent? Have I been shamefully used, and do you exhort me to bear
it meekly? And how shall I be able?" Nay, but it is most easy if you will look up
unto heaven; if you will behold the beauty that is in sight; and whither God has
promised to receive you, if you bear wrong nobly. Do this then; and looking up
unto the heaven, think that you are made like Him that sits there upon the
Cherubim. For He also was injured and He bore it; He was reproached and
avenged not Himself; and was beaten, yet He asserted not His cause. Nay, He
made return, in the contrary kind, to those who did such things, even in benefits
without number; and He commanded us to be imitators of Him. Consider that
you came naked out of your mother's womb, and that naked both you and he that
has done you wrong shall depart; rather, he for his part, with innumerable
wounds, breeding worms. Consider that things present are but for a season;