How on the Gentiles? It is said, "In your seed shall all the nations of the
earth be blessed:" [Genesis 22:18; 26:4] that is to say, in Christ. If this were said
of the Jews, how would it be reasonable that they who were themselves subject
to the curse, on account of transgression, should become the authors of a
blessing to others? An accursed person cannot impart to others that blessing of
which he is himself deprived. Plainly then it all refers to Christ who was the
Seed of Abraham, and through whom the Gentiles are blessed. And thus the
promise of the Spirit is added, as Paul himself declares, "that we might receive
the promise of the Spirit through faith." As the grace of the Spirit could not
possibly descend on the graceless and offending, they are first blessed the curse
having been removed; then being justified by faith, they draw unto themselves
the grace of the Spirit. Thus the Cross removed the curse, Faith brought in
righteousness, righteousness drew on the grace of the Spirit.
Ver. 15. "Brethren, I speak after the manner of men; Though it be but a
man's covenant, yet when it has been confirmed, no one makes it void or adds
thereto."
"To speak after the manner of men" means to use human examples. Having
founded his argument on the Scriptures, on the miracles wrought among
themselves, on the sufferings of Christ, and on the Patriarch, he proceeds to
common usages; and this he does invariably, in order to sweeten his discourse,
and render it more acceptable and intelligible to the duller sort. Thus he argues
with the Corinthians, "Who feeds a flock, and eats not of the milk of the flock?
Who plants a vineyard, and eats not the fruit thereof?" [1 Corinthians 9:7] and
again with the Hebrews, "For a testament is of force where there has been death;
for does it ever avail while he that made it lives?" [Hebrews 9:17] One may find
him dwelling with pleasure on such arguments. In the Old Testament God does
the same thing in many instances, as, "Can a woman forget her sucking child?"
[Isaiah 49:15] and again, "Shall the clay say to him that fashions it, What do you
make?" [Isaiah 45:9] and in Hosea, He represents a husband set at nought by his
wife. [Hosea 2:5 ff] This use of human examples frequently occurs in types also,

as when the prophet takes the girdle, [Jeremiah 13:1-9] and goes down to the
potter's house [Jeremiah 18:1-6] The meaning of the present example is, that
Faith is more ancient than the Law, which is later and only temporary, and
delivered in order to pave the way for Faith. Hence he says, "Brethren, I speak
after the manner of men;" above he had called them "foolish," now he calls them
"brethren," at once chiding and encouraging them. "Though it be but a man's
covenant, yet when it has been confirmed." If a man, says he, makes a covenant,
does any one dare to come afterwards and overturn it, or subjoin anything to it?
For this is the meaning of "or adds thereto." Much less then when God makes a
covenant; and with whom did God make a covenant?
Ver. 16, 17, 18. "Now to Abraham were the promises spoken and to his
seed. He says not, And to seeds, as of many; but as of One, And to your seed,
which is Christ. Now this I say, A covenant, confirmed before hand by God the
Law, which came four hundred and thirty years after, does not disannul, so as to
make the promise of none effect. For if the inheritance is of the Law, it is no
more of promise: but God has granted it to Abraham by promise."
Thus God made a covenant with Abraham, promising that in his seed the
blessing should come upon the heathen; and this blessing the Law cannot turn
aside. As this example was not in all respects appropriate to the matter in hand,
he introduces it thus, "I speak after the manner of men," that nothing might be
deduced from it derogatory to the majesty of God. But let us go to the bottom of
this illustration. It was promised Abraham that by his seed the heathen should be
blessed; and his seed according to the flesh is Christ; four hundred and thirty
years after came the Law; now, if the Law bestows the blessings even life and
righteousness, that promise is annulled. And so while no one annuls a man's
covenant, the covenant of God after four hundred and thirty years is annulled;
for if not that covenant but another instead of it bestows what is promised, then
is it set aside, which is most unreasonable.
Ver. 19. "What then is the Law? It was added because of transgressions."
This remark again is not superfluous; observe too how he glances round at