Ps. lxix. 21.

Eph. iv. 16.

For there are many mansions in the Father's house, inasmuch as there are also many members
in the body.

### Chapter XX.—God showed himself, by the fall of man, as patient, benign, merciful, mighty
to save. Man is therefore most ungrateful, if, unmindful of his own lot, and of the benefits
held out to him, he do not acknowledge divine grace.

1. Long-suffering therefore was God, when man became a defaulter, as foreseeing that victory
which should be granted to him through the Word. For, when strength was made perfect in
weakness, it showed the kindness and transcendent power of God. For as He patiently suffered
Jonah to be swallowed by the whale, not that he should be swallowed up and perish altogether, but
that, having been cast out again, he might be the more subject to God, and might glorify Him the
more who had conferred upon him such an unhoped-for deliverance, and might bring the Ninevites
to a lasting repentance, so that they should be converted to the Lord, who would deliver them from
death, having been struck with awe by that portent which had been wrought in Jonah's case, as the
Scripture says of them, "And they returned each from his evil way, and the unrighteousness which
was in their hands, saying, Who knoweth if God will repent, and turn away His anger from us, and
we shall not perish?"—so also, from the beginning, did God permit man to be swallowed up
by the great whale, who was the author of transgression, not that he should perish altogether when
so engulphed; but, arranging and preparing the plan of salvation, which was accomplished by the
Word, through the sign of Jonah, for those who held the same opinion as Jonah regarding the Lord,
and who confessed, and said, "I am a servant of the Lord, and I worship the Lord God of heaven,
who hath made the sea and the dry land." [This was done] that man, receiving an unhoped-for
salvation from God, might rise from the dead, and glorify God, and repeat that word which was
uttered in prophecy by Jonah: "I cried by reason of mine affliction to the Lord my God, and He
heard me out of the belly of hell;" and that he might always continue glorifying God, and giving
thanks without ceasing, for that salvation which he has derived from Him, "that no flesh should
glory in the Lord's presence;" and that man should never adopt an opposite opinion with regard
to God, supposing that the incorruptibility which belongs to him is his own naturally, and by thus
not holding the truth, should boast with empty superciliousness, as if he were naturally like to God.
For he (Satan) thus rendered him (man) more ungrateful towards his Creator, obscured the love

Jon. iii. 8, 9.

Jon. ii. 2.

which God had towards man, and blinded his mind not to perceive what is worthy of God, comparing
himself with, and judging himself equal to, God.
2. This, therefore, was the [object of the] long-suffering of God, that man, passing through all
things, and acquiring the knowledge of moral discipline, then attaining to the resurrection from the
dead, and learning by experience what is the source of his deliverance, may always live in a state
of gratitude to the Lord, having obtained from Him the gift of incorruptibility, that he might love
Him the more; for "he to whom more is forgiven, loveth more:" and that he may know himself,
how mortal and weak he is; while he also understands respecting God, that He is immortal and
powerful to such a degree as to confer immortality upon what is mortal, and eternity upon what is
temporal; and may understand also the other attributes of God displayed towards himself, by means
of which being instructed he may think of God in accordance with the divine greatness. For the
glory of man [is] God, but [His] works [are the glory] of God; and the receptacle of all His wisdom
and power [is] man. Just as the physician is proved by his patients, so is God also revealed through
men. And therefore Paul declares, "For God hath concluded all in unbelief, that He may have mercy
upon all;" not saying this in reference to spiritual Æons, but to man, who had been disobedient
to God, and being cast off from immortality, then obtained mercy, receiving through the Son of
God that adoption which is [accomplished] by Himself. For he who holds, without pride and
boasting, the true glory (opinion) regarding created things and the Creator, who is the Almighty
God of all, and who has granted existence to all; [such an one,] continuing in His love and
subjection, and giving of thanks, shall also receive from Him the greater glory of promotion,
looking forward to the time when he shall become like Him who died for him, for He, too, "was
made in the likeness of sinful flesh," to condemn sin, and to cast it, as now a condemned thing,
away beyond the flesh, but that He might call man forth into His own likeness, assigning him as
[His own] imitator to God, and imposing on him His Father's law, in order that he may see God,
and granting him power to receive the Father; [being] the Word of God who dwelt in man, and
became the Son of man, that He might accustom man to receive God, and God to dwell in man,
according to the good pleasure of the Father.