mere sign without profit: nor is the tongue any way useful to believers; for its
only work is to astonish and to confound; the word "sign" being one of those
which may be taken two ways: as when he says, "show me a sign," [Psalm
86:17] and adds, "for good:" and again, "I have become as a wonder unto many,"
[Psalm 71:7] i.e., a sign.
And to show you that he introduced the term "sign" here, not as a thing
which of course did some good, he added that which resulted from it. And what
was this? "They will say," says he, "that you are mad." This however not from
the nature of the sign, but from their folly. But when you hear of unbelievers, do
not suppose that the same persons are in every case intended, but at one time
they which are incurably diseased and abide uncorrected, and at another they
which may be changed; such as were they who in the times of the Apostles
admire the mighty things of God which they hear of; such as in the case of
Cornelius. His meaning accordingly is this; that prophecy avails both among the
unbelieving and among them that believe: as to the tongue, when heard by the
unbelieving and inconsiderate, instead of profiting by it, they rather deride the
utterers as madmen. For, in fact, it is to them but for a sign, i.e., in order to
astonish them merely; whereas they who had understanding used also to profit
by it: with a view to which the sign was given. Even as then there were not only
certain who accused them of drunkenness, but many also admired them as
relating the wonderful works of God. It appears then that the mockers were those
without understanding. Wherefore also Paul did not simply say, "they will say
that you are mad," but added, "unlearned and unbelievers."
But prophecy is not for a sign merely, but is also suitable and useful for
faith and for profit unto both classes. And this, if not directly, yet in the sequel he
more clearly explained, saying, "he is reproved by all. For, if all prophesy," says
he, "and there come in one unbelieving or unlearned, he is reproved by all; he is
judged by all; and thus are the secrets of his heart made manifest; and so he will
fall down on his face and worship God, declaring that God is among you
indeed."

So that not in this only is prophecy greater, in its availing with each class ,
but also in its attracting the more shameless of the unbelievers. For it was not the
same wonder, when Peter convicted Sapphira, which was a work of prophecy,
and when he spoke with tongues: but in the former case all shrank into
themselves; whereas, when he spoke with tongues, he got the credit of being
even beside himself.
3. Having said then, that a tongue profited not, and having again qualified
this statement by turning the charge upon the Jews, he proceeds to signify that it
even does injury. "And wherefore was it given?" That it might go forth with
interpretation: since without this, it has even the contrary effect among them that
are without understanding. "For if," says he, "all speak with tongues, and there
come in unbelievers or unlearned, they will say that you are mad;" as indeed
even the Apostles incurred the suspicion of being drunken: for "these men," it
says, are filled with new wine: [Acts 2:13] but it is not the fault of the sign, but
of their unskilfulness; therefore he added, "unlearned and unbelievers," to show
that the notion belongs to their ignorance and want of faith; for, as I before said,
his object is to rank that gift not among things that are disparaged, but among
those which do not greatly profit, and this, in order to repress them, and bring
them to a necessity of seeking for an interpreter. For since the greater part looked
not to this, but made use of it for display and rivalry, this is what he especially
withdraws them from, intimating that their credit is injured, they bringing on
themselves a suspicion of madness. And this especially is what Paul continually
attempts to establish, when he wants to lead men away from any thing: he shows
that the person suffers loss in respect of those very things which he desires.
And do thou accordingly likewise: if you would lead men away from
pleasure, show that the thing is bitter: if you would withdraw them from vainglory, show that the thing is full of dishonor: thus also was Paul used to do.
When he would tear away the rich from their love of money, he said not merely
that wealth is a hurtful thing, but also that it casts into temptations. "For they
that desire to be rich," says he, fall into a temptation. [1 Timothy 6:9] Thus,