we are ourselves to blame for our own destruction. Because we do not approach,
nor beseech, nor entreat Him, as we ought: but even if we do draw near, it is not
as persons who have need to receive, neither is it with the proper faith, nor as
making demand, but we do all in a gaping and listless way.
7. And yet God would have us demand things of Him, and for this accounts
Himself greatly bound to you. For He alone of all debtors, when the demand is
made, counts it a favor, and gives what we have not lent Him. And if He should
see him pressing earnestly that makes the demand, He pays down even what He
has not received of us; but if sluggishly, He too keeps on making delays; not
through unwillingness to give, but because He is pleased to have the demand
made upon Him by us. For this cause He told you also the example of that
friend, who came by night, and asked a loaf; [Luke 11:5-8] and of the judge that
feared not God, nor regarded men. [Luke 18:1-8] And He stayed not at
similitudes, but signified it also in His very actions, when He dismissed that
Phœnician woman, having filled her with His great gift. For through her He
signified, that He gives to them that ask earnestly, even the things that pertain
not to them. "For it is not meet," says He, "to take the children's bread, and to
give it unto the dogs." But for all that He gave, because she demanded of him
earnestly. But by the Jews He showed, that to them that are careless, He gives
not even their own. They accordingly received nothing, but lost what was their
own. And while these, because they asked not, did not receive so much as their
very own; she, because she assailed Him with earnestness, had power to obtain
even what pertained to others, and the dog received what was the children's. So
great a good is importunity. For though thou be a dog, yet being importunate,
you shall be preferred to the child being negligent: for what things affection
accomplishes not, these, all of them, importunity did accomplish. Say not
therefore, "God is an enemy to me, and will not hearken." He does straightway
answer you, continually troubling him, if not because you are His friend, yet
because of your importunity. And neither the enmity, or the unseasonable time,
nor anything else becomes an hindrance. Say not, "I am unworthy, and do not

pray;" for such was the Syrophœnician woman too. Say not, "I have sinned
much, and am not able to entreat Him whom I have angered;" for God looks not
at the desert, but at the disposition. For if the ruler that feared not God, neither
was ashamed of men, was overcome by the widow, much more will He that is
good be won over by continual entreaty.
So that though thou be no friend, though thou be not demanding your due,
though you have devoured your Father's substance, and have been a long time
out of sight, though without honor, though last of all, though thou approach Him
angry, though much displeased; be willing only to pray, and to return, and you
shall receive all, and shall quickly extinguish the wrath and the condemnation.
But, "behold, I pray," says one, "and there is no result." Why, you pray not
like those; such I mean as the Syrophœnician woman, the friend that came late at
night, and the widow that is continually troubling the judge, and the son that
consumed his father's goods. For did you so pray, you would quickly obtain. For
though despite have been done unto Him, yet is He a Father; and though He have
been provoked to anger, yet is He fond of His children; and one thing only does
He seek, not to take vengeance for our affronts, but to see you repenting and
entreating Him. Would that we were warmed in like measure, as those bowels
are moved to the love of us. But this fire seeks a beginning only, and if you
afford it a little spark, you kindle a full flame of beneficence. For not because He
has been insulted, is He sore vexed, but because it is thou who art insulting Him,
and so becoming frenzied. For if we being evil, when our children molest us,
grieve on their account; much more is God, who can not so much as suffer insult,
sore vexed on account of you, who hast committed it. If we, who love by nature,
much more He, who is kindly affectioned beyond nature. "For though," says He,
"a woman should forget the fruits of her womb, yet will I not forget you."
[Isaiah 49:15]
8. Let us therefore draw near unto Him, and say, "Truth, Lord; for even the
dogs eat of the crumbs which fall from their masters' table." [Matthew 15:27]
Let us draw near "in season, out of season:" or rather, one can never draw near