From Rome, July 18, 1556.

1 Androzzi was born in 1524 in Montecchio, in Macerata, and was a canon at Loreto when the Society established a house in that city (1554). He came to know Diego Laínez, made the Exercises under his direction, and then entered the Society in Rome in November 1555. Shortly thereafter he went to work in the province of Emilia. He died in Ferrara on August 27, 1575. 2 Ortensio was Fulvio Androzzi's brother. He was born in 1528, and became a Jesuit in Rome in March 1556, and was in Rome when Polanco was writing to Fulvio. He died in Rome on January 24, 1589. 3 Curzio was the youngest of the three Androzzi brothers who became Jesuits. He was born in 1536 and entered the Society in Loreto in April 1556, and was a novice at the time this letter was written. Curzio died in Brescia on June 13, 1584. 4 Giovanni Filippo Vito was Polanco's assistant. He was born in Messina in 1531, and became a Jesuit in February 1551. He came to Rome to study, and in April 1554 began working with Polanco. He was ordained the following year and died in Rome on April 8, 1558.

# 50. TO STEFANO CASANOVA

On Moderation in Mortification

Rome, July 20, 1556

Stefano Casanova 1 was a scholastic teaching in Tivoli. He was intent on the spiritual progress of his soul and, thus, practiced great mortification. The increasing physical weakness that he was beginning to feel, he attributed to the constant repression of his sensuality. Ignatius had been in correspondence with him but only this present letter has survived. Ignatius tells him that mortification would not be the sole cause of his increasing debility, and that there could be another, namely, intellectual over-work. This was true in Stefano's case, for there were some 120 students at the college in Tivoli and there was only one other teacher there besides Stefano. Ignatius tells him to follow the instructions he had given him in an earlier letter, and recalls that sensual motions that lead to sin must be repressed even if bodily weakness results. However, sensual motions toward something licit, and therefore not sinful, may be repressed out of love for the cross. But this second type of repression "is neither good for all, nor should it be used at all times." In fact, Ignatius goes on to say, it is sometimes more meritorious to take some honest bodily recreation so that the individual can work longer in God's service. Stefano is to continue repressing his sensuality if sin is in question, but not if it be of the second category. In writing to this young scholastic, less than two weeks before his own death, Ignatius is undoubtedly thinking of the penances that he himself had injudiciously practiced in the early days of his conversion and of the deleterious effect they had on him. This letter is one of spiritual insight and reveals the humaneness that was characteristic of Ignatius. The letter is in Italian [ Ep . 12:151-152].