recovers so many souls, both that now are and that shall be even until the coming
of Christ, what favor shall not that person reap from God! Raise thou a garrison
against the devil: for that is what the Church is. Thence as from headquarters let
the hands go forth to work: first let the people hold them up for prayers, and then
go their way to work. So shall there be vigor of body; so shall the tillage be
abundant; so shall all evil be kept aloof. It is not possible to represent in words
the pleasure thence arising, until it be realized. Look not to this, that it brings in
no revenue: if thou do it at all in this spirit, then do it not at all; if you account
not the revenue you get thence greater than from the whole estate beside; if you
be not thus affected, then let it alone; if you do not account this work to stand
you more in stead than any work beside. What can be greater than this revenue,
the gathering in of souls into the threshing-floor which is in heaven! Alas, that
you know not how much it is, to gain souls! Hear what Christ says to Peter,
"Feed My sheep." [John 21:15-17] If, seeing the emperor's sheep, or herd of
horses, by reason of having no fold or stable, exposed to depredation, thou were
to take them in hand, and build a fold or stables, or also provide a shepherd or
herdsman to take charge of them, what would not the emperor do for you in
return? Now, you gather the flock of Christ, and puttest a shepherd over them,
and do you think it is no great gain you are earning? But, if for offending even
one, a man shall incur so great a punishment, how can he that saves so many,
ever be punished? What sin will he have thenceforth? For, though he have it,
does not this blot it out? From the punishment threatened to him that offends,
learn the reward of him that saves. Were not the salvation of even one soul a
matter of great importance, to offend would not move God to so great anger.
Knowing these things, let us apply ourselves immediately to this spiritual work.
And let each invite me, and we will together help to the best of our ability. If
there be three joint-owners, let them do it by each bearing his part: if but one, he
will induce the others also that are near. Only be earnest to effect this, I beseech
you, that in every way being well-pleasing unto God, we may attain unto the
eternal blessings, by the grace and mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ with Whom to

the Father and the Holy Ghost together be glory, dominion, and honor, now and
ever world without end. Amen.

Homily 19 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts VIII. 26, 27
"And the Angel of the Lord spoke unto Philip, saying, arise and go toward
the south unto the way that goes down from Jerusalem unto Gaza, which is
desert. And he arose and went."
It seems to me, this (Philip) was one of the seven; for from Jerusalem he
would not have gone southwards, but to the north; but from Samaria it was
"towards the south. The same is desert:" so that there is no fear of an attack from
the Jews. And he did not ask, Wherefore? But "arose and went. And, behold," it
says, "a man of Ethiopia, an eunuch of great authority under Candace, queen of
the Ethiopians, who had the charge of all her treasure, and had come to
Jerusalem for to worship, was returning, and sitting in his chariot read Esaias
the prophet." (v. 27, 28.) High encomiums for the man, that he, residing in
Ethiopia and beset with so much business, and when there was no festival going
on, and living in that superstitious city, came "to Jerusalem for to worship."
Great also is his studiousness, that even "sitting in his chariot he read. And," it
says, "the Spirit said unto Philip, Go near, and join yourself to this chariot. And
Philip ran there to him, and heard him reading the prophet Esaias, and said, Do
you understand what you read? And he said, How can I, except some man
should guide me?" [Acts 8:29-31] Observe again his piety; that though he did
not understand, he read, and then after reading, examines. "And he desired Philip
that he would come up and sit with him. The place of the Scripture which he read
was this, He was led as a sheep to the slaughter; and like a lamb dumb before
his shearer, so opened He not His mouth: in His humiliation His judgment was
taken away: and who shall declare His generation? For His life is taken from the
earth. And the eunuch answered Philip, and said, I pray you, of whom speaks the
prophet this? Of himself, or of some other man? Then Philip opened his mouth,