which slept, arose," it is said, "and went into the holy city, and appeared to
many." For in order that what was done might not be accounted to be an
imagination, they appear, even to many, in the city. And the Centurion too then
glorified God, saying, "Truly this was a righteous man. And the multitudes that
came together to that sight, returned beating their breasts." [Luke 23:47-48] So
great was the power of the crucified, that after so many mockings, and scoffs,
and jeers, both the centurion was moved to compunction, and the people. And
some say that there is also a martyrdom of this centurion, who after these things
grew to manhood in the faith.
"And many women were there beholding afar off, which had followed Him,
ministering unto Him, Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James, and
Joses, and the mother of Zebedee's sons."
These things the women see done, these who were most inclined to feel for
Him, who were most of all bewailing Him. And mark how great their assiduity.
They had followed Him ministering to Him, and were present even unto the time
of the dangers. Wherefore also they saw all; how He cried, how He gave up the
ghost, how the rocks were rent, and all the rest.
And these first see Jesus; and the sex that was most condemned, this first
enjoys the sight of the blessings, this most shows its courage. And when the
disciples had fled, these were present. But who were these? His mother, for she
is called mother of James, and the rest. But another evangelist [Luke 22:48] says,
that many also lamented over the things that were done, and smote their breasts,
which above all shows the cruelty of the Jews, for that they gloried in things for
which others were lamenting, and were neither moved by pity, nor checked by
fear. For indeed the things that were done were of great wrath, and were not
merely signs, but signs of anger all of them, the darkness, the cloven rocks, the
veil rent in the midst, the shaking of the earth, and great was the excess of the
indignation.
"But Joseph went, and begged the body." This was Joseph, who was
concealing his discipleship of late; now however he had become very bold after

the death of Christ. For neither was he an obscure person, nor of the unnoticed;
but one of the council, and highly distinguished; from which circumstance
especially one may see his courage. For he exposed himself to death, taking
upon him enmity with all, by his affection to Jesus, both having dared to beg the
body, and not having desisted until he obtained it. But not by taking it only, nor
by burying it in a costly manner, but also by laying it in his own new tomb, he
shows his love, and his courage. And this was not so ordered without purpose,
but so there should not be any bare suspicion, that one had risen instead of
another.
"And there was Mary Magdalene, and the other Mary, sitting over against
the sepulchre." For what purpose do these wait by it? As yet they knew nothing
great, as was meet, and high about Him, wherefore also they had brought
ointments, and were waiting at the tomb, so that if the madness of the Jews
should relax, they might go and embrace the body. Do you see women's
courage? Do you see their affection? Do you see their noble spirit in money?
Their noble spirit even unto death?
Let us men imitate the women; let us not forsake Jesus in temptations. For
they for Him even dead spent so much and exposed their lives, but we (for again
I say the same things) neither feed Him when hungry, nor clothe Him when
naked, but seeing Him begging, we pass Him by. And yet if you saw Himself,
every one would strip himself of all his goods. But even now it is the same. For
He Himself has said, I am he. Wherefore then do you not strip yourself of all?
For indeed even now you hear Him say, You do it unto me; and there is no
difference whether you give to this man or to Him; you have nothing less than
these women that then fed Him, but even much more. But be not perplexed! For
it is not so much to have fed Him appearing in His own person, which would be
enough to prevail with a heart of stone, as (because of His mere word) to wait
upon the poor, the maimed, him that is bent down. For in the former case, the
look and the dignity of Him who appears divides with you that which is done;
but here the reward is entire for your benevolence; and there is the proof of the