way of standing, so that they who are perfectly upright, they stand. But they who
do not stand, cannot be upright, but are unstrung and disjointed. The luxurious
man does not stand upright, but is bent; so is the lewd man, and the lover of
money. He who knows how to stand will from his very standing, as from a sort
of foundation, find every part of the conflict easy to him.
"Stand therefore," says he, "having girded your loins with truth."
He is not speaking of a literal, physical girdle, for all the language in this
passage he employs in a spiritual sense. And observe how methodically he
proceeds. First he girds up his soldier. What then is the meaning of this? The
man that is loose in his life, and is dissolved in his lusts, and that has his
thoughts trailing on the ground, him he braces up by means of this girdle, not
suffering him to be impeded by the garments entangling his legs, but leaving him
to run with his feet well at liberty. "Stand therefore, having girded your loins,"
says he. By the "loins" here he means this; just what the keel is in ships, the
same are the loins with us, the basis or groundwork of the whole body: for they
are, as it were, a foundation, and upon them as the schools of the physicians tell
you, the whole frame is built. So then in "girding up the loins" he compacts the
foundation of our soul; for he is not of course speaking of these loins of our
body, but is discoursing spiritually: and as the loins are the foundation alike of
the parts both above and below, so is it also in the case of these spiritual loins.
Oftentimes, we know, when persons are fatigued, they put their hands there as if
upon a sort of foundation, and in that manner support themselves; and for this
reason it is that the girdle is used in war, that it may bind and hold together this
foundation, as it were, in our frame; for this reason too it is that when we run we
gird ourselves. It is this which guards our strength. Let this then, says he, be
done also with respect to the soul, and then in doing anything whatsoever we
shall be strong; and it is a thing most especially becoming to soldiers.
True, you may say, but these our natural loins we gird with a leathern band;
but we, spiritual soldiers, with what? I answer, with that which is the head and
crown of all our thoughts, I mean, "with truth." "Having girded your loins," says

he, "with truth." What then is the meaning of "with truth"? Let us love nothing
like falsehood, all our duties let us pursue "with truth," let us not lie one to
another. Whether it be an opinion, let us seek the truth, or whether it be a line of
life, let us seek the true one. If we fortify ourselves with this, if we "gird
ourselves with truth," then shall no one overcome us. He who seeks the doctrine
of truth, shall never fall down to the earth; for that the things which are not true
are of the earth, is evident from this, that all they that are without are enslaved to
the passions, following their own reasonings; and therefore if we are sober, we
shall need no instruction in the tales of the Greeks. Do you see how weak and
frivolous they are? Incapable of entertaining about God one severe thought or
anything above human reasoning? Why? Because they are not "girded about
with truth"; because their loins, the receptacle of the seed of life, and the main
strength of their reasonings, are ungirt; nothing then can be weaker than these.
And the Manicheans again, do you see, how all the things they have the boldness
to utter, are from their own reasonings? "It was impossible," say they, "for God
to create the world without matter." Whence is this so evident? These things they
say, groveling, and from the earth, and from what happens among ourselves;
because man, they say, cannot create otherwise. Marcion again, look what he
says. "God, if He took upon Him flesh, could not remain pure." Whence is this
evident? "Because," says he, "neither can men." But men are able to do this.
Valentinus again, with his reasonings all trailing along the ground, speaks the
things of the earth; and in like manner Paul of Samosata. And Arius, what does
he say? "It was impossible for God when He begot, to beget without passion."
Whence, Arius, have you the boldness to allege this; merely from the things
which take place among ourselves? Do you see how the reasonings of all these
trail along on the ground? All are, as it were, let loose and unconfined, and
savoring of the earth? And so much then for doctrines. With regard to life and
conduct, again, whoremongers, lovers of money, and of glory, and of everything
else, trail on the ground. They have not their loins themselves standing firm, so
that when they are weary they may rest upon them; but when they are weary,