FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.51, C.2.

grades of this disposition are becoming to different men in respect
of the individual nature. And this disposition may be either entirely
from nature, or partly from nature, and partly from an extrinsic
principle, as we have said of those who are healed by means of art.
But the habit which is a disposition to operation, and whose subject
is a power of the soul, as stated above (Question 50, Article 2), may
be natural whether in respect of the specific nature or in respect of
the individual nature: in respect of the specific nature, on the part of
the soul itself, which, since it is the form of the body, is the specific
principle; but in respect of the individual nature, on the part of the
body, which is the material principle. Yet in neither way does it
happen that there are natural habits in man, so that they be entirely
from nature. In the angels, indeed, this does happen, since they have
intelligible species naturally impressed on them, which cannot be
said of the human soul, as we have said in the FP, Question 55,
Article 2; FP, Question 84, Article 3.
There are, therefore, in man certain natural habits, owing their
existence, partly to nature, and partly to some extrinsic principle: in
one way, indeed, in the apprehensive powers; in another way, in the
appetitive powers. For in the apprehensive powers there may be a
natural habit by way of a beginning, both in respect of the specific
nature, and in respect of the individual nature. This happens with
regard to the specific nature, on the part of the soul itself: thus the
understanding of first principles is called a natural habit. For it is
owing to the very nature of the intellectual soul that man, having
once grasped what is a whole and what is a part, should at once
perceive that every whole is larger than its part: and in like manner
with regard to other such principles. Yet what is a whole, and what is
a part---this he cannot know except through the intelligible species
which he has received from phantasms: and for this reason, the
Philosopher at the end of the Posterior Analytics shows that
knowledge of principles comes to us from the senses.
But in respect of the individual nature, a habit of knowledge is
natural as to its beginning, in so far as one man, from the disposition
of his organs of sense, is more apt than another to understand well,
since we need the sensitive powers for the operation of the intellect.
In the appetitive powers, however, no habit is natural in its
beginning, on the part of the soul itself, as to the substance of the
habit; but only as to certain principles thereof, as, for instance, the

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.51, C.2.

principles of common law are called the "nurseries of virtue." The
reason of this is because the inclination to its proper objects, which
seems to be the beginning of a habit, does not belong to the habit,
but rather to the very nature of the powers.
But on the part of the body, in respect of the individual nature, there
are some appetitive habits by way of natural beginnings. For some
are disposed from their own bodily temperament to chastity or
meekness or such like.
Reply to Objection 1: This objection takes nature as divided against
reason and will; whereas reason itself and will belong to the nature
of man.
Reply to Objection 2: Something may be added even naturally to the
nature of a power, while it cannot belong to the power itself. For
instance, with regard to the angels, it cannot belong to the
intellective power itself capable of knowing all things: for thus it
would have to be the act of all things, which belongs to God alone.
Because that by which something is known, must needs be the
actual likeness of the thing known: whence it would follow, if the
power of the angel knew all things by itself, that it was the likeness
and act of all things. Wherefore there must needs be added to the
angels' intellective power, some intelligible species, which are
likenesses of things understood: for it is by participation of the
Divine wisdom and not by their own essence, that their intellect can
be actually those things which they understand. And so it is clear
that not everything belonging to a natural habit can belong to the
power.
Reply to Objection 3: Nature is not equally inclined to cause all the
various kinds of habits: since some can be caused by nature, and
some not, as we have said above. And so it does not follow that
because some habits are natural, therefore all are natural.