such a thing would not be voluntary: thus the sailor does not will the
casting of his cargo into the sea, considered universally and
absolutely, but on account of the threatened danger of his life, he
wills it. Wherefore this is voluntary rather than involuntary, as stated
in the same passage. Therefore universally and absolutely speaking
the angels do not will sin and the pains inflicted on its account: but
they do will the fulfilment of the ordering of Divine justice in this
matter, in respect of which some are subjected to pains and are
allowed to fall into sin.
Reply to Objection 1: These words of Isaias may be understood of
the angels, i.e. the messengers, of Ezechias, who wept on account of
the words of Rabsaces, as related Is. 37:2 seqq.: this would be the
literal sense. According to the allegorical sense the "angels of
peace" are the apostles and preachers who weep for men's sins. If
according to the anagogical sense this passage be expounded of the
blessed angels, then the expression is metaphorical, and signifies
that universally speaking the angels will the salvation of mankind:
for in this sense we attribute passions to God and the angels.
The reply to the second objection appears from what has been said.
Reply to Objection 3: Both in man's repentance and in man's sin
there is one reason for the angel's joy, namely the fulfilment of the
ordering of the Divine Providence.
Reply to Objection 4: The angels are brought into judgment for the
sins of men, not as guilty, but as witnesses to convict man of
weakness.

### ARTICLE 8. Whether there can be strife or discord among the

angels?
Objection 1: It would seem that there can be strife or discord among
the angels. For it is written (Job 25:2): "Who maketh peace in His
high places." But strife is opposed to peace. Therefore among the
high angels there is no strife.
Objection 2: Further, where there is perfect charity and just authority
there can be no strife. But all this exists among the angels. Therefore
there is no strife among the angels.
Objection 3: Further, if we say that angels strive for those whom they
guard, one angel must needs take one side, and another angel the
opposite side. But if one side is in the right the other side is in the
wrong. It will follow therefore, that a good angel is a compounder of
wrong; which is unseemly. Therefore there is no strife among good
angels.
On the contrary, It is written (Dan. 10:13): "The prince of the kingdom
of the Persians resisted me one and twenty days." But this prince of
the Persians was the angel deputed to the guardianship of the
kingdom of the Persians. Therefore one good angel resists the
others; and thus there is strife among them.
I answer that, The raising of this question is occasioned by this
passage of Daniel. Jerome explains it by saying that the prince of the
kingdom of the Persians is the angel who opposed the setting free of
the people of Israel, for whom Daniel was praying, his prayers being
offered to God by Gabriel. And this resistance of his may have been
caused by some prince of the demons having led the Jewish
captives in Persia into sin; which sin was an impediment to the
efficacy of the prayer which Daniel put up for that same people.
But according to Gregory (Moral. xvii), the prince of the kingdom of
Persia was a good angel appointed to the guardianship of that
kingdom. To see therefore how one angel can be said to resist
another, we must note that the Divine judgments in regard to various
kingdoms and various men are executed by the angels. Now in their
actions, the angels are ruled by the Divine decree. But it happens at
times in various kingdoms or various men there are contrary merits