men make the tongue an instrument, some of sin, others of righteousness! "Their
tongue is a sharp sword." But another speaks thus of his own tongue: "My
tongue is the pen of a ready writer." The former wrought destruction; the latter
wrote the divine law. Thus was one a sword, the other a pen, not according to its
own nature, but according to the choice of those who employed it. For the nature
of this tongue and of that was the same, but the operation was not the same. And
again, as to the mouth likewise, we may see this same thing. For these had a
mouth full of filth and of wickedness, therefore against such it is said by way of
accusation, "Their mouth is full of cursing and bitterness;" not such was his, but
"My mouth shall speak of wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of
understanding." Again, there were others who had their hands full of iniquity,
and accusing these he said, "Iniquities are in their hands, and their right hand is
filled with gifts." But he himself had hands practised in nothing but in being
stretched out towards heaven. Therefore he said of these too, "The lifting up of
my hands (let it be) an evening sacrifice." The same may also be perceived with
reference to the heart; for their heart indeed was foolish, but this man's was true;
hence he speaks of them thus, "Their heart is vain;" but of his own, "My heart is
inditing of a good matter." And as to the ear, one may see that the case is the
same; for some have a sense of hearing like that of beasts, which is not to be
charmed or moved to pity; and reproaching such the Psalmist says, "They are
like the deaf adder, that stops her ears." But his ear was the receptacle of the
divine words, and this he again makes manifest, when he says, "I will incline
mine ear to a parable, I will open my dark speech upon the harp."
12. Knowing these things then, let us fortify ourselves with virtue on all
sides, and thus we shall avert the wrath of God, and let us make the members of
the body instruments of righteousness; and let us discipline eyes, and mouth, and
hands, and feet, and heart, and tongue, and the whole body, to be employed only
in the service of virtue. And let us remember those three precepts, of which I
discoursed to your Charity, exhorting you to consider no one as an enemy, nor to
speak evil of any one of those who have aggrieved you; and to expel from your

mouth the evil custom of oaths. And with respect to the two former precepts, we
will discourse to you on another occasion; but we shall speak to you during the
whole of the present week respecting oaths; thus beginning with the easier
precept. For it is no labour at all to overcome the habit of swearing, if we would
but apply a little endeavour, by reminding each other; by advising; by observing;
and by requiring those who thus forget themselves, to render an account, and to
pay the penalty. For what advantage shall we gain by abstinence from meats, if
we do not also expel the evil habits of the soul? Lo, we have spent the whole of
this day fasting; and in the evening we shall spread a table, not such as we did on
yester-eve, but one of an altered and more solemn kind. Can any one of us then
say that he has changed his life too this day; that he has altered his ill custom, as
well as his food? Truly, I suppose not! Of what advantage then is our fasting?
Wherefore I exhort, and I will not cease to exhort, that undertaking each precept
separately, you should spend two or three days in the attainment of it; and just as
there are some who rival one another in fasting, and show a marvellous
emulation in it; (some indeed who spend two whole days without food; and
others who, rejecting from their tables not only the use of wine, and of oil, but of
every dish, and taking only bread and water, persevere in this practice during the
whole of Lent); so, indeed, let us also contend mutually with one another in
abolishing the frequency of oaths. For this is more useful than any fasting; this is
more profitable than any austerity. And this same care which we display in
abstaining from food, let us exhibit with respect to abstinence from oaths; since
we shall be chargeable with the reproach of extreme folly, while we regard not
things that are forbidden, and expend all our care upon things indifferent; for to
eat is not forbidden, but to swear is forbidden; we, however, abstaining from
those things that are permitted, daringly venture upon those things that are
forbidden! On this account I beseech your Charity to make some change, and to
let the beginning of it be visible from this day. For if we spend the whole of the
present fast with such zeal, having in this week attained the practice of not
swearing at all; and in the following having extinguished wrath; and in that