THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.5, C.5.

First, because it runs counter to the Gospel story, which relates how
He marveled (as is plain from Mt. 8:10). Now marveling cannot be
without reason, since it implies the collation of effect and cause, i.e.
inasmuch as when we see an effect and are ignorant of its cause, we
seek to know it, as is said Metaph. i, 2. Secondly, it is inconsistent
with the purpose of the Incarnation, which is the justification of man
from sin. For the human soul is not capable of sin nor of justifying
grace except through the mind. Hence it was especially necessary
for the mind to be assumed. Hence Damascene says (De Fide Orth.
iii, 6) that "the Word of God assumed a body and an intellectual and
rational soul," and adds afterwards: "The whole was united to the
whole, that He might bestow salvation on me wholly; for what was
not assumed is not curable." Thirdly, it is against the truth of the
Incarnation. For since the body is proportioned to the soul as matter
to its proper form, it is not truly human flesh if it is not perfected by
human, i.e. a rational soul. And hence if Christ had had a soul
without a mind, He would not have had true human flesh, but
irrational flesh, since our soul differs from an animal soul by the
mind alone. Hence Augustine says (Qq. lxxxiii, qu. 80) that from this
error it would have followed that the Son of God "took an animal with
the form of a human body," which, again, is against the Divine truth,
which cannot suffer any fictitious untruth.
Reply to Objection 1: Where a thing is by its presence, its image is
not required to supply the place of the thing, as where the emperor is
the soldiers do not pay homage to his image. Yet the image of a
thing is required together with its presence, that it may be perfected
by the presence of the thing, just as the image in the wax is
perfected by the impression of the seal, and as the image of man is
reflected in the mirror by his presence. Hence in order to perfect the
human mind it was necessary that the Word should unite it to
Himself.
Reply to Objection 2: The greater light dims the lesser light of
another luminous body; but it does not dim, rather it perfects the
light of the body illuminated---at the presence of the sun the light of
the stars is put out, but the light of the air is perfected. Now the
intellect or mind of man is, as it were, a light lit up by the light of the
Divine Word; and hence by the presence of the Word the mind of
man is perfected rather than overshadowed.
Reply to Objection 3: Although the intellective power is not the act of
a body, nevertheless the essence of the human soul, which is the

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.5, C.5.

form of the body, requires that it should be more noble, in order that
it may have the power of understanding; and hence it is necessary
that a better disposed body should correspond to it.