better than irony, when he declares that the teacher spoke beautifully, but what
he said, this he cannot tell. This has all the appearance of adulation. For when
indeed one has been hearing minstrels and players, it is no wonder if such be the
case with him, seeing he knows not how to utter the strain in the same manner:
but where the matter is not an exhibition of song or of voice, but the drift and
purport of thoughts and wise reflection ([φιλοσοφίας]), and it is easy for every
one to tell and report what was said, how can he but deserve the accusation, who
cannot tell what the matter was for which he praised the speaker? Nothing so
becomes a Church as silence and good order. Noise belongs to theatres, and
baths, and public processions, and market-places: but where doctrines, and such
doctrines, are the subject of teaching, there should be stillness, and quiet, and
calm reflection, and a haven of much repose ([φιλοσοφία καὶ πολὺς ὁ λιμήν]).
These things I beseech and entreat: for I go about in quest of ways by which I
shall be enabled to profit your souls. And no small way I take this to be: it will
profit not you only, but us also. So shall we not be carried away with pride ([ἐ]
[κτραχηλίζεσθαί]), not be tempted to love praises and honor, not be led to speak
those things which delight, but those which profit: so shall we lay the whole
stress of our time and diligence not upon arts of composition and beauties of
expression, but upon the matter and meaning of the thoughts. Go into a painter's
study, and you will observe how silent all is there. Then so ought it to be here:
for here too we are employed in painting portraits, royal portraits (every one of
them), none of any private man, by means of the colors of virtue— How now?
Applauding again? This is a reform not easy, but (only) by reason of long habit,
to be effected.— The pencil moreover is the tongue, and the Artist the Holy
Spirit. Say, during the celebration of the Mysteries, is there any noise? Any
disturbance? When we are baptizing ([βαπτιζώμεθα]), when we are doing all the
other acts? Is not all Nature decked (as it were) with stillness and silence? Over
all the face of heaven is scattered this charm (of repose).— On this account are
we evil spoken of even among the Gentiles, as though we did all for display and
ostentation. But if this be prevented, the love of the chief seats also will be

extinguished. It is sufficient, if any one be enamoured of praise, that he should
obtain it after having been heard, when all is gathered in. Yea, I beseech you, let
us establish this rule, that doing all things according to God's will, we may be
found worthy of the mercy which is from Him, through the grace and
compassion of His only begotten Son our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the
Father together with the Holy Spirit be glory, dominion, honor, now and ever,
world without end. Amen.