Because for this end, He left these things in your hand, in order "to give them
their meat in due season." But what means, "in due season?" To the needy, to the
hungry. For like as you gave to your fellow-servant to dispense, even so does the
Lord will you too to spend these things on what is needful. Therefore though He
was able to take them away from you, He left them, that you might have
opportunity to show forth virtue; that bringing us into need one of another, He
might make our love for one another more fervent.
But you, when you have received, so far from giving, dost even beat. And
yet if not to give be blame, what excuse is there for beating? But this, it seems to
me, He speaks, hinting at the insolent, and the covetous, and indicating the
charge to be heavy, when they beat them, whom they were commanded to feed.
5. But He seems to be here hinting also at those that live in luxury, since for
luxury too there is laid up a great punishment. "For He eats and drinks," it is
said, "with the drunken," pointing at gluttony. For not for this purpose did you
receive, that you should spend it on luxury, but that you should lay it out on
alms. What! Are they your own things which you have? With the goods of the
poor have you been entrusted, though thou be possessed of them by honest labor,
or though it be by inheritance from your father. What, could not God have taken
away these things from you? But He does not this, to give you power to be
liberal to the poor.
But mark thou, I pray you, how throughout all the parables He punishes
them that lay not out their money upon the needy. For neither had the virgins
robbed other men's goods, but they had not given their own; neither had he that
buried the one talent embezzled, but he had not doubled; neither are they that
overlooked the hungry punished, because they seized the possessions of others,
but because they did not lay out their own, like as also this servant.
Let us hearken, as many as please the belly, as many as lay out on costly
banquets the riches that pertain not at all to us, but belong to the needy. For do
not, because out of great love to man you are commanded to give as of yours,
therefore suppose these things to be indeed your own. He lent them to you, that

you might be able to approve yourself. Do not then suppose them to be yours,
when giving Him His own. For neither, if you had lent to any one, that he might
go and be able to find means of gain, would you say the money was his. To you
then also has God given, that you might traffic for Heaven. Make not then the
exceeding greatness of His love to man a cause of ingratitude.
Consider of what prayer it were a worthy object, to be able to find after
baptism a way to do away one's sins. If He had not said this, Give alms, how
many would have said, Would it were possible to give money, and so be freed
from the ills to come! But since this has become possible, again are they become
supine.
"But I give," you say. And what is this? You have not yet given as much as
she, who cast in the two mites; or rather not so much as the half, nor a very small
part of what she gave, but you lay out the greater part on useless expenses, on
banquets, and drunkenness, and extreme extravagance; now bidding, now
bidden; now spending, now constraining others to spend; so that the punishment
is even rendered twofold for you, both from what yourself doest, and what you
move others to do. See at any rate how He Himself blames His servant for this.
"For he eats," He says, "and drinks with the drunken." For not the drunken only,
but those that are with them, does He punish, and very fitly, because (together
with corrupting their own selves) they make light also of the salvation of others.
But nothing does so much provoke God, as for us to be inclined to overlook the
things that concern our neighbor. Wherefore showing His anger, He commands
him to be cut asunder. Therefore He also affirmed love to be a distinguishing
mark of His disciples, since it is altogether necessary that he who loves should
take thought for the things of his beloved.
To this way then let us hold, for this is especially the way that leads up to
Heaven, which renders men followers of Christ, which makes them, as far as
possible, like God. See at any rate how these virtues are more needful, which
have their dwelling by this way. And, if you will, let us make an inquiry into
them, and let us bring forth the sentences from the judgment of God.