John 10:19
"There was a division therefore among the Jews. And some said, He has a devil
(and is mad ). Others said, These are not the words of him that has a devil: can a
devil open the eyes of the blind?"
For because His words were greater than belonged to man, and not of
common use, they said that He had a devil, calling Him so now for the fourth
time. For they before had said, "You have a devil, who seeks to kill you?" [John
7:20]; and again, "Said we not well that you are a Samaritan, and hast a devil?"
[John 8:48]; and here, "He has a devil and is mad, why hear ye him?" Or rather
we should say, that He heard this not for the fourth time, but frequently. For to
ask, "Said we not well that you have a devil?" is a sign that they had said so not
twice or thrice, but many times. "Others said, These are not the words of him
that has a devil: can a devil open the eyes of the blind?" For since they could
not silence their opponents by words, they now brought proof from His works.
"Certainly neither are the words those of one that has a devil, yet if you are not
persuaded by the words, be ye shamed by the works. For if they are not the acts
of one that has a devil, and are greater than belong to man, it is quite clear that
they proceed from some divine power." Do you see the argument? That they were
greater than belonged to man is plain, from the Jews saying, "He has a devil";
that He had not a devil, He showed by what He did.
What then did Christ? He answered nothing to these things. Before this He
had replied, "I have not a devil"; but not so now; for since He had afforded proof
by His actions, He afterwards held His peace. For neither were they worthy of an
answer, who said that He was possessed of a devil, on account of those actions
for which they ought to have admired and deemed Him to be God. And how
were any farther refutations from Him needed, when they opposed and refuted
each other? Wherefore He was silent, and bore all mildly. And not for this reason
alone, but also to teach us all meekness and long-suffering.

4. Let us now imitate Him. For not only did He now hold His peace, but
even came among them again, and being questioned answered and showed the
things relating to His foreknowledge; and though called "demoniac" and
"madman," by men who had received from Him ten thousand benefits, and that
not once or twice but many times, not only did He refrain from avenging
Himself, but even ceased not to benefit them. To benefit, do I say? He laid down
His life for them, and while being crucified spoke in their behalf to His Father.
This then let us also imitate, for to be a disciple of Christ, is the being gentle and
kind. But whence can this gentleness come to us? If we continually reckon up
our sins, if we mourn, if we weep; for neither does a soul that dwells in the
company of so much grief endure to be provoked or angered. Since wherever
there is mourning, it is impossible that there should be anger; where grief is, all
anger is out of the way; where there is brokenness of spirit, there is no
provocation. For the mind, when scourged by sorrow, has not leisure to be
roused, but will groan bitterly, and weep yet more bitterly. I know that many
laugh on hearing these things, but I will not cease to lament for the laughers. For
the present is a time for mourning, and wailings, and lamentations, since we do
many sins both in word and deed, and hell awaits those who commit such
transgressions, and the river boiling with a roaring stream of fire, and
banishment from the Kingdom, which is the most grievous thing of all. When
these things then are threatened, tell me, do you laugh and bear you proudly?
And when your Lord is angered and threatening, do you stand careless, and do
you not fear lest by this thou light for yourself the furnace to a blaze? Do you not
hear what He cries out every day? "You saw Me an hungered, and gave Me no
meat; thirsty, and you gave Me no drink; depart ye into the fire prepared for the
devil and his angels." [Matthew 25] And these things He threatened every day.
"But," says some one, "I did give Him meat." When, and for how many days?
Ten or twenty? But He wills it not merely for so much time as this, but as much
as you spend upon earth. For the virgins also had oil, yet not sufficient for their
salvation; they too lighted their lamps, yet they were shut out from the