called healthy in so far as it is the sign of the animal's health. Thus
all names applied metaphorically to God, are applied to creatures
primarily rather than to God, because when said of God they mean
only similitudes to such creatures. For as "smiling" applied to a field
means only that the field in the beauty of its flowering is like the
beauty of the human smile by proportionate likeness, so the name of
"lion" applied to God means only that God manifests strength in His
works, as a lion in his. Thus it is clear that applied to God the
signification of names can be defined only from what is said of
creatures. But to other names not applied to God in a metaphorical
sense, the same rule would apply if they were spoken of God as the
cause only, as some have supposed. For when it is said, "God is
good," it would then only mean "God is the cause of the creature's
goodness"; thus the term good applied to God would included in its
meaning the creature's goodness. Hence "good" would apply
primarily to creatures rather than to God. But as was shown above
(Article 2), these names are applied to God not as the cause only, but
also essentially. For the words, "God is good," or "wise," signify not
only that He is the cause of wisdom or goodness, but that these exist
in Him in a more excellent way. Hence as regards what the name
signifies, these names are applied primarily to God rather than to
creatures, because these perfections flow from God to creatures; but
as regards the imposition of the names, they are primarily applied by
us to creatures which we know first. Hence they have a mode of
signification which belongs to creatures, as said above (Article 3).
Reply to Objection 1: This objection refers to the imposition of the
name.
Reply to Objection 2: The same rule does not apply to metaphorical
and to other names, as said above.
Reply to Objection 3: This objection would be valid if these names
were applied to God only as cause, and not also essentially, for
instance as "healthy" is applied to medicine.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether names which imply relation to creatures

are predicated of God temporally?
Objection 1: It seems that names which imply relation to creatures
are not predicated of God temporally. For all such names signify the
divine substance, as is universally held. Hence also Ambrose (De
Fide i) that this name "Lord" is the name of power, which is the
divine substance; and "Creator" signifies the action of God, which is
His essence. Now the divine substance is not temporal, but eternal.
Therefore these names are not applied to God temporally, but
eternally.
Objection 2: Further, that to which something applies temporally can
be described as made; for what is white temporally is made white.
But to make does no apply to God. Therefore nothing can be
predicated of God temporally.
Objection 3: Further, if any names are applied to God temporally as
implying relation to creatures, the same rule holds good of all things
that imply relation to creatures. But some names are spoken of God
implying relation of God to creatures from eternity; for from eternity
He knew and loved the creature, according to the word: "I have loved
thee with an everlasting love" (Jer. 31:3). Therefore also other names
implying relation to creatures, as "Lord" and "Creator," are applied
to God from eternity.
Objection 4: Further, names of this kind signify relation. Therefore
that relation must be something in God, or in the creature only. But it
cannot be that it is something in the creature only, for in that case
God would be called "Lord" from the opposite relation which is in
creatures; and nothing is named from its opposite. Therefore the
relation must be something in God also. But nothing temporal can be
in God, for He is above time. Therefore these names are not applied
to God temporally.
Objection 5: Further, a thing is called relative from relation; for
instance lord from lordship, as white from whiteness. Therefore if the
relation of lordship is not really in God, but only in idea, it follows
that God is not really Lord, which is plainly false.
Objection 6: Further, in relative things which are not simultaneous in