enable us thereby to return stronger to serious occupations: otherwise we should play
always, if play was sought for its own sake, which would be unbefitting. Therefore
the practical arts are ordained to the speculative, and all human activity has intellectual
speculation for its end. In all due ordination of sciences and arts, the character of final
end attaches to that science or art which issues precepts as master-builder to the rest:
thus the art of navigation, to which belongs the management of a ship, lays down
precepts for ship-building. In this relation Metaphysics (philosophia prima) stand to all
speculative sciences. On metaphysics they all depend, and from that science they
receive their principles and directions how to proceed against deniers of principles.

passage is suggested by Aristotle, Eth. Nic. X, vi, 6. St Thomas does not observe the
delight of the artist in the work of his hands, nor consider how few scholars study for
study's sake, nor generally how much of pure speculative interest is blended with
practice, and how much thinking is done for material gains. As Aristotle might have said,
to de kai theorountes demourgoumen kai pros lemmata theoroumen..

## CHAPTER XXVI--That Happiness does not consist in any Act of the Will

4. Everything has the truth of its nature by having the constituents of its substance: for a
real man differs from a painted one by the constituents of the substance of man. But
true happiness does not differ from false happiness in respect of the act of will: for the
will is in the same attitude of desire, or love, or delight, whatever the object proposed to
it for its sovereign good, true or false: but whether the object so proposed be the true
sovereign good or a counterfeit, that difference is decided by intellect. Happiness
therefore consists essentially in intellect rather than in any act of will.
5. If any act of will were happiness itself, that act would be either desire or love or
delight. Now it is impossible for desire to be the last end: for desire obtains inasmuch as
the will tends to something which it has not yet got: but such straining after the absent is
inconsistent with the idea of an achieved last end. Love again cannot be the last end:
for good is loved not only in its presence but also in its absence: for it is from love that
good not possessed is sought for by desire. And though the love of good already
attained is more perfect, that access of perfection is to be ascribed to the attainment
and established possession of the good loved. The attainment of good then, which is
the end, is a different thing from the love of good, which love is imperfect before
attainment, and perfect after attainment. In like manner neither is delight the last end:
for the very possession of good is the cause of delight, while we either feel the good
now possessed, or remember the good possessed before, or hope for the good to be
possessed in future: delight therefore is not the last end. No act of will therefore can be
the substance of happiness.
6. If delight were the last end, it would be desirable of itself. But that is false: for it
makes a difference what delight is desired, considering the object from which delight
ensues: for the delight which follows upon good and desirable activities is good and
desirable: but that which follows upon evil activities is evil and to be shunned. Delight
therefore has its goodness and desirability from something beyond itself. Therefore it is
not itself the final end, happiness.
7. The right order of things coincides with the order of nature, for natural things are
ordained to their end without mistakes. But in natural things delight is for activity, and
not the other way about: for we see that nature has attached delight to those activities of
animals which are manifestly ordained to necessary ends, as in the use of food, which
is ordained to the preservation of the individual, and in the intercourse of the sexes,
which is ordained to the preservation of the species: for if delight were not in
attendance, animals would abstain from the aforesaid necessary acts. It is impossible
therefore for delight to be the final end.
8. Delight seems to be nothing else than a rest of the will in some befitting good, as
desire is an inclination of the will to the gaining of some good. Now it is ridiculous to say
that the end of movement is not the coming to be in one's proper place, but the
satisfaction of the inclination whereby one tended to go there. If the principle aim of
nature were the satisfaction of the inclination, it would never give the inclination. It gives
the inclination, that thereby one may tend to one's proper place: when that end is