FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.52, C.2.

the subject its specific being. Nor again does the nature of a habit
include the notion of term, as do the species of numbers. Wherefore
there is nothing to hinder it from being susceptible of more or less.
Reply to Objection 3: Alteration is primarily indeed in the qualities of
the third species; but secondarily it may be in the qualities of the
first species: for, supposing an alteration as to hot and cold, there
follows in an animal an alteration as to health and sickness. In like
manner, if an alteration take place in the passions of the sensitive
appetite, or the sensitive powers of apprehension, an alteration
follows as to science and virtue (Phys. viii, text. 20).

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.52, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether habits increases by addition?

Objection 1: It would seem that the increase of habits is by way of
addition. For the word "increase," as we have said, is transferred to
forms, from corporeal quantities. But in corporeal quantities there is
no increase without addition: wherefore (De Gener. i, text. 31) it is
said that "increase is an addition to a magnitude already existing."
Therefore in habits also there is no increase without addition.
Objection 2: Further, habit is not increased except by means of some
agent. But every agent does something in the passive subject: for
instance, that which heats, causes heat in that which is heated.
Therefore there is no increase without addition.
Objection 3: Further, as that which is not white, is in potentiality to
be white: so that which is less white, is in potentiality to be more
white. But that which is not white, is not made white except by the
addition of whiteness. Therefore that which is less white, is not made
more white, except by an added whiteness.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Phys. iv, text. 84): "That
which is hot is made hotter, without making, in the matter,
something hot, that was not hot, when the thing was less hot."
Therefore, in like manner, neither is any addition made in other
forms when they increase.
I answer that, The solution of this question depends on what we
have said above (Article 1). For we said that increase and decrease
in forms which are capable of intensity and remissness, happen in
one way not on the part of the very form considered in itself, through
the diverse participation thereof by the subject. Wherefore such
increase of habits and other forms, is not caused by an addition of
form to form; but by the subject participating more or less perfectly,
one and the same form. And just as, by an agent which is in act,
something is made actually hot, beginning, as it were, to participate
a form, not as though the form itself were made, as is proved in
Metaph. vii, text. 32, so, by an intense action of the agent, something
is made more hot, as it were participating the form more perfectly,
not as though something were added to the form.
For if this increase in forms were understood to be by way of