not from want of hope only, but also from faintheartedness, and want of
patience, not from condemning him who made the promise.
"For God" (he says) "is not unrighteous to forget your love" and the zeal
"which you have showed toward His Name, in that you have ministered unto the
saints, and do minister." He testifies great things of them, not deeds only; but
deeds done with alacrity, which he says also in another place, "and not only so,
but they gave themselves also to the Lord and to us." [2 Corinthians 8:5]
"Which" (he says) "you have showed toward His Name, in that you have
ministered to the saints, and do minister." See how again he soothes them, by
adding "and do minister." Still even at this time (he says) you are ministering,
and he raises them up by showing that they had done [what they did] not to them
[the saints], but to God. "Which you have showed" (he says); and he said not
"unto the saints," but "towards God," for this is "toward His Name." It is for His
Name's sake (he means) that you have done all. He therefore who has the
enjoyment from you of so great zeal and love, will never despise you nor forget
you.
7. Hearing these things, let us, I beseech you, "minister to the saints." For
every believer is a saint in that he is a believer. Though he be a person living in
the world, he is a saint. "For" (he says) "the unbelieving husband is sanctified by
the wife, and the unbelieving wife by the husband." [1 Corinthians 7:14] See how
the faith makes the saintship. If then we see even a secular person in misfortune,
let us stretch out a hand [to him]. Let us not be zealous for those only who dwell
in the mountains; they are indeed saints both in manner of life and in faith; these
others however are saints by their faith, and many of them also in manner of life.
Let us not, if we see a monk [cast] into prison, in that case go in; but if it be a
secular person, refuse to go in. He also is a saint and a brother.
What then (you say) if he be unclean and polluted? Listen to Christ saying,
"Judge not that you be not judged." [Matthew 7:1] Do thou act for God's sake.
Nay, what am I saying? Even if we see a heathen in misfortune, we ought to
show kindness to him, and to every man without exception who is in

misfortunes, and much more to a believer who is in the world. Listen to Paul,
saying, "Do good unto all men, but especially to those who are of the household
of faith." [Galatians 6:10]
But I know not whence this [notion] has been introduced, or whence this
custom has prevailed. For he that only seeks after the solitaries, and is willing to
do good to them alone, and with regard to others on the contrary is over-curious
in his enquiries, and says, 'unless he be worthy, unless he be righteous, unless he
work miracles, I stretch out no hand'; [such an one] has taken away the greater
part of charity, yea and in time he will in turn destroy the very thing itself. And
yet that is charity, [which is shown] towards sinners, towards the guilty. For this
is charity, not the pitying those who have done well, but those who have done
wrong.
8. And that you may understand this, listen to the Parable: "A certain man"
(it is said) "went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell among thieves" [Luke
10:30, etc.]; and when they had beaten him, they left him by the way-side,
having badly bruised him. A certain Levite came, and when he saw him, he
passed by; A priest came, and when he saw him, he hastened past; a certain
Samaritan came, and bestowed great care upon him. For he "bound up his
wounds" [Luke 10:34], dropped oil on them, set him upon his ass, "brought him
to the inn, said to the host, Take care of him" [Luke 10:35]; and (observe his
great liberality), "and I," he says, "will give you whatsoever you shall expend."
Who then is his neighbor? "He," it is said, "that showed mercy on him. Go then
also," He says, "and do likewise." [Luke 10:37] And see what a parable He
spoke. He said not that a Jew did [so and so] to a Samaritan, but that a Samaritan
showed all that liberality. Having then heard these things, let us not care only for
"those that are of the household of faith" [Galatians 6:10], and neglect others. So
then also thou, if you see any one in affliction, be not curious to enquire further.
His being in affliction involves a just claim on your aid. For if when you see an
ass choking you raise him up, and dost not curiously enquire whose he is, much
more about a man one ought not to be over-curious in enquiring whose he is. He