FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.30, C.3.

specifically.
Now the nature of the motive power of the end or of the good, differs
according as it is really present, or absent: because, according as it
is present, it causes the faculty to find rest in it; whereas, according
as it is absent, it causes the faculty to be moved towards it.
Wherefore the object of sensible pleasure causes love, inasmuch as,
so to speak, it attunes and conforms the appetite to itself; it causes
concupiscence, inasmuch as, when absent, it draws the faculty to
itself; and it causes pleasure, inasmuch as, when present, it makes
the faculty to find rest in itself. Accordingly, concupiscence is a
passion differing "in species" from both love and pleasure. But
concupiscences of this or that pleasurable object differ "in number."
Reply to Objection 1: Pleasurable good is the object of
concupiscence, not absolutely, but considered as absent: just as the
sensible, considered as past, is the object of memory. For these
particular conditions diversify the species of passions, and even of
the powers of the sensitive part, which regards particular things.
Reply to Objection 2: In the passage quoted we have causal, not
essential predication: for covetousness is not essentially love, but
an effect of love. We may also say that Augustine is taking
covetousness in a wide sense, for any movement of the appetite in
respect of good to come: so that it includes both love and hope.
Reply to Objection 3: The passion which is directly contrary to
concupiscence has no name, and stands in relation to evil, as
concupiscence in regard to good. But since, like fear, it regards the
absent evil; sometimes it goes by the name of fear, just as hope is
sometimes called covetousness. For a small good or evil is reckoned
as though it were nothing: and consequently every movement of the
appetite in future good or evil is called hope or fear, which regard
good and evil as arduous.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.30, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether some concupiscences are natural, and

some not natural?
Objection 1: It would seem that concupiscences are not divided into
those which are natural and those which are not. For concupiscence
belongs to the animal appetite, as stated above (Article 1, ad 3). But
the natural appetite is contrasted with the animal appetite. Therefore
no concupiscence is natural.
Objection 2: Further, material differences makes no difference of
species, but only numerical difference; a difference which is outside
the purview of science. But if some concupiscences are natural, and
some not, they differ only in respect of their objects; which amounts
to a material difference, which is one of number only. Therefore
concupiscences should not be divided into those that are natural
and those that are not.
Objection 3: Further, reason is contrasted with nature, as stated in
Phys. ii, 5. If therefore in man there is a concupiscence which is not
natural, it must needs be rational. But this is impossible: because,
since concupiscence is a passion, it belongs to the sensitive
appetite, and not to the will, which is the rational appetite. Therefore
there are no concupiscences which are not natural.
On the contrary, The Philosopher (Ethic. iii, 11 and Rhetor. i, 11)
distinguishes natural concupiscences from those that are not
natural.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), concupiscence is the
craving for pleasurable good. Now a thing is pleasurable in two
ways. First, because it is suitable to the nature of the animal; for
example, food, drink, and the like: and concupiscence of such
pleasurable things is said to be natural. Secondly, a thing is
pleasurable because it is apprehended as suitable to the animal: as
when one apprehends something as good and suitable, and
consequently takes pleasure in it: and concupiscence of such
pleasurable things is said to be not natural, and is more wont to be
called "cupidity."
Accordingly concupiscences of the first kind, or natural
concupiscences, are common to men and other animals: because to