the fact that they belong to genera and species comprised in the
predicament of substance, but not because the species and genera
themselves subsist; except in the opinion of Plato, who asserted that
the species of things subsisted separately from singular things. To
substand, however, belongs to the same individual things in relation
to the accidents, which are outside the essence of genera and
species.
Reply to Objection 5: The individual composed of matter and form
substands in relation to accident from the very nature of matter.
Hence Boethius says (De Trin.): "A simple form cannot be a subject."
Its self-subsistence is derived from the nature of its form, which
does not supervene to the things subsisting, but gives actual
existence to the matter and makes it subsist as an individual. On this
account, therefore, he ascribes hypostasis to matter, and ousiosis,
or subsistence, to the form, because the matter is the principle of
substanding, and form is the principle of subsisting.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the word "person" should be said of

God?
Objection 1: It would seem that the name "person" should not be
said of God. For Dionysius says (Div. Nom.): "No one should ever
dare to say or think anything of the supersubstantial and hidden
Divinity, beyond what has been divinely expressed to us by the
oracles." But the name "person" is not expressed to us in the Old or
New Testament. Therefore "person" is not to be applied to God.
Objection 2: Further, Boethius says (De Duab. Nat.): "The word
person seems to be taken from those persons who represented men
in comedies and tragedies. For person comes from sounding
through [personando], since a greater volume of sound is produced
through the cavity in the mask. These "persons" or masks the
Greeks called prosopa, as they were placed on the face and covered
the features before the eyes." This, however, can apply to God only
in a metaphorical sense. Therefore the word "person" is only applied
to God metaphorically.
Objection 3: Further, every person is a hypostasis. But the word
"hypostasis" does not apply to God, since, as Boethius says (De
Duab. Nat.), it signifies what is the subject of accidents, which do not
exist in God. Jerome also says (Ep. ad Damas.) that, "in this word
hypostasis, poison lurks in honey." Therefore the word "person"
should not be said of God.
Objection 4: Further, if a definition is denied of anything, the thing
defined is also denied of it. But the definition of "person," as given
above, does not apply to God. Both because reason implies a
discursive knowledge, which does not apply to God, as we proved
above (Question 14, Article 12); and thus God cannot be said to have
"a rational nature." And also because God cannot be called an
individual substance, since the principle of individuation is matter;
while God is immaterial: nor is He the subject of accidents, so as to
be called a substance. Therefore the word "person" ought not to be
attributed to God.
On the contrary, In the Creed of Athanasius we say: "One is the
person of the Father, another of the Son, another of the Holy Ghost."