Since the Holy Spirit proceeds from both Father and Son, "the Father and
Son are a beginning (principium) of the Holy Spirit, not two beginnings."
V. xiv. 15. Compare also V. xiii.; X. iv.; and annotations pp. Augustin
employs this term "beginning" only in relation to the person, not to the
essence. There is no "beginning," or source, when the essence itself is
spoken of. Consequently, the "subordination" (implied in a "beginning"
by generation and spiration) is not the Arian subordination, as to essence,
but the trinitarian subordination, as to person and relation.
Augustin starts with the assumption that man was made in the image of
the triune God, the God of revelation not in the image of the God of
natural religion, or the untriune deity of the nations. Consequently, it is
to be expected that a trinitarian analogue can be found in his mental
constitution. If man is God's image, he will show traces of it in every
respect. All acknowledge that the Divine unity, and all the communicable
attributes, have their finite correspondants in the unity and attributes of
the human mind. But the Latin father goes further than this. This, in his
view, is not the whole of the Divine image. When God says, "Let us make
man in our image, after our likeness" (Gen. 1:26), Augustin understands
these words to be spoken by the Trinity, and of the Trinity—by and of the
true God, the God of revelation: the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, one
God. He denies that this is merely the pluralis excellentiæ, and that the
meaning of these words would be expressed by a change of the plural to
the singular, and to the reading, "Let me make man in my image, after my
likeness." "For if the Father alone had made man without the Son, it
would not have been written, 'Let us make man in our image, after our
likeness.' " City of God XVI. vi.; Trinity I. vii. 14. In Augustin's opinion,
the Old Testament declaration that God is a unity, does not exclude the
New Testament declaration that he is a trinity. "For" says he, "that which
is written, 'Hear O Israel: the Lord our God is one Lord' ought certainly
not to be understood as if the Son were excepted, or the Holy Spirit were
excepted; which one Lord our God we rightly call our Father, as
regenerating us by his grace." Trinity V. xi. 12. How far Moses understood
the full meaning of the Divine communication and instruction, is one
thing. Who it really and actually was that made the communication to
him, is another. Even if we assume, though with insufficient reason for so
doing, that Moses himself had no intimation of the Trinity, it does not

follow that it was not the Trinity that inspired him, and all the Hebrew
prophets. The apostle Peter teaches that the Old Testament inspiration
was a Trinitarian inspiration, when he says that "the prophets who
prophesied of the grace that should come, searched what the Spirit of
Christ which was in them did signify, when it testified beforehand of the
sufferings of Christ, and the glory that should follow." (1 Pet. 1:10, 11).
In asserting, however, that an image of the Trinity exists in man's nature,
Augustin is careful to observe that it is utterly imperfect and inadequate.
He has no thought or expectation of clearing up the mystery by any
analogy whatever. He often gives expression to his sense of the
inscrutability and incomprehensibility of the Supreme Being, in language
of the most lowly and awe-struck adoration. "I pray to our Lord God
himself, of whom we ought always to think, and yet of whom we are not
able to think worthily, and whom no speech is sufficient to declare, that
He will grant me both help for understanding and explaining that which I
design, and pardon if in anything I offend." V. i. 1. "O Lord the one God,
God the Trinity, whatever I have said in these books that is of Thine, may
they acknowledge who are Thine; if anything of my own, may it be
pardoned both by Thee and by those who are Thine. Amen." XV. xxviii.
Augustin's method in this work is (1.) The exegetical; (2.) The rational. He
first deduces the doctrine of the Trinity from Scripture, by a careful
collation and combination of the texts, and then defends it against
objections, and illustrates it by the analogies which he finds in nature
generally, and in the human mind particularly. The Scripture argument is
contained in the first seven books; the rational in the last eight. The first
part is, of course, the most valuable of the two. Though the reader may
not be able to agree with Augustin in his interpretation of some Scripture
passages, particularly some which he cites from the Old Testament, he
will certainly be impressed by the depth, acumen, and accuracy with
which the Latin father reaches and exhausts the meaning of the
acknowledged trinitarian texts. Augustin lived in an age when the
Scriptures and the Greek and Roman classics were nearly all that the
student had, upon which to expend his intellectual force. There was
considerable metaphysics, it is true, but no physics, and little
mathematics. There was consequently a more undivided and exclusive