7): Having found one precious pearl, he went and sold all that he had, and acquired it
(Matt. xiii, 46): the advantages that I had I considered as dirt, that I might gain Christ
(Philip. iii, 8).
Since then the three counsels aforesaid are dispositions to perfection, and effects of
perfection, and signs of the same, they who make the three corresponding vows to God
are properly said to be in a state of perfection. The perfection to which they dispose the
mind consists in the free converse of the soul with God. Hence they who make
profession of the aforesaid vows are called `religious,' as dedicating themselves and all
that is theirs to God by a manner of sacrifice, extending to property by poverty, to the
body by continence, and to the will by obedience: for religion consists in the worship of
God (Chap.CXIX).

CHAPTERS CXXXII, CXXXV--Arguments against Voluntary Poverty, with Replies
THERE have been found persons to condemn voluntary poverty, thereby going against
the teaching of the gospel, Of these Vigilantius was the first. He has had imitators, men
making themselves out to be doctors of the law, not understanding either what they say
or about what they affirm (1 Tim. i, 7). They have been led by these and the like
reasons.
Arg. 1. Animals that cannot find the necessaries of life at any time of the year, have a
natural instinct for gathering such necessaries at a time when they can be found, and
laying them up, as we see in bees and ants. But men need many things for the
preservation of their life, which cannot be found any time. Therefore man has a natural
tendency to gather together and lay up such things, and it is against the law of nature to
scatter them again.
Reply. Still it is not necessary for every one to be busy with this task of gathering: as
even among bees not all have the same duty, some gather honey, others make cells
out of wax, -- to say nothing of the queen-bees being exempt from all such occupations.
And so it must be with men: for many things being necessary to human life, for which
one man by himself cannot suffice, different functions have to be undertaken by
different men, -- some have to labour in the fields, some to tend cattle, and some to
build. And because human life needs not only corporal but also spiritual aids, some
have to devote themselves to spiritual things for the benefit of the rest; and these
persons should be set free from the care of temporals.
Arg. 2. As every one is bound by natural law to preserve his life, so also his exterior
substance, as being the means whereby life is preserved.
Reply. For them who relinquish temporal things there still remains every likelihood and
hope of finding the sustenance necessary for life, either through their own labour, or the
benefactions of others, whether in the shape of possessions held in common or of food
daily given: for what we can do through our friends, in a manner we can do of ourselves,
as the Philosopher says (Eth. Nic. VIII, xi).
Arg. 3. Man is by nature a social animal. But society cannot be maintained among men
except on a system of mutual aid. To take their part in this system of aid they render
themselves incapable, who fling away their exterior substance.
Reply. It is a greater thing to aid another in spirituals than in temporals, spiritual things
being the more necessary to the end of final happiness. Hence he who by voluntary
poverty strips himself of the ability to aid others in temporals, in order to the
acquirement of spiritual good, whereby he may aid others to better advantage, does
nothing against the good of human society.
Arg. 4. If it is an evil thing to have worldly substance, a good thing to rid neighbours of
evil, and an evil thing to lead them into evil, it follows that to give any of the substance of