Since, moreover, genus is the principle for knowableness of a thing, inasmuch as it is the first
part of a definition, though matter in itself is unknowable, it is not possible that from matter in se
diversity of genus should be known, but only according to that mode by which it is knowable.
Now, a thing is knowable in two ways. (1) In one way, by analogy, or by comparison, as is said

in I Physic. Thus we say that this is matter or that matter is related to natural things as wood is to
a couch. (2) In another way, a thing is known by the form because of which it has actual being.
For everything is known inasmuch as it is in act, not according as it is in potency, as is said in X
Metaph.

According to this aspect, diversity of genus derives from matter in two ways. (1) In one way, by
analogous diversity in relation to form, and thus the first genera of things are distinguished
according to matter. For what is in the genus of substance is referred to matter as to a part of
itself; but what is in the genus of quantity has no matter as a part of itself, but is related to it as its
measure, and quality is related as its disposition. And by means of these two genera (namely,
quantity and quality), all other genera are diversely related to matter, which is a part of substance;
hence substance has the nature of a subject and as such has a certain relation to accidents. (2) In
another way, diversity of genus has its, origin in matter inasmuch as matter is perfected by form.
And since matter is pure potency, just as God is Pure Act, to say that matter is perfected by act
(which is form) is to say nothing else than that in some way it shares in a certain similitude to
First Act, imperfectly indeed, since what is composed of matter and form is midway between
pure potency and pure act.

Moreover, matter does not receive similitude to First Act in an altogether equal way, but in some
things it is received imperfectly and in others more perfectly; thus, for example, some beings
participate in a divine similitude inasmuch only as they subsist; others, in that they have
knowledge; and still others, by possession of intellect. Therefore what is the similitude of First
Act in any existing matter is its form. But in some beings this form causes it only to exist, in
others to exist and to live, and so, in one and the same being, form may be the cause of other
perfections. For what is the more perfect similitude has everything that less perfect similitudes
have by way of perfections, and more besides. Something common, therefore, may be found in
various similitudes, but possessed more imperfectly in some and more perfectly in cothers; just
as matter may be subjected to both act and privation. And so matter, once taken together with this
common element, is still material in regard to the aforementioned perfection and imperfection.
From this material element it takes its genus, but its difference is from the perfection or
imperfection of which we spoke above. For example, frorp this common material element
(namely, having life), there is derived the genus "animated body"; but because of a superadded
perfection there derives the difference "sensible," while, on the other hand, from imperfection
there is derived the difference "insensible." Thus the diversity of such material things brings
about diversity of genus, as that between animal and plant. On this account matter is said to be
the principle of diversity according to genus, and in the same way, form is the principle of
diversity according to species; because it is by reason of formal qualities which material things
possess in addition to those which are the cause of their genus as material things, or by relation
of form to matter, that the differences constituting species are derived.