SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.46, C.3.

it is about human good, and this is not the best thing of all. And so it
is stated significantly that "prudence is wisdom for man," but not
wisdom absolutely.
Reply to Objection 2: Ambrose, and Tully also (De Invent. ii, 53) take
the word prudence in a broad sense for any human knowledge,
whether speculative or practical. And yet it may also be replied that
the act itself of the speculative reason, in so far as it is voluntary, is
a matter of choice and counsel as to its exercise; and consequently
comes under the direction of prudence. On the other hand, as
regards its specification in relation to its object which is the
"necessary true," it comes under neither counsel nor prudence.
Reply to Objection 3: Every application of right reason in the work of
production belongs to art: but to prudence belongs only the
application of right reason in matters of counsel, which are those
wherein there is no fixed way of obtaining the end, as stated in Ethic.
iii, 3. Since then, the speculative reason makes things such as
syllogisms, propositions and the like, wherein the process follows
certain and fixed rules, consequently in respect of such things it is
possible to have the essentials of art, but not of prudence; and so we
find such a thing as a speculative art, but not a speculative
prudence.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.46, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether prudence takes cognizance of singulars?

Objection 1: It would seem that prudence does not take cognizance
of singulars. For prudence is in the reason, as stated above (Articles
1,2). But "reason deals with universals," according to Phys. i, 5.
Therefore prudence does not take cognizance except of universals.
Objection 2: Further, singulars are infinite in number. But the reason
cannot comprehend an infinite number of things. Therefore prudence
which is right reason, is not about singulars.
Objection 3: Further, particulars are known by the senses. But
prudence is not in a sense, for many persons who have keen
outward senses are devoid of prudence. Therefore prudence does
not take cognizance of singulars.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. vi, 7) that "prudence
does not deal with universals only, but needs to take cognizance of
singulars also."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1, ad 3), to prudence belongs
not only the consideration of the reason, but also the application to
action, which is the end of the practical reason. But no man can
conveniently apply one thing to another, unless he knows both the
thing to be applied, and the thing to which it has to be applied. Now
actions are in singular matters: and so it is necessary for the prudent
man to know both the universal principles of reason, and the
singulars about which actions are concerned.
Reply to Objection 1: Reason first and chiefly is concerned with
universals, and yet it is able to apply universal rules to particular
cases: hence the conclusions of syllogisms are not only universal,
but also particular, because the intellect by a kind of reflection
extends to matter, as stated in De Anima iii.
Reply to Objection 2: It is because the infinite number of singulars
cannot be comprehended by human reason, that "our counsels are
uncertain" (Wis. 9:14). Nevertheless experience reduces the infinity
of singulars to a certain finite number which occur as a general rule,
and the knowledge of these suffices for human prudence.