We have learned, too, not the sounds, but the meanings of the words
themselves, partly through the sense of the body, partly through the
reason of the mind. Nor have we now heard those words for the first time,
but they are words we had heard before. And we were retaining in our
memory as things known, and we here recognized, not only the words
themselves, but also what they meant. For when the bisyllabic word
mundus is uttered, then something that is certainly corporeal, for it is a
sound, has become known through the body, that is, through the ear. But
that which it means also, has become known through the body, that is,
through the eyes of the flesh. For so far as the world is known to us at all,
it is known through sight. But the quadri-syllabic word crediderunt
reaches us, so far as its sound, since that is a corporeal thing, through the
ear of the flesh; but its meaning is discoverable by no sense of the body,
but by the reason of the mind. For unless we knew through the mind
what the word crediderunt meant, we should not understand what they
did not do, of whom it is said, "And His own received Him not." The
sound then of the word rings upon the ears of the body from without, and
reaches the sense which is called hearing. The species also of man is both
known to us in ourselves, and is presented to the senses of the body from
without, in other men; to the eyes, when it is seen; to the ears, when it is
heard; to the touch, when it is held and touched; and it has, too, its image
in our memory, incorporeal indeed, but like the body. Lastly, the
wonderful beauty of the world itself is at hand from without, both to our
gaze, and to that sense which is called touch, if we come in contact with
any of it: and this also has its image within in our memory, to which we
revert, when we think of it either in the enclosure of a room, or again in
darkness. But we have already sufficiently spoken in the eleventh book of
these images of corporeal things; incorporeal indeed, yet having the
likeness of bodies, and belonging to the life of the outer man. But we are
treating now of the inner man, and of his knowledge, namely, that
knowledge which is of things temporal and changeable; into the purpose
and scope of which, when anything is assumed, even of things belonging
to the outer man, it must be assumed for this end, that something may
thence be taught which may help rational knowledge. And hence the
rational use of those things which we have in common with irrational
animals belongs to the inner man; neither can it rightly be said that this is
common to us with the irrational animals.

### CHAP. 2.—FAITH A THING OF THE HEART, NOT OF THE BODY; HOW IT IS COMMON AND ONE AND THE SAME IN ALL BELIEVERS. THE FAITH OF BELIEVERS IS ONE, NO OTHERWISE THAN THE WILL OF THOSE WHO WILL IS ONE.