John 5:26
"For as the Father has life in Himself, so has He given to the Son to have life in
Himself."
3. Do you see that this declares a perfect likeness save in one point, which
is the One being a Father, and the Other a Son? For the expression "has given,"
merely introduces this distinction, but declares that all the rest is equal and
exactly alike. Whence it is clear that the Son does all things with as much
authority and power as the Father, and that He is not empowered from some
other source, for He "has life" so as the Father has. And on this account, what
comes after is straightway added, that from this we may understand the other
also. What is this then? It is,

John 5:27
"Hath given Him authority to execute judgment also."
And wherefore does He continually dwell upon "resurrection" and
"judgment"? For He says, "As the Father raises up the dead and quickens them,
even so the Son quickens whom He will": and again, "the Father judges no man,
but has committed all judgment to the Son": and again, "As the Father has life in
Himself so has He given to the Son to have life in Himself"; and again, "They
that have heard [the Voice of the Son of God] shall live"; and here again, "Hath
given to Him authority to execute judgment." Wherefore does He dwell on these
things continually? I mean, on "judgment," and "life," and "resurrection"? It is
because these subjects are able most of any to attract even the obstinate hearer.
For the man who is persuaded that he shall both rise again and shall give account
to Christ of his transgressions, even though he have seen no other sign, yet
having admitted this, will surely run to Him to propitiate his Judge.

John 5:28
"That He is the Son of Man, marvel not at this."
Paul of Samosata renders it not so; but how? "Hath given Him authority to
execute judgment, 'because' He is the Son of Man." Now the passage thus read is
inconsequent, for He did not receive judgment "because" He was man, (since
then what hindered all men from being judges,) but because He is the Son of that
Ineffable Essence, therefore is He Judge. So we must read, "That He is the Son
of Man, marvel not at this." For when what He said seemed to the hearers
inconsistent, and they deemed Him nothing more than mere man, while His
words were greater than suited man, yea, or even angel, and were proper to God
only, to solve this objection He adds,

John 5:28-29
"Marvel not [that He is the Son of Man, ] for the hour is coming in the which
they that are in the tombs shall hear His voice and shall go forth, they that have
done good to the resurrection of life, and they that have done evil to the
resurrection of judgment."
And wherefore said He not, "Marvel not that He is the Son of Man, for He
is also the Son of God," but rather mentioned the "resurrection"? He did indeed
put this above, by saying, "shall hear the Voice of the Son of God." And if here
He is silent on the matter, wonder not; for after mentioning a work which was
proper to God, He then permits His hearers to collect from it that He was God,
and the Son of God. For had this been continually asserted by Himself, it would
at that time have offended them, but when proved by the argument of miracles, it
rendered His doctrine less burdensome. So they who put together syllogisms,
when having laid down their premises they have fairly proved the point in
question, frequently do not draw the conclusion themselves, but to render their
hearers more fairly disposed, and to make their victory more evident, cause the
opponent himself to give the verdict, so that the by-standers may the rather agree
with them when their opponents decide in their favor. When therefore He
mentioned the resurrection of Lazarus, He spoke not of the Judgment (for it was
not for this that Lazarus arose); but when He spoke generally He also added, that
"they that have done good shall go forth unto the resurrection of life, and they
that have done evil unto the resurrection of judgment." Thus also John led on his
hearers by speaking of the Judgment, and that "he that believes not on the Son,
shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him" [John 3:36]: so too
Himself led on Nicodemus: "He that believes in the Son," He said to him, "is not
judged, but he that believes not is judged already" [John 3:18]; and so here He
mentions the Judgment-seat and the punishment which shall follow upon evil
deeds. For because He had said above, "He that hears My words and believes in