THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.15, C.4.

ignorance.
Reply to Objection 2: Christ is said not to have known sin, because
He did not know it by experience; but He knew it by simple cognition.
Reply to Objection 3: The prophet is speaking in this passage of the
human knowledge of Christ; thus he says: "Before the Child" (i.e. in
His human nature) "know to call His father" (i.e. Joseph, who was
His reputed father), "and His mother" (i.e. Mary), "the strength of
Damascus . . . shall be taken away." Nor are we to understand this as
if He had been some time a man without knowing it; but "before He
know" (i.e. before He is a man having human knowledge)---literally,
"the strength of Damascus and the spoils of Samaria shall be taken
away by the King of the Assyrians"---or spiritually, "before His birth
He will save His people solely by invocation," as a gloss expounds it.
Augustine however (Serm. xxxii de Temp.) says that this was fulfilled
in the adoration of the Magi. For he says: "Before He uttered human
words in human flesh, He received the strength of Damascus, i.e. the
riches which Damascus vaunted (for in riches the first place is given
to gold). They themselves were the spoils of Samaria. Because
Samaria is taken to signify idolatry; since this people, having turned
away from the Lord, turned to the worship of idols. Hence these were
the first spoils which the child took from the domination of idolatry."
And in this way "before the child know" may be taken to mean
"before he show himself to know."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.15, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether Christ's soul was passible?

Objection 1: It would seem that the soul of Christ was not passible.
For nothing suffers except by reason of something stronger; since
"the agent is greater than the patient," as is clear from Augustine
(Gen. ad lit. xii, 16), and from the Philosopher (De Anima iii, 5). Now
no creature was stronger than Christ's soul. Therefore Christ's soul
could not suffer at the hands of any creature; and hence it was not
passible; for its capability of suffering would have been to no
purpose if it could not have suffered at the hands of anything.
Objection 2: Further, Tully (De Tusc. Quaes. iii) says that the soul's
passions are ailments [FS, Question 24, Article 2]. But Christ's soul
had no ailment; for the soul's ailment results from sin, as is plain
from Ps. 40:5: "Heal my soul, for I have sinned against Thee."
Therefore in Christ's soul there were no passions.
Objection 3: Further, the soul's passions would seem to be the same
as the "fomes" of sin, hence the Apostle (Rm. 7:5) calls them the
"passions of sins." Now the "fomes" of sin was not in Christ, as was
said Article 2. Therefore it seems that there were no passions in His
soul; and hence His soul was not passible.
On the contrary, It is written (Ps. 87:4) in the person of Christ: "My
soul is filled with evils"---not sins, indeed, but human evils, i.e.
"pains," as a gloss expounds it. Hence the soul of Christ was
passible.
I answer that, A soul placed in a body may suffer in two ways: first
with a bodily passion; secondly, with an animal passion. It suffers
with a bodily passion through bodily hurt; for since the soul is the
form of the body, soul and body have but one being; and hence,
when the body is disturbed by any bodily passion, the soul, too,
must be disturbed, i.e. in the being which it has in the body.
Therefore, since Christ's body was passible and mortal, as was said
above (Question 14, Article 2), His soul also was of necessity
passible in like manner. But the soul suffers with an animal passion,
in its operations---either in such as are proper to the soul, or in such
as are of the soul more than of the body. And although the soul is
said to suffer in this way through sensation and intelligence, as was
said in the FS, Question 22, Article 3; FS, Question 41, Article 1;