brought his own share in, and God joined to bring in what was lacking to him.
For you cannot say even this, that Abraham received his religion from his
fathers, because he [Terah, see Joshua 24:2] was an idolater. But still, though he
was from such forefathers and was uncivilized, and lived among uncivilized
people, and had no instructor in religion, yet he attained to a knowledge of God,
and in comparison with all his descendants, who had the advantage both of the
Law and the Prophets, he was so much more illustrious as no words can express.
Why was it then? It was because in things of this world he did not give himself
any great anxiety, but in things of the spirit he applied his whole attention. (In
Gen. Hom. 33, etc.) And what of Melchizedek? Was not he also born about those
times, and was so bright as to be called even a priest of God? (In Gen. Hom. 35,
36.) For it is impossible in the extreme, that the sober-minded ([νήφοντα])
should ever be overlooked. And let not these things be a trouble to us, but
knowing that it is the mind with which in each case the power lies, let us look to
our own duties, that we may grow better. Let us not be demanding an account of
God or enquire why He let such an one alone, but called such an one. For we are
doing the same as if a servant that had given offense were to pry into his master's
housekeeping. Wretched and miserable man, when you ought to be thoughtful
about the account you have to give, and how you will reconcile your master, do
you call him to account for things that you are not to give an account of, passing
over those things of which you are to give a reckoning? What am I to say to the
Gentile? He asks. Why, the same that I have been saying. And look not merely to
what you shall say to the Gentile, but also to the means of amending yourself.
When he is offended by examining into your life, then consider what you will
say. For if he be offended, you will not be called to a reckoning for him, but if it
be your way of life by which he is injured, you will have to undergo the greatest
danger. When he sees you philosophizing about the kingdom, and fluttering at
the things of this life, and at once afraid about hell, and trembling at the
calamities of this life, then lay it to mind. When he sees this, and accuses you,
and says, If you are in love with the Kingdom, how is it thou dost not look down

upon the things of this life? If you are expecting the awful judgment, why do you
not despise the terrors of this world? If you hope for immortality, why do you
not think scorn of death? When he says this, be thou anxious what defence you
will make. When he sees you trembling at the thought of losing your money, you
that expectest the heavens, and exceedingly glad about a single penny, and
selling your soul again for a little money, then lay it to mind. For these are the
things, just these, that make the Gentiles stumble. And so, if you are thoughtful
about his salvation, make your defence on these heads, not by words, but by
actions. For it is not through that question that anybody ever blasphemed God,
but through men's bad lives it is, that there are thousands of blasphemies in all
quarters. Set him right then. For the Gentile will next ask you, How am I to
know that God's commands are feasible? For thou that art of Christian
extraction, and hast been brought up in this fine religion, dost not do anything of
the kind. And what will you tell him? You will be sure to say, I will show you
others that do; monks that dwell in the deserts. And are you not ashamed to
confess to being a Christian, and yet to send to others, as unable to show that you
display the temper of a Christian? For he also will say directly, What need have I
to go to the mountains, and to hunt up the deserts? For if there is no possibility
for a person who is living in the midst of cities to be a disciple, this is a sad
imputation on this rule of conduct, that we are to leave the cities, and run to the
deserts. But show me a man who has a wife, and children, and family, and yet
pursues wisdom. What are we then to say to all this? Must we not hang down
our heads, and be ashamed? For Christ gave us no such commandment; but
what? "Let your light shine before men" [Matthew 5:16], not mountains, and
deserts, and wildernesses, and out-of-the-way places. And this I say, not as
abusing those who have taken up with the mountains, but as bewailing those that
dwell in cities, because they have banished virtue from thence. Wherefore I
beseech you let us introduce the discipline they have there here also, that the
cities may become cities indeed. This will improve the Gentile. This will free
him from countless offenses. And so if you would set him free from scandal, and