THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.69, C.9.

But the accidental effect of Baptism, is that to which Baptism is not
ordained, but which the Divine power produces miraculously in
Baptism: thus on Rm. 6:6, "that we may serve sin no longer," a gloss
says: "this is not bestowed in Baptism, save by an ineffable miracle
of the Creator, so that the law of sin, which is in our members, be
absolutely destroyed." And such like effects are not equally received
by all the baptized, even if they approach with equal devotion: but
they are bestowed according to the ordering of Divine providence.
Reply to Objection 1: The least baptismal grace suffices to blot out
all sins. Wherefore that in some more sins are loosed than in others
is not due to the greater efficacy of Baptism, but to the condition of
the recipient: for in each one it looses whatever it finds.
Reply to Objection 2: That greater or lesser grace appears in the
baptized, may occur in two ways. First, because one receives greater
grace in Baptism than another, on account of his greater devotion,
as stated above. Secondly, because, though they receive equal
grace, they do not make an equal use of it, but one applies himself
more to advance therein, while another by his negligence baffles
grace.
Reply to Objection 3: The various degrees of capacity in men arise,
not from a variety in the mind which is renewed by Baptism (since all
men, being of one species, are of one form), but from the diversity of
bodies. But it is otherwise with the angels, who differ in species. And
therefore gratuitous gifts are bestowed on the angels according to
their diverse capacity for natural gifts, but not on men.
Reply to Objection 4: Bodily health is not the essential effect of
Baptism, but a miraculous work of Divine providence.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.69, C.10.

### ARTICLE 9. Whether insincerity hinders the effect of Baptism?

Objection 1: It seems that insincerity does not hinder the effect of
Baptism. For the Apostle says (Gal. 3:27): "As many of you as have
been baptized in Christ Jesus, have put on Christ." But all that
receive the Baptism of Christ, are baptized in Christ. Therefore they
all put on Christ: and this is to receive the effect of Baptism.
Consequently insincerity does not hinder the effect of Baptism.
Objection 2: Further, the Divine power which can change man's will
to that which is better, works in Baptism. But the effect of the
efficient cause cannot be hindered by that which can be removed by
that cause. Therefore insincerity cannot hinder the effect of Baptism.
Objection 3: Further, the effect of Baptism is grace, to which sin is in
opposition. But many other sins are more grievous than insincerity,
which are not said to hinder the effect of Baptism. Therefore neither
does insincerity.
On the contrary, It is written (Wis. 1:5): "The Holy Spirit of discipline
will flee from the deceitful." But the effect of Baptism is from the
Holy Ghost. Therefore insincerity hinders the effect of Baptism.
I answer that, As Damascene says (De Fide Orth. ii), "God does not
compel man to be righteous." Consequently in order that a man be
justified by Baptism, his will must needs embrace both Baptism and
the baptismal effect. Now, a man is said to be insincere by reason of
his will being in contradiction with either Baptism or its effect. For,
according to Augustine (De Bapt. cont. Donat. vii), a man is said to
be insincere, in four ways: first, because he does not believe,
whereas Baptism is the sacrament of Faith; secondly, through
scorning the sacrament itself; thirdly, through observing a rite which
differs from that prescribed by the Church in conferring the
sacrament; fourthly, through approaching the sacrament without
devotion. Wherefore it is manifest that insincerity hinders the effect
of Baptism.
Reply to Objection 1: "To be baptized in Christ," may be taken in two
ways. First, "in Christ," i.e. "in conformity with Christ." And thus
whoever is baptized in Christ so as to be conformed to Him by Faith
and Charity, puts on Christ by grace. Secondly, a man is said to be