SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.96, C.2.

tempted. Now we put a person to the test by words or by deeds. By
words, that we may find out whether he knows what we ask, or
whether he can and will grant it: by deeds, when, by what we do, we
probe another's prudence, will or power. Either of these may happen
in two ways. First, openly, as when one declares oneself a tempter:
thus Samson (Judges 14:12) proposed a riddle to the Philistines in
order to tempt them. In the second place it may be done with
cunning and by stealth, as the Pharisees tempted Christ, as we read
in Mt. 22:15, sqq. Again this is sometimes done explicitly, as when
anyone intends, by word or deed, to put some person to the test; and
sometimes implicitly, when, to wit, though he does not intend to test
a person, yet that which he does or says can seemingly have no
other purpose than putting him to a test.
Accordingly, man tempts God sometimes by words, sometimes by
deeds. Now we speak with God in words when we pray. Hence a man
tempts God explicitly in his prayers when he asks something of God
with the intention of probing God's knowledge, power or will. He
tempts God explicitly by deeds when he intends, by whatever he
does, to experiment on God's power, good will or wisdom. But He
will tempt God implicitly, if, though he does not intend to make an
experiment on God, yet he asks for or does something which has no
other use than to prove God's power, goodness or knowledge. Thus
when a man wishes his horse to gallop in order to escape from the
enemy, this is not giving the horse a trial: but if he make the horse
gallop with out any useful purpose, it seems to be nothing else than
a trial of the horse's speed; and the same applies to all other things.
Accordingly when a man in his prayers or deeds entrusts himself to
the divine assistance for some urgent or useful motive, this is not to
tempt God: for it is written (2 Paralip 20:12): "As we know not what to
do, we can only turn our eyes to Thee." But if this be done without
any useful or urgent motive, this is to tempt God implicitly.
Wherefore a gloss on Dt. 6:16, "Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy
God," says: "A man tempts God, if having the means at hand,
without reason he chooses a dangerous course, trying whether he
can be delivered by God."
Reply to Objection 1: Man also is sometimes tempted by means of
deeds, to test his ability or knowledge or will to uphold or oppose
those same deeds.
Reply to Objection 2: When saints work miracles by their prayers,
they are moved by a motive of necessity or usefulness to ask for that

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.96, C.2.

which is an effect of the divine power.
Reply to Objection 3: The preachers of God's kingdom dispense with
temporal aids, so as to be freer to give their time to the word of God:
wherefore if they depend on God alone, it does not follow that they
tempt God. But if they were to neglect human assistance without any
useful or urgent motive, they would be tempting God. Hence
Augustine (Contra Faust. xxii, 36) says that "Paul fled, not through
ceasing to believe in God, but lest he should tempt God, were he not
to flee when he had the means of flight." The Blessed Agatha had
experience of God's kindness towards her, so that either she did not
suffer such sickness as required bodily medicine, or else she felt
herself suddenly cured by God.