"If Your Enemy Hunger, Feed Him"
To those who had not attended the assembly.
To those who had not attended the assembly; on the apostolic saying, "If
your enemy hunger feed him," and concerning resentment of injuries.
1. I did no good as it seems by the prolonged discourse which I lately
addressed to you with a view to kindling your zeal for the assemblies here: for
again our Church is destitute of her children. Wherefore also I am again
compelled to seem vexatious and burdensome, reproving those who are present,
and finding fault with those who have been left behind: with them because they
have not put away their sloth, and with you because you have not given a
helping hand to the salvation of your brethren. I am compelled to seem
burdensome and vexatious, not on behalf of myself, or my own possessions, but
on your behalf and for your salvation, which is more precious to me than
anything else. Let him who pleases take it in bad part, and call me insolent and
impudent, yet will I not cease continually annoying him for the same purpose;
for nothing is better for me than this kind of impudence. For it may be, it may
be, that this at least if nothing else, will put you to shame, and that to avoid being
perpetually importuned concerning the same things, you will take part in the
tender care of your brethren. For what profit is there to me in praise when I do
not see you making advances in virtue? And what harm is there from the silence
of the hearers when I behold your piety increasing? For the praise of the speaker
does not consist in applause, but in the zeal of the hearers for godliness: not in
noise made just at the time of hearing, but in lasting earnestness. As soon as
applause has issued from the lips it is dispersed in air and perishes; but the moral
improvement of the hearers brings an imperishable and immortal reward both to
him who speaks and to them who obey. The praise of your cheers makes the
speaker illustrious here, but the piety of your soul affords the teacher much

confidence before the judgment-seat of Christ. Wherefore if any one loves the
speaker, let him not desire the applause but the profit of the hearers. To neglect
our brethren is no ordinary wrong, but one which brings extreme punishment,
and an inexorable penalty. And the case of the man who buried the talent proves
this: he was not reproached at least on account of his own life: for as regarded
the deposit itself he did not turn out a bad man, since he restored it intact:
nevertheless he did turn out a bad man as regarded his management of the
deposit. For he did not double that which was entrusted to him; and so was
punished. Whence it is manifest that even if we are earnest and well trained, and
have much zeal about hearing the holy scriptures this does not suffice for our
salvation. For the deposit must be doubled, and it becomes doubled when
together with our own salvation we undertake to make some provision for the
good of others. For the man in the parable said "Lo! There you have that is
yours:" but this did not serve him for a defence: for it was said to him "you
ought to have put the money to the exchangers." [Matthew 25:27]
And observe I pray how easy the commands of the Master are: for men
indeed make those who lend out capital sums at interest answerable for recalling
them; "you have made the deposit," one says, "you must call it in: I have no
concern with the man who has received it." But God does not act thus; He only
commands us to make the deposit, and does not render us liable for the recall.
For the speaker has the power of advising, not of persuading. Therefore he says:
"I make you answerable for depositing only, and not for the recall." What can be
easier than this? And yet the servant called the master hard, who was thus gentle
and merciful. For such is the wont of the ungrateful and indolent; they always try
to shift the blame of their offenses from themselves to their master. And
therefore the man was thrust out with torture and bonds into the outer darkness.
And lest we should suffer this penalty let us deposit our teaching with the
brethren, whether they be persuaded by it, or not. For if they be persuaded they
will profit both themselves and us: and if they are not, they involve themselves
indeed in inevitable punishment, but will not be able to do us the slightest injury.