to strike into it as compelled by another occasion, which is ever a characteristic
of his Apostolic wisdom. For if he had showed it in the times of grace, what he
said would have had a very suspicious look. But on describing the vice which
possessed the world, and where end the ways of wickedness, to pass from that
consecutively into the treatment of these points renders his teaching
unsuspected. And that he means this, and for this purpose so put this together, is
plain from hence: for if he were not intent upon effecting this, it were enough for
him to have said, "According to your hardness and impenitent heart you store up
unto yourself wrath against the day of wrath;" and then to have dropped this
subject, since it would have been complete. But in that what he had in view was
not to speak of the judgment to come only, but to show also that the Jew had no
advantage of such a Greek, and so was not to be haughty-spirited, he advances
farther, and speaks of them in order. But consider! He had put the hearer in fear,
had advanced against him the fearful day, had told him what an evil it is to be
living in wickedness, had showed him that no man sins of ignorance, nor with
impunity, but that even though he suffer no punishment now, yet he certainly
will suffer it: then he wishes to make good next that the teaching of the Law was
not a thing of great importance. For it is upon works that both punishment and
reward depend, not upon circumcision and uncircumcision. Since then he had
said, that the Gentile shall by no means go unpunished and had taken this for
granted, and upon it had made good that he shall also be rewarded, he next
showed the Law and circumcision to be superfluous. For it is the Jews that he is
here chiefly opposing. For inasmuch as they were somewhat captiously
disposed, first, of their haughtiness, not deigning to be reckoned along with the
Gentiles, and secondly thinking it ridiculous if the faith is to do away all sins; for
this cause he accused the Gentiles first, in whose behalf he is speaking, that
without suspicion and with boldness of speech, he may attack the Jews. And
then having come to the enquiry concerning the punishment, he shows that the
Jew is so far from being at all profited by the Law, that he is even weighed down
by it. And this was his drift some way back. For if the Gentile be on this score

inexcusable, because, when the creation led him on and his own reasonings, he
yet did not amend, much more were the Jew so, who besides these had the
teaching of the Law also. Having then persuaded him to a ready admission of
these reasonings, in the case of other men's sins, he now compels him even
against his will to do so in the case of his own. And in order that what he says
may be more readily allowed, he leads him forward with the better things also in
view, speaking on this wise: "But glory and honor and peace to every man that
works good, to the Jew first, and also to the Gentile." For here whatever good
things a man has, he has with fightings, even if he be rich, if a prince, if a king.
Even if he be not at variance with others, yet is he often so with himself, and has
abundant war in his own thoughts. But there it is no such thing, but all is still and
void of trouble, and in possession of true peace. Having then made good from
what was said above, that they too which have not the Law are to enjoy the same
blessings, he adds his reason in the following words:
Ver. 11. "For there is no respect of persons with God."
For when he says that as well the Jew as the Gentile is punished if he sin, he
needs no reasonings: but when he wants to prove that the Gentile is honored
also, he then needs a foundation for it also; as it seemed wonderful and
extravagant if he who had heard neither Law nor Prophets, were to be honored
upon his working good. And this is why (as I also said before) he exercises their
hearing in the times before grace, that he might afterwards more treatably bring
in, along with the faith, the acquiescence in these things also. For here he is not
at all suspected, as seeming not to be making his own point good. Having then
said, "Glory and honor and peace to every man that works good, to the Jew first,
and also to the Gentile," he adds, "For there is no respect of persons with God."
Wonderful! What more than victory has he gained! For he shows, by reducing it
to an absurdity, that it was not meet with God that it should be otherwise. For it
would then be a case of respecting of persons. But of such character God is not.
And he does not say, "for if this were not so, God would be a respecter of
persons," but with more of dignity, "For there is no respect of persons with