Eph. vi. 12.

faith; and explain [with special clearness] the operation and dispensation of God connected with
human salvation; and show that God manifested longsuffering in regard to the apostasy of the
angels who transgressed, as also with respect to the disobedience of men; and set forth why it is
that one and the same God has made some things temporal and some eternal, some heavenly and
others earthly; and understand for what reason God, though invisible, manifested Himself to the
prophets not under one form, but differently to different individuals; and show why it was that more
covenants than one were given to mankind; and teach what was the special character of each of
these covenants; and search out for what reason "God hath concluded every man in unbelief,
that He may have mercy upon all;" and gratefully describe on what account the Word of God
became flesh and suffered; and relate why the advent of the Son of God took place in these last
times, that is, in the end, rather than in the beginning [of the world]; and unfold what is contained
in the Scriptures concerning the end [itself], and things to come; and not be silent as to how it is
that God has made the Gentiles, whose salvation was despaired of, fellow-heirs, and of the same
body, and partakers with the saints; and discourse how it is that "this mortal body shall put on
immortality, and this corruptible shall put on incorruption;" and proclaim in what sense [God]
says, "That is a people who was not a people; and she is beloved who was not beloved;" and in
what sense He says that "more are the children of her that was desolate, than of her who possessed
a husband." For in reference to these points, and others of a like nature, the apostle exclaims:
"Oh! the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God; how unsearchable are His
judgments, and His ways past finding out!" But [the superior skill spoken of] is not found in
this, that any one should, beyond the Creator and Framer [of the world], conceive of the Enthymesis
of an erring Æon, their mother and his, and should thus proceed to such a pitch of blasphemy; nor
does it consist in this, that he should again falsely imagine, as being above this [fancied being], a
Pleroma at one time supposed to contain thirty, and at another time an innumerable tribe of Æons,
as these teachers who are destitute of truly divine wisdom maintain; while the Catholic Church
possesses one and the same faith throughout the whole world, as we have already said.
Hos. ii. 23; Rom. ix. 25.

### Chapter XI.—The opinions of Valentinus, with those of his disciples and others.
1. Let us now look at the inconsistent opinions of those heretics (for there are some two or
three of them), how they do not agree in treating the same points, but alike, in things and names,
set forth opinions mutually discordant. The first of them, Valentinus, who adapted the principles
of the heresy called "Gnostic" to the peculiar character of his own school, taught as follows: He
maintained that there is a certain Dyad (twofold being), who is inexpressible by any name, of whom
one part should be called Arrhetus (unspeakable), and the other Sige (silence). But of this Dyad a
second was produced, one part of whom he names Pater, and the other Aletheia. From this Tetrad,
again, arose Logos and Zoe, Anthropos and Ecclesia. These constitute the primary Ogdoad. He
next states that from Logos and Zoe ten powers were produced, as we have before mentioned. But
from Anthropos and Ecclesia proceeded twelve, one of which separating from the rest, and falling
from its original condition, produced the rest of the universe. He also supposed two beings of
the name of Horos, the one of whom has his place between Bythus and the rest of the Pleroma, and
divides the created Æons from the uncreated Father, while the other separates their mother from
the Pleroma. Christ also was not produced from the Æons within the Pleroma, but was brought
forth by the mother who had been excluded from it, in virtue of her remembrance of better things,
but not without a kind of shadow. He, indeed, as being masculine, having severed the shadow from
himself, returned to the Pleroma; but his mother being left with the shadow, and deprived of her
spiritual substance, brought forth another son, namely, the Demiurge, whom he also styles the
supreme ruler of all those things which are subject to him. He also asserts that, along with the
Demiurge, there was produced a left-hand power, in which particular he agrees with those falsely
called Gnostics, of whom to we have yet to speak. Sometimes, again, he maintains that Jesus was
produced from him who was separated from their mother, and united to the rest, that is, from
Theletus, sometimes as springing from him who returned into the Pleroma, that is, from Christ;
and at other times still as derived from Anthropos and Ecclesia. And he declares that the Holy Spirit
was produced by Aletheia for the inspection and fructification of the Æons, by entering invisibly
into them, and that, in this way, the Æons brought forth the plants of truth.
2. Secundus again affirms that the primary Ogdoad consists of a right hand and a left hand
Tetrad, and teaches that the one of these is called light, and the other darkness. But he maintains
that the power which separated from the rest, and fell away, did not proceed directly from the thirty
Æons, but from their fruits.
Gnosticism of one age may be essentially the same in spirit as the Agnosticism of another.]