Hence "living" is not an accidental but an essential predicate.
Sometimes, however, life is used less properly for the operations
from which its name is taken, and thus the Philosopher says (Ethic.
ix, 9) that to live is principally to sense or to understand.
Reply to Objection 1: The Philosopher here takes "to live" to mean
an operation of life. Or it would be better to say that sensation and
intelligence and the like, are sometimes taken for the operations,
sometimes for the existence itself of the operator. For he says (Ethic.
ix, 9) that to live is to sense or to understand---in other words, to
have a nature capable of sensation or understanding. Thus, then, he
distinguishes life by the four operations mentioned. For in this lower
world there are four kinds of living things. It is the nature of some to
be capable of nothing more than taking nourishment, and, as a
consequence, of growing and generating. Others are able, in
addition, to sense, as we see in the case of shellfish and other
animals without movement. Others have the further power of moving
from place to place, as perfect animals, such as quadrupeds, and
birds, and so on. Others, as man, have the still higher faculty of
understanding.
Reply to Objection 2: By vital operations are meant those whose
principles are within the operator, and in virtue of which the operator
produces such operations of itself. It happens that there exist in men
not merely such natural principles of certain operations as are their
natural powers, but something over and above these, such as habits
inclining them like a second nature to particular kinds of operations,
so that the operations become sources of pleasure. Thus, as by a
similitude, any kind of work in which a man takes delight, so that his
bent is towards it, his time spent in it, and his whole life ordered with
a view to it, is said to be the life of that man. Hence some are said to
lead to life of self-indulgence, others a life of virtue. In this way the
contemplative life is distinguished from the active, and thus to know
God is said to be life eternal.
Wherefore the Reply to the Third Objection is clear.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether life is properly attributed to God?

Objection 1: It seems that life is not properly attributed to God. For
things are said to live inasmuch as they move themselves, as
previously stated (Article 2). But movement does not belong to God.
Neither therefore does life.
Objection 2: Further, in all living things we must needs suppose
some principle of life. Hence it is said by the Philosopher (De Anima
ii, 4) that "the soul is the cause and principle of the living body." But
God has no principle. Therefore life cannot be attributed to Him.
Objection 3: Further, the principle of life in the living things that exist
among us is the vegetative soul. But this exists only in corporeal
things. Therefore life cannot be attributed to incorporeal things.
On the contrary, It is said (Ps. 83:3): "My heart and my flesh have
rejoiced in the living God."
I answer that, Life is in the highest degree properly in God. In proof
of which it must be considered that since a thing is said to live in so
far as it operates of itself and not as moved by another, the more
perfectly this power is found in anything, the more perfect is the life
of that thing. In things that move and are moved, a threefold order is
found. In the first place, the end moves the agent: and the principal
agent is that which acts through its form, and sometimes it does so
through some instrument that acts by virtue not of its own form, but
of the principal agent, and does no more than execute the action.
Accordingly there are things that move themselves, not in respect of
any form or end naturally inherent in them, but only in respect of the
executing of the movement; the form by which they act, and the end
of the action being alike determined for them by their nature. Of this
kind are plants, which move themselves according to their inherent
nature, with regard only to executing the movements of growth and
decay.
Other things have self-movement in a higher degree, that is, not only
with regard to executing the movement, but even as regards to the
form, the principle of movement, which form they acquire of
themselves. Of this kind are animals, in which the principle of
movement is not a naturally implanted form; but one received