quality, which a priest ought to possess, yet let him be always confined to his
bed by reason of great infirmity, what service will he be able to render? Upon
what mission can he go? What visitation can he undertake? Whom can he rebuke
or admonish? These things I say, that you may learn not causelessly to accuse
him, but rather may receive him favorably; as also that if any one desire rule in
the Church, seeing the shower of abuse that attends it, he may quench that
desire. Great indeed is the danger of such a station, and it requires "the grace
and peace of God." Which that we may have abundantly, do you pray for us, and
we for you, that practicing virtue aright we may so obtain the blessings
promised, through Jesus Christ, with whom, etc.

## Homily 2 on Titus

[Titus 1:5, 6]
"For this cause left I you in Crete, that you should set in order the things
that are wanting, and ordain elders in every city as I had appointed you: If any
be blameless, the husband of one wife, having faithful children, not accused of
riot, or unruly."
The whole life of men in ancient times was one of action and contention;
ours on the contrary is a life of indolence. They knew that they were brought into
the world for this purpose, that they might labor according to the will of Him
who brought them into it; but we, as if we had been placed here but to eat and
drink, and lead a life of pleasure, we pay no regard to spiritual things. I speak not
only of the Apostles, but of those that followed them. You see them accordingly
traversing all places, and pursuing this as their only business, living altogether as
in a foreign land, as those who had no city upon earth. Hear therefore what the
blessed Apostle says,
"For this cause left I you in Crete."
As if the whole world had been one house, they divided it among
themselves, administering its affairs everywhere, each taking care of his several
portion of it.
"For this cause left I you in Crete, that you should set in order the things
that are [R.V. were] wanting."
He does not command this in an imperious manner; "that you should set in
order," he says. Here we see a soul free from all envy, seeking everywhere the
advantage of his disciples, not curiously solicitous, whether the good was done
by himself or by another. For where there was a case of danger and great
difficulty, he in his own person set it in order. But those things which were rather
attended with honor and praise he committed to his disciple, as the ordination of

Bishops, and such other things as required some farther arrangement, or, so to
speak, to be brought to greater perfection. What do you say? Does he farther set
in order your work? And do you not think it a disgrace bringing shame upon
you? By no means; for I look only to the common good, and whether it be done
by me, or by another, it makes no difference to me. Thus it becomes him to be
affected who presides in the Church, not to seek his own honor, but the common
good.
"And ordain elders in every city," here he is speaking of Bishops, as we
have before said, "as I had appointed you. If any is blameless." "In every city,"
he says, for he did not wish the whole island to be entrusted to one, but that each
should have his own charge and care, for thus he would have less labor himself,
and those under his rule would receive greater attention, if the Teacher had not to
go about to the presidency of many Churches, but was left to be occupied with
one only, and to bring that into order.
Ver. 6. "If any be blameless, the husband of one wife, having faithful
children, not accused of riot, or unruly."
Why does he bring forward such an one? To stop the mouths of those
heretics, who condemned marriage, showing that it is not an unholy thing in
itself, but so far honorable, that a married man might ascend the holy throne; and
at the same reproving the wanton, and not permitting their admission into this
high office who contracted a second marriage. For he who retains no kind regard
for her who is departed, how shall he be a good president? And what accusation
would he not incur? For you all know, that though it is not forbidden by the laws
to enter into a second marriage, yet it is a thing liable to many ill constructions.
Wishing therefore a ruler to give no handle for reproach to those under his rule,
he on this account says, "If any be blameless," that is, if his life be free from
reproach, if he has given occasion to no one to assail his character. Hear what
Christ says, "If the light that is in you be darkness, how great is that darkness!"
[Matthew 6:23]
"Having faithful children, not accused of riot, or unruly."