be perfect, sell that you have, and give to the poor; and come, follow Me; and
you shall have treasure in heaven." [Matthew 19:21] But if you will, let us see
what is said on either side. "Narrow and straitened is the way," He says, "that
leads unto life." [Matthew 7:14] Who then treads the narrow way, he that is in
luxury, or that is in poverty; that is independent, or that carries ten thousand
burdens; the lax and dissolute, or the thoughtful and anxious? But what need of
these arguments, when it is best to betake one's self to the persons themselves.
Lazarus was poor, yea very poor; and he that passed him by as he lay at his
gateway was rich. Which then entered into the kingdom, and was in delights in
Abraham's bosom? And which of them was scorched, with not even a drop at his
command? But, says one, 'both many poor will be lost, and [many] rich will
enjoy those unspeakable goods.' Nay rather, one may see the contrary, few rich
saved, but of the poor far more. For, consider, making accurate measure of the
hindrances of riches and the defects of poverty, (or rather, neither of riches nor of
poverty are they, but each of those who have riches or poverty; howbeit,) let us
at least see which is the more available weapon. What defect then does poverty
seem to possess? Lying. And what, wealth? Pride, the mother of evils; which
also made the devil a devil, who was not such before. Again, "the love of money
is a root of all kinds of evil." [1 Timothy 6:10] Which then stands near this root,
the rich man, or the poor? Is it not very plainly the rich? For the more things
anyone surrounds himself with, he desires so much the more. Vainglory again
damages tens of thousands of good deeds, and near this too again the rich man
has his dwelling. "But," says one, "you mention not the [evils] of the poor man,
his affliction, his straits." Nay, but this is both common to the rich, and is his
more than the poor man's; so that those indeed which appear to be evils of
poverty are common to either: while those of riches are riches' only. 'But what,'
says one, 'when for want of necessaries the poor man commits many horrible
things?' But no poor man, no, not one, commits as many horrible things from
want, as do the rich for the sake of surrounding themselves with more, and of not
losing what stores they have. For the poor man does not so eagerly desire

necessaries as the rich does superfluities; nor again has he as much strength to
put wickedness in practice as the other has power. If then the rich man is both
more willing and able, it is quite plain that he will rather commit such, and more
of them. Nor is the poor man so much afraid in respect of hunger, as the rich
trembles and is anxious in respect of the loss of what he has, and because he has
not yet gotten all men's possessions. Since then he is near both vainglory and
arrogance, and the love of money, the root of all evils, what hope of salvation
shall he have except he display much wisdom? And how shall he walk the
narrow way? Let us not therefore carry about the notions of the many, but
examine into the facts. For how is it not absurd that in respect to money, indeed,
we do not trust to others, but refer this to figures and calculation; but in
calculating upon facts we are lightly drawn aside by the notions of others; and
that too, though we possess an exact balance , and square and rule for all things,
the declaration of the divine laws? Wherefore I exhort and entreat you all,
disregard what this man and that man thinks about these things, and inquire from
the Scriptures all these things; and having learned what are the true riches, let us
pursue after them that we may obtain also the eternal good things; which may we
all obtain, through the grace and love towards men of our Lord Jesus Christ, with
Whom, to the Father and the Holy Spirit, be glory, might, and honor, now and
ever, and world without end. Amen.