victory may be greater and more evident, let the man who enjoys his own wife
only, have a fancy also for the other, the adulteress, but restrain his passion and
do nothing evil: (although neither is this pure chastity.) However, granting more
than is necessary, that you may convince yourself how great is the pleasure of
virtue, for this cause have we so framed our story.
Now then, having brought them together, let us ask them accordingly,
whose is the pleasanter life: and you will hear the one glorying and exulting in
the conquest over his lust: but the other— or rather, there is no need to wait to be
informed of any thing by him. For you shall see him, though he deny it times
without number, more wretched than men in a prison. For he fears and suspects
all, both his own wife and the husband of the adulteress and the adulteress
herself, and domestics, and friends, and kinsmen, and walls, and shadows, and
himself, and what is worst of all, he has his conscience crying out against him,
barking aloud every day. But if he should also bring to mind the judgment-seat
of God, he will not be able even to stand. And the pleasure is short: but the pain
from it unceasing. For both at even, and in the night, in the desert and the city
and every where, the accuser haunts him, pointing to a sharpened sword and the
intolerable punishment, and with that terror consuming and wasting him. But the
other, the chaste person, is free from all these things, and is at liberty, and with
comfort looks upon his wife, his children, his friends, and meets all with
unembarrassed eyes. Now if he that is enamored but is master of himself enjoy
so great pleasure, he that indulges no such passion but is truly chaste, what
harbor, what calm will be so sweet and serene as the mind which he will attain?
And on this account you may see few adulterers but many chaste persons. But if
the former were the pleasanter, it would be preferred by the greater number. And
tell me not of the terror of the laws. For this is not that which restrains them, but
the excessive unreasonableness, and the fact that the pains of it are more than the
pleasures, and the sentence of conscience.
8. Such then is the adulterer. Now, if you please, let us bring before you the
covetous, laying bare again another lawless passion. For him too we shall see

afraid of the same things and unable to enjoy real pleasure: in that calling to
mind both those whom he has wronged, and those who sympathize with them,
and the public sentence of all concerning himself, he has ten thousand agitations.
And this is not his only vexation, but not even his beloved object can he
enjoy. For such is the way of the covetous; not that they may enjoy do they
possess, but that they may not enjoy. But if this seem to you a riddle, hear next
what is yet worse than this and more perplexing; that not in this way only are
they deprived of the pleasure of their goods, by their not venturing to use them
as they would, but also by their never being filled with them but living in a
continual thirst: than which what can be more grievous? But the just man is not
so, but is delivered both from trembling and hatred and fear and this incurable
thirst: and as all men curse the one, even so do all men conspire to bless the
other: and as the one has no friend, so has the other no enemy.
What now, these things being so acknowledged, can be more unpleasing
than vice or more pleasant than virtue? Nay, rather, though we should speak for
ever, no one shall be able to represent in discourse either the pain of this, or the
pleasure of the other, until we shall experience it. For then shall we find vice
more bitter than gall, when we shall have fully tasted the honey of virtue. Not
but vice is even now unpleasant, and disgusting, and burdensome, and this not
even her very votaries gainsay; but when we withdraw from her, then do we
more clearly discern the bitterness of her commands. But if the multitude run to
her, it is no marvel; since children also oftentimes, choosing things less pleasant,
despise those which are more delightful and the sick for a momentary
gratification lose the perpetual and more certain joy. But this comes of the
weakness and folly of those who are possessed with any fondness, not of the
nature of the things. For it is the virtuous man who lives in pleasure; he who is
rich indeed and free indeed.
But if any one would grant the rest to virtue—liberty, security, freedom
from cares, the fearing no man, the suspecting no man—but would not grant it
pleasure; to laugh, and that heartily, occurs to me, I confess, as the only course to