And what is wonderful indeed is, that he has even set David before Abraham
speaking on this wise, "the Son of David, the Son of Abraham," and then begins
the catalogue of Isaac and Jacob, and all the rest in order. And this is why the
Apostle here keeps presenting them in turns, and speaks of the righteousness of
God being witnessed by the Law and the Prophets. Then that no one should say,
How are we to be saved without contributing anything at all to the object in
view? He shows that we also offer no small matter toward this, I mean our faith.
Therefore after saying, "the righteousness of God," he adds straightway, "by
faith unto all and upon all that believe."
Here again the Jew is alarmed by his not having anything better than the
rest, and being numbered with the whole world. Now that he may not feel this,
he again lowers him with fear by adding, "For there is no difference, for all have
sinned." For tell me not that it is such and such a Greek, such and such a
Scythian, such and such a Thracian, for all are in the same plight. For even if
you have received the Law, one thing alone is there which you have learned from
the Law— to know sin, not to flee from it. Next, that they may say, "even if we
have sinned, still it is not in the same way that they did," he added, "and have
come short of the glory of God." So that even if you have not done the same sins
as others, still you are alike bereft of the glory, since you belong to those who
have offended, and he that has offended belongs not to such as are glorified, but
to such as are put to shame. Yet, be not afraid: for the reason of my saying this
was not that I might thrust you into despair, but that I might show the love of the
Lord ([Δεσπότου]) toward man: and so he goes on;
Ver. 24, 25. "Being justified freely by His grace through the redemption that
is in Christ Jesus: Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through faith in
His blood, to declare His righteousness."
See by how many proofs he makes good what was said. First, from the
worthiness of the person, for it is not a man who does these things, that He
should be too weak for it, but God all-powerful. For it is to God, he says, that the
righteousness belongs. Again, from the Law and the Prophets. For you need not

be afraid at hearing the "without the Law," inasmuch as the Law itself approves
this. Thirdly, from the sacrifices under the old dispensation. For it was on this
ground that he said, "In His blood," to call to their minds those sheep and calves.
For if the sacrifices of things without reason, he means, cleared from sin, much
more would this blood. And he does not say barely [λυτρώσεως], but
ἀ[πολυτρώσεως], entire redemption, to show that we should come no more into
such slavery. And for this same reason he calls it a propitiation, to show that if
the type had such force, much more would the reality display the same. But to
show again that it was no novel thing or recent, he says, "fore-ordained" (Auth.
Version marg.); and by saying God "fore-ordained," and showing that the good
deed is the Father's, he shows it to be the Son's also. For the Father "foreordained," but Christ in His own blood wrought the whole aright.
"To declare His righteousness." What is declaring of righteousness? Like
the declaring of His riches, not only for Him to be rich Himself, but also to make
others rich, or of life, not only that He is Himself living, but also that He makes
the dead to live; and of His power, not only that He is Himself powerful, but also
that He makes the feeble powerful. So also is the declaring of His righteousness
not only that He is Himself righteous, but that He does also make them that are
filled with the putrefying sores ([κατασαπέντας]) of sin suddenly righteous. And
it is to explain this, viz. what is "declaring," that he has added, "That He might
be just, and the justifier of him which believes in Jesus." Doubt not then: for it is
not of works, but of faith: and shun not the righteousness of God, for it is a
blessing in two ways; because it is easy, and also open to all men. And be not
abashed and shamefaced. For if He Himself openly declares ([ἐ] [νδείκνυται])
Himself to do so, and He, so to say, finds a delight and a pride therein, how do
you come to be dejected and to hide your face at what your Master glories in?
Now then after raising his hearers expectations by saying that what had taken
place was a declaring of the righteousness of God, he next by fear urges him on
that is tardy and remissful about coming; by speaking as follows:
"On account of the relaxing of sins that were before." Do you see how often