use a sharper way of speech against them. And he does not direct his aim at
them, without first divesting them of a suspicion they had. Lest then he should
seem to be addressing them as enemies, further on he says "Brethren, my heart's
desire and prayer to God for Israel is, that they might be saved." [Romans 10:1]
And here, along with other remarks, he so ordered things, as not to seem to be
saying what he was going to say out of enmity against them. Hence he does not
decline calling them even kinsmen and brothers. For even if it was for Christ's
sake that he said what he did, still he is for drawing ([ἐ] [πισπἅται]) their mind to
him also, and paves his way to what he has to say, and quits himself of all
suspicion owing to what had to be said against them, and then he at last goes into
the subject most of them were looking for. For many, as I have already stated,
wanted to know what was the reason why they who had received the promise fell
short of it, while those who had even never heard of it were saved before them.
Therefore, to clear up this difficulty, he brings forward the answer before the
objection. For to prevent any from saying, What? Are you more thoughtful for
God's glory than God is for His own? And does He need your aid that His word
may not fall to the ground? In reply to these things he says, I spoke this not as if
God's Word had fallen to the ground, but to show my love for Christ. For as
things have had this issue, we are in no want of words in God's behalf, or of
showing that stand His promise did. God said to Abraham, "To you and to your
seed will I give the land." And, "In your seed shall all the nations of the earth be
blessed." [Genesis 12:7] Let us see then, he says, of what sort this seed is. For it
is not all that are from him that are his seed. Whence he says, "For they are not
all Israel that are of (or from) Israel."
Ver. 7. "Neither, because they are the seed of Abraham, are they all
children."
Now when you come to know of what kind the seed of Abraham is, you
will see that the promise is given to his seed, and know that the word has not
fallen to the ground. Of what kind, pray, is the seed then? It is no saying of mine,
he means, but the Old Testament itself explains itself by saying as follows, "In

Isaac shall your seed be called." [Genesis 21:12] What is, "In Isaac?" Explain.
Ver. 8. "That is, they which are the children of the flesh, these are not the
children of God: but the children of the promise, these are counted for the seed."
And observe the judgment and depth of Paul's mind. For in interpreting, he
does not say, "they which are the children of the flesh, these are not" the children
of Abraham, but, "the children of God:" so blending the former things with the
present, and showing that even Isaac was not merely Abraham's son. And what
he means is something of this sort: as many as have been born as Isaac was, they
are sons of God, and of the seed of Abraham. And this is why he said, "in Isaac
shall your seed be called." That one may learn that they who are born after the
fashion of Isaac, these are in the truest sense Abraham's children. In what way
was Isaac born then? Not according to the law of nature, not according to the
power of the flesh, but according to the power of the promise. What is meant
then by the power of "the promise?"
Ver. 9. "At this time will I come, and Sarah shall have a son."
This promise then and word of God it was that fashioned Isaac, and begot
him. For what if a womb was its instrument and the belly of a woman? Since it
was not the power of the belly, but the might of the promise that begot the child.
Thus are we also gendered by the words of God. Since in the pool of water it is
the words of God which generate and fashion us. For it is by being baptized into
the Name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost that we are
gendered. And this birth is not of nature, but of the promise of God. [John 3:3;
Ephesians 5:26; James 1:18; 1 Peter 3:21] For as after first foretelling the birth
of Isaac, He then accomplished it; so ours also He had announced before, many
ages ago by all the Prophets, and afterwards brought it to pass. You know how
great He has set it forth as being, and how, as He promised a great thing, He
furnished it with abundant ease! [Hosea 2:1, etc] But if the Jews were to say, that
the words, "In Isaac shall your seed be called," mean this, that those born of
Isaac should be reckoned to him for a seed, then the Edomites too, and all those
people, ought to be denominated his sons, since their forefather Esau was a son