change in an animal's body, as in the case of cold or heat; and
through the body being affected by the motion of an outward body,
the sensitive appetite which is the power of a bodily organ, is also
moved indirectly; thus it happens that through some alteration in the
body the appetite is roused to the desire of something. But this is
not contrary to the nature of voluntariness, as stated above (ad 1),
for such movements caused by an extrinsic principle are of another
genus of movement.
Reply to Objection 3: God moves man to act, not only by proposing
the appetible to the senses, or by effecting a change in his body, but
also by moving the will itself; because every movement either of the
will or of nature, proceeds from God as the First Mover. And just as it
is not incompatible with nature that the natural movement be from
God as the First Mover, inasmuch as nature is an instrument of God
moving it: so it is not contrary to the essence of a voluntary act, that
it proceed from God, inasmuch as the will is moved by God.
Nevertheless both natural and voluntary movements have this in
common, that it is essential that they should proceed from a
principle within the agent.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.6, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether there is anything voluntary in irrational

animals?
Objection 1: It would seem that there is nothing voluntary in
irrational animals. For a thing is called "voluntary" from
"voluntas" [will]. Now since the will is in the reason (De Anima iii, 9),
it cannot be in irrational animals. Therefore neither is there anything
voluntary in them.
Objection 2: Further, according as human acts are voluntary, man is
said to be master of his actions. But irrational animals are not
masters of their actions; for "they act not; rather are they acted
upon," as Damascene says (De Fide Orth. ii, 27). Therefore there is
no such thing as a voluntary act in irrational animals.
Objection 3: Further, Damascene says (De Fide Orth. 24) that
"voluntary acts lead to praise and blame." But neither praise nor
blame is due to the acts of irrational minds. Therefore such acts are
not voluntary.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. iii, 2) that "both
children and irrational animals participate in the voluntary." The
same is said by Damascene (De Fide Orth. 24) and Gregory of Nyssa
[Nemesius, De Nat. Hom. xxxii.].
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), it is essential to the
voluntary act that its principle be within the agent, together with
some knowledge of the end. Now knowledge of the end is twofold;
perfect and imperfect. Perfect knowledge of the end consists in not
only apprehending the thing which is the end, but also in knowing it
under the aspect of end, and the relationship of the means to that
end. And such knowledge belongs to none but the rational nature.
But imperfect knowledge of the end consists in mere apprehension
of the end, without knowing it under the aspect of end, or the
relationship of an act to the end. Such knowledge of the end is
exercised by irrational animals, through their senses and their
natural estimative power.
Consequently perfect knowledge of the end leads to the perfect
voluntary; inasmuch as, having apprehended the end, a man can,
from deliberating about the end and the means thereto, be moved, or