THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.35, C.5.

Now from this is a woman called a man's mother, that she conceived
him and gave birth to him. Therefore the Blessed Virgin is truly
called the Mother of God. For the only way in which it could be
denied that the Blessed Virgin is the Mother of God would be either if
the humanity were first subject to conception and birth, before this
man were the Son of God, as Photinus said; or if the humanity were
not assumed unto unity of the Person or hypostasis of the Word of
God, as Nestorius maintained. But both of these are erroneous.
Therefore it is heretical to deny that the Blessed Virgin is the Mother
of God.
Reply to Objection 1: This was an argument of Nestorius, and it is
solved by saying that, although we do not find it said expressly in
Scripture that the Blessed Virgin is the Mother of God, yet we do find
it expressly said in Scripture that "Jesus Christ is true God," as may
be seen 1 Jn. 5:20, and that the Blessed Virgin is the "Mother of
Jesus Christ," which is clearly expressed Mt. 1:18. Therefore, from
the words of Scripture it follows of necessity that she is the Mother
of God.
Again, it is written (Rm. 9:5) that Christ is of the Jews "according to
the flesh, who is over all things, God blessed for ever." But He is not
of the Jews except through the Blessed Virgin. Therefore He who is
"above all things, God blessed for ever," is truly born of the Blessed
Virgin as of His Mother.
Reply to Objection 2: This was an argument of Nestorius. But Cyril,
in a letter against Nestorius [Acta Conc. Ephes., p. 1, cap. ii],
answers it thus: "Just as when a man's soul is born with its body,
they are considered as one being: and if anyone wish to say that the
mother of the flesh is not the mother of the soul, he says too much.
Something like this may be perceived in the generation of Christ. For
the Word of God was born of the substance of God the Father: but
because He took flesh, we must of necessity confess that in the flesh
He was born of a woman." Consequently we must say that the
Blessed Virgin is called the Mother of God, not as though she were
the Mother of the Godhead, but because she is the mother,
according to His human nature, of the Person who has both the
divine and the human nature.
Reply to Objection 3: Although the name "God" is common to the
three Persons, yet sometimes it stands for the Person of the Father
alone, sometimes only for the Person of the Son or of the Holy

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.35, C.5.

Ghost, as stated above (Question 16, Article 1; FP, Question 39,
Article 4). So that when we say, "The Blessed Virgin is the Mother of
God," this word "God" stands only for the incarnate Person of the
Son.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.35, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether there are two filiations in Christ?