SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.172, C.3.

the prophetic light, since a deeper truth is gathered from these
pictures in the imagination by means of the enlightenment of the
higher light.
Reply to Objection 3: It is true that man is able by his natural powers
to form all kinds of pictures in the imagination, by simply
considering these pictures, but not so that they be directed to the
representation of intelligible truths that surpass his intellect, since
for this purpose he needs the assistance of a supernatural light.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.172, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the prophetic vision is always

accompanied by abstraction from the senses?
Objection 1: It would seem that the prophetic vision is always
accompanied by abstraction from the senses. For it is written (Num.
12:6): "If there be among you a prophet of the Lord, I will appear to
him in a vision, or I will speak to him in a dream." Now a gloss says
at the beginning of the Psalter, "a vision that takes place by dreams
and apparitions consists of things which seem to be said or done."
But when things seem to be said or done, which are neither said nor
done, there is abstraction from the senses. Therefore prophecy is
always accompanied by abstraction from the senses.
Objection 2: Further, when one power is very intent on its own
operation, other powers are drawn away from theirs; thus men who
are very intent on hearing something fail to see what takes place
before them. Now in the prophetic vision the intellect is very much
uplifted, and intent on its act. Therefore it seems that the prophetic
vision is always accompanied by abstraction from the senses.
Objection 3: Further, the same thing cannot, at the same time, tend
in opposite directions. Now in the prophetic vision the mind tends to
the acceptance of things from above, and consequently it cannot at
the same time tend to sensible objects. Therefore it would seem
necessary for prophetic revelation to be always accompanied by
abstraction from the senses.
Objection 4: On the contrary, It is written (1 Cor. 14:32): "The spirits
of the prophets are subject to the prophets." Now this were
impossible if the prophet were not in possession of his faculties, but
abstracted from his senses. Therefore it would seem that prophetic
vision is not accompanied by abstraction from the senses.
I answer that, As stated in the foregoing Article, the prophetic
revelation takes place in four ways: namely, by the infusion of an
intelligible light, by the infusion of intelligible species, by impression
or coordination of pictures in the imagination, and by the outward
presentation of sensible images. Now it is evident that there is no
abstraction from the senses, when something is presented to the
prophet's mind by means of sensible species---whether these be
divinely formed for this special purpose, as the bush shown to