SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.31, C.3.

power, especially by way of sorrow, which is remedied by
"comforting." Thirdly, the deficiency may be due to an inordinate act;
and this may be the subject of a threefold consideration. First, in
respect of the sinner, inasmuch as the sin proceeds from his
inordinate will, and thus the remedy takes the form of "reproof."
Secondly, in respect of the person sinned against; and if the sin be
committed against ourselves, we apply the remedy by "pardoning
the injury," while, if it be committed against God or our neighbor, it is
not in our power to pardon, as Jerome observes (Super Matth. xviii,
15). Thirdly, in respect of the result of the inordinate act, on account
of which the sinner is an annoyance to those who live with him, even
beside his intention; in which case the remedy is applied by "bearing
with him," especially with regard to those who sin out of weakness,
according to Rm. 15:1: "We that are stronger, ought to bear the
infirmities of the weak," and not only as regards their being infirm
and consequently troublesome on account of their unruly actions,
but also by bearing any other burdens of theirs with them, according
to Gal. 6:2: "Bear ye one another's burdens."
Reply to Objection 1: Burial does not profit a dead man as though
his body could be capable of perception after death. In this sense
Our Lord said that those who kill the body "have no more that they
can do"; and for this reason He did not mention the burial of the
dead with the other works of mercy, but those only which are more
clearly necessary. Nevertheless it does concern the deceased what
is done with his body: both that he may live in the memory of man
whose respect he forfeits if he remain without burial, and as regards
a man's fondness for his own body while he was yet living, a
fondness which kindly persons should imitate after his death. It is
thus that some are praised for burying the dead, as Tobias, and
those who buried Our Lord; as Augustine says (De Cura pro Mort.
iii).
Reply to Objection 2: All other needs are reduced to these, for
blindness and lameness are kinds of sickness, so that to lead the
blind, and to support the lame, come to the same as visiting the sick.
In like manner to assist a man against any distress that is due to an
extrinsic cause comes to the same as the ransom of captives. And
the wealth with which we relieve the poor is sought merely for the
purpose of relieving the aforesaid needs: hence there was no reason
for special mention of this particular need.
Reply to Objection 3: The reproof of the sinner, as to the exercise of

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.31, C.3.

the act of reproving, seems to imply the severity of justice, but, as to
the intention of the reprover, who wishes to free a man from the evil
of sin, it is an act of mercy and lovingkindness, according to Prov.
27:6: "Better are the wounds of a friend, than the deceitful kisses of
an enemy."
Reply to Objection 4: Nescience is not always a defect, but only
when it is about what one ought to know, and it is a part of
almsgiving to supply this defect by instruction. In doing this
however we should observe the due circumstances of persons,
place and time, even as in other virtuous acts.