Philosopher says. And after the sensitive soul, by the power of the
active principle in the semen, has been produced in one of the
principal parts of the thing generated, then it is that the sensitive
soul of the offspring begins to work towards the perfection of its own
body, by nourishment and growth. As to the active power which was
in the semen, it ceases to exist, when the semen is dissolved and the
(vital) spirit thereof vanishes. Nor is there anything unreasonable in
this, because this force is not the principal but the instrumental
agent; and the movement of an instrument ceases when once the
effect has been produced.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the intellectual soul is produced from the

semen?
Objection 1: It would seem that the intellectual soul is produced from
the semen. For it is written (Gn. 46:26): "All the souls that came out
of [Jacob's] thigh, sixty-six." But nothing is produced from the thigh
of a man, except from the semen. Therefore the intellectual soul is
produced from the semen.
Objection 2: Further, as shown above (Question 76, Article 3), the
intellectual, sensitive, and nutritive souls are, in substance, one soul
in man. But the sensitive soul in man is generated from the semen,
as in other animals; wherefore the Philosopher says (De Gener.
Animal. ii, 3) that the animal and the man are not made at the same
time, but first of all the animal is made having a sensitive soul.
Therefore also the intellectual soul is produced from the semen.
Objection 3: Further, it is one and the same agent whose action is
directed to the matter and to the form: else from the matter and the
form there would not result something simply one. But the
intellectual soul is the form of the human body, which is produced
by the power of the semen. Therefore the intellectual soul also is
produced by the power of the semen.
Objection 4: Further, man begets his like in species. But the human
species is constituted by the rational soul. Therefore the rational
soul is from the begetter.
Objection 5: Further, it cannot be said that God concurs in sin. But if
the rational soul be created by God, sometimes God concurs in the
sin of adultery, since sometimes offspring is begotten of illicit
intercourse. Therefore the rational soul is not created by God.
On the contrary, It is written in De Eccl. Dogmat. xiv that "the rational
soul is not engendered by coition."
I answer that, It is impossible for an active power existing in matter
to extend its action to the production of an immaterial effect. Now it
is manifest that the intellectual principle in man transcends matter;
for it has an operation in which the body takes no part whatever. It is
therefore impossible for the seminal power to produce the

intellectual principle.
Again, the seminal power acts by virtue of the soul of the begetter
according as the soul of the begetter is the act of the body, making
use of the body in its operation. Now the body has nothing whatever
to do in the operation of the intellect. Therefore the power of the
intellectual principle, as intellectual, cannot reach the semen. Hence
the Philosopher says (De Gener. Animal. ii, 3): "It follows that the
intellect alone comes from without."
Again, since the intellectual soul has an operation independent of
the body, it is subsistent, as proved above (Question 75, Article 2):
therefore to be and to be made are proper to it. Moreover, since it is
an immaterial substance it cannot be caused through generation, but
only through creation by God. Therefore to hold that the intellectual
soul is caused by the begetter, is nothing else than to hold the soul
to be non-subsistent and consequently to perish with the body. It is
therefore heretical to say that the intellectual soul is transmitted with
the semen.
Reply to Objection 1: In the passage quoted, the part is put instead
of the whole, the soul for the whole man, by the figure of
synecdoche.
Reply to Objection 2: Some say that the vital functions observed in
the embryo are not from its soul, but from the soul of the mother; or
from the formative power of the semen. Both of these explanations
are false; for vital functions such as feeling, nourishment, and
growth cannot be from an extrinsic principle. Consequently it must
be said that the soul is in the embryo; the nutritive soul from the
beginning, then the sensitive, lastly the intellectual soul.
Therefore some say that in addition to the vegetative soul which
existed first, another, namely the sensitive, soul supervenes; and in
addition to this, again another, namely the intellectual soul. Thus
there would be in man three souls of which one would be in
potentiality to another. This has been disproved above (Question 76,
Article 3).
Therefore others say that the same soul which was at first merely
vegetative, afterwards through the action of the seminal power,
becomes a sensitive soul; and finally this same soul becomes