sense; but by some inward, not feigned, but true presence (for nothing is
more present to it than itself); just as it thinks that itself lives, and
remembers, and understands, and wills. For it knows these things in
itself, and does not imagine them as though it had touched them by the
sense outside itself, as corporeal things are touched. And if it attaches
nothing to itself from the thought of these things, so as to think itself to
be something of the kind, then whatsoever remains to it from itself, that
alone is itself.

### CHAP. 11.—IN MEMORY, UNDERSTANDING , AND WILL, WE HAVE TO NOTE ABILITY, LEARNING, AND USE. MEMORY, UNDERSTANDING, AND WILL ARE ONE ESSENTIALLY, AND THREE RELATIVELY.

17. Putting aside, then, for a little while all other things, of which the
mind is certain concerning itself, let us especially consider and discuss
these three—memory, understanding, will. For we may commonly
discern in these three the character of the abilities of the young also; since
the more tenaciously and easily a boy remembers, and the more acutely
he understands, and the more ardently he studies, the more praiseworthy
is he in point of ability. But when the question is about any one's
learning, then we ask not how solidly and easily he remembers, or how
shrewdly he understands; but what it is that he remembers, and what it is
that he understands. And because the mind is regarded as praiseworthy,
not only as being learned, but also as being good, one gives heed not only
to what he remembers and what he understands, but also to what he wills
(velit); not how ardently he wills, but first what it is he wills, and then
how greatly he wills it. For the mind that loves eagerly is then to be
praised, when it loves that which ought to be loved eagerly. Since, then,
we speak of these three—ability, knowledge, use—the first of these is to be
considered under the three heads, of what a man can do in memory, and
understanding, and will. The second of them is to be considered in regard
to that which any one has in his memory and in his understanding, which
he has attained by a studious will. But the third, viz. use, lies in the will,
which handles those things that are contained in the memory and
understanding, whether it refer them to anything further, or rest satisfied
with them as an end. For to use, is to take up something into the power of

the will; and to enjoy, is to use with joy, not any longer of hope, but of the
actual thing. Accordingly, every one who enjoys, uses; for he takes up
something into the power of the will, wherein he also is satisfied as with
an end. But not every one who uses, enjoys, if he has sought after that,
which he takes up into the power of the will, not on account of the thing
itself, but on account of something else.
18. Since, then, these three, memory, understanding, wills are not three
lives, but one life; nor three minds, but one mind; it follows certainly that
neither are they three substances, but one substance. Since memory,
which is called life, and mind, and substance, is so called in respect to
itself; but it is called memory, relatively to something. And I should say
the same also of understanding and of will, since they are called
understanding and will relatively to something; but each in respect to
itself is life, and mind, and essence. And hence these three are one, in that
they are one life, one mind, one essence; and whatever else they are
severally called in respect to themselves, they are called also together, not
plurally, but in the singular number. But they are three, in that wherein
they are mutually referred to each other; and if they were not equal, and
this not only each to each, but also each to all, they certainly could not
mutually contain each other; for not only is each contained by each, but
also all by each. For I remember that I have memory and understanding,
and will; and I understand that I understand, and will, and remember;
and I will that I will, and remember, and understand; and I remember
together my whole memory, and understanding, and will. For that of my
memory which I do not remember, is not in my memory; and nothing is
so much in the memory as memory itself. Therefore I remember the
whole memory. Also, whatever I understand I know that I understand,
and I know that I will whatever I will; but whatever I know I remember.
Therefore I remember the whole of my understanding, and the whole of
my will. Likewise, when I understand these three things, I understand
them together as whole. For there is none of things intelligible which I do
not understand, except what I do not know; but what I do not know, I
neither remember, nor will. Therefore, whatever of things intelligible I do
not understand, it follows also that I neither remember nor will. And
whatever of things intelligible I remember and will, it follows that I
understand. My will also embraces my whole understanding and my