SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.184, C.5.

are regarded from different standpoints. For it belongs to the
perfection of a religious to occupy oneself in working out one's own
salvation, whereas it belongs to the perfection of a bishop to occupy
oneself in working for the salvation of others. Hence so long as a
man can be useful to the salvation of his neighbor, he would be
going back, if he wished to pass to the religious state, to busy
himself only with his own salvation, since he has bound himself to
work not only for his own but also for others' salvation. Wherefore
Innocent III says in the Decretal quoted above that "it is more easily
allowable for a monk to ascend to the episcopacy, than for a bishop
to descend to the monastic life. If, however, he be unable to procure
the salvation of others it is meet he should seek his own."
Reply to Objection 2: On account of no obstacle should a man
forego the work of his own salvation, which pertains to the religious
state. But there may be an obstacle to the procuring of another's
salvation; wherefore a monk may be raised to the episcopal state
wherein he is able also to work out his own salvation. And a bishop,
if he be hindered from procuring the salvation of others, may enter
the religious life, and may return to his bishopric should the obstacle
cease, for instance by the correction of his subjects, cessation of the
scandal, healing of his infirmity, removal of his ignorance by
sufficient instruction. Again, if he owed his promotion to simony of
which he was in ignorance, and resigning his episcopate entered the
religious life, he can be reappointed to another bishopric [Cap. Post
translat., de Renunt.]. On the other hand, if a man be deposed from
the episcopal office for some sin, and confined in a monastery that
he may do penance, he cannot be reappointed to a bishopric. Hence
it is stated (VII, qu. i, can. Hoc nequaquam): "The holy synod orders
that any man who has been degraded from the episcopal dignity to
the monastic life and a place of repentance, should by no means rise
again to the episcopate."
Reply to Objection 3: Even in natural things power remains inactive
on account of a supervening obstacle, for instance the act of sight
ceases through an affliction of the eye. So neither is it unreasonable
if, through the occurrence of some obstacle from without, the
episcopal power remain without the exercise of its act.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.184, C.5.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.184, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether it is lawful for a bishop on account of

bodily persecution to abandon the flock committed to his
care?
Objection 1: It would seem that it is unlawful for a bishop, on
account of some temporal persecution, to withdraw his bodily
presence from the flock committed to his care. For our Lord said (Jn.
10:12) that he is a hireling and no true shepherd, who "seeth the wolf
coming, and leaveth the sheep and flieth": and Gregory says (Hom.
xiv in Ev.) that "the wolf comes upon the sheep when any man by his
injustice and robbery oppresses the faithful and the humble."
Therefore if, on account of the persecution of a tyrant, a bishop
withdraws his bodily presence from the flock entrusted to his care, it
would seem that he is a hireling and not a shepherd.
Objection 2: Further, it is written (Prov. 6:1): "My son, if thou be
surety for thy friend, thou hast engaged fast thy hand to a stranger,"
and afterwards (Prov. 6:3): "Run about, make haste, stir up thy
friend." Gregory expounds these words and says (Pastor. iii, 4): "To
be surety for a friend, is to vouch for his good conduct by engaging
oneself to a stranger. And whoever is put forward as an example to
the lives of others, is warned not only to watch but even to rouse his
friend." Now he cannot do this if he withdraw his bodily presence
from his flock. Therefore it would seem that a bishop should not on
account of persecution withdraw his bodily presence from his flock.
Objection 3: Further, it belongs to the perfection of the bishop's state
that he devote himself to the care of his neighbor. Now it is unlawful
for one who has professed the state of perfection to forsake
altogether the things that pertain to perfection. Therefore it would
seem unlawful for a bishop to withdraw his bodily presence from the
execution of his office, except perhaps for the purpose of devoting
himself to works of perfection in a monastery.
On the contrary, our Lord commanded the apostles, whose
successors bishops are (Mt. 10:23): "When they shall persecute you
in this city, flee into another."
I answer that, In any obligation the chief thing to be considered is the
end of the obligation. Now bishops bind themselves to fulfil the
pastoral office for the sake of the salvation of their subjects.