Hebrews 4:16
6. "Let us come then boldly [with confidence] unto the throne of His grace,
that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need."
What "throne of grace" is he speaking of? That royal throne concerning
which it is said, "The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit on My right hand." [Psalm
110:1]
What is "let us come boldly"? Because "we have a sinless High Priest"
contending with the world. For, says He, "Be of good cheer, I have overcome the
world" [John 16:33]; for, this is to suffer all things, and yet to be pure from sins.
Although we (he means) are under sin, yet He is sinless.
How is it that we should "approach boldly"? Because now it is a throne of
Grace, not a throne of Judgment. Therefore boldly, "that we may obtain mercy,"
even such as we are seeking. For the affair is [one of] munificence, a royal
largess.
"And may find grace to help in time of need [for help in due season]." He
well said, "for help in time of need." If you approach now (he means) you will
receive both grace and mercy, for you approach "in due season"; but if you
approach then, no longer [will you receive it]. For then the approach is
unseasonable, for it is not "then a throne of Grace." Till that time He sits
granting pardon, but when the end [has come], then He rises up to judgment. For
it is said, "Arise, O God, judge the earth." [Psalm 82:8] ("Let us come boldly," or
he says again having no "evil conscience," that is, not being in doubt, for such an
one cannot "come with boldness.") On this account it is said, "I have heard you
in an accepted time and in a day of salvation have I succored you." [2
Corinthians 6:2] Since even now for those to find repentance who sin after
baptism is of grace.
But lest when you hear of an High Priest, you should think that He stands,

he immediately leads to the throne. But a Priest does not sit, but stands. Do you
see that [for Him] to be made High Priest, is not of nature, but of grace and
condescension, and humiliation?
This is it seasonable for us also now to say, "Let us draw near" asking
"boldly": let us only bring Faith and He gives all things. Now is the time of the
gift; let no man despair of himself. Then [will be] the time of despairing, when
the bride-chamber is shut, when the King has come in to see the guests, when
they who shall be accounted worthy thereof, shall have received as their portion
the Patriarch's bosom: but now it is not as yet so. For still are the spectators
assembled, still is the contest, still is the prize in suspense.
7. Let us then be earnest. For even Paul says, "I so run not as uncertainly."
[1 Corinthians 9:26] There is need of running, and of running vehemently. He
that runs [a race] sees none of those that meet him; whether he be passing
through meadows, or through dry places: he that runs looks not at the spectators,
but at the prize. Whether they be rich or whether they be poor, whether one
mock at him, or praise him, whether one insult, or cast stones at him, or plunder
his house, whether he see children, or wife, or anything whatever. He is occupied
in one thing alone, in running, in gaining the prize. He that runs, never stands
still, since even if he slacken a little, he has lost the whole. He that runs, not only
slackens nothing before the end, but then even especially strains his speed.
This have I spoken for those who say; In our younger days we used
discipline, in our younger days we fasted, now we are grown old. Now most of
all it behooves you to make your carefulness more intense. Do not count up to
me the old things especially done well: be now youthful and vigorous. For he
that runs this bodily race, when gray hairs have overtaken him, probably is not
able to run as he did before: for the whole contest depends on the body; but thou
— wherefore do you lessen your speed? For in this race there is need of a soul, a
soul thoroughly awakened: and the soul is rather strengthened in old age; then it
is in its full vigor, then is it in its pride.
For as the body, so long as it is oppressed by fevers and by one sickness