FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.100, C.2.

actions are so evident, that after very little consideration one is able
at once to approve or disapprove of them by means of these general
first principles: while some matters cannot be the subject of
judgment without much consideration of the various circumstances,
which all are not competent to do carefully, but only those who are
wise: just as it is not possible for all to consider the particular
conclusions of sciences, but only for those who are versed in
philosophy: and lastly there are some matters of which man cannot
judge unless he be helped by Divine instruction; such as the articles
of faith.
It is therefore evident that since the moral precepts are about
matters which concern good morals; and since good morals are
those which are in accord with reason; and since also every
judgment of human reason must needs by derived in some way from
natural reason; it follows, of necessity, that all the moral precepts
belong to the law of nature; but not all in the same way. For there are
certain things which the natural reason of every man, of its own
accord and at once, judges to be done or not to be done: e.g. "Honor
thy father and thy mother," and "Thou shalt not kill, Thou shalt not
steal": and these belong to the law of nature absolutely. And there
are certain things which, after a more careful consideration, wise
men deem obligatory. Such belong to the law of nature, yet so that
they need to be inculcated, the wiser teaching the less wise: e.g.
"Rise up before the hoary head, and honor the person of the aged
man," and the like. And there are some things, to judge of which,
human reason needs Divine instruction, whereby we are taught
about the things of God: e.g. "Thou shalt not make to thyself a
graven thing, nor the likeness of anything; Thou shalt not take the
name of the Lord thy God in vain."
This suffices for the Replies to the Objections.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.100, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the moral precepts of the Law are about

all the acts of virtue?
Objection 1: It would seem that the moral precepts of the Law are not
about all the acts of virtue. For observance of the precepts of the Old
Law is called justification, according to Ps. 118:8: "I will keep Thy
justifications." But justification is the execution of justice. Therefore
the moral precepts are only about acts of justice.
Objection 2: Further, that which comes under a precept has the
character of a duty. But the character of duty belongs to justice
alone and to none of the other virtues, for the proper act of justice
consists in rendering to each one his due. Therefore the precepts of
the moral law are not about the acts of the other virtues, but only
about the acts of justice.
Objection 3: Further, every law is made for the common good, as
Isidore says (Etym. v, 21). But of all the virtues justice alone regards
the common good, as the Philosopher says (Ethic. v, 1). Therefore
the moral precepts are only about the acts of justice.
On the contrary, Ambrose says (De Paradiso viii) that "a sin is a
transgression of the Divine law, and a disobedience to the
commandments of heaven." But there are sins contrary to all the
acts of virtue. Therefore it belongs to Divine law to direct all the acts
of virtue.
I answer that, Since the precepts of the Law are ordained to the
common good, as stated above (Question 90, Article 2), the precepts
of the Law must needs be diversified according to the various kinds
of community: hence the Philosopher (Polit. iv, 1) teaches that the
laws which are made in a state which is ruled by a king must be
different from the laws of a state which is ruled by the people, or by a
few powerful men in the state. Now human law is ordained for one
kind of community, and the Divine law for another kind. Because
human law is ordained for the civil community, implying mutual
duties of man and his fellows: and men are ordained to one another
by outward acts, whereby men live in communion with one another.
This life in common of man with man pertains to justice, whose
proper function consists in directing the human community.
Wherefore human law makes precepts only about acts of justice; and