diadem of love is upon our head, it is enough to point out the genuine disciple of
Christ, not to ourselves only, but also to the unbelievers. For, "by this," says He,
"shall all men know that you are My disciples, if you have love one to another."
[John 13:35] So that this sign is greater surely than all signs, in that the disciple
is recognised by it. For though any should work ten thousand signs, but be at
strife one with another, they will be a scorn to the unbelievers. Just as if they do
no sign, but love one another exactly, they will continue both reverenced and
inviolable by all men. Since Paul himself we admire on this account, not for the
dead whom he raised, nor for the lepers whom he cleansed, but because he said,
"who is weak, and I am not weak? Who is made to stumble, and I burn not?" [2
Corinthians 11:29] For should you have ten thousand miracles to compare with
this, you will have nothing equal to it to say. Since Paul also himself said, that a
great reward was laid up for him, not because he wrought miracles, but because
"to the weak he became as weak. For what is my reward?" says he. "That, when
I preach the Gospel, I may make the Gospel without charge." [1 Corinthians
9:18] And when he puts himself before the Apostles, he says not, "I have
wrought miracles more abundant than they," but, "I have labored more
abundantly than they." [1 Corinthians 15:10] And even by famine was he willing
to perish for the salvation of the disciples. "For it were better for me to die," says
he, "than that any man should make my glorying void:" [1 Corinthians 9:15] not
because he was glorying, but that he might not seem to reproach them. For he no
where is wont to glory in his own achievements, when the season does not call to
it; but even if he be compelled so to do he calls himself "a fool." But if he ever
glory it is "in infirmities," in wrongs, in greatly sympathizing with those who are
injured: even as here also he says, "who is weak, and I am not weak?" These
words are greater even than perils. Wherefore also he sets them last, amplifying
his discourse.
Of what then must we be worthy compared with him, who neither contemn
wealth for our own sake, nor give up the superfluities of our goods? But not so
Paul; rather both soul and body did he use to give up, that they who stoned and

beat him with rods, might obtain the kingdom. "For thus," says he, "has Christ
taught me to love;" who left behind Him the new commandment concerning
love, which also Himself fulfilled in deed. For being Lord of all, and of that
Blessed Nature; from men, whom He created out of nothing and on whom He
had bestowed innumerable benefits, from these, insulting and spitting on Him,
He turned not away, but even became man for their sakes, and conversed with
harlots and publicans, and healed the demoniacs, and promised heaven. And
after all these things they apprehended and beat him with rods, bound, scourged,
mocked, and at last crucified Him. And not even so did He turn away, but even
when He was on high upon the cross, He says, "Father, forgive them their sin."
But the thief who before this reviled Him, He translated into very paradise; and
made the persecutor Paul, an Apostle; and gave up His own disciples, who were
His intimates and wholly devoted to Him, unto death for the Jews' sake who
crucified Him.
Recollecting therefore in our minds all these things, both those of God and
of men, let us emulate these high deeds, and possess ourselves of the love which
is above all gifts, that we may obtain both the present and the future blessings:
the which may we all obtain, through the grace and mercy of our Lord Jesus
Christ, with Whom to the Father, with the Holy Ghost, be glory, power, honor,
now and ever, and world without end. Amen.