when another has done the wrong is far worse. Is it I that wronged you? Why
then inflict pain on Him who has not wronged you? This is the very extreme of
madness. I speak not in irony what I am about to say, nor without purpose, but as
I really think and as I feel. I would that every one of those who with you are
exasperated against me, and who by this exasperation are injuring themselves,
and departing elsewhere, would direct his blows at me in my very face, would
strip me and scourge me, be his charge against me just or unjust, and let loose
his wrath upon me, rather than that they should dare to commit what they now
dare. If this were done, it were nothing; nothing, that a man who is a mere
nothing and of no account whatever, should be so treated. And besides, I, the
wronged and injured person, might call upon God, and He might forgive you
your sins. Not because I have so great confidence; but because when he who has
been wronged, entreats for him who has done the wrong, he gains great
confidence. "If one man sin against another," it is said, "then shall they pray for
him" [1 Samuel 2:25]; and if I were unable, I might seek for other holy men, and
entreat them, and they might do it. But now whom shall we even entreat, when
God is outraged by us?
Mark the consistency; for of those who belong to this Church, some never
approach to communicate at all, or but once in the year, and then without
purpose, and just as it may happen; others more regularly indeed, yet they too
carelessly and without purpose, and while engaged in conversation, and trifling
about nothing: while those who, forsooth, seem to be in earnest, these are the
very persons who work this mischief. Yet surely, if it is for these things you are
in earnest, it were better that you also were in the ranks of the indifferent; or
rather it were better still, that neither they should be indifferent, nor you such as
you are. I speak not of you that are present, but of those who are deserting from
us. The act is adultery. And if you bear not to hear these things of them, neither
should ye of us. There must be breach of the law either on the one side or the
other. If then you have these suspicions concerning me, I am ready to retire from
my office, and resign it to whomsoever ye may choose. Only let the Church be

one. But if I have been lawfully made and consecrated, entreat those who have
contrary to the law mounted the episcopal throne to resign it.
These things I have said, not as dictating to you, but only to secure and
protect you. Since every one of you has come to age, and will have to give
account of the things which he has done, I entreat you not to cast the whole
matter on us, and consider yourselves to be irresponsible, that you may not go on
fruitlessly deceiving yourselves, and at last bewail it. An account indeed we shall
have to give of your souls; but it will be when we have been wanting on our part,
when we fail to exhort, when we fail to admonish, when we fail to protest. But
after these words, allow even me to say that "I am pure from the blood of all
men" [Acts 20:26]; and that "God will deliver my soul." [Ezekiel 3:19-21] Say
what you will, give a just cause why ye depart, and I will answer you. But no,
you will not state it. Wherefore I entreat you, endeavor henceforward both to
resist nobly and to bring back those who have seceded, that we may with one
accord lift up thanksgiving to God; for to Him belongs the glory for ever and
ever. Amen.