SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.184, C.2.

sufficiency of temporalities, according to 1 Tim. 5:17, "Let the priests
that rule well be esteemed worthy of double honor." Accordingly, to
desire the episcopal office on account of these incidental goods is
manifestly unlawful, and pertains to covetousness or ambition.
Wherefore our Lord said against the Pharisees (Mt. 23:6,7): "They
love the first places at feasts, and the first chairs in the synagogues,
and salutations in the market-place, and to be called by men, Rabbi."
As regards the second, namely the height of degree, it is
presumptuous to desire the episcopal office. Hence our Lord
reproved His disciples for seeking precedence, by saying to them
(Mt. 20:25): "You know that the princes of the gentiles lord it over
them." Here Chrysostom says (Hom. lxv in Matth.) that in these
words "He points out that it is heathenish to seek precedence; and
thus by comparing them to the gentiles He converted their
impetuous soul."
On the other hand, to desire to do good to one's neighbor is in itself
praiseworthy, and virtuous. Nevertheless, since considered as an
episcopal act it has the height of degree attached to it, it would seem
that, unless there be manifest and urgent reason for it, it would be
presumptuous for any man to desire to be set over others in order to
do them good. Thus Gregory says (Pastor. i, 8) that "it was
praiseworthy to seek the office of a bishop when it was certain to
bring one into graver dangers." Wherefore it was not easy to find a
person to accept this burden, especially seeing that it is through the
zeal of charity that one divinely instigated to do so, according to
Gregory, who says (Pastor. i, 7) that "Isaias being desirous of
profiting his neighbor, commendably desired the office of preacher."
Nevertheless, anyone may, without presumption, desire to do such
like works if he should happen to be in that office, or to be worthy of
doing them; so that the object of his desire is the good work and not
the precedence in dignity. Hence Chrysostom says: "It is indeed
good to desire a good work, but to desire the primacy of honor is
vanity. For primacy seeks one that shuns it, and abhors one that
desires it" [Opus Imperfectum in Matth. (Hom. xxxv)].
Reply to Objection 1: As Gregory says (Pastor. i, 8), "when the
Apostle said this he who was set over the people was the first to be
dragged to the torments of martyrdom," so that there was nothing to
be desired in the episcopal office, save the good work. Wherefore
Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xix, 19) that when the Apostle said,
"'Whoever desireth the office of bishop, desireth a good work,' he

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.184, C.2.

wished to explain what the episcopacy is: for it denotes work and
not honor: since skopos signifies 'watching.' Wherefore if we like we
may render episkopein by the Latin 'superintendere' [to watch over]:
thus a man may know himself to be no bishop if he loves to precede
rather than to profit others." For, as he observed shortly before, "in
our actions we should seek, not honor nor power in this life, since all
things beneath the sun are vanity, but the work itself which that
honor or power enables us to do." Nevertheless, as Gregory says
(Pastor. i, 8), "while praising the desire" (namely of the good work)
"he forthwith turns this object of praise into one of fear, when he
adds: It behooveth . . . a bishop to be blameless," as though to say:
"I praise what you seek, but learn first what it is you seek."
Reply to Objection 2: There is no parity between the religious and
the episcopal state, for two reasons. First, because perfection of life
is a prerequisite of the episcopal state, as appears from our Lord
asking Peter if he loved Him more than the others, before committing
the pastoral office to him, whereas perfection is not a prerequisite of
the religious state, since the latter is the way to perfection. Hence
our Lord did not say (Mt. 19:21): "If thou art perfect, go, sell all thou
hast," but "If thou wilt be perfect." The reason for this difference is
because, according to Dionysius (Eccl. Hier. vi), perfection pertains
actively to the bishop, as the "perfecter," but to the monk passively
as one who is "perfected": and one needs to be perfect in order to
bring others to perfection, but not in order to be brought to
perfection. Now it is presumptuous to think oneself perfect, but it is
not presumptuous to tend to perfection. Secondly, because he who
enters the religious state subjects himself to others for the sake of a
spiritual profit, and anyone may lawfully do this. Wherefore
Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xix, 19): "No man is debarred from
striving for the knowledge of truth, since this pertains to a
praiseworthy ease." On the other hand, he who enters the episcopal
state is raised up in order to watch over others, and no man should
seek to be raised thus, according to Heb. 5:4, "Neither doth any man
take the honor to himself, but he that is called by God": and
Chrysostom says: "To desire supremacy in the Church is neither just
nor useful. For what wise man seeks of his own accord to submit to
such servitude and peril, as to have to render an account of the
whole Church? None save him who fears not God's judgment, and
makes a secular abuse of his ecclesiastical authority, by turning it to
secular uses."
Reply to Objection 3: The dispensing of spiritual corn is not to be