anyone, or be possessed by anyone in time, does not come from
change of the divine person, but from change in the creature; as God
Himself is called Lord temporally by change of the creature.
Reply to Objection 3: Mission signifies not only procession from the
principle, but also determines the temporal term of the procession.
Hence mission is only temporal. Or we may say that it includes the
eternal procession, with the addition of a temporal effect. For the
relation of a divine person to His principle must be eternal. Hence
the procession may be called a twin procession, eternal and
temporal, not that there is a double relation to the principle, but a
double term, temporal and eternal.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the invisible mission of the divine person

is only according to the gift of sanctifying grace?
Objection 1: It would seem that the invisible mission of the divine
person is not only according to the gift of sanctifying grace. For the
sending of a divine person means that He is given. Hence if the
divine person is sent only according to the gift of sanctifying grace,
the divine person Himself will not be given, but only His gifts; and
this is the error of those who say that the Holy Ghost is not given,
but that His gifts are given.
Objection 2: Further, this preposition, "according to," denotes the
habitude of some cause. But the divine person is the cause why the
gift of sanctifying grace is possessed, and not conversely, according
to Rm. 5:5, "the charity of God is poured forth in our hearts by the
Holy Ghost, Who is given to us." Therefore it is improperly said that
the divine person is sent according to the gift of sanctifying grace.
Objection 3: Further, Augustine says (De Trin. iv, 20) that "the Son,
when temporally perceived by the mind, is sent." But the Son is
known not only by sanctifying grace, but also by gratuitous grace, as
by faith and knowledge. Therefore the divine person is not sent only
according to the gift of sanctifying grace.
Objection 4: Further, Rabanus says that the Holy Ghost was given to
the apostles for the working of miracles. This, however, is not a gift
of sanctifying grace, but a gratuitous grace. Therefore the divine
person is not given only according to the gift of sanctifying grace.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Trin. iii, 4) that "the Holy Ghost
proceeds temporally for the creature's sanctification." But mission is
a temporal procession. Since then the creature's sanctification is by
sanctifying grace, it follows that the mission of the divine person is
only by sanctifying grace.
I answer that, The divine person is fittingly sent in the sense that He
exists newly in any one; and He is given as possessed by anyone;
and neither of these is otherwise than by sanctifying grace.
For God is in all things by His essence, power and presence,
according to His one common mode, as the cause existing in the