some moments of prayer can become an excuse for not offering one’s life in mission; a privatized
lifestyle can lead Christians to take refuge in some false forms of spirituality.

263. We do well to keep in mind the early Christians and our many brothers and sisters throughout
history who were filled with joy, unflagging courage and zeal in proclaiming the Gospel. Some
people nowadays console themselves by saying that things are not as easy as they used to be,
yet we know that the Roman empire was not conducive to the Gospel message, the struggle for
justice, or the defence of human dignity. Every period of history is marked by the presence of
human weakness, self-absorption, complacency and selfishness, to say nothing of the
concupiscence which preys upon us all. These things are ever present under one guise or
another; they are due to our human limits rather than particular situations. Let us not say, then,
that things are harder today; they are simply different. But let us learn also from the saints who
have gone before us, who confronted the difficulties of their own day. So I propose that we pause
to rediscover some of the reasons which can help us to imitate them today.

Personal encounter with the saving love of Jesus

264. The primary reason for evangelizing is the love of Jesus which we have received, the
experience of salvation which urges us to ever greater love of him. What kind of love would not
feel the need to speak of the beloved, to point him out, to make him known? If we do not feel an
intense desire to share this love, we need to pray insistently that he will once more touch our
hearts. We need to implore his grace daily, asking him to open our cold hearts and shake up our
lukewarm and superficial existence. Standing before him with open hearts, letting him look at us,
we see that gaze of love which Nathaniel glimpsed on the day when Jesus said to him: “I saw you
under the fig tree” (Jn 1:48). How good it is to stand before a crucifix, or on our knees before the
Blessed Sacrament, and simply to be in his presence! How much good it does us when he once
more touches our lives and impels us to share his new life! What then happens is that “we speak
of what we have seen and heard” (1 Jn 1:3). The best incentive for sharing the Gospel comes from
contemplating it with love, lingering over its pages and reading it with the heart. If we approach it in
this way, its beauty will amaze and constantly excite us. But if this is to come about, we need to
recover a contemplative spirit which can help us to realize ever anew that we have been entrusted
with a treasure which makes us more human and helps us to lead a new life. There is nothing
more precious which we can give to others.

265. Jesus’ whole life, his way of dealing with the poor, his actions, his integrity, his simple daily
acts of generosity, and finally his complete self-giving, is precious and reveals the mystery of his
divine life. Whenever we encounter this anew, we become convinced that it is exactly what others
need, even though they may not recognize it: “What therefore you worship as unknown, this I
proclaim to you” (Acts 17:23). Sometimes we lose our enthusiasm for mission because we forget
that the Gospel responds to our deepest needs, since we were created for what the Gospel offers
us: friendship with Jesus and love of our brothers and sisters. If we succeed in expressing