actually considering everything that he knows by natural knowledge.
But as to the knowledge of the Word, and of the things he beholds in
the Word, he is never in this way in potentiality; because he is
always actually beholding the Word, and the things he sees in the
Word. For the bliss of the angels consists in such vision; and
beatitude does not consist in habit, but in act, as the Philosopher
says (Ethic. i, 8).
Reply to Objection 1: Movement is taken there not as the act of
something imperfect, that is, of something existing in potentiality,
but as the act of something perfect, that is, of one actually existing.
In this way understanding and feeling are termed movements, as
stated in De Anima iii, text. 28.
Reply to Objection 2: Such desire on the part of the angels does not
exclude the object desired, but weariness thereof. Or they are said to
desire the vision of God with regard to fresh revelations, which they
receive from God to fit them for the tasks which they have to
perform.
Reply to Objection 3: In the angel's substance there is no potentiality
divested of act. In the same way, the angel's intellect is never so in
potentiality as to be without act.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether an angel can understand many things at

the same time?
Objection 1: It would seem that an angel cannot understand many
things at the same time. For the Philosopher says (Topic. ii, 4) that "it
may happen that we know many things, but understand only one."
Objection 2: Further, nothing is understood unless the intellect be
informed by an intelligible species; just at the body is formed by
shape. But one body cannot be formed into many shapes. Therefore
neither can one intellect simultaneously understand various
intelligible things.
Objection 3: Further, to understand is a kind of movement. But no
movement terminates in various terms. Therefore many things
cannot be understood altogether.
On the contrary, Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. iv, 32): "The spiritual
faculty of the angelic mind comprehends most easily at the same
time all things that it wills."
I answer that, As unity of term is requisite for unity of movement, so
is unity of object required for unity of operation. Now it happens that
several things may be taken as several or as one; like the parts of a
continuous whole. For if each of the parts be considered severally
they are many: consequently neither by sense nor by intellect are
they grasped by one operation, nor all at once. In another way they
are taken as forming one in the whole; and so they are grasped both
by sense and intellect all at once and by one operation; as long as
the entire continuous whole is considered, as is stated in De Anima
iii, text. 23. In this way our intellect understands together both the
subject and the predicate, as forming parts of one proposition; and
also two things compared together, according as they agree in one
point of comparison. From this it is evident that many things, in so
far as they are distinct, cannot be understood at once; but in so far
as they are comprised under one intelligible concept, they can be
understood together. Now everything is actually intelligible
according as its image is in the intellect. All things, then, which can
be known by one intelligible species, are known as one intelligible
object, and therefore are understood simultaneously. But things
known by various intelligible species, are apprehended as different