FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.100, C.12.

shalt not lend to thy brother money to usury"; and the prohibition
against fraud, according to Dt. 25:13: "Thou shalt not have divers
weights in thy bag"; and universally all prohibitions relating to
peculations and larceny. To the eighth commandment, forbidding
false testimony, is added the prohibition against false judgment,
according to Ex. 23:2: "Neither shalt thou yield in judgment, to the
opinion of the most part, to stray from the truth"; and the prohibition
against lying (Ex. 23:7): "Thou shalt fly lying," and the prohibition
against detraction, according to Lev. 19:16: "Thou shalt not be a
detractor, nor a whisperer among the people." To the other two
commandments no further precepts are added, because thereby are
forbidden all kinds of evil desires.
Reply to Objection 1: The precepts of the decalogue are ordained to
the love of God and our neighbor as pertaining evidently to our duty
towards them; but the other precepts are so ordained as pertaining
thereto less evidently.
Reply to Objection 2: It is in virtue of their institution that the
ceremonial and judicial precepts "are determinations of the precepts
of the decalogue," not by reason of a natural instinct, as in the case
of the superadded moral precepts.
Reply to Objection 3: The precepts of a law are ordained for the
common good, as stated above (Question 90, Article 2). And since
those virtues which direct our conduct towards others pertain
directly to the common good, as also does the virtue of chastity, in
so far as the generative act conduces to the common good of the
species; hence precepts bearing directly on these virtues are given,
both in the decalogue and in addition thereto. As to the act of
fortitude there are the order to be given by the commanders in the
war, which is undertaken for the common good: as is clear from Dt.
20:3, where the priest is commanded (to speak thus): "Be not afraid,
do not give back." In like manner the prohibition of acts of gluttony
is left to paternal admonition, since it is contrary to the good of the
household; hence it is said (Dt. 21:20) in the person of parents: "He
slighteth hearing our admonitions, he giveth himself to revelling, and
to debauchery and banquetings."

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.100, C.12.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.100, C.13.

### ARTICLE 12. Whether the moral precepts of the Old Law

justified man?
Objection 1: It would seem that the moral precepts of the Old Law
justified man. Because the Apostle says (Rm. 2:13): "For not the
hearers of the Law are justified before God, but the doers of the Law
shall be justified." But the doers of the Law are those who fulfil the
precepts of the Law. Therefore the fulfilling of the precepts of the
Law was a cause of justification.
Objection 2: Further, it is written (Lev. 18:5): "Keep My laws and My
judgments, which if a man do, he shall live in them." But the spiritual
life of man is through justice. Therefore the fulfilling of the precepts
of the Law was a cause of justification.
Objection 3: Further, the Divine law is more efficacious than human
law. But human law justifies man; since there is a kind of justice
consisting in fulfilling the precepts of law. Therefore the precepts of
the Law justified man.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (2 Cor. 3:6): "The letter killeth":
which, according to Augustine (De Spir. et Lit. xiv), refers even to the
moral precepts. Therefore the moral precepts did not cause justice.
I answer that, Just as "healthy" is said properly and first of that
which is possessed of health, and secondarily of that which is a sign
or a safeguard of health; so justification means first and properly the
causing of justice; while secondarily and improperly, as it were, it
may denote a sign of justice or a disposition thereto. If justice be
taken in the last two ways, it is evident that it was conferred by the
precepts of the Law; in so far, to wit, as they disposed men to the
justifying grace of Christ, which they also signified, because as
Augustine says (Contra Faust. xxii, 24), "even the life of that people
foretold and foreshadowed Christ."
But if we speak of justification properly so called, then we must
notice that it can be considered as in the habit or as in the act: so
that accordingly justification may be taken in two ways. First,
according as man is made just, by becoming possessed of the habit
of justice: secondly, according as he does works of justice, so that
in this sense justification is nothing else than the execution of