that which is spoken outwardly, is the superabundance of that which is within.
See how vehemently He reprehends them. For if what they had said is so
evil, and is of the very mind of the devil, consider the root and well-spring of
their words, how far that must reach. And this is naturally the case; for while the
tongue through shame often pours not forth all its wickedness at once, the heart
having no human witness, fearlessly gives birth to whatever evils it will; for of
God it has not much regard. Since then men's sayings come to examination and
are set before all, but the heart is concealed; therefore the evils of the former
grow less, while those of the latter increase. But when that within is multiplied,
all that has been awhile hidden comes forth with a violent gushing. And as
persons vomiting strive at first to keep down the humors that force their way out,
but, when they are overcome, cast forth much abomination; so do they that
devise evil things, and speak ill of their neighbors.
"A good man out of his good treasure," says He, "brings forth good things,
and an evil man out of his evil treasure brings forth evil things."
For think not by any means, says He, that it is so in respect of wickedness
only, for in goodness also the same occurs: for there too the virtue within is more
than the words without. By which He signified, that both they were to be
accounted more wicked than their words indicated, and Himself more perfectly
good than His sayings declared. And He calls it "a treasure," indicating its
abundance.
Then again He fences them in with great terror. For think not at all, says He,
that the thing stops at this, that is, at the condemnation of the multitude; nay, for
all that do wickedly in such things shall suffer the utmost punishment. And He
said not, "ye," partly in order to instruct our whole race, partly to make His
saying the less burdensome.
"But I say unto you," this is His word, "that every idle word that men shall
speak, they shall give account thereof in the day of judgment." [Matthew 12:36]
And that is idle, which is not according to the fact, which is false, which has
in it unjust accusation; and some say, that which is vain also, for instance,

provoking inordinate laughter, or what is filthy, and immodest, and coarse.
"For by your words you shall be justified, and by your words you shall be
condemned." [Matthew 12:37]
Do you see how far the tribunal is from invidiousness? How favorable the
account required? For not upon what another has said of you, but from what you
have yourself spoken, will the Judge give His sentence; which is of all things the
very fairest: since surely with you it rests, either to speak, or not to speak.
2. Wherefore not those that are slandered, but the slanderers, have need to
be anxious and to tremble. For the former are not constrained to answer for
themselves touching the evil things which are said of them, but the latter will, for
the evil they have spoken; and over these impends the whole danger. So that the
persons censured should be without anxiety, not being to give account of the evil
that others have said; but the censurers have cause to be in anxiety, and to
tremble, as being themselves to be dragged before the judgment-seat in that
behalf. For this is indeed a diabolical snare, and a sin having in it no pleasure,
but harm only. Yea, and such an one is laying up an evil treasure in his soul. And
if he that has an evil humor in him does himself first reap the fruits of the
malady, much more he that is treasuring up in himself what is more bitter than
any bile, I mean, wickedness, will suffer the utmost evils, gathering unto himself
a grievous disease. And it is evident from the things that He vomits out. For if
they pain others so much, far more the soul that gives them birth.
Thus the plotter destroys himself first; just as he that treads on fire burns up
himself, and he that smites adamant spites himself, and he that kicks against the
pricks draws blood from himself. For somewhat of this kind is he that knows
how to suffer wrong, and to bear it manfully; he is adamant, and the pricks, and
fire; but he that has used himself to do wrong is feebler than any clay.
Not therefore to suffer wrong is evil, but to do it, and not to know how to
bear being wronged. For instance, how great wrongs did David endure! How
great wrongs did Saul commit! Which then was the stronger and happier? Which
the more wretched and miserable? Was it not he that did wrong? And mark it.