of precept (1 Cor. 7:3): "Let the husband render the debt to his life."
Therefore it is not a sin.
I answer that, If we suppose the corporeal nature to be created by
the good God we cannot hold that those things which pertain to the
preservation of the corporeal nature and to which nature inclines,
are altogether evil; wherefore, since the inclination to beget an
offspring whereby the specific nature is preserved is from nature, it
is impossible to maintain that the act of begetting children is
altogether unlawful, so that it be impossible to find the mean of
virtue therein; unless we suppose, as some are mad enough to
assert, that corruptible things were created by an evil god, whence
perhaps the opinion mentioned in the text is derived (Sent. iv, D, 26);
wherefore this is a most wicked heresy.
Reply to Objection 1: By these words the Apostle did not forbid the
marriage act, as neither did he forbid the possession of things when
he said (1 Cor. 7:31): "They that use this world" (let them be) "as if
they used it not." In each case he forbade enjoyment; which is clear
from the way in which he expresses himself; for he did not say "let
them not use it," or "let them not have them," but let them be "as if
they used it not" and "as if they had none."
Reply to Objection 2: We are united to God by the habit of grace and
by the act of contemplation and love. Therefore whatever severs the
former of these unions is always a sin, but not always that which
severs the latter, since a lawful occupation about lower things
distracts the mind so that it is not fit for actual union with God; and
this is especially the case in carnal intercourse wherein the mind is
withheld by the intensity of pleasure. For this reason those who have
to contemplate Divine things or handle sacred things are enjoined
not to have to do with their wives for that particular time; and it is in
this sense that the Holy Ghost, as regards the actual revelation of
hidden things, did not touch the hearts of the prophets at the time of
the marriage act.
Reply to Objection 3: The shamefulness of concupiscence that
always accompanies the marriage act is a shamefulness not of guilt,
but of punishment inflicted for the first sin, inasmuch as the lower
powers and the members do not obey reason. Hence the argument
does not prove.

Reply to Objection 4: Properly speaking, a thing is said to be
excused when it has some appearance of evil, and yet is not evil, or
not as evil as it seems, because some things excuse wholly, others
in part. And since the marriage act, by reason of the corruption of
concupiscence, has the appearance of an inordinate act, it is wholly
excused by the marriage blessing, so as not to be a sin.
Reply to Objection 5: Although they are the same as to their natural
species, they differ as to their moral species, which differs in respect
of one circumstance, namely intercourse with one's wife and with
another than one's wife; just as to kill a man by assault or by justice
differentiates the moral species, although the natural species is the
same; and yet the one is lawful and the other unlawful.
Reply to Objection 6: The excess of passions that corrupts virtue not
only hinders the act of reason, but also destroys the order of reason.
The intensity of pleasure in the marriage act does not do this, since,
although for the moment man is not being directed, he was
previously directed by his reason.