Hebrews 2:4
How then was it confirmed? What if those that heard were forgers? Says
some one. This objection then he overthrows, and shows that the grace was not
human. If they had gone astray, God would not have borne witness to them; for
he subjoined [Hebrews 2:4], "God also bearing witness with them." Both they
indeed bear witness, and God bears witness too. How does He bear witness? Not
by word or by voice, (though this also would have been worthy of belief): but
how? "By signs, and wonders, and various miracles." (Well said he, "various
miracles," declaring the abundance of the gifts: which was not so in the former
dispensation, neither so great signs and so various.) That is, we did not believe
them simply, but through signs and wonders: wherefore we believe not them, but
God Himself.
"And by gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to His own will."
What then, if wizards also do signs, and the Jews said that He "cast out
devils through Beelzebub"? [Luke 11:15] But they do not such kind of signs:
therefore said he "various miracles": for those others were not miracles, [or
powers, ] but weakness and fancy, and things altogether vain. Wherefore he said,
"by gifts of the Holy Ghost according to His own will."
8. Here he seems to me to intimate something further. For it is not likely
there were many there who had gifts, but that these had failed, upon their
becoming more slothful. In order then that even in this he might comfort them,
and not leave them to fall away, he referred all to the will of God. He knows (he
says) what is expedient, and for whom, and apportions His grace accordingly.
Which also he [Paul] does in the Epistle to the Corinthians, saying, "God has set
every one of us, as it pleased Him." [1 Corinthians 12:18] And again, "The
manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal." [1 Corinthians
12:7]

"According to His will." He shows that the gift is according to the will of
the Father. But oftentimes on account of their unclean and slothful life many
have not received a gift, and sometimes also those whose life is good and pure
have not received one. Why, I pray you? Lest they might be made haughty, that
they might not be puffed up, that they might not grow more negligent, that they
might not be more excited. For if even without a gift, the mere consciousness of
a pure life be sufficient to lift a man up, much more when the grace is added
also. Wherefore to the humble, to the simple, it was rather given, and especially
to the simple: for it is said, "in singleness and gladness of heart." [Acts 2:46]
Yea, and hereby also he rather urged them on, and if they were growing
negligent gave them a spur. For the humble, and he who imagines no great things
concerning himself, becomes more earnest when he has received a gift, in that he
has obtained what is beyond his deserts, and thinks that he is not worthy thereof.
But he who thinks he has done well, reckoning it to be his due, is puffed up.
Wherefore God dispenses this profitably: which one may see taking place also in
the Church: for one has the word of teaching, another has not power to open his
mouth. Let not this man (he says) be grieved because of this. For "the
manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal." [1 Corinthians
12:7] For if a man that is an householder knows to whom he should entrust
anything, much more God, who understands the mind of men, "who knows all
things or ever they come into being." One thing only is worthy of grief, Sin:
there is nothing else.
Say not, Wherefore have I not riches? Or, If I had, I would give to the poor.
You know not, if you had them, whether you would not the rather be covetous.
For now indeed you say these things, but being put to the trial you would be
different. Since also when we are satisfied, we think that we are able to fast; but
when we have gone without a little space, other thoughts come into us. Again,
when we are out of the way of strong drink, we think ourselves able to master
our appetite, but no longer so, when we are caught by it.
Say not, Wherefore had I not the gift of teaching? Or, If I had it, I should