love of Paul, the charm ([φίλτρον]) they found in Christ. Compare with this your
own estate, your anxiety about money, your vying with harlots (i.e. in dress),
your emulating of the grass, and then you will see who they were and who you
are. Or rather do not compare only, but vie with this woman, and after laying
aside the burdens of grass ([χλόης]), (for this is what your costly dressing is),
take thou the dress from heaven, and learn whence Priscilla became such as she
was. How then did they become so? For two years they entertained Paul as a
guest: [Probably Acts 19:10] and what is there that these two years may not have
done for their souls? What am I to do then, you will say because I have not Paul?
If you be minded you may have him in a truer sense than they. For even with
them the sight of Paul was not what made them of such a character, but the
words of Paul. And so, if you be so minded, you shall have both Paul, and Peter,
and John, and the whole choir of the Prophets, with the Apostles, associating
with you continually. For take the books of these blessed ones, and hold a
continual intercourse with their writings, and they will be able to make you like
the tent-maker's wife. And why speak I of Paul? For if you will, you may have
Paul's Master Himself. For through Paul's tongue even He will discourse with
you. And in another way again you will be able to receive this Person, when you
receive the saints, even when you tend those that believe in Him. And so even
after their departure you will have many memorials of piety. For even the table at
which the saint ate, and a seat on which he sat, and the couch on which he lay
knows how to pierce him that received him; even after his departure. How then,
think you, was that Shunamite pierced at entering the upper chamber where
Elisha abode, when she saw the table, the couch on which the holy man slept;
and what religiousness must she have felt come from it? For had this not been
so, she would not have cast the child there when dead, if she had not reaped
great benefit from thence. For if so long time after upon entering in where Paul
abode, where he was bound, where he sat and discoursed, we are elevated, and
find ourselves starting off from the places to that memory (so Field: Vulg. "the
memory of that day"); when the circumstances were still fresher, what must those

have been likely to feel, who had religiously entertained him? Knowing all this
then, let us receive the Saints, that the house may shine, that it may be freed
from choking thorns, that the bedchamber may become a haven. And let us
receive them, and wash their feet. You are not better than Sarah, nor more noble,
nor more wealthy, though thou be an empress. For she had three hundred and
eighteen homeborn servants, at a time when to have two servants even was to be
wealthy. And why do I mention the three hundred and eighteen servants? She
had become possessed of the whole world in her seed and in the promises, she
had the "friend of God" [Isaiah 41:8; James 2:23] for her husband, God Himself
as a Patron, a thing greater than any kingdom. And yet, though she was in so
illustrious and honorable estate, this woman kneaded the flour, and did all the
other servant's offices, and stood by them as they banqueted too in the rank of a
servant. You are not of nobler birth than Abraham, who yet did the part of
domestics after his exploits after his victories, after the honor paid him by the
king of Egypt, after driving out the kings of the Persians, and raising the glorious
trophies. And look not to this; that in appearance the Saints that lodge with you
are but poor, and as beggars, and in rags many times, but be mindful of that
voice which says, "Inasmuch as you have done it to the least of these, you have
done it unto me." [Matthew 25:40] And, "Despise not one of these little ones,
because their angels do always behold the face of My Father which is in
heaven." [Matthew 18:10] Receive them then with readiness of mind, bringing
as they do ten thousand blessings to you, through the greeting of peace. (ib.
10:12, 13.) And after Sarah, reflect upon Rebecca also, who both drew water and
gave to drink, and called the stranger in, trampling down all haughtiness.
However, through this, great were the rewards of hospitality she received! And
thou, if you be so minded, wilt receive even greater than those. For it will not be
the fruit of children only that God will give you, but the heaven, and the
blessings there, and a freedom from hell, and a remission of sins. For great, yea,
very great, is the fruit of hospitality. [Luke 11:41] Thus too Jethro, and that
though he was a foreigner, gained for a relation him who with so great power