SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.185, C.4.

Objection 5: Further, the episcopal state is more perfect than the
religious state. But bishops may have property, as stated above
(Question 185, Article 6). Therefore religious may also.
Objection 6: Further, almsgiving is a work most acceptable to God,
and as Chrysostom says (Hom. ix in Ep. ad Hebr.) "is a most
effective remedy in repentance." Now poverty excludes almsgiving.
Therefore it would seem that poverty does not pertain to religious
perfection.
On the contrary, Gregory says (Moral. viii, 26): "There are some of
the righteous who bracing themselves up to lay hold of the very
height of perfection, while they aim at higher objects within, abandon
all things without." Now, as stated above, (Articles 1,2), it belongs
properly to religious to brace themselves up in order to lay hold of
the very height of perfection. Therefore it belongs to them to
abandon all outward things by voluntary poverty.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 2), the religious state is an
exercise and a school for attaining to the perfection of charity. For
this it is necessary that a man wholly withdraw his affections from
worldly things; since Augustine says (Confess. x, 29), speaking to
God: "Too little doth he love Thee, who loves anything with Thee,
which he loveth not for Thee." Wherefore he says (Questions. lxxxiii,
qu. 36) that "greater charity means less cupidity, perfect charity
means no cupidity." Now the possession of worldly things draws a
man's mind to the love of them: hence Augustine says (Ep. xxxi ad
Paulin. et Theras.) that "we are more firmly attached to earthly things
when we have them than when we desire them: since why did that
young man go away sad, save because he had great wealth? For it is
one thing not to wish to lay hold of what one has not, and another to
renounce what one already has; the former are rejected as foreign to
us, the latter are cut off as a limb." And Chrysostom says (Hom. lxiii
in Matth.) that "the possession of wealth kindles a greater flame and
the desire for it becomes stronger."
Hence it is that in the attainment of the perfection of charity the first
foundation is voluntary poverty, whereby a man lives without
property of his own, according to the saying of our Lord (Mt. 19:21),
"If thou wilt be perfect, go, sell all thou hast, and give to the poor . . .
and come, follow Me."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.185, C.4.

Reply to Objection 1: As the gloss adds, "when the Apostle said this
(namely "not that you should be burthened," i.e. with poverty)," he
did not mean that "it were better not to give: but he feared for the
weak, whom he admonished so to give as not to suffer privation."
Hence in like manner the other gloss means not that it is unlawful to
renounce all one's temporal goods, but that this is not required of
necessity. Wherefore Ambrose says (De Offic. i, 30): "Our Lord does
not wish," namely does not command us "to pour out our wealth all
at once, but to dispense it; or perhaps to do as did Eliseus who slew
his oxen, and fed the poor with that which was his own so that no
household care might hold him back."
Reply to Objection 2: He who renounces all his possessions for
Christ's sake exposes himself to no danger, neither spiritual nor
corporal. For spiritual danger ensues from poverty when the latter is
not voluntary; because those who are unwillingly poor, through the
desire of money-getting, fall into many sins, according to 1 Tim. 6:9,
"They that will become rich, fall into temptation and into the snare of
the devil." This attachment is put away by those who embrace
voluntary poverty, but it gathers strength in those who have wealth,
as stated above. Again bodily danger does not threaten those who,
intent on following Christ, renounce all their possessions and
entrust themselves to divine providence. Hence Augustine says (De
Serm. Dom. in Monte ii, 17): "Those who seek first the kingdom of
God and His justice are not weighed down by anxiety lest they lack
what is necessary."
Reply to Objection 3: According to the Philosopher (Ethic. ii, 6), the
mean of virtue is taken according to right reason, not according to
the quantity of a thing. Consequently whatever may be done in
accordance with right reason is not rendered sinful by the greatness
of the quantity, but all the more virtuous. It would, however, be
against right reason to throw away all one's possessions through
intemperance, or without any useful purpose; whereas it is in
accordance with right reason to renounce wealth in order to devote
oneself to the contemplation of wisdom. Even certain philosophers
are said to have done this; for Jerome says (Ep. xlviii ad Paulin.):
"The famous Theban, Crates, once a very wealthy man, when he was
going to Athens to study philosophy, cast away a large amount of
gold; for he considered that he could not possess both gold and
virtue at the same time." Much more therefore is it according to right
reason for a man to renounce all he has, in order perfectly to follow
Christ. Wherefore Jerome says (Ep. cxxv ad Rust. Monach.): "Poor