On the contrary, It is written (Lk. 21:27): "Then they shall see the Son
of man coming in a cloud with great power and majesty." Now
majesty and power pertain to glory. Therefore He will appear in the
form of glory.
Further, he who judges should be more conspicuous than those who
are judged. Now the elect who will be judged by Christ will have a
glorified body. Much more therefore will the Judge appear in a
glorified form.
Further, as to be judged pertains to weakness, so to judge pertains
to authority and glory. Now at His first coming when Christ came to
be judged, He appeared in the form of weakness. Therefore at the
second coming, when He will come to judge, He will appear in the
form of glory.
I answer that, Christ is called the mediator of God and men (1 Tim.
2:5) inasmuch as He satisfies for men and intercedes for them to the
Father, and confers on men things which belong to the Father,
according to Jn. 17:22, "The glory which Thou hast given Me, I have
given to them." Accordingly then both these things belong to Him in
that He communicates with both extremes: for in that He
communicates with men, He takes their part with the Father, and in
that He communicates with the Father, He bestows the Father's gifts
on men. Since then at His first coming He came in order to make
satisfaction for us to the Father, He came in the form of our
weakness. But since at His second coming He will come in order to
execute the Father's justice on men, He will have to show forth His
glory which is in Him by reason of His communication with the
Father: and therefore He will appear in the form of glory.
Reply to Objection 1: He will appear in the same flesh, but not under
the same form.
Reply to Objection 2: The sign of the cross will appear at the
judgment, to denote not a present but a past weakness: so as to
show how justly those were condemned who scorned so great
mercy, especially those who persecuted Christ unjustly. The scars
which will appear in His body will not be due to weakness, but will
indicate the exceeding power whereby Christ overcame His enemies
by His Passion and infirmity. He will also show forth His most
shameful death, not by bringing it sensibly before the eye, as though

He suffered it there; but by the things which will appear then, namely
the signs of His past Passion, He will recall men to the thought of His
past death.
Reply to Objection 3: A glorified body has it in its power to show
itself or not to show itself to an eye that is not glorified, as stated
above (Question 85, Article 2, ad 3). Hence Christ will be visible to all
in His glorified form.
Reply to Objection 4: Even as our friend's glory gives us pleasure, so
the glory and power of one we hate is most displeasing to us. Hence
as the sight of the glory of Christ's humanity will be a reward to the
righteous, so will it be a torment to Christ's enemies: wherefore it is
written (Is. 26:11): "Let the envious people see and be confounded
and let fire" (i.e. envy) "devour Thy enemies."
Reply to Objection 5: Form is taken there for human nature wherein
He was judged and likewise will judge; but not for a quality of nature,
namely of weakness, which will not be the same in Him when judging
as when judged (Cf. ad 2).