making them bright and shining. It leads unto the kingdom, that unto hell. And
therefore the one way is broad, the other narrow. Wherefore also, He Himself
said, "In the world you shall have tribulation," [John 16:33] as though he were
leaving some great good behind unto us. If then you are a disciple, travel thou
the straight and narrow way, and be not disgusted nor discouraged. For even if
you be not afflicted in that way; you must inevitably be afflicted on other
grounds, of no advantage to you. For the envious man also, and the lover of
money, and he that burns for an harlot, and the vainglorious, and each one of the
rest that follow whatsoever is evil, endures many disheartenings and afflictions,
and is not less afflicted than they who mourn. And if he does not weep nor
mourn, it is for shame and insensibility: since if you should look into his soul,
you will see it filled with countless waves. Since then whether we follow this
way of life or that, we must needs be afflicted: wherefore choose we not this way
which along with affliction brings crowns innumerable? For thus has God led all
the saints through affliction and distress, at once doing them service, and
securing the rest of men against entertaining a higher opinion of them than they
deserve. For thus it was that idolatries gained ground at first; men being held in
admiration beyond their desert. Thus the Roman senate decreed Alexander to be
the thirteenth God, for it possessed the privilege of electing and enrolling Gods.
For instance, when all about Christ had been reported, the ruler of the nation sent
to inquire, whether they would be pleased to elect Him also a God. They
however refused their consent, being angry and indignant that previous to their
vote and decree, the Power of the Crucified flashing abroad had won over the
whole world to its own worship. But thus it was ordered even against their will
that the Divinity of Christ was not proclaimed by man's decree, nor was He
counted one of the many that were by them elected. For they counted even
boxers to be Gods, and the favorite of Hadrian; after whom the city Antinous is
named. For since death testifies against their moral nature, the devil invented
another way, that of the soul's immortality; and mingling therewith that
excessive flattery, he seduced many into impiety. And observe what wicked

artifice. When we advance that doctrine for a good purpose, he overthrows our
words; but when he himself is desirous of framing an argument for mischief, he
is very zealous in setting it up. And if any one ask, 'How is Alexander a God? Is
he not dead? And miserably too?' 'Yes, but the soul is immortal?' he replies. Now
you argue and philosophizest for immortality, to detach men from the God Who
is over all: but when we declare that this is God's greatest gift, you persuade your
dupes that men are low and grovelling, and in no better case than the brutes. And
if we say, 'the Crucified lives,' laughter follows immediately: although the whole
world proclaims it, both in old time and now; in old time by miracles, now by
converts; for truly these successes are not those of a dead man: but if one say,
'Alexander lives,' you believe, although you have no miracle to allege.
5. 'Yes,' one replies; 'I have; for when he lived he wrought many and great
achievements; for he subdued both nations and cities, and in many wars and
battles he conquered, and erected trophies.'
If then I shall show [somewhat] which he when alive never dreamed of,
neither he, nor any other man that ever lived, what other proof of the resurrection
will you require? For that while alive one should win battles and victories, being
a king and having armies at his disposal, is nothing marvelous, no, nor startling
or novel; but that after a Cross and Tomb one should perform such great things
throughout every land and sea, this it is which is most especially replete with
such amazement, and proclaims His divine and unutterable Power. And
Alexander indeed after his decease never restored again his kingdom which had
been rent in pieces and quite abolished: indeed how was it likely he, dead,
should do so? But Christ then most of all set up His after He was dead. And why
speak I of Christ? Seeing that He granted to His disciples also, after their deaths,
to shine? For, tell me, where is the tomb of Alexander? Show it me and tell me
the day on which he died. But of the servants of Christ the very tombs are
glorious, seeing they have taken possession of the most loyal city; and their days
are well known, making festivals for the world. And his tomb even his own
people know not, but this man's the very barbarians know. And the tombs of the