Hebrews 10:1
5. [Hebrews 10:1] "For" (he says) "the Law having a shadow of the good
things to come, not the very image of the things"; i.e. not the very reality. For as
in painting, so long as one [only] draws the outlines, it is a sort of "shadow" but
when one has added the bright paints and laid in the colors, then it becomes "an
image." Something of this kind also was the Law.
"For" (he says) "the Law having a shadow of the good things to come, not
the very image of the things," i.e. of the sacrifice, of the remission: "can never by
those sacrifices with which they offered continually make the comers thereunto
perfect."

Hebrews 10:2-9
"For then would they not have ceased to be offered? Because that the
worshipers once purged, should have had no more conscience of sins? But in
those sacrifices there is a remembrance again made of sins every year. For it is
not possible that the blood of bulls and of goats should take away sins.
Wherefore when He comes into the world, He says, Sacrifice and offering You
would not, but a body have You prepared Me. In burnt-offerings and sacrifices
for sin You have had no pleasure. Then said I, Lo! I come, in the volume of the
book it is written of Me, to do Your will, O God. Above when He said, Sacrifice,
and offering, and burnt-offerings, and [offering] for sin You would not, neither
had pleasure therein, which are offered by the Law, then He said, Lo! I come to
do Your will, O God! He takes away the first that He may establish the second."
[Hebrews 10:2-9]
You see again the superabundance [of his proofs]? This sacrifice (he says)
is one; whereas the others were many: therefore they had no strength, because
they were many. For, tell me, what need of many, if one had been sufficient? So
that their being many, and offered "continually," proves that they [the
worshipers] were never made clean. For as a medicine, when it is powerful and
productive of health, and able to remove the disease entirely, effects all after one
application; as, therefore, if being once applied it accomplishes the whole, it
proves its own strength in being no more applied, and this is its business, to be
no more applied; whereas if it is applied continually, this is a plain proof of its
not having strength. For it is the excellence of a medicine to be applied once, and
not often. So is it in this case also. Why forsooth are they continually cured with
the "same sacrifices"? For if they were set free from all their sins, the sacrifices
would not have gone on being offered every day. For they had been appointed to
be continually offered in behalf of the whole people, both in the evening and in

the day. So that there was an arraignment of sins, and not a release from sins; an
arraignment of weakness, not an exhibition of strength. For because the first had
no strength, another also was offered: and since this effected nothing, again
another; so that it was an evidence of sins. The "offering" indeed then, was an
evidence of sins, the "continually," an evidence of weakness. But with regard to
Christ, it was the contrary: He was "once offered." The types therefore contain
the figure only, not the power; just as in images, the image has the figure of the
man, not the power. So that the reality and the type have [somewhat] in common
with one another. For the figure exists equally in both, but not the power. So too
also is it in respect of Heaven and of the tabernacle, for the figure was equal: for
there was the Holy of Holies, but the power and the other things were not the
same.
What is, "He has appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of Himself"?
What is this "putting away"? It is making contemptible. For sin has no longer
any boldness; for it is made of no effect in that when it ought to have demanded
punishment, it did not demand it: that is, it suffered violence: when it expected to
destroy all men, then it was itself destroyed.
"He has appeared by the sacrifice of Himself" (he says), that is, "He has
appeared," unto God, and drawn near [unto Him]. For do not [think] because the
High Priest was wont to do this oftentimes in the year.... So that henceforward
this is done in vain, although it is done; for what need is there of medicines
where there are no wounds? On this account He ordained offerings
"continually," because of their want of power, and that a remembrance of sins
might be made.
6. What then? Do not we offer every day? We offer indeed, but making a
remembrance of His death, and this [remembrance] is one and not many. How is
it one, and not many? Inasmuch as that [Sacrifice] was once for all offered, [and]
carried into the Holy of Holies. This is a figure of that [sacrifice] and this
remembrance of that. For we always offer the same, not one sheep now and
tomorrow another, but always the same thing: so that the sacrifice is one. And