For this cause indeed does he set death last, that from the victory over the
rest this also might be easily admitted by the unbeliever. For when He destroys
the devil who brought in death, much more will He put an end to His work.
9. Since then he referred all to Him, the "abolishing rule and authority," the
perfecting of His kingdom, (I mean the salvation of the faithful, the peace of the
world, the taking away of evils, for this is to perfect His kingdom,) the putting an
end to death; and he said not, "the Father by Him," but, "Himself shall put down,
and Himself shall put under His feet," and he no where mentioned Him that
begot Him; he was afraid afterward, lest on this account among some of the
more irrational persons, either the Son might seem to be greater than the Father,
or to be a certain distinct principle, unbegotten. And therefore, gently guarding
himself, he qualifies the magnitude of his expressions, saying, "for He put all
things in subjection under His feet," again referring to the Father these high
achievements; not as though the Son were without power. For how could He be,
of whom he testified so great things before, and referred to Him all that was
said? But it was for the reason which I mentioned, and that he might show all
things to be common to Father and Son which were done in our behalf. For that
Himself alone was sufficient to "put all things in subjection under Him," hear
again Paul saying, [Philippians 3:21] "Who shall fashion anew the body of our
humiliation that it may be conformed to the body of His glory, according to the
working whereby He is able even to subject all things unto Himself."
Then also he uses a correction, saying, "But when He says, all things are
put in subjection, it is evident that He is excepted who did subject all things unto
Him," testifying even thence no small glory to the Only-Begotten. For if He were
less and much inferior, this fear would never have been entertained by him.
Neither is he content with this, but also adds another thing, as follows. I say, lest
any should doubtingly ask, "And what if the Father has not been 'put under
Him?' this does not at all hinder the Son from being the more mighty;" fearing
this impious supposition, because that expression was not sufficient to point out
this also, he added, going very much beyond it, "But when all things have been

subjected unto Him, then shall the Son also Himself be subjected;" showing His
great concord with the Father, and that He is the principle of all other good
things and the first Cause, who has begotten One so great in power and in
achievements.
10. But if he said more than the subject-matter demanded, marvel not. For
in imitation of his Master he does this: since He too purposing to show His
concord with Him that begot Him, and that He has not come without His mind,
descends so far, I say not, as the proof of concord demanded, but as the
weakness of the persons present required. For He prays to His Father for no
other cause but this; and stating the reason He says, "that they may believe that
You have sent Me." [John 11:42] In imitation therefore of Him, Paul here in his
manner of speech goes beyond what was required; not that you might have any
suspicion of a forced servitude, far from it; but that he might the more entirely
cast out those impious doctrines. For so when he is minded to pull up any thing
by the roots, he is wont to do it, and abundantly more with it. Thus too, for
example, when he spoke of a believing wife and an unbelieving husband,
companying with one another by the law of marriage, that the wife might not
consider herself defiled by that intercourse and the embraces of the unbeliever,
he said not, "the wife is not unclean," nor, "she is no wise harmed by the
unbeliever," but, which was much more, "the unbeliever is even 'sanctified' by
her," not meaning to signify that the heathen was made holy through her, but by
the very great strength of the expression anxious to remove her fear. So also
here, his zeal to take away that impious doctrine by a very strong utterance was
the cause of his expressing himself as he did. For as to suspect the Son of
weakness is extreme impiety: (wherefore he corrects it, saying, "He shall put all
enemies under His feet:") so on the other hand is it more impious to consider the
Father inferior to Him. Wherefore he takes it also away with exceeding force.
And observe how he puts it. For he said not simply, "He is excepted which put
all things under Him," but, "it is manifest," "for even if it be admitted," says he,
"nevertheless I make it sure. "