THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.31, C.4.

defection to strange nations during the Babylonian captivity; which
also foreshadowed the fact that Christ would pass from the Jews to
the Gentiles."
On the other hand, Jerome (on Mt. 1:12-15) says that there were two
Joachims---that is, Jechonias, father and son: both of whom are
mentioned in Christ's genealogy, so as to make clear the distinction
of the generations, which the evangelist divides into three series of
fourteen; which amounts in all to forty-two persons. Which number
may also be applied to the Holy Church: for it is the product of six,
which signifies the labor of the present life, and seven, which
signifies the rest of the life to come: for six times seven are fortytwo. The number fourteen, which is the sum of ten and four, can also
be given the same signification as that given to the number forty,
which is the product of the same numbers by multiplication.
But the number used by Luke in Christ's genealogy signifies the
generality of sins. "For the number ten is shown in the ten precepts
of the Law to be the number of righteousness. Now, to sin is to go
beyond the restriction of the Law. And eleven is the number beyond
ten." And seven signifies universality: because "universal time is
involved in seven days." Now seven times eleven are seventy-seven:
so that this number signifies the generality of sins which are taken
away by Christ.
Reply to Objection 4: As Jerome says on Mt. 1:8,11: "Because Joram
allied himself with the family of the most wicked Jezabel, therefore
his memory is omitted down to the third generation, lest it should be
inserted among the holy predecessors of the Nativity." Hence as
Chrysostom [Opus Imperf. in Matth. Hom. i] says: "Just as great was
the blessing conferred on Jehu, who wrought vengeance on the
house of Achab and Jezabel, so also great was the curse on the
house of Joram, through the wicked daughter of Achab and Jezabel,
so that until the fourth generation his posterity is cut off from the
number of kings, according to Ex. 20:5: I shall visit the iniquity of the
fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generations."
It must also be observed that there were other kings who sinned and
are mentioned in Christ's genealogy: but their impiety was not
continuous. For, as it is stated in the book De Qq. Vet. et Nov. Test.
qu. lxxxv: "Solomon through his father's merits is included in the
series of kings; and Roboam . . . through the merits of Asa," who
was son of his (Roboam's) son, Abiam. "But the impiety of those

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.31, C.4.

three [Ochozias, Joas, and Amasias] was continuous."
Reply to Objection 5: As Jerome says on Mt. 1:3: "None of the holy
women are mentioned in the Saviour's genealogy, but only those
whom Scripture censures, so that He who came for the sake of
sinners, by being born of sinners, might blot out all sin." Thus
Thamar is mentioned, who is censured for her sin with her father-inlaw; Rahab who was a whore; Ruth who was a foreigner; and
Bethsabee, the wife of Urias, who was an adulteress. The last,
however, is not mentioned by name, but is designated through her
husband; both on account of his sin, for he was cognizant of the
adultery and murder; and further in order that, by mentioning the
husband by name, David's sin might be recalled. And because Luke
purposes to delineate Christ as the expiator of our sins, he makes no
mention of these women. But he does mention Juda's brethren, in
order to show that they belong to God's people: whereas Ismael, the
brother of Isaac, and Esau, Jacob's brother, were cut off from God's
people, and for this reason are not mentioned in Christ's genealogy.
Another motive was to show the emptiness of pride of birth: for
many of Juda's brethren were born of hand-maidens, and yet all were
patriarchs and heads of tribes. Phares and Zara are mentioned
together, because, as Ambrose says on Lk. 3:23, "they are the type
of the twofold life of man: one, according to the Law," signified by
Zara; "the other by Faith," of which Phares is the type. The brethren
of Jechonias are included, because they all reigned at various times:
which was not the case with other kings: or, again, because they
were alike in wickedness and misfortune.