THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.15, C.7.

Himself, as His passion and death---or to others, as the sin of His
disciples, or of the Jews that killed Him. And hence, as there could
be true pain in Christ, so too could there be true sorrow; otherwise,
indeed, than in us, in the three ways above stated (Article 4), when
we were speaking of the passions of Christ's soul in general.
Reply to Objection 1: Sorrow was not in Christ, as a perfect passion;
yet it was inchoatively in Him as a "propassion." Hence it is written
(Mt. 26:37): "He began to grow sorrowful and to be sad." For "it is
one thing to be sorrowful and another to grow sorrowful," as Jerome
says, on this text.
Reply to Objection 2: As Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xiv, 8), "for the
three passions"---desire, joy, and fear---the Stoics held three
eupatheias i.e. good passions, in the soul of the wise man, viz. for
desire, will---for joy, delight---for fear, caution. But as regards
sorrow, they denied it could be in the soul of the wise man, for
sorrow regards evil already present, and they thought that no evil
could befall a wise man; and for this reason, because they believed
that only the virtuous is good, since it makes men good, and that
nothing is evil, except what is sinful, whereby men become wicked.
Now although what is virtuous is man's chief good, and what is
sinful is man's chief evil, since these pertain to reason which is
supreme in man, yet there are certain secondary goods of man,
which pertain to the body, or to the exterior things that minister to
the body. And hence in the soul of the wise man there may be
sorrow in the sensitive appetite by his apprehending these evils;
without this sorrow disturbing the reason. And in this way are we to
understand that "whatsoever shall befall the just man, it shall not
make him sad," because his reason is troubled by no misfortune.
And thus Christ's sorrow was a propassion, and not a passion.
Reply to Objection 3: All sorrow is an evil of punishment; but it is not
always an evil of fault, except only when it proceeds from an
inordinate affection. Hence Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xiv, 9):
"Whenever these affections follow reason, and are caused when and
where needed, who will dare to call them diseases or vicious
passions?"
Reply to Objection 4: There is no reason why a thing may not of itself
be contrary to the will, and yet be willed by reason of the end, to
which it is ordained, as bitter medicine is not of itself desired, but
only as it is ordained to health. And thus Christ's death and passion

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.15, C.7.

were of themselves involuntary, and caused sorrow, although they
were voluntary as ordained to the end, which is the redemption of
the human race.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.15, C.8.