cease bewailing both her and myself, and amidst continual distress and
perplexity, I kept saying— who then made such a suggestion as this? Why has
the Church of God made so great a mistake? Why has she so provoked her
Master, as to be delivered over to me, the unworthiest of all men, and to undergo
such great disgrace? Considering these things often by myself, and being unable
to bear the thought of so monstrous a thing, I used to be like thunderstruck
people, speechless, and unable either to see or hear. And when this condition of
great helplessness left me, for there were times when it passed off, tears and
despondency succeeded to it, and after the flood of tears, then fear again, entered
in their stead, disturbing, confusing and agitating my mind. In such a tempest I
used to pass the time that is gone; but you were ignorant of it, and thought that I
was spending my time in a perfect tranquillity, but I will now try and unveil to
you the storm of my soul, for it may be you will henceforth pardon me,
abandoning your accusations. How then shall I unveil this to you? For if you
would see this clearly, it is not otherwise possible than by laying bare my own
heart; but as this is impossible, I will try and show you as well as I can, by a
certain faint illustration, the gloom of my despondency, and from this image
please to infer my condition.
Let us suppose that the daughter of the King of all the earth under the sun is
the betrothed of a certain man, and that this damsel has matchless beauty,
transcending that of human nature, and that in this respect she outstrips by a long
distance the whole race of women; also that she has virtues of the soul, so great
as to distance by a long way the whole generation of men that have been, or that
shall be; and that the grace of her manners transcends all standards of art, and
that the loveliness of her person is eclipsed by the beauty of her countenance;
and that her betrothed, not only for the sake of these things, is enamored of the
maiden, but apart from these things has an affection for her, and by his ardor
throws into the shade the most passionate of lovers that ever were. Then let us
suppose, while he is burning with love, he hears from some quarter that some
mean, abject man, low born, and crippled in body, in fact a thoroughly bad

fellow, was about to wed this wondrous, well-beloved maiden. Have we then
presented to you some small portion of our grief? And is it enough to stay my
illustration at this point? So far as my despondency is concerned, I think it is
enough; for this was the only purpose for which I introduced the comparison, but
that I may show you the measure of my fear, and my terror, let me proceed to
another description.
Let there be an armament composed of infantry, cavalry, and marines, and
let a number of triremes cover the sea, and phalanxes of foot and horse cover
most of the plains, and the ridges of the mountains, and let the metal of their
armor reflect the sunshine, and the glitter of the helmets and shields be reflected
by the beams which are emitted from them; let the clashing of spears and the
neighing of horses be borne up to the very heavens, and let neither sea nor land
appear, but only brass and iron in every direction. Let the enemy be drawn up in
battle array opposite to these, fierce and savage men, and let the time of the
engagement be now at hand. Then let some one suddenly seize some young lad,
one of those brought up in the country, knowing nothing but the use of the
shepherd's pipe and crook; let him be clad in brazen armor, and let him be led
round the whole camp and be shown the squadrons and their officers, the
archers, slingers, captains, generals, the foot and horse, the spearmen, the
triremes and their commanders, the dense mass of soldiers in the ships, and the
multitude of engines of war lying ready on board. Let him be shown, moreover,
the whole array of the enemy, their repulsive aspect, and the varied stores and
unusual quantity of their arms; the ravines also and precipices of the mountains,
deep and difficult. Let him be shown further on the enemies' side, horses flying
by some enchantment and infantry borne through the air, and sorcery of every
power and form; and let him consider the calamities of war, the cloud of spears,
the hailstorm of arrows, that great mist and obscurity that gloomiest night which
the multitude of weapons occasions, eclipsing the sunbeams with their cloud, the
dust no less than the darkness baffling the eyesight. The torrents of blood, the
groanings of the falling, the shouts of the surviving, the heaps of slain, wheels