when there is nothing to press on us?
And herein too we should admire the instructiveness of His teaching, that
He nailed him fast to His word, and with this freed him from those endless evils,
such as lamentations, and mournings, and the things that follow thereafter. For
after the burial he must of necessity proceed to inquire about the will, then about
the distribution of the inheritance, and all the other things that follow thereupon;
and thus waves after waves coming in succession upon him, would bear him
away very far from the harbor of truth. For this cause He draws him, and fastens
him to Himself.
But if you still marvellest, and art perplexed, that he was not permitted to be
present at his father's burial; consider that many suffer not the sick, if it be a
father that is dead, or a mother, or a child, or any other of their kinsmen, to know
it, nor to follow him to the tomb; and we do not for this charge them with cruelty
nor inhumanity: and very reasonably. For, on the contrary, it were cruelty to
bring out to the funeral solemnity men in such a state.
But if to mourn and be afflicted in mind for them that are of our kindred is
evil, much more our being withdrawn from spiritual discourses. For this same
cause He said elsewhere also, "No man having put his hand to the plough, and
looking back, is fit for the kingdom of Heaven." And surely it is far better to
proclaim the kingdom, and draw back others from death, than to bury the dead
body, that is nothing advantaged thereby; and especially, when there are some to
fulfill all these duties.
7. Nothing else then do we learn hereby, but that we must not wantonly lose
any, no not the smallest time, though there be ten thousand things to press on us;
but to set what is spiritual before all, even the most indispensable matters, and to
know both what is life, and what is death. Since many even of them that seem to
live are nothing better than dead men, living as they do in wickedness; or rather
these are worse than the dead; "For he that is dead," it is said, "is freed from
sin," [Romans 6:7] but this man is a slave to sin. For tell me not of this, that he is
not eaten of worms, nor lies in a coffin, nor has closed his eyes, nor is bound in

graveclothes. Nay, for these things he undergoes more grievously than the dead,
no worms devouring him, but the passions of his soul tearing him to pieces more
fiercely than wild beasts.
And if his eyes be open, this too again is far worse than having closed them.
For those of the dead see no evil thing, but this man is gathering unto himself
diseases without number, while his eyes are open. And whereas the other lies in
a coffin, unmoved by anything, this one is buried in the tomb of his innumerable
distempers.
But you see not his body in a state of decay. And what of that? Since before
his body, his soul is corrupted and destroyed, and undergoes greater rottenness.
For the other stinks a few days, but this for the whole of his life exhales evil
odors, having a mouth more foul than sewers.
And so the one differs from the other, by just so much as this, that the dead
indeed undergoes that decay only which comes of nature, but this man together
with that, brings in also that rottenness which is from intemperance, devising
each day unnumbered causes of corruption.
But is he borne on horseback? And what of that? Why, so is the other on a
couch. And what is very hard, while the other is seen by no one in his dissolution
and decay, but has his coffin for a veil, this man is going about everywhere with
his evil savor, bearing about a dead soul in his body as in a tomb.
And if one could but once see a man's soul who is living in luxury and vice,
you would perceive that it is far better to lie bound in a grave than to be rivetted
by the chains of our sins; and to have a stone laid over you, than that heavy
cover of insensibility. Wherefore above all things it behooves the friends of these
dead men, seeing that they are past feeling, to come near to Jesus in their behalf,
as Mary then did in the case of Lazarus. Though he "stinks," though he be "dead
four days," do not despair, but approach, and remove the stone first. Yea, for
then you shall see him lying as in a tomb, and bound in his grave clothes.
And if you will, let it be some one of them that are great and distinguished,
whom we bring before you. Nay, fear not, for I will state the example without a