THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.88, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether sins that have been forgiven, return

through ingratitude which is shown especially in four kinds of
sin?
Objection 1: It would seem that sins do not return through
ingratitude, which is shown especially in four kinds of sin, viz.,
hatred of one's neighbor, apostasy from faith, contempt of
confession and regret for past repentance, and which have been
expressed in the following verse:
"Fratres odit, apostata fit, spernitque, fateri,
Poenituisse piget, pristina culpa redit." For the more grievous the sin
committed against God after one has received the grace of pardon,
the greater the ingratitude. But there are sins more grievous than
these, such as blasphemy against God, and the sin against the Holy
Ghost. Therefore it seems that sins already pardoned do not return
through ingratitude as manifested in these sins, any more than as
shown in other sins.
Objection 2: Further, Rabanus says: "God delivered the wicked
servant to the torturers, until he should pay the whole debt, because
a man will be deemed punishable not only for the sins he commits
after Baptism, but also for original sin which was taken away when
he was baptized." Now venial sins are reckoned among our debts,
since we pray in their regard: "Forgive us our trespasses [debita]."
Therefore they too return through ingratitude; and, in like manner
seemingly, sins already pardoned return through venial sins, and not
only through those sins mentioned above.
Objection 3: Further, ingratitude is all the greater, according as one
sins after receiving a greater favor. Now innocence whereby one
avoids sin is a Divine favor, for Augustine says (Confess. ii):
"Whatever sins I have avoided committing, I owe it to Thy grace."
Now innocence is a greater gift, than even the forgiveness of all sins.
Therefore the first sin committed after innocence is no less an
ingratitude to God, than a sin committed after repentance, so that
seemingly ingratitude in respect of the aforesaid sins is not the chief
cause of sins returning.
On the contrary, Gregory says (Moral. xviii [Dial. iv]): "It is evident

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.88, C.3.

from the words of the Gospel that if we do not forgive from our
hearts the offenses committed against us, we become once more
accountable for what we rejoiced in as forgiven through Penance":
so that ingratitude implied in the hatred of one's brother is a special
cause of the return of sins already forgiven: and the same seems to
apply to the others.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), sins pardoned through
Penance are said to return, in so far as their debt of punishment, by
reason of ingratitude, is virtually contained in the subsequent sin.
Now one may be guilty of ingratitude in two ways: first by doing
something against the favor received, and, in this way, man is
ungrateful to God in every mortal sin whereby he offends God Who
forgave his sins, so that by every subsequent mortal sin, the sins
previously pardoned return, on account of the ingratitude. Secondly,
one is guilty of ingratitude, by doing something not only against the
favor itself, but also against the form of the favor received. If this
form be considered on the part of the benefactor, it is the remission
of something due to him; wherefore he who does not forgive his
brother when he asks pardon, and persists in his hatred, acts
against this form. If, however, this form be taken in regard to the
penitent who receives this favor, we find on his part a twofold
movement of the free-will. The first is the movement of the free-will
towards God, and is an act of faith quickened by charity; and against
this a man acts by apostatizing from the faith. The second is a
movement of the free-will against sin, and is the act of penance. This
act consists first, as we have stated above (Question 85, Articles 2,5)
in man's detestation of his past sins; and against this a man acts
when he regrets having done penance. Secondly, the act of penance
consists in the penitent purposing to subject himself to the keys of
the Church by confession, according to Ps. 31:5: "I said: I will
confess against myself my injustice to the Lord: and Thou hast
forgiven the wickedness of my sin": and against this a man acts
when he scorns to confess as he had purposed to do.
Accordingly it is said that the ingratitude of sinners is a special
cause of the return of sins previously forgiven.
Reply to Objection 1: This is not said of these sins as though they
were more grievous than others, but because they are more directly
opposed to the favor of the forgiveness of sin.
Reply to Objection 2: Even venial sins and original sin return in the