many martyrs to a cruel death" [De his qui fide dormierunt].
Therefore the suffrages of the Church avail even for those who are in
hell.
On the contrary, Dionysius says (Eccl. Hier. vii): "The high priest
prays not for the unclean, because by so doing he would act counter
to the Divine order," and consequently he says (Eccl. Hier. vii) that
"he prays not that sinners be forgiven, because his prayer for them
would not be heard." Therefore suffrages avail not those who are in
hell.
Further, Gregory says (Moral. xxxiv, 19): "There is the same reason
for not praying then" (namely after the judgment day) "for men
condemned to the everlasting fire, as there is now for not praying for
the devil and his angels who are sentenced to eternal punishment,
and for this reason the saints pray not for dead unbelieving and
wicked men, because, forsooth, knowing them to be already
condemned to eternal punishment, they shrink from pleading for
them by the merit of their prayers before they are summoned to the
presence of the just Judge."
Further, the text (Sent. iv, D, 45) quotes the words of Augustine (De
Verb. A post. Serm. xxxii): "If a man depart this life without the faith
that worketh by charity and its sacraments, in vain do his friends
have recourse to such like acts of kindness." Now all the damned
come under that head. Therefore suffrages profit them not.
I answer that, There have been three opinions about the damned. For
some have said that a twofold distinction must be made in this
matter. First, as to time; for they said that after the judgment day no
one in hell will be assisted by any suffrage, but that before the
judgment day some are assisted by the suffrages of the Church.
Secondly, they made a distinction among those who are detained in
hell. Some of these, they said, are very bad, those namely who have
died without faith and the sacraments, and these, since they were
not of the Church, neither "by grace nor, by name" [Oratio ad
Vesperas, Fer. ii, post Dom. Pass.] can the suffrages of the Church
avail; while others are not very bad, those namely who belonged to
the Church as actual members, who had the faith, frequented the
sacraments and performed works generically good, and for these the
suffrages of the Church ought to avail. Yet they were confronted with
a difficulty which troubled them, for it would seem to follow from this
(since the punishment of hell is finite in intensity although infinite in

duration) that a multiplicity of suffrages would take away that
punishment altogether, which is the error of Origen (Peri Archon. i;
cf. Gregory, Moral. xxxiv): and consequently endeavored in various
ways to avoid this difficulty.
Praepositivus [Gilbert Prevostin, Chancellor of the See of Paris] said
that suffrages for the damned can be so multiplied that they are
entirely freed from punishment, not absolutely as Origen maintained,
but for a time, namely till the judgment day: for their souls will be
reunited to their bodies, and will be cast back into the punishments
of hell without hope of pardon. But this opinion seems incompatible
with Divine providence, which leaves nothing inordinate in the world.
For guilt cannot be restored to order save by punishment: wherefore
it is impossible for punishment to cease, unless first of all guilt be
expiated: so that, as guilt remains for ever in the damned, their
punishment will nowise be interrupted.
For this reason the followers of Gilbert de la Porree devised another
explanation. These said that the process in the diminution of
punishments by suffrages is as the process in dividing a line, which
though finite, is indefinitely divisible, and is never destroyed by
division, if it be diminished not by equal but by proportionate
quantities, for instance if we begin by taking away a quarter of the
whole, and secondly, a quarter of that quarter, and then a quarter of
this second quarter, and so on indefinitely. In like manner, they say
by the first suffrage a certain proportion of the punishment is taken
away, and by the second an equally proportionate part of the
remainder. But this explanation is in many ways defective. First,
because it seems that indefinite division which is applicable to
continuous quantity cannot be transferred to spiritual quantity:
secondly, because there is no reason why the second suffrage, if it
be of equal worth, should diminish the punishment less than the
first: thirdly, because punishment cannot be diminished unless guilt
be diminished, even as it cannot be done away unless the guilt be
done away: fourthly, because in the division of a line we come at
length to something which is not sensible, for a sensible body is not
indefinitely divisible: and thus it would follow that after many
suffrages the remaining punishment would be so little as not to be
felt, and thus would no longer be a punishment.
Hence others found another explanation. For Antissiodorensis
[William of Auxerre, Archdeacon of Beauvais] (Sent. iv, Tract. 14)
said that suffrages profit the damned not by diminishing or