THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.62, C.2.

But if we examine the question properly, we shall see that according
to the above mode the sacraments are mere signs. For the leaden
coin is nothing but a sign of the king's command that this man
should receive money. In like manner the book is a sign of the
conferring of a canonry. Hence, according to this opinion the
sacraments of the New Law would be mere signs of grace; whereas
we have it on the authority of many saints that the sacraments of the
New Law not only signify, but also cause grace.
We must therefore say otherwise, that an efficient cause is twofold,
principal and instrumental. The principal cause works by the power
of its form, to which form the effect is likened; just as fire by its own
heat makes something hot. In this way none but God can cause
grace: since grace is nothing else than a participated likeness of the
Divine Nature, according to 2 Pt. 1:4: "He hath given us most great
and precious promises; that we may be partakers of the Divine
Nature." But the instrumental cause works not by the power of its
form, but only by the motion whereby it is moved by the principal
agent: so that the effect is not likened to the instrument but to the
principal agent: for instance, the couch is not like the axe, but like
the art which is in the craftsman's mind. And it is thus that the
sacraments of the New Law cause grace: for they are instituted by
God to be employed for the purpose of conferring grace. Hence
Augustine says (Contra Faust. xix): "All these things," viz. pertaining
to the sacraments, "are done and pass away, but the power," viz. of
God, "which works by them, remains ever." Now that is, properly
speaking, an instrument by which someone works: wherefore it is
written (Titus 3:5): "He saved us by the laver of regeneration."
Reply to Objection 1: The principal cause cannot properly be called a
sign of its effect, even though the latter be hidden and the cause
itself sensible and manifest. But an instrumental cause, if manifest,
can be called a sign of a hidden effect, for this reason, that it is not
merely a cause but also in a measure an effect in so far as it is
moved by the principal agent. And in this sense the sacraments of
the New Law are both cause and signs. Hence, too, is it that, to use
the common expression, "they effect what they signify." From this it
is clear that they perfectly fulfil the conditions of a sacrament; being
ordained to something sacred, not only as a sign, but also as a
cause.
Reply to Objection 2: An instrument has a twofold action; one is
instrumental, in respect of which it works not by its own power but

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.62, C.2.

by the power of the principal agent: the other is its proper action,
which belongs to it in respect of its proper form: thus it belongs to
an axe to cut asunder by reason of its sharpness, but to make a
couch, in so far as it is the instrument of an art. But it does not
accomplish the instrumental action save by exercising its proper
action: for it is by cutting that it makes a couch. In like manner the
corporeal sacraments by their operation, which they exercise on the
body that they touch, accomplish through the Divine institution an
instrumental operation on the soul; for example, the water of
baptism, in respect of its proper power, cleanses the body, and
thereby, inasmuch as it is the instrument of the Divine power,
cleanses the soul: since from soul and body one thing is made. And
thus it is that Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. xii) that it "touches the
body and cleanses the heart."
Reply to Objection 3: This argument considers that which causes
grace as principal agent; for this belongs to God alone, as stated
above.