manifested sufficiently the truth of His Resurrection?
Objection 1: It would seem that the proofs which Christ made use of
did not sufficiently manifest the truth of His Resurrection. For after
the Resurrection Christ showed nothing to His disciples which
angels appearing to men did not or could not show; because angels
have frequently shown themselves to men under human aspect,
have spoken and lived with them, and eaten with them, just as if they
were truly men, as is evident from Genesis 18, of the angels whom
Abraham entertained. and in the Book of Tobias, of the angel who
"conducted" him "and brought" him back. Nevertheless, angels have
not true bodies naturally united to them; which is required for a
resurrection. Consequently, the signs which Christ showed His
disciples were not sufficient for manifesting His Resurrection.
Objection 2: Further, Christ rose again gloriously, that is, having a
human nature with glory. But some of the things which Christ
showed to His disciples seem contrary to human nature, as for
instance, that "He vanished out of their sight," and entered in among
them "when the doors were shut": and some other things seem
contrary to glory, as for instance, that He ate and drank, and bore the
scars of His wounds. Consequently, it seems that those proofs were
neither sufficient nor fitting for establishing faith in the Resurrection.
Objection 3: Further, after the Resurrection Christ's body was such
that it ought not to be touched by mortal man; hence He said to
Magdalen (Jn. 20:17): "Do not touch Me; for I am not yet ascended to
My Father." Consequently, it was not fitting for manifesting the truth
of His Resurrection, that He should permit Himself to be handled by
His disciples.
Objection 4: Further, clarity seems to be the principal of the qualities
of a glorified body: yet He gave no sign thereof in His Resurrection.
Therefore it seems that those proofs were insufficient for showing
the quality of Christ's Resurrection.
Objection 5: [This objection is wanting in the older codices, and in
the text of the Leonine edition, which, however, gives it in a note as
taken from one of the more recent codices of the Vatican.]

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.55, C.7.

Further, the angels introduced as witnesses for the Resurrection
seem insufficient from the want of agreement on the part of the
Evangelists. Because in Matthew's account the angel is described as
sitting upon the stone rolled back, while Mark states that he was
seen after the women had entered the tomb; and again, whereas
these mention one angel, John says that there were two sitting, and
Luke says that there were two standing. Consequently, the
arguments for the Resurrection do not seem to agree.
On the contrary, Christ, who is the Wisdom of God, "ordereth all
things sweetly" and in a fitting manner, according to Wis. 8:1.
I answer that, Christ manifested His Resurrection in two ways:
namely, by testimony; and by proof or sign: and each manifestation
was sufficient in its own class. For in order to manifest His
Resurrection He made use of a double testimony, neither of which
can be rebutted. The first of these was the angels' testimony, who
announced the Resurrection to the women, as is seen in all the
Evangelists: the other was the testimony of the Scriptures, which He
set before them to show the truth of the Resurrection, as is narrated
in the last chapter of Luke.
Again, the proofs were sufficient for showing that the Resurrection
was both true and glorious. That it was a true Resurrection He shows
first on the part of the body; and this He shows in three respects;
first of all, that it was a true and solid body, and not phantastic or
rarefied, like the air. And He establishes this by offering His body to
be handled; hence He says in the last chapter of Luke (39): "Handle
and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as you see Me to
have." Secondly, He shows that it was a human body, by presenting
His true features for them to behold. Thirdly, He shows that it was
identically the same body which He had before, by showing them the
scars of the wounds; hence, as we read in the last chapter of Luke
(39) he said to them: "See My hands and feet, that it is I Myself."
Secondly, He showed them the truth of His Resurrection on the part
of His soul reunited with His body: and He showed this by the works
of the threefold life. First of all, in the operations of the nutritive life,
by eating and drinking with His disciples, as we read in the last
chapter of Luke. Secondly, in the works of the sensitive life, by
replying to His disciples' questions, and by greeting them when they
were in His presence, showing thereby that He both saw and heard;
thirdly, in the works of the intellective life by their conversing with