FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.62, C.2.

even as he is directed to his connatural end, by means of his natural
principles, albeit not without Divine assistance. Such like principles
are called "theological virtues": first, because their object is God,
inasmuch as they direct us aright to God: secondly, because they
are infused in us by God alone: thirdly, because these virtues are not
made known to us, save by Divine revelation, contained in Holy Writ.
Reply to Objection 1: A certain nature may be ascribed to a certain
thing in two ways. First, essentially: and thus these theological
virtues surpass the nature of man. Secondly, by participation, as
kindled wood partakes of the nature of fire: and thus, after a fashion,
man becomes a partaker of the Divine Nature, as stated above: so
that these virtues are proportionate to man in respect of the Nature
of which he is made a partaker.
Reply to Objection 2: These virtues are called Divine, not as though
God were virtuous by reason of them, but because of them God
makes us virtuous, and directs us to Himself. Hence they are not
exemplar but exemplate virtues.
Reply to Objection 3: The reason and will are naturally directed to
God, inasmuch as He is the beginning and end of nature, but in
proportion to nature. But the reason and will, according to their
nature, are not sufficiently directed to Him in so far as He is the
object of supernatural happiness.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.62, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the theological virtues are distinct from

the intellectual and moral virtues?
Objection 1: It would seem that the theological virtues are not
distinct from the moral and intellectual virtues. For the theological
virtues, if they be in a human soul, must needs perfect it, either as to
the intellective, or as to the appetitive part. Now the virtues which
perfect the intellective part are called intellectual; and the virtues
which perfect the appetitive part, are called moral. Therefore, the
theological virtues are not distinct from the moral and intellectual
virtues.
Objection 2: Further, the theological virtues are those which direct
us to God. Now, among the intellectual virtues there is one which
directs us to God: this is wisdom, which is about Divine things, since
it considers the highest cause. Therefore the theological virtues are
not distinct from the intellectual virtues.
Objection 3: Further, Augustine (De Moribus Eccl. xv) shows how the
four cardinal virtues are the "order of love." Now love is charity,
which is a theological virtue. Therefore the moral virtues are not
distinct from the theological.
On the contrary, That which is above man's nature is distinct from
that which is according to his nature. But the theological virtues are
above man's nature; while the intellectual and moral virtues are in
proportion to his nature, as clearly shown above (Question 58,
Article 3). Therefore they are distinct from one another.
I answer that, As stated above (Question 54, Article 2, ad 1), habits
are specifically distinct from one another in respect of the formal
difference of their objects. Now the object of the theological virtues
is God Himself, Who is the last end of all, as surpassing the
knowledge of our reason. On the other hand, the object of the
intellectual and moral virtues is something comprehensible to
human reason. Wherefore the theological virtues are specifically
distinct from the moral and intellectual virtues.
Reply to Objection 1: The intellectual and moral virtues perfect man's
intellect and appetite according to the capacity of human nature; the
theological virtues, supernaturally.