FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.105, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the judicial precepts were suitably

framed as to the relations of one man with another?
Objection 1: It would seem that the judicial precepts were not
suitably framed as regards the relations of one man with another.
Because men cannot live together in peace, if one man takes what
belongs to another. But this seems to have been approved by the
Law: since it is written (Dt. 23:24): "Going into thy neighbor's
vineyard, thou mayest eat as many grapes as thou pleasest."
Therefore the Old Law did not make suitable provisions for man's
peace.
Objection 2: Further, one of the chief causes of the downfall of states
has been the holding of property by women, as the Philosopher says
(Polit. ii, 6). But this was introduced by the Old Law; for it is written
(Num. 27:8): "When a man dieth without a son, his inheritance shall
pass to his daughter." Therefore the Law made unsuitable provision
for the welfare of the people.
Objection 3: Further, it is most conducive to the preservation of
human society that men may provide themselves with necessaries
by buying and selling, as stated in Polit. i. But the Old Law took away
the force of sales; since it prescribes that in the 50th year of the
jubilee all that is sold shall return to the vendor (Lev. 25:28).
Therefore in this matter the Law gave the people an unfitting
command.
Objection 4: Further, man's needs require that men should be ready
to lend: which readiness ceases if the creditors do not return the
pledges: hence it is written (Ecclus. 29:10): "Many have refused to
lend, not out of wickedness, but they were afraid to be defrauded
without cause." And yet this was encouraged by the Law. First,
because it prescribed (Dt. 15:2): "He to whom any thing is owing
from his friend or neighbor or brother, cannot demand it again,
because it is the year of remission of the Lord"; and (Ex. 22:15) it is
stated that if a borrowed animal should die while the owner is
present, the borrower is not bound to make restitution. Secondly,
because the security acquired through the pledge is lost: for it is
written (Dt. 24:10): "When thou shalt demand of thy neighbor any
thing that he oweth thee, thou shalt not go into his house to take
away a pledge"; and again (Dt. 24:12,13): "The pledge shall not lodge

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.105, C.3.

with thee that night, but thou shalt restore it to him presently."
Therefore the Law made insufficient provision in the matter of loans.
Objection 5: Further, considerable risk attaches to goods deposited
with a fraudulent depositary: wherefore great caution should be
observed in such matters: hence it is stated in 2 Mach 3:15 that "the
priests . . . called upon Him from heaven, Who made the law
concerning things given to be kept, that He would preserve them
safe, for them that had deposited them." But the precepts of the Old
Law observed little caution in regard to deposits: since it is
prescribed (Ex. 22:10,11) that when goods deposited are lost, the
owner is to stand by the oath of the depositary. Therefore the Law
made unsuitable provision in this matter.
Objection 6: Further, just as a workman offers his work for hire, so
do men let houses and so forth. But there is no need for the tenant to
pay his rent as soon as he takes a house. Therefore it seems an
unnecessarily hard prescription (Lev. 19:13) that "the wages of him
that hath been hired by thee shall not abide with thee until morning."
Objection 7: Further, since there is often pressing need for a judge, it
should be easy to gain access to one. It was therefore unfitting that
the Law (Dt. 17:8,9) should command them to go to a fixed place to
ask for judgment on doubtful matters.
Objection 8: Further, it is possible that not only two, but three or
more, should agree to tell a lie. Therefore it is unreasonably stated
(Dt. 19:15) that "in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word
shall stand."
Objection 9: Further, punishment should be fixed according to the
gravity of the fault: for which reason also it is written (Dt. 25:2):
"According to the measure of the sin, shall the measure also of the
stripes be." Yet the Law fixed unequal punishments for certain
faults: for it is written (Ex. 22:1) that the thief "shall restore five oxen
for one ox, and four sheep for one sheep." Moreover, certain slight
offenses are severely punished: thus (Num. 15:32, seqq.) a man is
stoned for gathering sticks on the sabbath day: and (Dt. 21:18, seqq.)
the unruly son is commanded to be stoned on account of certain
small transgressions, viz. because "he gave himself to revelling . . .
and banquetings." Therefore the Law prescribed punishments in an
unreasonable manner.