there is not a good which is not such by participation. Wherefore
that good which is the end of the whole universe must be a good
outside the universe.
Reply to Objection 1: We may acquire some good in many ways:
first, as a form existing in us, such as health or knowledge;
secondly, as something done by us, as a builder attains his end by
building a house; thirdly, as something good possessed or acquired
by us, as the buyer of a field attains his end when he enters into
possession. Wherefore nothing prevents something outside the
universe being the good to which it is directed.
Reply to Objection 2: The Philosopher is speaking of the ends of
various arts; for the end of some arts consists in the operation itself,
as the end of a harpist is to play the harp; whereas the end of other
arts consists in something produced, as the end of a builder is not
the act of building, but the house he builds. Now it may happen that
something extrinsic is the end not only as made, but also as
possessed or acquired or even as represented, as if we were to say
that Hercules is the end of the statue made to represent him.
Therefore we may say that some good outside the whole universe is
the end of the government of the universe, as something possessed
and represented; for each thing tends to a participation thereof, and
to an assimilation thereto, as far as is possible.
Reply to Objection 3: A good existing in the universe, namely, the
order of the universe, is an end thereof; this. however, is not its
ultimate end, but is ordered to the extrinsic good as to the end: thus
the order in an army is ordered to the general, as stated in Metaph.
xii, Did. xi, 10.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the world is governed by one?

Objection 1: It would seem that the world is not governed by one. For
we judge the cause by the effect. Now, we see in the government of
the universe that things are not moved and do not operate uniformly,
but some contingently and some of necessity in variously different
ways. Therefore the world is not governed by one.
Objection 2: Further, things which are governed by one do not act
against each other, except by the incapacity or unskillfulness of the
ruler; which cannot apply to God. But created things agree not
together, and act against each other; as is evident in the case of
contraries. Therefore the world is not governed by one.
Objection 3: Further, in nature we always find what is the better. But
it "is better that two should be together than one" (Eccles. 4:9).
Therefore the world is not governed by one, but by many.
On the contrary, We confess our belief in one God and one Lord,
according to the words of the Apostle (1 Cor. 8:6): "To us there is but
one God, the Father . . . and one Lord": and both of these pertain to
government. For to the Lord belongs dominion over subjects; and
the name of God is taken from Providence as stated above (Question
13, Article 8). Therefore the world is governed by one.
I answer that, We must of necessity say that the world is governed
by one. For since the end of the government of the world is that
which is essentially good, which is the greatest good; the
government of the world must be the best kind of government. Now
the best government is the government by one. The reason of this is
that government is nothing but the directing of the things governed
to the end; which consists in some good. But unity belongs to the
idea of goodness, as Boethius proves (De Consol. iii, 11) from this,
that, as all things desire good, so do they desire unity; without which
they would cease to exist. For a thing so far exists as it is one.
Whence we observe that things resist division, as far as they can;
and the dissolution of a thing arises from defect therein. Therefore
the intention of a ruler over a multitude is unity, or peace. Now the
proper cause of unity is one. For it is clear that several cannot be the
cause of unity or concord, except so far as they are united.
Furthermore, what is one in itself is a more apt and a better cause of