FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.5.

foreshadow the death of Christ, which is signified by the west,
according to Ps. 67:5: "Who ascendeth unto the west; the Lord is His
name."
Reply to Objection 6: Both literal and figurative reasons may be
assigned for the things contained in the tabernacle. The literal
reason is in connection with the divine worship. And because, as
already observed (ad 4), the inner tabernacle, called the Holy of
Holies, signified the higher world of spiritual substances, hence that
tabernacle contained three things, viz. "the ark of the testament in
which was a golden pot that had manna, and the rod of Aaron that
had blossomed, and the tables" (Heb. 9:4) on which were written the
ten commandments of the Law. Now the ark stood between two
"cherubim" that looked one towards the other: and over the ark was
a table, called the "propitiatory," raised above the wings of the
cherubim, as though it were held up by them; and appearing, to the
imagination, to be the very seat of God. For this reason it was called
the "propitiatory," as though the people received propitiation thence
at the prayers of the high-priest. And so it was held up, so to speak,
by the cherubim, in obedience, as it were, to God: while the ark of
the testament was like the foot-stool to Him that sat on the
propitiatory. These three things denote three things in that higher
world: namely, God Who is above all, and incomprehensible to any
creature. Hence no likeness of Him was set up; to denote His
invisibility. But there was something to represent his seat; since, to
wit, the creature, which is beneath God, as the seat under the sitter,
is comprehensible. Again in that higher world there are spiritual
substances called angels. These are signified by the two cherubim,
looking one towards the other, to show that they are at peace with
one another, according to Job 25:2: "Who maketh peace in . . . high
places." For this reason, too, there was more than one cherub, to
betoken the multitude of heavenly spirits, and to prevent their
receiving worship from those who had been commanded to worship
but one God. Moreover there are, enclosed as it were in that spiritual
world, the intelligible types of whatsoever takes place in this world,
just as in every cause are enclosed the types of its effects, and in the
craftsman the types of the works of his craft. This was betokened by
the ark, which represented, by means of the three things it
contained, the three things of greatest import in human affairs.
These are wisdom, signified by the tables of the testament; the
power of governing, betokened by the rod of Aaron; and life,
betokened by the manna which was the means of sustenance. Or
else these three things signified the three Divine attributes, viz.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.5.