And the evangelist, implying also that at long intervals He visited the
several neighborhoods, says, "The men of that place took knowledge of Him, and
sent out into the country round about, and brought unto Him them that were
diseased." But yet the interval, so far from abolishing their faith, made it even
greater, and preserved it in vigor.
3. Let us also then touch the hem of His garment, or rather, if we be willing,
we have Him entire. For indeed His body is set before us now, not His garment
only, but even His body; not for us to touch it only, but also to eat, and be filled.
Let us now then draw near with faith, every one that has an infirmity. For if they
that touched the hem of His garment drew from Him so much virtue, how much
more they that possess Him entire? Now to draw near with faith is not only to
receive the offering, but also with a pure heart to touch it; to be so minded, as
approaching Christ Himself. For what, if you hear no voice? Yet you see Him
laid out; or rather thou dost also hear His voice, while He is speaking by the
evangelists.
Believe, therefore, that even now it is that supper, at which He Himself sat
down. For this is in no respect different from that. For neither does man make
this and Himself the other; but both this and that is His own work. When
therefore you see the priest delivering it unto you, account not that it is the priest
that does so, but that it is Christ's hand that is stretched out.
Even as when he baptizes, not he does baptize you, but it is God that
possesses your head with invisible power, and neither angel nor archangel nor
any other dare draw near and touch you; even so now also. For when God
begets, the gift is His only. Do you see not those who adopt to themselves sons
here, how they commit not the act to slaves, but are themselves present at the
judgment-seat? Even so neither has God committed His gift to angels, but
Himself is present, commanding and saying, "Call no man Father on earth;"
[Matthew 23:9] not that you should dishonor them that gave you birth, but that
you should prefer to all those Him that made you, and enrolled you among His
own children. For He that has given the greater, that is, has set Himself before

you, much more will He not think scorn to distribute unto you of His body. Let
us hear therefore, both priests and subjects, what we have had vouchsafed to us;
let us hear and tremble. Of His own holy flesh He has granted us our fill; He has
set before us Himself sacrificed.
What excuse shall we have then, when feeding on such food, we commit
such sins? When eating a lamb, we become wolves? When feeding on a sheep,
we spoil by violence like the lions?
For this mystery He directs to be always clear, not from violence only, but
even from bare enmity. Yea, for this mystery is a mystery of peace; it allows us
not to cling to wealth. For if He spared not Himself for us, what must we
deserve, sparing our wealth, and being lavish of a soul, in behalf of which He
spared not Himself?
Now upon the Jews God every year bound in their feasts a memorial of His
peculiar favors to them: but for you, every day, as I may say, through these
mysteries.
Be not therefore ashamed of the cross: for these are our venerable things,
these our mysteries; with this gift do we adorn ourselves, with this we are
beautified.
And if I say, He stretched out the heaven, He spread out the earth and the
sea, He sent prophets and angels, I say nothing in comparison. For the sum of
His benefits is this, that "He spared not His own Son," [Romans 8:32] in order to
save His alienated servants.
4. Let no Judas then approach this table, no Simon; nay, for both these
perished through covetousness. Let us flee then from this gulf; neither let us
account it enough for our salvation, if after we have stripped widows and
orphans, we offer for this table a gold and jewelled cup. Nay, if you desire to
honor the sacrifice, offer your soul, for which also it was slain; cause that to
become golden; but if that remain worse than lead or potter's clay, while the
vessel is of gold, what is the profit?
Let not this therefore be our aim, to offer golden vessels only, but to do so