things intelligible; whereas the active life is occupied with externals.
Hence Rachael, by whom the contemplative life is signified, is
interpreted "the vision of the principle," whereas as Gregory says
(Moral. vi, 37) the active life is signified by Lia who was blear-eyed.
The second reason is because the contemplative life can be more
continuous, although not as regards the highest degree of
contemplation, as stated above (Question 180, Article 8, ad 2;
Question 181, Article 4, ad 3), wherefore Mary, by whom the
contemplative life is signified, is described as "sitting" all the time
"at the Lord's feet." Thirdly, because the contemplative life is more
delightful than the active; wherefore Augustine says (De Verb. Dom.
Serm. ciii) that "Martha was troubled, but Mary feasted." Fourthly,
because in the contemplative life man is more self-sufficient, since
he needs fewer things for that purpose; wherefore it was said (Lk.
10:41): "Martha, Martha, thou art careful and art troubled about many
things." Fifthly, because the contemplative life is loved more for its
own sake, while the active life is directed to something else. Hence it
is written (Ps. 36:4): "One thing I have asked of the Lord, this will I
seek after, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of
my life, that I may see the delight of the Lord." Sixthly, because the
contemplative life consists in leisure and rest, according to Ps.
45:11, "Be still and see that I am God." Seventhly, because the
contemplative life is according to Divine things, whereas active life is
according to human things; wherefore Augustine says (De Verb.
Dom. Serm. civ): "'In the beginning was the Word': to Him was Mary
hearkening: 'The Word was made flesh': Him was Martha serving."
Eighthly, because the contemplative life is according to that which is
most proper to man, namely his intellect; whereas in the works of the
active life the lower powers also, which are common to us and
brutes, have their part; wherefore (Ps. 35:7) after the words, "Men
and beasts Thou wilt preserve, O Lord," that which is special to man
is added (Ps. 35:10): "In Thy light we shall see light."
Our Lord adds a ninth reason (Lk. 10:42) when He says: "Mary hath
chosen the best part, which shall not be taken away from her," which
words Augustine (De Verb. Dom. Serm. ciii) expounds thus: "Not--Thou hast chosen badly but---She has chosen better. Why better?
Listen---because it shall not be taken away from her. But the burden
of necessity shall at length be taken from thee: whereas the
sweetness of truth is eternal."
Yet in a restricted sense and in a particular case one should prefer
the active life on account of the needs of the present life. Thus too

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.181, C.2.

the Philosopher says (Topic. iii, 2): "It is better to be wise than to be
rich, yet for one who is in need, it is better to be rich . . ."
Reply to Objection 1: Not only the active life concerns prelates, they
should also excel in the contemplative life; hence Gregory says
(Pastor. ii, 1): "A prelate should be foremost in action, more uplifted
than others in contemplation."
Reply to Objection 2: The contemplative life consists in a certain
liberty of mind. For Gregory says (Hom. iii in Ezech.) that "the
contemplative life obtains a certain freedom of mind, for it thinks not
of temporal but of eternal things." And Boethius says (De Consol. v,
2): "The soul of man must needs be more free while it continues to
gaze on the Divine mind, and less so when it stoops to bodily
things." Wherefore it is evident that the active life does not directly
command the contemplative life, but prescribes certain works of the
active life as dispositions to the contemplative life; which it
accordingly serves rather than commands. Gregory refers to this
when he says (Hom. iii in Ezech.) that "the active life is bondage,
whereas the contemplative life is freedom."
Reply to Objection 3: Sometimes a man is called away from the
contemplative life to the works of the active life, on account of some
necessity of the present life, yet not so as to be compelled to forsake
contemplation altogether. Hence Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xix,
19): "The love of truth seeks a holy leisure, the demands of charity
undertake an honest toil," the work namely of the active life. "If no
one imposes this burden upon us we must devote ourselves to the
research and contemplation of truth, but if it be imposed on us, we
must bear it because charity demands it of us. Yet even then we
must not altogether forsake the delights of truth, lest we deprive
ourselves of its sweetness, and this burden overwhelm us." Hence it
is clear that when a person is called from the contemplative life to
the active life, this is done by way not of subtraction but of addition.