## Homily 18 on Second Corinthians

2 Corinthians 8:16
But thanks be to God, Which put the same earnest care for you into the heart
of Titus.
Again he praises Titus. For since he had discoursed of almsgiving, he
afterwards discourses also of those who are to receive the money from them and
carry it away. For this was of aid towards this collection, and towards increasing
the forwardness of the contributors. For he that feels confidence as to him that
ministers , and suspects not those who are to be receivers, gives with the fuller
bountifulness. And that this might be the case then also, hear how he commends
those that had come for this purpose, the first of whom was Titus. Wherefore
also he says, "But thanks be to God, Which put (literally, 'gave') the same
earnest care into the heart of Titus." What is "the same?" Which he had also in
respect to the Thessalonians, or "the same" with me. And mark here wisdom.
Showing this to be the work of God, he also gives thanks to Him that gave, so as
to incite by this also. 'For if God stirred him up and sent him to you, He asks
through Him. Think not therefore that what has happened is of men.' And
whence is it manifest that God incited him?

2 Corinthians 8:17
"For indeed he accepted our exhortation, but being himself very earnest, he
went forth of his own accord."
Observe how he also represents him as fulfilling his own part, and needing
no prompting from others. And having mentioned the grace of God, he does not
leave the whole to be God's; again, that by this also he may win them unto
greater love, having said that he was stirred up from himself also. For, "being
very earnest, he went forth of his own accord," 'he seized at the thing, he rushed
upon the treasure, he considered your service to be his own advantage; and
because he loved you exceedingly, he needed not the exhortation I gave; but
though he was exhorted by me also, yet it was not by that he was stirred up; but
from himself and by the grace of God.'

2 Corinthians 8:18
"And we have sent together with him the brother whose praise in the Gospel
is spread through all the Churches."
And who is this brother? Some indeed say, Luke, because of the history
which he wrote, but some, Barnabas; for he calls the unwritten preaching also
Gospel. And for what cause does he not mention their names; while he both
makes Titus known [see also 2 Corinthians 8:23] by name, and praises him for
his cooperation in the Gospel, (seeing that he was so useful that by reason of his
absence even Paul could do nothing great and noble; for, "because I found not
Titus my brother, I had no relief for my spirit," 2 Corinthians 2:13) and for his
love towards them, (for, says he, "his inward affection is more abundant towards
you;" 2 Corinthians 7:15) and for his zeal in this matter ("for," he says, "of his
own accord he went")? But these he neither equally commends, nor mentions by
name? What then is one to say? Perhaps they did not know them; wherefore he
does not dwell upon their praises because as yet they had had no experience of
them, but only says so much as was sufficient for their commendation unto them
(i.e. the Corinthians,) and to their escaping all evil suspicion. However, let us see
on what score he eulogizes this man himself also. On what score then does he
eulogize? First, praising him from his preaching; that he not only preached, but
also as he ought, and with the befitting earnestness. For he said not, 'he preaches
and proclaims the Gospel,' but, "whose praise is in the Gospel." And that he may
not seem to flatter him, he brings not one or two or three men, but whole
Churches to testify to him, saying, "through all the churches." Then he makes
him respected also from the judgment of those that had chosen him. And this too
is no light matter. Therefore after saying, "Whose praise in the Gospel is spread
through all the churches," he added,