and destructive pride; and instead of permitting it to proceed any further, He
admonished Him by actual experience, that he was mortal and corruptible; thus
to convince him that he must never again think or dream of such things as he had
done. For the devil's suggestion, was, "You shall be as gods." [Genesis 3:5]
Desiring then utterly to eradicate this idea, God made the body subject to much
suffering and disease; to instruct him by its very nature that he must never again
entertain such a thought. And that this is true, is really most evident from what
befell him; for after such an expectation, he was condemned to this punishment.
Consider also with me the wisdom of God in this matter. He did not allow him to
be the first to die, but permitted his son to suffer this death; in order that seeing
before his eyes the body corrupting and decaying, he might receive a striking
lesson of wisdom from that spectacle; and learn what had come to pass, and be
duly chastened before he departed hence.
4. Really then, as I said, this point is apparent from what has already taken
place; but it will be made no less clear from what yet remains to be stated. For if
while we are fettered with such necessities of the body; and while it is the lot of
all men to die, to suffer corruption, to moulder in the sight of all, and to dissolve
into dust, so that the Gentile philosophers made one and the same
comprehensive definition of the human race (for when asked what man was,
they answered, he is an animal, rational and mortal); if, forsooth, while all
admitted this, there were some who dared in the opinion of the multitude to
immortalize themselves; and notwithstanding that the very sense of sight bore
witness to their mortality, were ambitious to be called gods, and were honoured
as such; to what a length of impiety would not many men have proceeded, if
death had not gone on teaching all men the mortality and corruptibility of our
nature? Hear, for instance, what the prophet says of a barbarian king, when
seized with this frenzy. "I will exalt," says he, "my throne above the stars of
heaven; and I will be like the Most High." [Isaiah 14:13-14] Afterwards,
deriding him, and speaking of his death, he says, "Corruption is under you, and
the worm is your covering;" [Isaiah 14:11] but his meaning is, "Do you dare, O

man, whom such an end is awaiting, to entertain such imaginations?" Again, of
another, I mean the king of the Tyrians, when he conceived the like aims, and
was ambitious to be considered as a God, he says, "You are not a God, but a
man, and they that pierce you shall say so." [Ezekiel 28:9] Thus God, in making
this body of ours as it is, has from the beginning utterly taken away all occasion
of idolatry.
5. But why do you marvel if this has happened in respect to the body, when
even with respect to the soul it is plain, that a similar thing has taken place. For
God made it not mortal, but permitted it to be immortal; He constituted it
however subject to forgetfulness, to ignorance, to sadness, and to care; and this,
lest regarding its own nobility of birth, it might take up a conceit too high for its
proper dignity. For if, even while the case stands thus, some have dared to aver,
that it is of the Divine essence; to what a pitch of frenzy would they not have
reached, if it had been devoid of these imperfections? What, however, I affirmed
respecting the creation, I affirm also respecting the body, that both these things
alike excite my admiration of God; that He has made it corruptible; and that in
its very corruptibility, He has manifested His own power and wisdom. For that
He could have made it of some better material, He has evidenced from the
celestial and the solar substance. For He that made those such as they are, could
have made this also like them, had He thought proper to do so. But the cause of
its imperfection is what I before adverted to. This circumstance by no means
lowers the admiration due to the Creator's workmanship, but rather increases it;
for the meanness of the substance, manifests the resource and adaptiveness of
His art; since He has introduced such a harmony of parts in clay and ashes, and
senses so various and manifold and capable of such spiritual wisdom.
6. In proportion, therefore, as you find fault with the meanness of the
substance, be so much the more astonished at the greatness of the art displayed.
For this reason also, I do not so much admire the statuary who forms a beautiful
figure out of gold, as him who, by the resources of art, is able, even in crumbling
clay, to exhibit a marvellous and inimitable mould of beauty. In the former case,