church is no barber's or perfumer's shop, nor any other merchant's warehouse in
the market-place, but a place of angels, a place of archangels, a palace of God,
heaven itself. As therefore if one had parted the heaven and had brought you in
there, though you should see your father or your brother, you would not venture
to speak; so neither here ought one to utter any other sound but these which are
spiritual. For, in truth, the things in this place are also a heaven.
And if you believe not, look to this table, call to mind for Whose sake it is
set, and why: consider Who it is that is coming forth here; tremble with awe
even before the time. For so, when one sees the throne only of a king, in heart he
rises up, expecting the king's coming forth. And do thou accordingly thrill with
awe even before that thrilling moment: raise up yourself, and before you see the
veils drawn aside and the choir of angels marching forth, ascend thou to the very
heaven.
But the uninitiated knows not these things. Well then, it is necessary with a
view to him also to introduce other topics. For neither towards him shall we
want reasons able to stir him up thoroughly and cause him to soar.
Thou then who know not these things, when you shall hear the prophet
saying, "Thus says the Lord," quit the earth, ascend thou also unto heaven,
consider who it is that by him discourses with you.
But as things are, for a buffoon who is moving laughter or for a whorish
and abandoned woman, so vast an assemblage of spectators is set, listening in
entire quietness to what is spoken, and this when none commands silence ; and
there is neither tumult, nor cry, nor any the least noise: but when God is speaking
from heaven on subjects so awful, we behave ourselves more impudently than
dogs, and even to the harlot women we pay greater respect than to God.
Does it make your flesh creep to be told of these things? Nay then, much
rather let it creep when you do them.
9. That which Paul said of them that despised the poor and feasted alone,
"What, have ye not houses to eat and to drink in? Or despise ye the Church of
God, and shame them that have not?" [1 Corinthians 11:22]— the same allow

me also to say of those who make a disturbance and hold conversations in this
place. "What? Have ye not houses to trifle in? Or despise ye the Church of God,
and corrupt those even who would be modest and quiet?" "But it is sweet and
pleasant for you to converse with your friends." I do not forbid this, but let it be
done in the house, in the market, in the baths. For the church is not a place of
conversation, but of teaching. But now it differs not from the market; nay, if it be
not too bold a word, haply, not even from the stage; in such sort do the women
who assemble here adorn themselves more wantonly than the unchaste who are
to be found there. Accordingly we see that even hither many profligates are
enticed by them; and if any one is trying or intending to corrupt a woman, there
is no place, I suppose, that seems to him more suitable than the church. And if
anything be to be sold or bought, the church appears more convenient than the
market. For on such subjects also there is more talk here than in the shops
themselves. Or if any wish to say or to hear any scandal, you will find that this
too is to be had here more than in the forum without. And if you wish to hear
any thing of political matters, or the affairs of private families, or the camp, go
not to the judgment-hall, nor sit in the apothecary's shop; for here, here I say are
those who report all these things more accurately; and our assemblies are any
thing rather than a church.
Can it be that I have touched you to the quick? I for my part think not. For
while you continue in the same practices, how am I to know that you are touched
by what has been said? Therefore I must needs handle the same topics again.
Are these things then to be endured? Are these things to be borne? We
weary and distract ourselves every day that you may not depart without having
learned something useful: and none of you go away at all the better, but rather
injured the more. Yea, and "ye come together unto judgment," having no longer
any cloak for your sin, and you thrust out the more modest, disturbing them with
your fooleries on every side.
But what do the multitude say? "I do not hear what is read," says one, "nor
do I know what the words are which are spoken." Because you make a tumult