FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.68, C.8.

directive power to the executive, and so is knowledge united to
piety: because counsel and fortitude are concerned with matters of
difficulty, while knowledge and piety are concerned with ordinary
matters. Hence counsel together with fortitude, by reason of their
matter, are given the preference to knowledge and piety.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.68, C.9.

### ARTICLE 8. Whether the virtues are more excellent than the

gifts?
Objection 1: It would seem that the virtues are more excellent than
the gifts. For Augustine says (De Trin. xv, 18) while speaking of
charity: "No gift of God is more excellent than this. It is this alone
which divides the children of the eternal kingdom from the children
of eternal damnation. Other gifts are bestowed by the Holy Ghost,
but, without charity, they avail nothing." But charity is a virtue.
Therefore a virtue is more excellent than the gifts of the Holy Ghost.
Objection 2: Further, that which is first naturally, seems to be more
excellent. Now the virtues precede the gifts of the Holy Ghost; for
Gregory says (Moral. ii, 26) that "the gift of the Holy Ghost in the
mind it works on, forms first of all justice, prudence, fortitude,
temperance . . . and doth afterwards give it a temper in the seven
virtues", so "as against folly to bestow wisdom; against dullness,
understanding; against rashness, counsel; against fear, fortitude;
against ignorance, knowledge; against hardness of heart, piety;
against piety, fear." Therefore the virtues are more excellent than the
gifts.
Objection 3: Further, Augustine says (De Lib. Arb. ii, 19) that "the
virtues cannot be used to evil purpose." But it is possible to make
evil use of the gifts, for Gregory says (Moral. i, 18): "We offer up the
sacrifice of prayer . . . lest wisdom may uplift; or understanding,
while it runs nimbly, deviate from the right path; or counsel, while it
multiplies itself, grow into confusion; that fortitude, while it gives
confidence, may not make us rash; lest knowledge, while it knows
and yet loves not, may swell the mind; lest piety, while it swerves
from the right line, may become distorted; and lest fear, while it is
unduly alarmed, may plunge us into the pit of despair." Therefore the
virtues are more excellent than the gifts of the Holy Ghost.
On the contrary, The gifts are bestowed to assist the virtues and to
remedy certain defects, as is shown in the passage quoted (OBJ 2),
so that, seemingly, they accomplish what the virtues cannot.
Therefore the gifts are more excellent than the virtues.
I answer that, As was shown above (Question 58, Article 3; Question
62, Article 1), there are three kinds of virtues: for some are

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.68, C.9.

theological, some intellectual, and some moral. The theological
virtues are those whereby man's mind is united to God; the
intellectual virtues are those whereby reason itself is perfected; and
the moral virtues are those which perfect the powers of appetite in
obedience to the reason. On the other hand the gifts of the Holy
Ghost dispose all the powers of the soul to be amenable to the
Divine motion.
Accordingly the gifts seem to be compared to the theological virtues,
by which man is united to the Holy Ghost his Mover, in the same way
as the moral virtues are compared to the intellectual virtues, which
perfect the reason, the moving principle of the moral virtues.
Wherefore as the intellectual virtues are more excellent than the
moral virtues and control them, so the theological virtues are more
excellent than the gifts of the Holy Ghost and regulate them. Hence
Gregory says (Moral. i, 12) that "the seven sons," i.e. the seven gifts,
"never attain the perfection of the number ten, unless all they do be
done in faith, hope, and charity."
But if we compare the gifts to the other virtues, intellectual and
moral, then the gifts have the precedence of the virtues. Because the
gifts perfect the soul's powers in relation to the Holy Ghost their
Mover; whereas the virtues perfect, either the reason itself, or the
other powers in relation to reason: and it is evident that the more
exalted the mover, the more excellent the disposition whereby the
thing moved requires to be disposed. Therefore the gifts are more
perfect than the virtues.
Reply to Objection 1: Charity is a theological virtue; and such we
grant to be more perfect than the gifts.
Reply to Objection 2: There are two ways in which one thing
precedes another. One is in order of perfection and dignity, as love
of God precedes love of our neighbor: and in this way the gifts
precede the intellectual and moral virtues, but follow the theological
virtues. The other is the order of generation or disposition: thus love
of one's neighbor precedes love of God, as regards the act: and in
this way moral and intellectual virtues precede the gifts, since man,
through being well subordinate to his own reason, is disposed to be
rightly subordinate to God.
Reply to Objection 3: Wisdom and understanding and the like are