FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.6.

denote either Christ's Godhead Which went away into solitude when
the Man Christ suffered, not by going to another place, but by
restraining His power: or it may signify the base concupiscence
which we ought to cast away from ourselves, while we offer up to
Our Lord acts of virtue.
With regard to the uncleanness contracted by those who burnt these
sacrifices, the reason is the same as that which we assigned (ad 5)
to the sacrifice of the red heifer.
Reply to Objection 7: The legal rite did not cleanse the leper of his
deformity, but declared him to be cleansed. This is shown by the
words of Lev. 14:3, seqq., where it was said that the priest, "when he
shall find that the leprosy is cleansed," shall command "him that is
to be purified": consequently, the leper was already healed: but he
was said to be purified in so far as the verdict of the priest restored
him to the society of men and to the worship of God. It happened
sometimes, however, that bodily leprosy was miraculously cured by
the legal rite, when the priest erred in his judgment.
Now this purification of a leper was twofold: for, in the first place, he
was declared to be clean; and, secondly, he was restored, as clean,
to the society of men and to the worship of God, to wit, after seven
days. At the first purification the leper who sought to be cleansed
offered for himself "two living sparrows . . . cedar-wood, and scarlet,
and hyssop," in such wise that a sparrow and the hyssop should be
tied to the cedar-wood with a scarlet thread, so that the cedar-wood
was like the handle of an aspersory: while the hyssop and sparrow
were that part of the aspersory which was dipped into the blood of
the other sparrow which was "immolated . . . over living waters."
These things he offered as an antidote to the four defects of leprosy:
for cedar-wood, which is not subject to putrefaction, was offered
against the putrefaction; hyssop, which is a sweet-smelling herb,
was offered up against the stench; a living sparrow was offered up
against numbness; and scarlet, which has a vivid color, was offered
up against the repulsive color of leprosy. The living sparrow was let
loose to fly away into the plain, because the leper was restored to his
former liberty.
On the eighth day he was admitted to divine worship, and was
restored to the society of men; but only after having shaved all the
hair of his body, and washed his clothes, because leprosy rots the
hair, infects the clothes, and gives them an evil smell. Afterwards a

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.6.

sacrifice was offered for his sin, since leprosy was frequently a
result of sin: and some of the blood of the sacrifice was put on the
tip of the ear of the man that was to be cleansed, "and on the thumb
of his right hand, and the great toe of his right foot"; because it is in
these parts that leprosy is first diagnosed and felt. In this rite,
moreover, three liquids were employed: viz. blood, against the
corruption of the blood; oil, to denote the healing of the disease; and
living waters, to wash away the filth.
The figurative reason was that the Divine and human natures in
Christ were denoted by the two sparrows, one of which, in likeness
of His human nature, was offered up in an earthen vessel over living
waters, because the waters of Baptism are sanctified by Christ's
Passion. The other sparrow, in token of His impassible Godhead,
remained living, because the Godhead cannot die: hence it flew
away, for the Godhead could not be encompassed by the Passion.
Now this living sparrow, together with the cedar-wood and scarlet or
cochineal, and hyssop, i.e. faith, hope and charity, as stated above
(ad 5), was put into the water for the purpose of sprinkling, because
we are baptized in the faith of the God-Man. By the waters of Baptism
or of his tears man washes his clothes, i.e. his works, and all his
hair, i.e. his thoughts. The tip of the right ear of the man to be
cleansed is moistened with some the blood and oil, in order to
strengthen his hearing against harmful words; and the thumb and
toe of his right hand and foot are moistened that his deeds may be
holy. Other matters pertaining to this purification, or to that also of
any other uncleannesses, call for no special remark, beyond what
applies to other sacrifices, whether for sins or for trespasses.
Reply to Objection 8:and 9: Just as the people were initiated by
circumcision to the divine worship, so were the ministers by some
special purification or consecration: wherefore they are commanded
to be separated from other men, as being specially deputed, rather
than others, to the ministry of the divine worship. And all that was
done touching them in their consecration or institution, was with a
view to show that they were in possession of a prerogative of purity,
power and dignity. Hence three things were done in the institution of
ministers: for first, they were purified; secondly, they were adorned
and consecrated; thirdly, they were employed in the ministry. All in
general used to be purified by washing in water, and by certain
sacrifices; but the Levites in particular shaved all the hair of their
bodies, as stated in Lev. 8 (cf. Num. 8).