is not unsound. For what inflammation is in the body, that pride is in the soul.
And as we do not in the first case say that the inflamed part is sound, so neither
do we here consider the arrogant. It is possible then to be knowing, and yet to
know nothing. For he that knows not what he ought to know, knows nothing.
And that pride arises from knowing nothing is manifest from hence. Christ
"made Himself of no reputation" [Philippians 2:7], he therefore who knows this
will not be high-minded. Man has nothing except from God, therefore he will
not be high-minded. "For what have you that thou did not receive?" [1
Corinthians 4:7] He washed the feet of His disciples, how can he who knows this
be setting himself up? Therefore He says, "When you have done all, say we are
unprofitable servants." [Luke 17:10] The publican was accepted only from his
humility, the Pharisee perished by his boastfulness. He who is puffed up knows
none of these things. Again, Christ Himself says, "If I have spoken evil, bear
witness of the evil; but if well, why do you smite me?" [John 18:23]
"Doting about questions." To question then is to dote. "And strifes of
words"; this is justly said. For when the soul is fevered with reasonings, and
stormy, then it questions, but when it is in a sound state, it does not question, but
receives the faith. But from questionings and strifes of words nothing can be
discovered. For when the things which faith only promises are received by an
inquisitive spirit, it neither demonstrates them, nor suffers us to understand them.
If one should close his eyes, he would not be able to find anything he sought: or
if, again with his eyes open, he should bury himself, and exclude the sun, he
would be unable to find anything, thus seeking. So without faith nothing can be
discerned, but contentions must needs arise. "Whereof come railings, evil
surmisings"; that is, erroneous opinions and doctrines arising from questionings.
For when we begin to question, then we surmise concerning God things that we
ought not.
"Perverse disputings," that is, leisure or conversation, or he may mean
intercommunication, and that as infected sheep by contact communicate disease
to the sound, so do these bad men.

"Destitute of the truth, thinking that gain is godliness." Observe what evils
are produced by strifes of words. The love of gain, ignorance, and pride; for
pride is engendered by ignorance.
"From such withdraw yourself." He does not say, engage and contend with
them, but "withdraw yourself," turn away from them; as elsewhere he says, "A
man that is an heretic after the first and second admonition reject." [Titus 3:10]
He shows that they do not so much err from ignorance, as they owe their
ignorance to their indolence. Those who are contentious for the sake of money
you will never persuade. They are only to be persuaded, so long as you give, and
even so you will never satisfy their desires. For it is said, "The covetous man's
eye is not satisfied with a portion." [Sirach 14:9] From such then, as being
incorrigible, it is right to turn away. And if he who had much obligation to fight
for the truth, is advised not to engage in contention with such men, much more
should we avoid it, who are in the situation of disciples.
Having said, "They think that godliness is a means of gain," he adds: "But
godliness with contentment is great gain," not when it possesses wealth, but
when it has it not. For that he may not despond on account of his poverty, he
encourages and revives his spirit. They think, he says, that godliness is a means
of gain, and so it is; only not in their way, but in a much higher. Then having
demolished theirs he extols the other. For that worldly gain is nothing, is
manifest, because it is left behind, and does not attend us, or go along with us at
our departure. Whence is this plain? Because we had nothing when we came into
this world, therefore we shall have nothing when we depart from it. For nature
came naked into the world, and naked she will go out of it. Therefore we want
no superfluities; if we brought nothing with us, and shall take nothing away with
us.
Ver. 8. "And having food and raiment, let us be therewith content."
Such things, and so much ought we to eat, as will suffice to nourish us, and
such things should we put on, as will cover us, and clothe our nakedness, and
nothing more; and a common garment will answer this purpose. Then he urges