but as we do in the case of children, this let us do here: namely, if we see any one
terrifying children, we do not hold that man in admiration: since in fact whoever
does frighten, only frightens children; for were it a man, he could not frighten
him. Just as those who frighten (children in sport), do this either by drawing up
their eyelids, or by otherwise distorting their face, but with the eye looking
naturally and mild they would not be able to do this: so these others do this, by
distorting their mental vision ([τὸ διορατικὸν τἥς διανοίας]). So that of a mild
man and beautiful in soul nobody would be afraid; on the contrary, we all respect
him, honor and venerate him. See ye not, how the man who causes terror is also
an object of hatred and abhorrence to us all? For of those things which are only
able to terrify what do we not turn away from? Is it not so with wild beasts, with
sounds, with sights, with places, with the air, such as darkness? Let us not
therefore think it a great thing, if men fear us. For, in the first place, no man
indeed is frightened at us: and, secondly, it is no great thing (if they were). Virtue
is a great good: and see how great. However wretched we may deem the things
by means of which it consists, yet we admire virtue itself, and count them
blessed (that have it). For who would not count the patient sufferer blessed,
although poverty and such like things seem to be wretched? When therefore it
shines forth through those things which seem to be wretched, see how
surpassingly great this is! Do you think much, O man, because you are in power?
And what sort of power? Say, was it conferred by appointment? (If so,) of men
you have received power: appoint yourself to it from within. For the ruler is not
he who is so called, but he who is really so. For as a king could not make a
physician or an orator, so neither can he make a ruler: since it is not the
(imperial) letters nor the name that makes a ruler. For, if you will, let any man
build a medicine-shop, let him also have pupils, let him have instruments too and
drugs, and let him visit those who are sick: are these things sufficient to make a
physician? By no means: but there is need of art, and without that, not only do
these things profit nothing, but they even hurt: since it were better that he who is
not a physician should not even possess medicines. He that possesses them not,

neither saves nor destroys: but he that possesses them, destroys, if he knows not
how to use them: since the healing power is not only in the nature of the
medicines, but also in the art of the person applying them: where this is not, all is
marred. Such also is the ruler: he has for instruments, his voice, anger,
executioners, banishments, honors, gifts, and praises; he has also for medicines,
the law; has also for his patients, men; for a place to practise in, the court of
justice; for pupils, he has the soldiers: if then he know not the science of healing,
all these profit him nothing. The judge is a physician of souls, not of bodies: but
if this art of healing the bodies needs so much care, much more that of healing
the soul, since the soul is of more importance than the body. Then not the mere
having the name of ruler is to be a ruler: since others also are called by great
names: as Paul, Peter, James, and John: but the names do not make them that
which they are called, as neither does my name make me (to be that which John
was); I bear indeed the same name with that blessed man, but I am not the same
thing ([ὁ] [μώνυμος], [οὐ μὴν συνώνυμος]), I am not John, but am called so. In
the same way they are not rulers, but are called so. But those others are rulers
even without these adjuncts, just as also a physician, though he may not actually
practise his science, yet if he have it in his soul, he is a physician. Those are
rulers, who bear rule over themselves. For there are these four things, soul,
family; city, world: and the things form a regular progression ([ὁ] [δᾥ
προβαίνει]). He therefore that is to superintend a family, and order it well, must
first bring his own soul into order; for it is his family: but if he cannot order his
own family, where there is but one soul, where he himself is master, where he is
always along with himself, how shall he order others? He that is able to regulate
his own soul, and makes the one part to rule, the other to be subject, this man
will be able to regulate a family also: but he that can do this by a family, can do
it by a city also: and if by a city, then also by the world. But if he cannot do this
for his own soul, how then shall he be able to do it for the world? These things
have been spoken by me, that we may not be excited about offices of rule; that
we may know what ruling is: for this (which is so called) is not ruling, but a