SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.109, C.4.

Holy Writ. Therefore not every lie is a sin.
On the contrary, It is written (Ecclus. 7:14): "Be not willing to make
any manner of lie."
I answer that, An action that is naturally evil in respect of its genus
can by no means be good and lawful, since in order for an action to
be good it must be right in every respect: because good results from
a complete cause, while evil results from any single defect, as
Dionysius asserts (Div. Nom. iv). Now a lie is evil in respect of its
genus, since it is an action bearing on undue matter. For as words
are naturally signs of intellectual acts, it is unnatural and undue for
anyone to signify by words something that is not in his mind. Hence
the Philosopher says (Ethic. iv, 7) that "lying is in itself evil and to be
shunned, while truthfulness is good and worthy of praise." Therefore
every lie is a sin, as also Augustine declares (Contra Mend. i).
Reply to Objection 1: It is unlawful to hold that any false assertion is
contained either in the Gospel or in any canonical Scripture, or that
the writers thereof have told untruths, because faith would be
deprived of its certitude which is based on the authority of Holy Writ.
That the words of certain people are variously reported in the Gospel
and other sacred writings does not constitute a lie. Hence Augustine
says (De Consens. Evang. ii): "He that has the wit to understand that
in order to know the truth it is necessary to get at the sense, will
conclude that he must not be the least troubled, no matter by what
words that sense is expressed." Hence it is evident, as he adds (De
Consens. Evang. ii), that "we must not judge that someone is lying, if
several persons fail to describe in the same way and in the same
words a thing which they remember to have seen or heard."
Reply to Objection 2: The midwives were rewarded, not for their lie,
but for their fear of God, and for their good-will, which latter led them
to tell a lie. Hence it is expressly stated (Ex. 2:21): "And because the
midwives feared God, He built them houses." But the subsequent lie
was not meritorious.
Reply to Objection 3: In Holy Writ, as Augustine observes (Lib. De
Mend. v), the deeds of certain persons are related as examples of
perfect virtue: and we must not believe that such persons were liars.
If, however, any of their statements appear to be untruthful, we must
understand such statements to have been figurative and prophetic.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.109, C.4.

Hence Augustine says (Lib. De Mend. v): "We must believe that
whatever is related of those who, in prophetical times, are mentioned
as being worthy of credit, was done and said by them prophetically."
As to Abraham "when he said that Sara was his sister, he wished to
hide the truth, not to tell a lie, for she is called his sister since she
was the daughter of his father," Augustine says (Questions. Super.
Gen. xxvi; Contra Mend. x; Contra Faust. xxii). Wherefore Abraham
himself said (Gn. 20:12): "She is truly my sister, the daughter of my
father, and not the daughter of my mother," being related to him on
his father's side. Jacob's assertion that he was Esau, Isaac's firstborn, was spoken in a mystical sense, because, to wit, the latter's
birthright was due to him by right: and he made use of this mode of
speech being moved by the spirit of prophecy, in order to signify a
mystery, namely, that the younger people, i.e. the Gentiles, should
supplant the first-born, i.e. the Jews.
Some, however, are commended in the Scriptures, not on account of
perfect virtue, but for a certain virtuous disposition, seeing that it
was owing to some praiseworthy sentiment that they were moved to
do certain undue things. It is thus that Judith is praised, not for lying
to Holofernes, but for her desire to save the people, to which end she
exposed herself to danger. And yet one might also say that her
words contain truth in some mystical sense.
Reply to Objection 4: A lie is sinful not only because it injures one's
neighbor, but also on account of its inordinateness, as stated above
in this Article. Now it is not allowed to make use of anything
inordinate in order to ward off injury or defects from another: as
neither is it lawful to steal in order to give an alms, except perhaps in
a case of necessity when all things are common. Therefore it is not
lawful to tell a lie in order to deliver another from any danger
whatever. Nevertheless it is lawful to hide the truth prudently, by
keeping it back, as Augustine says (Contra Mend. x).
Reply to Objection 5: A man does not lie, so long as he has a mind to
do what he promises, because he does not speak contrary to what
he has in mind: but if he does not keep his promise, he seems to act
without faith in changing his mind. He may, however, be excused for
two reasons. First, if he has promised something evidently unlawful,
because he sinned in promise, and did well to change his mind.
Secondly, if circumstances have changed with regard to persons
and the business in hand. For, as Seneca states (De Benef. iv), for a
man to be bound to keep a promise, it is necessary for everything to