FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.105, C.5.

to allow them to marry captive women from strange nations (Dt.
21:10, seqq.).
Objection 7: Further, the Lord forbade them to marry within certain
degrees of consanguinity and affinity, according to Lev. 18.
Therefore it was unsuitably commanded (Dt. 25:5) that if any man
died without issue, his brother should marry his wife.
Objection 8: Further, as there is the greatest familiarity between man
and wife, so should there be the staunchest fidelity. But this is
impossible if the marriage bond can be sundered. Therefore it was
unfitting for the Lord to allow (Dt. 24:1-4) a man to put his wife away,
by writing a bill of divorce; and besides, that he could not take her
again to wife.
Objection 9: Further, just as a wife can be faithless to her husband,
so can a slave be to his master, and a son to his father. But the Law
did not command any sacrifice to be offered in order to investigate
the injury done by a servant to his master, or by a son to his father.
Therefore it seems to have been superfluous for the Law to prescribe
the "sacrifice of jealousy" in order to investigate a wife's adultery
(Num. 5:12, seqq.). Consequently it seems that the Law put forth
unsuitable judicial precepts about the members of the household.
On the contrary, It is written (Ps. 18:10): "The judgments of the Lord
are true, justified in themselves."
I answer that, The mutual relations of the members of a household
regard everyday actions directed to the necessities of life, as the
Philosopher states (Polit. i, 1). Now the preservation of man's life
may be considered from two points of view. First, from the point of
view of the individual, i.e. in so far as man preserves his
individuality: and for the purpose of the preservation of life,
considered from this standpoint, man has at his service external
goods, by means of which he provides himself with food and
clothing and other such necessaries of life: in the handling of which
he has need of servants. Secondly man's life is preserved from the
point of view of the species, by means of generation, for which
purpose man needs a wife, that she may bear him children.
Accordingly the mutual relations of the members of a household
admit of a threefold combination: viz. those of master and servant,
those of husband and wife, and those of father and son: and in

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.105, C.5.

respect of all these relationships the Old Law contained fitting
precepts. Thus, with regard to servants, it commanded them to be
treated with moderation---both as to their work, lest, to wit, they
should be burdened with excessive labor, wherefore the Lord
commanded (Dt. 5:14) that on the Sabbath day "thy manservant and
thy maidservant" should "rest even as thyself"---and also as to the
infliction of punishment, for it ordered those who maimed their
servants, to set them free (Ex. 21:26,27). Similar provision was made
in favor of a maidservant when married to anyone (Ex. 21:7, seqq.).
Moreover, with regard to those servants in particular who were taken
from among the people, the Law prescribed that they should go out
free in the seventh year taking whatever they brought with them,
even their clothes (Ex. 21:2, seqq.): and furthermore it was
commanded (Dt. 15:13) that they should be given provision for the
journey.
With regard to wives the Law made certain prescriptions as to those
who were to be taken in marriage: for instance, that they should
marry a wife from their own tribe (Num. 36:6): and this lest confusion
should ensue in the property of various tribes. Also that a man
should marry the wife of his deceased brother when the latter died
without issue, as prescribed in Dt. 25:5,6: and this in order that he
who could not have successors according to carnal origin, might at
least have them by a kind of adoption, and that thus the deceased
might not be entirely forgotten. It also forbade them to marry certain
women; to wit, women of strange nations, through fear of their losing
their faith; and those of their near kindred, on account of the natural
respect due to them. Furthermore it prescribed in what way wives
were to be treated after marriage. To wit, that they should not be
slandered without grave reason: wherefore it ordered punishment to
be inflicted on the man who falsely accused his wife of a crime (Dt.
22:13, seqq.). Also that a man's hatred of his wife should not be
detrimental to his son (Dt. 21:15, seqq.). Again, that a man should
not ill-use his wife through hatred of her, but rather that he should
write a bill of divorce and send her away (Dt. 24:1). Furthermore, in
order to foster conjugal love from the very outset, it was prescribed
that no public duties should be laid on a recently married man, so
that he might be free to rejoice with his wife.
With regard to children, the Law commanded parents to educate
them by instructing them in the faith: hence it is written (Ex. 12:26,
seqq.): "When your children shall say to you: What is the meaning of
this service? You shall say to them: It is the victim of the passage of