John 6:64
"But there are some of you that believe not."
Again, according to His custom, He adds weight to His words, by
foretelling what would come to pass, and by showing that He spoke thus not
from desire of honor from them, but because He cared for them. And when He
said "some," He excepted the disciples. For at first He said, "You have both seen
Me, and believe not" [John 6:36]; but here, "There are some of you that believe
not."
For He "knew from the beginning who they were that believed not, and who
should betray Him."

John 6:65
"And He said, Therefore said I unto you, that no man can come unto Me except it
were given unto Him from above from My Father."
3. Here the Evangelist intimates to us the voluntary character of the
Dispensation, and His endurance of evil. Nor is the, "from the beginning," put
here without a cause, but that you may be aware of His foreknowledge from the
first, and that before the words were uttered, and not after the men had
murmured nor after they had been offended, He knew the traitor, but before,
which was an attribute of Godhead. Then He added, "Except it be given him from
above from My Father"; thus persuading them to deem God His Father, not
Joseph, and showing them that it is no common thing to believe in Him. As
though He had said, "Unbelievers disturb Me not; trouble Me not, astonish Me
not. I know of old before they were created, I know to whom the Father has given
to believe;" and do thou, when you hear that "He has given," imagine not merely
an arbitrary distribution, but that if any has rendered himself worthy to receive
the gift, he has received it.

John 6:66
"From that time many of His disciples went back, and walked no more with
Him."
Rightly has the Evangelist said, not that they "departed," but that they
"went back"; showing that they cut themselves off from any increase in virtue,
and that by separating themselves they lost the faith which they had of old. But
this was not the case with the twelve; wherefore He says to them,

John 6:67
"Will ye also go away?"
Again showing that He needs not their ministry and service, and proving to
them that it was not for this that He led them about with Him. For how could He
when He used such expressions even to them? But why did He not praise them?
Why did He not approve them? Both because He preserved the dignity befitting
a teacher, and also to show them that they ought rather to be attracted by this
mode of dealing. For had He praised them, they might, supposing that they were
doing Him a favor, have had some human feeling; but by showing them that He
needed not their attendance, He kept them to Him the more. And observe with
what prudence He spoke. He said not, "Depart ye," (this would have been to
thrust them from Him,) but asked them a question, "Will ye also go away?" the
expression of one who would remove all force or compulsion, and who wished
not that they should be attached to Him through any sense of shame, but with a
sense of favor. By not openly accusing, but gently glancing at them, He shows
what is the truly wise course under such circumstances. But we feel differently;
with good reason, since we do everything holding fast our own honor, and
therefore think that our estate is lowered by the departure of those who attend on
us. But He neither flattered nor repulsed them, but asked them a question. Now
this was not the act of one despising them, but of one wishing them not to be
restrained by force and compulsion: for to remain on such terms is the same as to
depart. What then says Peter?