SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.27, C.2.

Reply to Objection 1: So long as we are in the body, we are said to
be "absent from the Lord," in comparison with that presence
whereby He is present to some by the vision of "sight"; wherefore
the Apostle goes on to say (2 Cor. 5:6): "For we walk by faith and not
by sight." Nevertheless, even in this life, He is present to those who
love Him, by the indwelling of His grace.
Reply to Objection 2: The mourning that merits happiness, is about
those things that are contrary to happiness. Wherefore it amounts to
the same that charity causes this mourning, and this spiritual joy
about God, since to rejoice in a certain good amounts to the same as
to grieve for things that are contrary to it.
Reply to Objection 3: There can be spiritual joy about God in two
ways. First, when we rejoice in the Divine good considered in itself;
secondly, when we rejoice in the Divine good as participated by us.
The former joy is the better, and proceeds from charity chiefly: while
the latter joy proceeds from hope also, whereby we look forward to
enjoy the Divine good, although this enjoyment itself, whether
perfect or imperfect, is obtained according to the measure of one's
charity.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.27, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the spiritual joy, which results from

charity, is compatible with an admixture of sorrow?
Objection 1: It would seem that the spiritual joy that results from
charity is compatible with an admixture of sorrow. For it belongs to
charity to rejoice in our neighbor's good, according to 1 Cor. 13:4,6:
"Charity . . . rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth with the truth." But
this joy is compatible with an admixture of sorrow, according to Rm.
12:15: "Rejoice with them that rejoice, weep with them that weep."
Therefore the spiritual joy of charity is compatible with an admixture
of sorrow.
Objection 2: Further, according to Gregory (Hom. in Evang. xxxiv),
"penance consists in deploring past sins, and in not committing
again those we have deplored." But there is no true penance without
charity. Therefore the joy of charity has an admixture of sorrow.
Objection 3: Further, it is through charity that man desires to be with
Christ according to Phil. 1:23: "Having a desire to be dissolved and
to be with Christ." Now this desire gives rise, in man, to a certain
sadness, according to Ps. 119:5: "Woe is me that my sojourning is
prolonged!" Therefore the joy of charity admits of a seasoning of
sorrow.
On the contrary, The joy of charity is joy about the Divine wisdom.
Now such like joy has no admixture of sorrow, according to Wis.
8:16: "Her conversation hath no bitterness." Therefore the joy of
charity is incompatible with an admixture of sorrow.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1, ad 3), a twofold joy in God
arises from charity. One, the more excellent, is proper to charity; and
with this joy we rejoice in the Divine good considered in itself. This
joy of charity is incompatible with an admixture of sorrow, even as
the good which is its object is incompatible with any admixture of
evil: hence the Apostle says (Phil. 4:4): "Rejoice in the Lord always."
The other is the joy of charity whereby we rejoice in the Divine good
as participated by us. This participation can be hindered by anything
contrary to it, wherefore, in this respect, the joy of charity is
compatible with an admixture of sorrow, in so far as a man grieves
for that which hinders the participation of the Divine good, either in