according to the jurisdiction of the tribunal, the punishments which
in this temporal life are inflicted for some particular sin are
themselves temporal, and extend not beyond the term of this life.
Hence although the damned are not pardoned their sins, it does not
follow that there they will undergo the same punishments as they
have in this world: but the Divine justice demands that there they
shall suffer more severe punishment for eternity.
Reply to Objection 2: There is no parity between the good and the
wicked, because a thing can be altogether good, but not altogether
evil. Hence the final happiness of the saints requires that they
should be altogether exempt from all evil; whereas the final
unhappiness of the wicked will not exclude all good, because "if a
thing be wholly evil it destroys itself," as the Philosopher says
(Ethic. iv, 5). Hence it is necessary for the good of their nature to
underlie the unhappiness of the damned, which good is the work of
their perfect Creator, Who will restore that same nature to the
perfection of its species.
Reply to Objection 3: Slowness of movement is one of those defects
which are the natural result of the principles of the human body; but
deformity is not, and consequently the comparison fails.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the bodies of the damned will be

incorruptible?
Objection 1: It would seem that the bodies of the damned will be
corruptible. For everything composed of contraries must necessarily
be corruptible. Now the bodies of the damned will be composed of
the contraries whereof they are composed even now, else they
would not be the same, neither specifically nor, in consequence,
numerically. Therefore they will be corruptible.
Objection 2: Further, if the bodies of the damned will not be
corruptible, this will be due either to nature, or to grace, or to glory.
But it will not be by nature, since they will be of the same nature as
now; nor will it be by grace or glory, since they will lack these things
altogether. Therefore they will be corruptible.
Objection 3: Further, it would seem inconsistent to withdraw the
greatest of punishments from those who are in the highest degree of
unhappiness. Now death is the greatest of punishments, as the
Philosopher declares (Ethic. iii, 6). Therefore death should not be
withdrawn from the damned, since they are in the highest degree of
unhappiness. Therefore their bodies will be corruptible.
On the contrary, It is written (Apoc. 9:6): "In those days men shall
seek death, and shall not find it, and they shall desire to die, and
death shall fly from them."
Further, the damned will be punished with an everlasting
punishment both in soul and body (Mt. 25:46): "These shall go into
everlasting punishment." But this would not be possible if their
bodies were corruptible. Therefore their bodies will be incorruptible.
I answer that, Since in every movement there must needs be a
principle of movement, movement or change may be withdrawn from
a movable in two ways: first through absence of a principle of
movement, secondly through an obstacle to the principle of
movement. Now corruption is a kind of change: and consequently a
body which is corruptible on account of the nature of its principles
may be rendered incorruptible in two ways. First by the total removal
of the principle which leads to corruption, and in this way the bodies
of the damned will be incorruptible. For since the heaven is the first