THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.2, C.11.

place by grace, even as the union of the saints with God by
knowledge and love. But if grace be taken as the free gift of God,
then the fact that the human nature is united to the Divine Person
may be called a grace, inasmuch as it took place without being
preceded by any merits---but not as though there were an habitual
grace, by means of which the union took place.
Reply to Objection 1: The grace which is an accident is a certain
likeness of the Divinity participated by man. But by the Incarnation
human nature is not said to have participated a likeness of the Divine
nature, but is said to be united to the Divine Nature itself in the
Person of the Son. Now the thing itself is greater than a participated
likeness of it.
Reply to Objection 2: Habitual grace is only in the soul; but the
grace, i.e. the free gift of God, of being united to the Divine Person
belongs to the whole human nature, which is composed of soul and
body. And hence it is said that the fulness of the Godhead dwelt
corporeally in Christ because the Divine Nature is united not merely
to the soul, but to the body also. Although it may also be said that it
dwelt in Christ corporeally, i.e. not as in a shadow, as it dwelt in the
sacraments of the old law, of which it is said in the same place (Col.
2:17) that they are the "shadow of things to come but the body is
Christ", inasmuch as the body is opposed to the shadow. And some
say that the Godhead is said to have dwelt in Christ corporeally, i.e.
in three ways, just as a body has three dimensions: first, by essence,
presence, and power, as in other creatures; secondly, by sanctifying
grace, as in the saints; thirdly, by personal union, which is proper to
Christ.
Hence the reply to the third is manifest, viz. because the union of the
Incarnation did not take place by habitual grace alone, but in
subsistence or person.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.2, C.12.

### ARTICLE 11. Whether any merits preceded the union of the

Incarnation?
Objection 1: It would seem that the union of the Incarnation followed
upon certain merits, because upon Ps. 32:22, "Let Thy mercy, o Lord,
be upon us, as," etc. a gloss says: "Here the prophet's desire for the
Incarnation and its merited fulfilment are hinted at." Therefore the
Incarnation falls under merit.
Objection 2: Further, whoever merits anything merits that without
which it cannot be. But the ancient Fathers merited eternal life, to
which they were able to attain only by the Incarnation; for Gregory
says (Moral. xiii): "Those who came into this world before Christ's
coming, whatsoever eminency of righteousness they may have had,
could not, on being divested of the body, at once be admitted into
the bosom of the heavenly country, seeing that He had not as yet
come Who, by His own descending, should place the souls of the
righteous in their everlasting seat." Therefore it would seem that
they merited the Incarnation.
Objection 3: Further, of the Blessed Virgin it is sung that "she
merited to bear the Lord of all" [Little Office of B. V. M., Dominican
Rite, Ant. at Benedictus], and this took place through the Incarnation.
Therefore the Incarnation falls under merit.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Praed. Sanct. xv): "Whoever can
find merits preceding the singular generation of our Head, may also
find merits preceding the repeated regeneration of us His members."
But no merits preceded our regeneration, according to Titus 3:5:
"Not by the works of justice which we have done, but according to
His mercy He saved us, by the laver of regeneration." Therefore no
merits preceded the generation of Christ.
I answer that, With regard to Christ Himself, it is clear from the above
(Article 10) that no merits of His could have preceded the union. For
we do not hold that He was first of all a mere man, and that
afterwards by the merits of a good life it was granted Him to become
the Son of God, as Photinus held; but we hold that from the
beginning of His conception this man was truly the Son of God,
seeing that He had no other hypostasis but that of the Son of God,
according to Luke 1:35: "The Holy which shall be born of thee shall