same time a person seeing it thrown out, yet standing there and receiving it all on
his head: you not only do not pity him, but you are angry, and tell him it serves
him right; and, "Do not be a fool," everyone cries out to him, and lays the blame
not so much on the other for shooting out the filth, as on him for letting it come
on him. But now, you know that covetousness is of the devil; you know that it is
the cause of ten thousand evils; you see him flinging out, like filth, his noisome
imaginations; and do you not see that you are receiving on your bare head his
nastiness, when it needed but to turn aside a little to escape it altogether? Just as
our man by shifting his position would have escaped; so, do you refuse to admit
such imaginations, ward off the lust. And how am I to do this? You will ask.
Were you a Gentile, and had eyes for things present alone, the matter perhaps
might be one of considerable difficulty, and yet even the Gentiles have achieved
as much; but you— a man in expectation of heaven and heavenly bliss— and
you to ask, "How am I to repel bad thoughts?" Were I saying the contrary, then
you might doubt: did I say, covet riches, "How shall I covet riches," you might
answer, "seeing such things as I do?" Tell me, if gold and precious stones were
set before you, and I were to say, Desire lead, would there not be reason for
hesitation? For you would say, How can I? But if I said, Do not desire it; this had
been plainer to understand. I do not marvel at those who despise, but at those
who despise not riches. This is the character of a soul exceeding full of stupidity,
no better than flies and gnats, a soul crawling upon the earth, wallowing in filth,
destitute of all high ideas. What is it you say? Are you destined to inherit eternal
life; and do you say, how shall I despise the present life for the future? What, can
the things be put in competition? You are to receive a royal vest; and say you,
How shall I despise these rags? You are going to be led into the king's palace;
and do you say, How shall I despise this present hovel? Of a truth, we ourselves
are to blame in every point, we who do not choose to let ourselves be stirred up
ever so little. For the willing have succeeded, and that with great zeal and
facility. Would that you might be persuaded by our exhortation, and succeed too,
and become imitators of those who have been successful, through the grace and

mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father and the Holy Ghost
together be glory, and power, and honor, now and ever, and world without end.
Amen.

Homily 8 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts III. 1
"Now Peter and John went up together into the temple, at the hour of
prayer, being the ninth hour."
Everywhere we find these two Apostles in great harmony together. "To him
Simon Peter beckoned." [John 13:24] These two also came together to the
sepulchre. [John 20:3 et seq.] And concerning John, Peter said unto Christ, "And
what shall this man do?" [John 21:21] Now as for the other miracles, the writer
of this book omits them; but he mentions the miracle by which they were all put
in commotion. Observe again that they do not come to them purposely; so clear
were they of ambition, so closely did they imitate their Master. Why now did
they go up to the temple? Did they still live as Jews? No, but for expediency
([χρησίμως]). A miraculous sign again takes place, which both confirms the
converts, and draws over the rest; and such, as they were a sign for having
wrought. The disease was in the nature of the man, and baffled the art of
medicine. He had been forty years lame [Acts 4:20], as the writer says
afterwards, and no one during all that time had cured him. And the most
obstinate diseases are those which are born with men. It was a great calamity,
insomuch that even to provide for himself his necessary sustenance was
impossible for him. The man was conspicuous both from the place, and from his
malady. Hear how the matter is related. "And a certain man, lame from his
mother's womb, was carried, whom they laid daily at the gate of the temple
which is called Beautiful, to ask alms of them that entered into the temple." [Acts
3:2] He sought to receive alms, and he did not know who the men were. "Who
seeing Peter and John about to go into the temple, asked an alms. And Peter,
fastening his eyes upon him, with John, said, Look on us." (v. 3, 4.) Yet, not even
so were the man's thoughts elevated, but he persisted in his importunity. For such