therefore, lest any one should deem that He knew as a man knows, He added,
"As the Father knows Me, even so know I the Father." "I know Him as exactly as
He knows Me." Wherefore He said, "No man knows the Son save the Father, nor
the Father save the Son" [Luke 10:22], speaking of a distinct kind of knowledge,
and such as no other can possess.
2. "I lay down My life." This He says continually, to show that He is no
deceiver. So also the Apostle, when he desired to show that he was a genuine
teacher, and was arguing against the false apostles, established his authority by
his dangers and deaths, saying, "In stripes above measure, in deaths oft." [2
Corinthians 11:23] For to say, "I am light," and "I am life," seemed to the foolish
to be a matter of pride; but to say, "I am willing to die," admitted not any malice
or envy. Wherefore they do not say to Him, "You bear witness of yourself, your
witness is not true," for the speech manifested very tender care for them, if
indeed He was willing to give Himself for those who would have stoned Him.
On this account also He seasonably introduces mention of the Gentiles;

John 10:16
"For other sheep also I have, which are not of this fold, them also must I bring."
Observe again, the word "must," here used, does not express necessity, but
is declaratory of something which will certainly come to pass. As though He had
said, "Why marvel ye if these shall follow Me, and if My sheep shall hear My
voice? When you shall see others also following Me and hearing My voice, then
shall you be astonished more." And be not confounded when you hear Him say,
"which are not of this fold", for the difference relates to the Law only, as also
Paul says, "Neither circumcision avails anything, nor uncircumcision."
"Them also must I bring." He shows that both these and those were
scattered and mixed, and without shepherds, because the good Shepherd had not
yet come. Then He proclaims beforehand their future union, that,
"They shall be one fold."
Which same thing also Paul declared, saying, "For to make in Himself of
two one new man." [Ephesians 2:15]

John 10:17
"Therefore does My Father love Me, because I lay down My life, that I might
take it again."
What could be more full of humanity than this saying, if so be that on our
account our Lord shall be beloved, because He dies for us? What then? Tell me,
was He not beloved during the time before this; did the Father now begin to love
Him, and were we the causes of His love? Do you see how He used
condescension? But what does He here desire to prove? Because they said that
He was alien from the Father, and a deceiver, and had come to ruin and destroy
He tells them, "This if nothing else would persuade Me to love you, namely, your
being so beloved by the Father, that I also am beloved by Him, because I die for
you." Besides this He desires also to prove that other point, that He came not to
the action unwillingly, (for it unwillingly, how could what was done cause love?)
and that this was especially known to the Father. And if He speaks as a man,
marvel not, for we have often mentioned the cause of this, and to say again the
same things is superfluous and unpleasant.
"I lay down My life, that I might take it again."