Homily 69 on the Gospel of John
John 12:42-43
"Nevertheless among the chief rulers also many believed on Him; but because of
the Pharisees they did not confess Him, lest they should be put out of the
synagogue: for they loved the praise of men more than the praise of God."
1. It is necessary for us to avoid alike all the passions which corrupt the
soul, but most especially those, which from themselves generate numerous sins.
I mean such as the love of money. It is in truth of itself a dreadful malady, but it
becomes much more grievous, because it is the root and mother of all mischiefs.
Such also is vainglory. See, for instance, how these men were broken off from
the faith through their love of honor. "Many," it says, "of the chief rulers also
believed on Him, but because of the Jews they did not confess Him, lest they
should be put out of the synagogue." As He said also to them before, "How can
you believe which receive honor one of another, and seek not the honor that
comes from God only?" [John 5:44] So then they were not rulers, but slaves in
the utmost slavery. However, this fear was afterwards done away, for nowhere
during the time of the Apostles do we find them possessed by this feeling, since
in their time both rulers and priests believed. The grace of the Spirit having
come, made them all firmer than adamant. Since therefore this was what
hindered them from believing at this time, hear what He says.

John 12:44
"He that believes in Me, believes not on Me, but on Him that sent Me."
As though He had said, "Why fear ye to believe in Me? Faith passes to the
Father through Me, as does also unbelief." See how in every way He shows the
unvaryingness of His Essence. He said not, He that believes "Me," lest any
should assert that He spoke concerning His words; this might have been said in
the case of mere men, for he that believes the Apostles, believes not them, but
God. But that you might learn that He speaks here of the belief on His Essence,
He said not, "He that believes My words," but, "He that believes in Me." "And
wherefore," says some one, "has He nowhere said conversely, He that believes in
the Father, believes not on the Father but on Me?" Because they would have
replied, "Lo, we believe in the Father, but we believe not on you." Their
disposition was as yet too infirm. Anyhow, conversing with the disciples, He did
speak thus: "You believe in the Father, believe also on Me" [John 14:1]; but
seeing that these then were too weak to hear such words, He leads them in
another way, showing that it is not possible to believe in the Father, without
believing on Him. And that you may not deem that the words are spoken as of
man, He adds,

John 12:45
"He that sees Me, sees Him that sent Me."
What then! Is God a body? By no means. The "seeing" of which He here
speaks is that of the mind, thence showing the Consubstantiality. And what is,
"He that believes in Me"? It is as though one should say, "He that takes water
from the river, takes it not from the river but from the fountain"; or rather this
image is too weak, when compared with the matter before us.