In the first way, we can prove that God is one; and the like. In the
second way, reasons avail to prove the Trinity; as, when assumed to
be true, such reasons confirm it. We must not, however, think that
the trinity of persons is adequately proved by such reasons. This
becomes evident when we consider each point; for the infinite
goodness of God is manifested also in creation, because to produce
from nothing is an act of infinite power. For if God communicates
Himself by His infinite goodness, it is not necessary that an infinite
effect should proceed from God: but that according to its own mode
and capacity it should receive the divine goodness. Likewise, when it
is said that joyous possession of good requires partnership, this
holds in the case of one not having perfect goodness: hence it needs
to share some other's good, in order to have the goodness of
complete happiness. Nor is the image in our mind an adequate proof
in the case of God, forasmuch as the intellect is not in God and
ourselves univocally. Hence, Augustine says (Tract. xxvii. in Joan.)
that by faith we arrive at knowledge, and not conversely.
Reply to Objection 3: There are two reason why the knowledge of the
divine persons was necessary for us. It was necessary for the right
idea of creation. The fact of saying that God made all things by His
Word excludes the error of those who say that God produced things
by necessity. When we say that in Him there is a procession of love,
we show that God produced creatures not because He needed them,
nor because of any other extrinsic reason, but on account of the love
of His own goodness. So Moses, when he had said, "In the beginning
God created heaven and earth," subjoined, "God said, Let there be
light," to manifest the divine Word; and then said, "God saw the light
that it was good," to show proof of the divine love. The same is also
found in the other works of creation. In another way, and chiefly, that
we may think rightly concerning the salvation of the human race,
accomplished by the Incarnate Son, and by the gift of the Holy
Ghost.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether there are notions in God?

Objection 1: It would seem that in God there are no notions. For
Dionysius says (Div. Nom. i): "We must not dare to say anything of
God but what is taught to us by the Holy Scripture." But Holy
Scripture does not say anything concerning notions. Therefore there
are none in God.
Objection 2: Further, all that exists in God concerns the unity of the
essence or the trinity of the persons. But the notions do not concern
the unity of the essence, nor the trinity of the persons; for neither
can what belongs to the essence be predicated of the notions: for
instance, we do not say that paternity is wise or creates; nor can
what belongs to the persons be so predicated; for example, we do
not say that paternity begets, nor that filiation is begotten. Therefore
there do not exist notions in God.
Objection 3: Further, we do not require to presuppose any abstract
notions as principles of knowing things which are devoid of
composition: for they are known of themselves. But the divine
persons are supremely simple. Therefore we are not to suppose any
notions in God.
On the contrary, Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii, 5): "We
recognize difference of hypostases, in the three properties; i.e. in the
paternal, the filial, and the processional." Therefore we must admit
properties and notions in God.
I answer that, Prepositivus, considering the simplicity of the
persons, said that in God there were no properties or notions, and
wherever there were mentioned, he propounded the abstract for the
concrete. For as we are accustomed to say, "I beseech your
kindness"---i.e. you who are kind---so when we speak of paternity in
God, we mean God the Father.
But, as shown above (Question 3, Article 3, ad 1), the use of concrete
and abstract names in God is not in any way repugnant to the divine
simplicity; forasmuch as we always name a thing as we understand
it. Now, our intellect cannot attain to the absolute simplicity of the
divine essence, considered in itself, and therefore, our human
intellect apprehends and names divine things, according to its own