the shepherd is well skilled in refuting them all, the wolf, by means of any one of
them, can enter, and devour the greater part of the flock. In ordinary warfare we
must always look for victory being won or defeat sustained by the soldiers who
are on the field of battle. But in the spiritual warfare the case is quite different.
For there it often happens that the combat with one set of enemies secures a
victory for others who never engaged in battle at all, nor took any trouble, but
were sitting still all the while; and he who has not much experience in such
occurrences will get pierced, so to say, with his own sword, and become the
laughing-stock of friends and foes alike. I will try by an example to make clear
what I am saying. They who receive the wild doctrines of Valentinus and
Marcion, and of all whose minds are similarly diseased, exclude the Law given
by God to Moses from the catalogue of the Divine Scriptures. But Jews so revere
the Law, that although the time has come which annuls it, they still contend for
the observance of all its contents, contrary to the purpose of God. But the Church
of God, avoiding either extreme, has trodden a middle path, and is neither
induced on the one hand to place herself under its yoke, nor on the other does
she tolerate its being slandered, but commends it, though its day is over, because
of its profitableness while its season lasted. Now it is necessary for him who is
going to fight with both these enemies, to be fully conversant with this middle
course. For if in wishing to teach the Jews that they are out of date in clinging to
the old law, he begins to find fault with it unsparingly, he gives no little handle to
those heretics who wish to pull it to pieces; and if in his ambition to stop their
mouths he extols it immoderately, and speaks of it with admiration, as necessary
for this present time, he unseals the lips of the Jews. Again they who labor under
the frenzy of Sabellius and the craze of Arius, have both fallen from a sound
faith for want of observing a middle course. The name of Christian is applied to
both these heretics; but if any one examines their doctrines, he will find the one
sect not much better than the Jews, and differing from them only in name, and
the other very nearly holding the heresy of Paul of Samosata, and that both are
very wide of the truth. Great, therefore, is the danger in such cases, and the way

of orthodoxy is narrow and hemmed in by threatening crags on either side, and
there is no little fear lest when intending to strike at one enemy we should be
wounded by the other. For if any one assert the unity of the Godhead, Sabellius
straightway turns that expression to the advantage of his own mental vagary, and
if he distinguish the Persons, and say that the Father is one, and the Son another,
and the Holy Spirit a third, up gets Arius, ready to wrest that distinction of
Persons into a difference of substance; so we must turn and flee both from the
impious confounding of the Persons by the one, and the senseless division of the
substance by the other, confessing, indeed, that the Godhead of the Father and of
the Son and of the Holy Ghost, is all one, while we add thereunto a Trinity of
Persons. For then we shall be able to fortify ourselves against the attacks of both
heretics. I might tell you besides these, of several other adversaries against
which, except we contend bravely and carefully, we shall leave the field covered
with wounds.
5. Why should any one describe the silly chatter of our own people? For
these are not less than the attacks upon us from without, while they give the
teacher even more trouble. Some out of an idle curiosity are rashly bent upon
busying themselves about matters which are neither possible for them to know,
nor of any advantage to them if they could know them. Others again demand
from God an account of his judgments, and force themselves to sound the depth
of that abyss which is unfathomable. "For your judgments," says the Scriptures,
"are a great deep," and about their faith and practice you would find few of them
anxious, but the majority curiously inquiring into matters which it is not possible
to discover, and the mere inquiry into which provokes God. For when we make a
determined effort to learn what He does not wish us to know, we fail to succeed
(for how should we succeed against the will of God?); and there only remains for
us the danger arising from our inquiry. Now, though this be the case, whenever
any one authoritatively stops the search, into such fathomless depths, he gets
himself the reputation of being proud and ignorant; so that at such times much
tact is needed on the Bishop's part, so as to lead his people away from these