he passed all his life in afflictions, in tears and groanings night and day. "For the
space of three years," he says, "I ceased not to warn every one night and day
with tears." [Acts 20:31] And again: "That which comes upon me daily." [1
Corinthians 11:28] He did not rejoice today, and grieve tomorrow, but he ceased
not daily to grieve. How then does he say, "Evil men shall wax worse and
worse"? He has not said, they shall find rest, but "they shall wax worse and
worse." Their progress is for the worse. He has not said, they shall be in
prosperity. But if they are punished, they are punished that you may not suppose
their sins are unavenged. For since we are not deterred from wickedness by the
fear of hell, in very tenderness He rouses us from our insensibility, and awakens
us. If no wicked man was ever punished, no one would believe that God presides
over human affairs. If all were punished, no one would expect a future
resurrection, since all had received their due here. On this account He both
punishes, and forbears to punish. On this account the righteous suffer tribulation
here, because they are sojourners, and strangers, and are in a foreign country.
The just therefore endure these things for the purpose of trial. For hear what God
said to Job: "Do you think that I have warned you otherwise, than that you might
appear just?" [Job 40:3, Septuagint] But sinners when they endure any affliction
suffer but the punishment of their sins. Under all circumstances, therefore,
whether afflictive or otherwise, let us give thanks to God. For both are
beneficial. He does nothing in hatred or enmity to us, but all things from care
and consideration for us.
"Knowing that from a child you have known the sacred writings." The holy
Scriptures he calls "sacred writings." In these you were nurtured, so that through
them your faith ought to be firm and unshaken. For the root was laid deep, and
nourished by length of time, nor will anything subvert it.
And speaking of the holy Scriptures, he has added, "Which are able to make
you wise," that is, they will not suffer you to have any foolish feeling, such as
most men have. For he who knows the Scriptures as he ought, is not offended at
anything that happens; he endures all things manfully, referring them partly to

faith, and to the incomprehensible nature of the divine dispensation, and partly
knowing reasons for them, and finding examples in the Scriptures. Since it is a
great sign of knowledge not to be curious about everything, nor to wish to know
all things. And if you will allow me, I will explain myself by an example. Let us
suppose a river, or rather rivers (I ask no allowance, I only speak of what rivers
really are,) all are not of the same depth. Some have a shallow bed, others one
deep enough to drown one unacquainted with it. In one part there are whirlpools,
and not in another. It is good therefore to forbear to make trial of all, and it is no
small proof of knowledge not to wish to sound all the depths: whereas he that
would venture on every part of the river, is really most ignorant of the peculiar
nature of rivers, and will often be in danger of perishing, from venturing into the
deeper parts with the same boldness with which he crossed the shallows. So it is
in the things of God. He that will know all things, and ventures to intrude into
everything, he it is that is most ignorant what God is. And of rivers indeed, the
greater part is safe, and the depths and whirlpools few, but with respect to the
things of God, the greater part is hidden, and it is not possible to trace out His
works. Why then are you bent on drowning yourself in those depths?
Know this, however, that God dispenses all things, that He provides for all,
that we are free agents, that some things He works, and some things He permits;
that He wills nothing evil to be done; that all things are not done by His will, but
some by ours also; all evil things by ours alone, all good things by our will
conjointly with His influence; and that nothing is without His knowledge.
Therefore He works all things. Thou then knowing this canst reckon what things
are good, what are evil, and what are indifferent. Thus virtue is good, vice is
evil; but riches and poverty, life and death, are things indifferent. If you know
this, you will know thereby, that the righteous are afflicted that they may be
crowned, the wicked, that they may receive the punishment of their sins. But all
sinners are not punished here, lest the generality should disbelieve the
Resurrection; nor all the righteous afflicted, lest men should think that vice, and
not virtue, is approved. These are the rules and limits. Bring what you will to the