was "eaten with worms, and gave up the ghost," the other "burst asunder in the
midst." Moreover, the fountains failing, when sacrifices were made there, and the
entrance of the famine into the cities together with the emperor himself, was a
very great sign. For it is usual with God to do such things; when evils are
multiplied, and He sees His own people afflicted, and their adversaries greatly
intoxicated with their dominion over them, then to display His own power;
which he did also in Persia with respect to the Jews.
3. Wherefore, that he was not acting without an object, or by chance, when
he distributed Christ's forefathers into three portions, is plain from what has been
said. And mark, too, whence he begins, and where he ends. From Abraham to
David; from David to the captivity of Babylon; from this unto Christ Himself.
For both at the beginning he put the two in close succession, David and
Abraham, and also in summing up he mentions both in the same way. And this,
because, as I have already said, it was to them that the promises were made.
But why can it be, that as he mentioned the captivity of Babylon, he did not
mention also the descent into Egypt? Because they had ceased to be any longer
afraid of the Egyptians, but the Babylonians they dreaded still. And the one thing
was ancient, but the other fresh, and had taken place of late. And to the one they
were carried down for no sins, but to the other, transgressions were the cause of
their being removed.
And also with regard to the very names, if any one were to attempt to
translate their etymologies, even thence would he derive great matter of divine
speculation, and such as is of great importance with regard to the New
Testament: as, for instance, from Abraham's name, from Jacob's, from
Solomon's, from Zorobabel's. For it was not without purpose that these names
were given them. But lest we should seem to be wearisome by running out a
great length, let us pass these things by, and proceed to what is urgent.
4. Having then mentioned all His forefathers, and ending with Joseph, he
did not stop at this, but added, "Joseph the husband of Mary;" intimating that it
was for her sake he traced his genealogy also. Then, lest when you have heard of

the "husband of Mary," you should suppose that Christ was born after the
common law of nature, mark, how he sets it right by that which follows. "You
have heard," says he, "of an husband, you have heard of a mother, you have
heard a name assigned to the child, therefore hear the manner too of the birth."
"The birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise." [Matthew 1:18] "Of what kind of
birth are you telling me, I pray you, since you have already mentioned His
ancestors?" "I still wish to tell you the manner also of His birth." Do you see,
how he wakens up the hearer? For as though he were about to speak of
something unusual, he promises to tell also the manner thereof.
And observe a most admirable order in the things he has mentioned. For he
did not proceed directly to the birth, but puts us in mind first, how many
generations he was from Abraham, how many from David, and from the
captivity of Babylon; and thus he sets the careful hearer upon considering the
times, to show that this is the Christ who was preached by the prophets. For
when you have numbered the generations, and hast learned by the time that this
is He, you will readily receive likewise the miracle which took place in His birth.
Thus, being about to tell of a certain great thing, His birth of a virgin, he first
shadows over the statement, until he has numbered the generations, by speaking
of "an husband of Mary;" or rather he does even put in short space the narration
of the birth itself, and then proceeds to number also the years, reminding the
hearer, that this is He, of whom the patriarch Jacob had said, He should then at
length come, when the Jewish rulers had come to an end; of whom the prophet
Daniel had proclaimed beforehand, that He should come after those many
weeks. And if any one, counting the years spoken of to Daniel by the angel in a
number of weeks, would trace down the time from the building of the city to His
birth, by reckoning he will perceive the one to agree with the other.
5. How then was He born, I pray you? "When as His mother Mary was
espoused:" [Matthew 1:18] He says not "virgin," but merely "mother;" so that
his account is easy to be received. And so having beforehand prepared the hearer
to look for some ordinary piece of information, and by this laying hold of him,