defective knowledge about a certain thing, which he would desire to
know perfectly. Accordingly, in the damned there will be actual
consideration of the things they knew heretofore as matters of
sorrow, but not as a cause of pleasure. For they will consider both
the evil they have done, and for which they were damned, and the
delightful goods they have lost, and on both counts they will suffer
torments. Likewise they will be tormented with the thought that the
knowledge they had of speculative matters was imperfect, and that
they missed its highest degree of perfection which they might have
acquired.
Reply to Objection 1: Although the consideration of knowledge is
delightful in itself, it may accidentally be the cause of sorrow, as
explained above.
Reply to Objection 2: In this world the soul is united to a corruptible
body, wherefore the soul's consideration is hindered by the suffering
of the body. On the other hand, in the future life the soul will not be
so drawn by the body, but however much the body may suffer, the
soul will have a most clear view of those things that can be a cause
of anguish to it.
Reply to Objection 3: Time causes forgetfulness accidentally, in so
far as the movement whereof it is the measure is the cause of
change. But after the judgment day there will be no movement of the
heavens; wherefore neither will it be possible for forgetfulness to
result from any lapse of time however long. Before the judgment day,
however, the separated soul is not changed from its disposition by
the heavenly movement.

### ARTICLE 8. Whether the damned will ever think of God?

Objection 1: It would seem that the damned will sometimes think of
God. For one cannot hate a thing actually, except one think about it.
Now the damned will hate God, as stated in the text of Sentent. iv, in
the last Distinction. Therefore they will think of God sometimes.
Objection 2: Further, the damned will have remorse of conscience.
But the conscience suffers remorse for deeds done against God.
Therefore they will sometimes think of God.
On the contrary, Man's most perfect thoughts are those which are
about God: whereas the damned will be in a state of the greatest
imperfection. Therefore they will not think of God.
I answer that, one may think of God in two ways. First, in Himself and
according to that which is proper to Him, namely that He is the fount
of all goodness: and thus it is altogether impossible to think of Him
without delight, so that the damned will by no means think of Him in
this way. Secondly, according to something accidental as it were to
Him in His effects, such as His punishments, and so forth, and in this
respect the thought of God can bring sorrow, so that in this way the
damned will think of God.
Reply to Objection 1: The damned do not hate God except because
He punishes and forbids what is agreeable to their evil will: and
consequently they will think of Him only as punishing and
forbidding. This suffices for the Reply to the Second Objection, since
conscience will not have remorse for sin except as forbidden by the
Divine commandment.