to attain unto the good things promised to them that love Him, by the grace and
mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father and the Holy Ghost
together, be glory, dominion, honor, now and ever, world without end. Amen.

Homily 34 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts XV. 35
"Paul also and Barnabas continued in Antioch, teaching and preaching the
word of the Lord, with many others also."
Observe again their humility, how they let others also take part in the
preaching. "And some days after Paul said unto Barnabas, Let us go again and
visit our brethren in every city where we have preached the word of the Lord,
and see how they do. And Barnabas determined to take with them John, whose
surname was Mark. But Paul thought not good ([ἡ] [ξίου] see note 3, p. 213) to
take him with them, who departed from them from Pamphylia, and went not with
them to the work. And the contention (or exasperation) was so sharp between
them, that they departed asunder one from the other." [Acts 15:36-39] And
already indeed Luke has described to us the character of the Apostles, that the
one was more tender and indulgent, but this one more strict and austere. For the
gifts are diverse— (the gifts, I say), for that this is a gift is manifest— but the
one befitting one, the other another set of characters, and if they change places,
harm results instead of good. (b) In the Prophets too we find this: diverse minds,
diverse characters: for instance, Elias austere, Moses meek. So here Paul is more
vehement. And observe for all this, how gentle he is. "Thought not good," it
says, "to take him with them that had departed from them from Pamphylia." (a)
And there seems indeed to be exasperation ([παροξυσμός]), but in fact the whole
matter is a plan of the Divine Providence, that each should receive his proper
place: and it behooved that they should not be upon a par, but the one should
lead, and the other be led. "And so Barnabas took Mark, and sailed unto Cyprus;
and Paul chose Silas, and departed, being recommended by the brethren unto the
grace of God. And he went through Syria and Cilicia, confirming the Churches."
[Acts 15:39-41] And this also is a work of Providence. For the Cyprians had

exhibited nothing of the like sort as they at Antioch and the rest: and those
needed the softer character, but these needed such a character as Paul's. "Which
then," say you, "did well? He that took, or he that left?" *** (c) For just as a
general would not choose to have a low person always to his baggage-bearer, so
neither did the Apostle. This corrected the other's, and instructed (Mark) himself.
"Then did Barnabas ill?" say you. "And how is it not amiss ([ἄ] [τοπον]), that
upon so small a matter there should arise so great an evil?" In the first place
then, no evil did come of it, if, sufficing each for whole nations, they were
divided the one from the other, but a great good. And besides, they would not
readily have chosen to leave each other. But admire, I pray you, the writer, how
he does not conceal this either. "But at any rate," say you, "if they must needs
part, let it be without exasperation." Nay, but if nothing more, observe this, that
in this too is shown what was of man (in the preaching of the Gospel). For if the
like behooved to be shown (even) in what Christ did, much more here. And
besides, the contention cannot be said to be evil, when each disputes for such
objects (as here) and with just reason. I grant you, if the exasperation were in
seeking his own, and contending for his own honor, this might well be
(reproved): but if wishing, both the one and the other, to instruct and teach, the
one took this way and the other that, what is there to find fault with? For in many
things they acted upon their human judgment; for they were not stocks or stones.
And observe how Paul impeaches (Mark), and gives the reason. For of his
exceeding humility he reverenced Barnabas, as having been partner with him in
so great works, and being with him: but still he did not so reverence him, as to
overlook (what was necessary). Now which of them advised best, it is not for us
to pronounce: but thus far (we may affirm), that it was a great arrangement of
Providence, if these were to be vouchsafed a second visitation, but those were
not to be visited even once.
(a) "Teaching and preaching the word of the Lord." [Acts 15:35] They did
not simply tarry in Antioch, but taught. What did they "teach," and what
"preach" (evangelize)? They both (taught) those that were already believers, and