## CHAPTER XXI--That it belongs to God alone to create
SINCE the order of actions is according to the order of agents, and the action is nobler
of the nobler agent, the first and highest action must be proper to the first and highest
agent. But creation is the first and highest action, presupposing no other, and in all
others presupposed. Therefore creation is the proper action of God alone, who is the
highest agent.
2. Nothing else is the universal cause of being but God (Chap.XV).
3. Effects answer proportionally to their causes. Thus actual effects we attribute to
actual causes, potential effects to potential causes, particular effects to particular
causes, and universal effects to universal causes. Now the first thing caused is `being,'
as we see by its presence in all things. Therefore the proper cause of `being,' simply as
such, is the first and universal agent, which is God. Other agents are not causes of
`being,' simply as such, but causes of `being this,' as `man' or `white': but `being,' simply
as such, is caused by creation, which presupposes nothing, because nothing can be
outside of the extension of `being,' simply as such. Other productions result in `being
this,' or `being of this quality': for out of pre-existent being is made `being this,' or `being
of this quality.'
6. Every agent that acts as an instrument completes the action of the principal agent by
some action proper and connatural to itself, as a saw operates to the making of a stool
by cutting. If then there be any nature that operates to creation as an instrument of the
prime creator, this being must operate through some action due and proper to its own
nature. Now the effect answering to the proper action of an instrument is prior in the
way of production to the effect answering to the principal agent; hence it is that the final
end answers to the principal agent: for the cutting of the wood is prior to the form
of the stool. There must then be some effect due to the proper operation of the
instrument used for creation; and this effect must be prior in the way of production to
`being': for `being' is the effect answering to the action of the prime creator. But that is
impossible: for the more general is prior in the way of generation to the more particular.

as abstract: it is a reality in these and these particulars. St Thomas, in one place, if
indeed the argument is really his, calls God an abstract Being: see B. I, Chap.XLII,
n. 13, with note. He means that God is a Being of ideal perfection. God is ideal Being,
actualised: He is the actuality of ideality. To say that God gives being to things is by no
means to deny that He gives also particular determinations of being. The first being was
created under certain particular determinations. Once created, created agents act and
react, modifying these determinations. But Being, as such, they can neither give nor
take away. They can neither create nor annihilate anything. Matter is indestructible; and
the light of intelligence, once kindled by the Creator's touch, burns for eternity.