SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.57, C.4.

virtuously. Hence it is written (Wis. 8:7) that Divine wisdom "teacheth
temperance, and prudence, and justice, and fortitude, which are
such things as men (i.e. virtuous men) can have nothing more
profitable in life."
Reply to Objection 2: Necessity is twofold. One arises from
"constraint," and this removes merit, since it runs counter to the will.
The other arises from the obligation of a "command," or from the
necessity of obtaining an end, when, to wit, a man is unable to
achieve the end of virtue without doing some particular thing. The
latter necessity does not remove merit, when a man does voluntarily
that which is necessary in this way. It does however exclude the
credit of supererogation, according to 1 Cor. 9:16, "If I preach the
Gospel, it is no glory to me, for a necessity lieth upon me."
Reply to Objection 3: Justice is concerned about external things, not
by making them, which pertains to art, but by using them in our
dealings with other men.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.57, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether justice is in the will as its subject?

Objection 1: It would seem that justice is not in the will as its subject.
For justice is sometimes called truth. But truth is not in the will, but
in the intellect. Therefore justice is not in the will as its subject.
Objection 2: Further, justice is about our dealings with others. Now it
belongs to the reason to direct one thing in relation to another.
Therefore justice is not in the will as its subject but in the reason.
Objection 3: Further, justice is not an intellectual virtue, since it is
not directed to knowledge; wherefore it follows that it is a moral
virtue. Now the subject of moral virtue is the faculty which is
"rational by participation," viz. the irascible and the concupiscible,
as the Philosopher declares (Ethic. i, 13). Therefore justice is not in
the will as its subject, but in the irascible and concupiscible.
On the contrary, Anselm says (De Verit. xii) that "justice is rectitude
of the will observed for its own sake."
I answer that, The subject of a virtue is the power whose act that
virtue aims at rectifying. Now justice does not aim at directing an act
of the cognitive power, for we are not said to be just through
knowing something aright. Hence the subject of justice is not the
intellect or reason which is a cognitive power. But since we are said
to be just through doing something aright, and because the
proximate principle of action is the appetitive power, justice must
needs be in some appetitive power as its subject.
Now the appetite is twofold; namely, the will which is in the reason
and the sensitive appetite which follows on sensitive apprehension,
and is divided into the irascible and the concupiscible, as stated in
the FP, Question 81, Article 2. Again the act of rendering his due to
each man cannot proceed from the sensitive appetite, because
sensitive apprehension does not go so far as to be able to consider
the relation of one thing to another; but this is proper to the reason.
Therefore justice cannot be in the irascible or concupiscible as its
subject, but only in the will: hence the Philosopher (Ethic. v, 1)
defines justice by an act of the will, as may be seen above (Article 1).
Reply to Objection 1: Since the will is the rational appetite, when the