THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.1, C.3.

Augustine says (De Vera Relig. xvi): "God has proved to us how high
a place human nature holds amongst creatures, inasmuch as He
appeared to men as a true man." And Pope Leo says in a sermon on
the Nativity (xxi): "Learn, O Christian, thy worth; and being made a
partner of the Divine nature, refuse to return by evil deeds to your
former worthlessness." Thirdly, because, "in order to do away with
man's presumption, the grace of God is commended in Jesus Christ,
though no merits of ours went before," as Augustine says (De Trin.
xiii, 17). Fourthly, because "man's pride, which is the greatest
stumbling-block to our clinging to God, can be convinced and cured
by humility so great," as Augustine says in the same place. Fifthly, in
order to free man from the thraldom of sin, which, as Augustine says
(De Trin. xiii, 13), "ought to be done in such a way that the devil
should be overcome by the justice of the man Jesus Christ," and this
was done by Christ satisfying for us. Now a mere man could not
have satisfied for the whole human race, and God was not bound to
satisfy; hence it behooved Jesus Christ to be both God and man.
Hence Pope Leo says in the same sermon: "Weakness is assumed
by strength, lowliness by majesty, mortality by eternity, in order that
one and the same Mediator of God and men might die in one and rise
in the other---for this was our fitting remedy. Unless He was God, He
would not have brought a remedy; and unless He was man, He would
not have set an example."
And there are very many other advantages which accrued, above
man's apprehension.
Reply to Objection 1: This reason has to do with the first kind of
necessity, without which we cannot attain to the end.
Reply to Objection 2: Satisfaction may be said to be sufficient in two
ways---first, perfectly, inasmuch as it is condign, being adequate to
make good the fault committed, and in this way the satisfaction of a
mere man cannot be sufficient for sin, both because the whole of
human nature has been corrupted by sin, whereas the goodness of
any person or persons could not be made up adequately for the
harm done to the whole of the nature; and also because a sin
committed against God has a kind of infinity from the infinity of the
Divine majesty, because the greater the person we offend, the more
grievous the offense. Hence for condign satisfaction it was
necessary that the act of the one satisfying should have an infinite
efficiency, as being of God and man. Secondly, man's satisfaction
may be termed sufficient, imperfectly---i.e. in the acceptation of him

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.1, C.3.

who is content with it, even though it is not condign, and in this way
the satisfaction of a mere man is sufficient. And forasmuch as every
imperfect presupposes some perfect thing, by which it is sustained,
hence it is that satisfaction of every mere man has its efficiency from
the satisfaction of Christ.
Reply to Objection 3: By taking flesh, God did not lessen His
majesty; and in consequence did not lessen the reason for
reverencing Him, which is increased by the increase of knowledge of
Him. But, on the contrary, inasmuch as He wished to draw nigh to us
by taking flesh, He greatly drew us to know Him.