FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.33, C.3.

(Confess. iv, 11). In this way nearly all bodily pleasures cause thirst
for themselves, until they are fully realized, because pleasures of
this kind arise from some movement: as is evident in pleasures of
the table. On the part of the possessor, this happens when a man
possesses a thing which is perfect in itself, yet does not possess it
perfectly, but obtains possession of it little by little. Thus in this life,
a faint perception of Divine knowledge affords us delight, and delight
sets up a thirst or desire for perfect knowledge; in which sense we
may understand the words of Ecclus. 24:29: "They that drink me
shall yet thirst."
On the other hand, if by thirst or desire we understand the mere
intensity of the emotion, that excludes distaste, thus more than all
others spiritual pleasures cause thirst or desire for themselves.
Because bodily pleasures become distasteful by reason of their
causing an excess in the natural mode of being, when they are
increased or even when they are protracted; as is evident in the case
of pleasures of the table. This is why, when a man arrives at the
point of perfection in bodily pleasures, he wearies of them, and
sometimes desires another kind. Spiritual pleasures, on the contrary,
do not exceed the natural mode of being, but perfect nature. Hence
when their point of perfection is reached, then do they afford the
greatest delight: except, perchance, accidentally, in so far as the
work of contemplation is accompanied by some operation of the
bodily powers, which tire from protracted activity. And in this sense
also we may understand those words of Ecclus. 24:29: "They that
drink me shall yet thirst": for, even of the angels, who know God
perfectly, and delight in Him, it is written (1 Pt. 1:12) that they "desire
to look at Him."
Lastly, if we consider pleasure, not as existing in reality, but as
existing in the memory, thus it has of itself a natural tendency to
cause thirst and desire for itself: when, to wit, man returns to that
disposition, in which he was when he experienced the pleasure that
is past. But if he be changed from that disposition, the memory of
that pleasure does not give him pleasure, but distaste: for instance,
the memory of food in respect of a man who has eaten to repletion.
Reply to Objection 1: When pleasure is perfect, then it includes
complete rest; and the movement of desire, tending to what was not
possessed, ceases. But when it is imperfect, then the desire, tending
to what was not possessed, does not cease altogether.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.33, C.3.

Reply to Objection 2: That which is possessed imperfectly, is
possessed in one respect, and in another respect is not possessed.
Consequently it may be the object of desire and pleasure at the same
time.
Reply to Objection 3: Pleasures cause distaste in one way, desire in
another, as stated above.