creatures to the Father.
Ver. 2. "By Whom also we have access," he says, by faith unto this grace. (7
manuscripts add, unto, etc.)
If then He has brought us near to Himself, when we were far off, much
more will He keep us now that we are near. And let me beg you to consider how
he everywhere sets down these two points; His part, and our part. On His part,
however, there be things varied and numerous and diverse. For He died for us,
and farther reconciled us, and brought us to Himself, and gave us grace
unspeakable. But we brought faith only as our contribution. And so he says, "by
faith, unto this grace." What grace is this? Tell me. It is the being counted
worthy of the knowledge of God, the being forced from error, the coming to a
knowledge of the Truth, the obtaining of all the blessings that come through
Baptism. For the end of His bringing us near was that we might receive these
gifts. For it was not only that we might have simple remission of sins, that we
were reconciled; but that we might receive also countless benefits. Nor did He
even pause at these, but promised others, namely, those unutterable blessings
that pass understanding alike and language. And this is why he has set them both
down also. For by mentioning grace he clearly points at what we have at present
received, but by saying, "And we rejoice in hope of the glory of God," he unveils
the whole of things to come. And he had well said, "wherein also we stand." For
this is the nature of God's grace. It has no end, it knows no bound, but evermore
is on the advance to greater things, which in human things is not the case. Take
an instance of what I mean. A person has acquired rule and glory and authority,
yet he does not stand therein continuously, but is speedily cast out of it. Or if
man take it not from him, death comes, and is sure to take it from him. But God's
gifts are not of this kind; for neither man, nor occasion, nor crisis of affairs, nor
even the Devil, nor death, can come and cast us out of them. But when we are
dead we then more strictly speaking have possession of them, and keep going on
enjoying more and more. And so if you feel in doubt about those to come; from
those now present, and what you have already received, believe in the other also.

For this is why he says, "And we rejoice ([καυχώμεθα]) in hope of the glory of
God," that you may learn, what kind of soul the faithful ought to have. For it is
not only for what has been given, but for what is to be given, that we ought to be
filled with confidingness, as though it were already given. For one "rejoices" in
what is already given. Since then the hope of things to come is even as sure and
clear as that of what is given, he says that in that too we in like manner "rejoice."
For this cause also he called them glory. For if it contributes unto God's glory,
come to pass it certainly will, though it do not for our sakes, yet for Him it will.
And why am I saying (he means) that the blessings to come are worthy of being
gloried in ([καυχήσεως])? Why even the very evils of this time present are able
to brighten up our countenances, and make us find in them even our repose.
Wherefore also he added,
Ver. 3. "And not only so, but we glory in tribulations also."
Now, consider how great the things to come are, when even at things that
seem to be distressful we can be elated; so great is God's gift, and such a nothing
any distastefulness in them! For in the case of external goods, the struggle for
them brings trouble and pain and irksomeness along with it; and it is the crowns
and rewards that carry the pleasure with them. But in this case it is not so, for the
wrestlings have to us no less relish than the rewards. For since there were sundry
temptations in those days, and the kingdom existed in hopes, the terrors were at
hand, but the good things in expectation, and this unnerved the feebler sort, even
before the crowns he gives them the prize now, by saying that we should "glory
even in tribulations." And what he says is not "you should glory," but we glory,
giving them encouragement in his own person. Next since what he had said had
an appearance of being strange and paradoxical, if a person who is struggling in
famine, and is in chains and torments, and insulted, and abused, ought to glory,
he next goes on to confirm it. And (what is more), he says they are worthy of
being gloried in, not only for the sake of those things to come, but for the things
present in themselves. For tribulations are in their own selves a goodly thing.
How so? It is because they anoint us unto patient abiding. Wherefore after