communicate in the same form, but not according to the same
formality; as we see in non-univocal agents. For since every agent
reproduces itself so far as it is an agent, and everything acts
according to the manner of its form, the effect must in some way
resemble the form of the agent. If therefore the agent is contained in
the same species as its effect, there will be a likeness in form
between that which makes and that which is made, according to the
same formality of the species; as man reproduces man. If, however,
the agent and its effect are not contained in the same species, there
will be a likeness, but not according to the formality of the same
species; as things generated by the sun's heat may be in some sort
spoken of as like the sun, not as though they received the form of
the sun in its specific likeness, but in its generic likeness. Therefore
if there is an agent not contained in any "genus," its effect will still
more distantly reproduce the form of the agent, not, that is, so as to
participate in the likeness of the agent's form according to the same
specific or generic formality, but only according to some sort of
analogy; as existence is common to all. In this way all created
things, so far as they are beings, are like God as the first and
universal principle of all being.
Reply to Objection 1: As Dionysius says (Div. Nom. ix), when Holy
Writ declares that nothing is like God, it does not mean to deny all
likeness to Him. For, "the same things can be like and unlike to God:
like, according as they imitate Him, as far as He, Who is not perfectly
imitable, can be imitated; unlike according as they fall short of their
cause," not merely in intensity and remission, as that which is less
white falls short of that which is more white; but because they are
not in agreement, specifically or generically.
Reply to Objection 2: God is not related to creatures as though
belonging to a different "genus," but as transcending every "genus,"
and as the principle of all "genera."
Reply to Objection 3: Likeness of creatures to God is not affirmed on
account of agreement in form according to the formality of the same
genus or species, but solely according to analogy, inasmuch as God
is essential being, whereas other things are beings by participation.
Reply to Objection 4: Although it may be admitted that creatures are
in some sort like God, it must nowise be admitted that God is like
creatures; because, as Dionysius says (Div. Nom. ix): "A mutual
likeness may be found between things of the same order, but not

between a cause and that which is caused." For, we say that a statue
is like a man, but not conversely; so also a creature can be spoken
of as in some sort like God; but not that God is like a creature.

## QUESTION 5 — OF GOODNESS IN GENERAL