SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.17, C.2.

Reply to Objection 1: The object of the irascible is an arduous
sensible: whereas the object of the virtue of hope is an arduous
intelligible, or rather superintelligible.
Reply to Objection 2: Charity perfects the will sufficiently with regard
to one act, which is the act of loving: but another virtue is required in
order to perfect it with regard to its other act, which is that of hoping.
Reply to Objection 3: The movement of hope and the movement of
charity are mutually related, as was shown above (Question 17,
Article 8). Hence there is no reason why both movements should not
belong at the same time to the same power: even as the intellect can
understand many things at the same time if they be related to one
another, as stated in the FP, Question 85, Article 4.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.17, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether in the blessed there is hope?

Objection 1: It would seem that in the blessed there is hope. For
Christ was a perfect comprehensor from the first moment of His
conception. Now He had hope, since, according to a gloss, the
words of Ps. 30:2, "In Thee, O Lord, have I hoped," are said in His
person. Therefore in the blessed there can be hope.
Objection 2: Further, even as the obtaining of happiness is an
arduous good, so is its continuation. Now, before they obtain
happiness, men hope to obtain it. Therefore, after they have obtained
it, they can hope to continue in its possession.
Objection 3: Further, by the virtue of hope, a man can hope for
happiness, not only for himself, but also for others, as stated above
(Question 17, Article 3). But the blessed who are in heaven hope for
the happiness of others, else they would not pray for them.
Therefore there can be hope in them.
Objection 4: Further, the happiness of the saints implies not only
glory of the soul but also glory of the body. Now the souls of the
saints in heaven, look yet for the glory of their bodies (Apoc. 6:10;
Augustine, Gen. ad lit. xii, 35). Therefore in the blessed there can be
hope.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (Rm. 8:24): "What a man seeth,
why doth he hope for?" Now the blessed enjoy the sight of God.
Therefore hope has no place in them.
I answer that, If what gives a thing its species be removed, the
species is destroyed, and that thing cannot remain the same; just as
when a natural body loses its form, it does not remain the same
specifically. Now hope takes its species from its principal object,
even as the other virtues do, as was shown above (Question 17,
Articles 5,6; FS, Question 54, Article 2): and its principal object is
eternal happiness as being possible to obtain by the assistance of
God, as stated above (Question 17, Article 2).
Since then the arduous possible good cannot be an object of hope
except in so far as it is something future, it follows that when
happiness is no longer future, but present, it is incompatible with the