man for God, it is impossible for man to make satisfaction for one
sin while holding to another: even as neither would a man make
satisfaction to another for a blow, if while throwing himself at his feet
he were to give him another.
Reply to Objection 1: As sins are not connected together in some
single one, a man can incur one without incurring another; whereas
all sins are remitted by reason of one same thing, so that the
remissions of various sins are connected together. Consequently
satisfaction cannot be made for one and not for another.
Reply to Objection 2: When a man is under obligation to another by
reason of a debt, the only inequality between them is that which is
opposed to justice, so that for restitution nothing further is required
than that the equality of justice should be reinstated, and this can be
done in respect of one debt without another. But when the obligation
is based on an offense, there is inequality not only of justice but also
of friendship, so that for the offense to be removed by satisfaction,
not only must the equality of justice be restored by the payment of a
punishment equal to the offense, but also the equality of friendship
must be reinstated, which is impossible so long as an obstacle to
friendship remains.
Reply to Objection 3: By its weight, one sin drags us down to
another, as Gregory says (Moral. xxv): so that when a man holds to
one sin, he does not sufficiently cut himself off from the causes of
further sin.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether, when deprived of charity, a man can

make satisfaction for sins for which he was previously
contrite?
Objection 1: It would seem that if a man fall into sin after being
contrite for all his sins, he can, now that he has lost charity, satisfy
for his other sins which were already pardoned him through his
contrition. For Daniel said to Nabuchodonosor (Dan. 4:24): "Redeem
thou thy sins with alms." Yet he was still a sinner, as is shown by his
subsequent punishment. Therefore a man can make satisfaction
while in a state of sin.
Objection 2: Further, "Man knoweth not whether he be worthy of love
or hatred" (Eccles. 9:1). If therefore one cannot make satisfaction
unless one be in a state of charity, it would be impossible to know
whether one had made satisfaction, which would be unseemly.
Objection 3: Further, a man's entire action takes its form from the
intention which he had at the beginning. But a penitent is in a state
of charity when he begins to repent. Therefore his whole subsequent
satisfaction will derive its efficacy from the charity which quickens
his intention.
Objection 4: Further, satisfaction consists in a certain equalization of
guilt to punishment. But these things can be equalized even in one
who is devoid of charity. Therefore, etc.
On the contrary, "Charity covereth all sins" (Prov. 10:12). But
satisfaction has the power of blotting out sins. Therefore it is
powerless without charity.
Further, the chief work of satisfaction is almsdeeds. But alms given
by one who is devoid of charity avail nothing, as is clearly stated 1
Cor. 13:3, "If I should distribute all my goods to feed the poor . . . and
have not charity, it profiteth me nothing." Therefore there can be no
satisfaction with mortal sin.
I answer that, Some have said that if, when all a man's sins have
been pardoned through contrition, and before he has made
satisfaction for them, he falls into sin, and then makes satisfaction,
such satisfaction will be valid, so that if he die in that sin, he will not