Literally, "should also possess a vacant substance"
"reliquorum omnium," as the reference manifestly is to other heretics.

and ignorance, and not with respect to local distance; but that, in the Pleroma, or in those things
which are contained by the Father, the whole creation which we know to have been formed, having
been made by the Demiurge, or by the angels, is contained by the unspeakable greatness, as the
centre is in a circle, or as a spot is in a garment, —then, in the first place, what sort of a being must
that Bythus be, who allows a stain to have place in His own bosom, and permits another one to
create or produce within His territory, contrary to His own will? Such a mode of acting would truly
entail [the charge of] degeneracy upon the entire Pleroma, since it might from the first have cut off
that defect, and those emanations which derived their origin from it, and not have agreed to
permit the formation of creation either in ignorance, or passion, or in defect. For he who can
afterwards rectify a defect, and does, as it were, wash away a stain, could at a much earlier date
have taken care that no such stain should, even at first, be found among his possessions. Or if at
the first he allowed that the things which were made [should be as they are], since they could not,
in fact, be formed otherwise, then it follows that they must always continue in the same condition.
For how is it possible, that those things which cannot at the first obtain rectification, should
subsequently receive it? Or how can men say that they are called to perfection, when those very
beings who are the causes from which men derive their origin—either the Demiurge himself, or
the angels—are declared to exist in defect? And if, as is maintained, [the Supreme Being,] inasmuch
as He is benignant, did at last take pity upon men, and bestow on them perfection, He ought at first
to have pitied those who were the creators of man, and to have conferred on them perfection. In
this way, men too would verily have shared in His compassion, being formed perfect by those that
were perfect. For if He pitied the work of these beings, He ought long before to have pitied
themselves, and not to have allowed them to fall into such awful blindness.
3. Their talk also about shadow and vacuity, in which they maintain that the creation with which
we are concerned was formed, will be brought to nothing, if the things referred to were created
within the territory which is contained by the Father. For if they hold that the light of their Father
is such that it fills all things which are inside of Him, and illuminates them all, how can any vacuum
or shadow possibly exist within that territory which is contained by the Pleroma, and by the light
of the Father? For, in that case, it behoves them to point out some place within the Propator, or
within the Pleroma, which is not illuminated, nor kept possession of by any one, and in which either
the angels or the Demiurge formed whatever they pleased. Nor will it be a small amount of space
in which such and so great a creation can be conceived of as having been formed. There will
therefore be an absolute necessity that, within the Pleroma, or within the Father of whom they
364
different from that of the Latin word which he has himself employed. We may therefore here "eo" to "labem," which is the
translation of the neuter noun !"#$%&'(.