country, as having received both the oracle from the angel, and the testimony
from the prophet.
6. But "when Herod," says the Scripture, "had heard, he was troubled, and
all Jerusalem with him." Herod naturally, as being king, and afraid both for
himself and for his children; but why Jerusalem? Surely the prophets had
foretold Him a Saviour, and Benefactor, and a Deliverer from above. Wherefore
then was Jerusalem troubled? From the same feeling which caused them before
also to turn away from God when pouring His benefits on them, and to be
mindful of the flesh-pots of Egypt, while in the enjoyment of great freedom.
But mark, I pray you, the accuracy of the prophets. For this selfsame thing
also had the prophet foretold from the first, saying, "They would be glad, if they
had been burnt with fire; for unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given."
But nevertheless, although troubled, they seek not to see what has
happened, neither do they follow the wise men, nor make any particular inquiry;
to such a degree were they at once both contentious and careless above all men.
For when they had reason rather to pride themselves that the king was born
among them, and had attracted to Him the land of the Persians, and they were on
the point of having all subject to them, as though their affairs had advanced
towards improvement, and from the very outset His empire had become so
glorious; nevertheless, they do not even for this become better. And yet they
were but just delivered from their captivity there; and it was natural for them to
think (even if they knew none of those things that are high and mysterious, but
formed their judgment from what is present only), "If they thus tremble before
our king at His birth, much more when grown up will they fear and obey Him,
and our estate will be more glorious than that of the barbarians."
7. But none of these things thoroughly awakens them, so great was their
dullness, and with this their envy also: both which we must with exact care root
out of our mind; and he must be more fervent than fire who is to stand in such an
array. Wherefore also Christ said, "I have come to send fire on earth, and I
would it were already kindled." in the same lot with it, even so godly tears are a

germ of perpetual and unfading joy. In this way the very harlot became more
honorable than virgins when seized by this fire. That is, being thoroughly
warmed by repentance, she was thenceforth carried out of herself by her longing
desire toward Christ; loosing her hair, and drenching with her tears His holy feet,
and wiping them with her own tresses, and exhausting the ointment. And all
these were outward results, but those wrought in her mind were far more fervent
than these; which things God Himself alone beheld. And therefore, every one,
when he hears, rejoices with her and takes delight in her good works, and acquits
her of every blame. But if we that are evil pass this judgment, consider what
sentence she obtained from that God who is a lover of mankind; and how much,
even before God's gifts, her repentance caused her to reap in the way of blessing.
For much as after a violent burst of rain, there is a clear open sky; so
likewise when tears are pouring down, a calm arises, and serenity, and the
darkness that ensues on our sins quite disappears. And like as by water and the
spirit, so by tears and confession are we cleansed the second time; unless we be
acting thus for display and vanity: for as to a woman whose tears were of that
sort, I should call her justly condemnable, more than if she decked herself out
with lines and coloring. For I seek those tears which are shed not for display, but
in compunction; those which trickle down secretly and in closets, and in sight of
no man, softly and noiselessly; those which arise from a certain depth of mind,
those shed in anguish and in sorrow, those which are for God alone; such as were
Hannah's, for "her lips moved," it is said, "but her voice was not heard;"
however, her tears alone uttered a cry more clear than any trumpet. And because
of this, God also opened her womb, and made the hard rock a fruitful field.
If you also weep thus, you have become a follower of your Lord. Yea, for
He also wept, both over Lazarus, and over the city; and touching Judas He was
greatly troubled. And this indeed one may often see Him do, but nowhere laugh,
nay, nor smile but a little; no one at least of the evangelists has mentioned this.
Therefore also with regard to Paul, that he wept, that he did so three years night
and day, both he has said of himself, and others say this of him; but that he