THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.68, C.12.

nowise be washed with water; unless perchance it be said that the
baptismal water, with which the mother's body is washed, reaches
the child while yet in its mother's womb. But this is impossible: both
because the child's soul, to the sanctification of which Baptism is
ordained, is distinct from the soul of the mother; and because the
body of the animated infant is already formed, and consequently
distinct from the body of the mother. Therefore the Baptism which
the mother receives does not overflow on to the child which is in her
womb. Hence Augustine says (Cont. Julian. vi): "If what is conceived
within a mother belonged to her body, so as to be considered a part
thereof, we should not baptize an infant whose mother, through
danger of death, was baptized while she bore it in her womb. Since,
then, it," i.e. the infant, "is baptized, it certainly did not belong to the
mother's body while it was in the womb." It follows, therefore, that a
child can nowise be baptized while in its mother's womb.
Reply to Objection 1: Children while in the mother's womb have not
yet come forth into the world to live among other men. Consequently
they cannot be subject to the action of man, so as to receive the
sacrament, at the hands of man, unto salvation. They can, however,
be subject to the action of God, in Whose sight they live, so as, by a
kind of privilege, to receive the grace of sanctification; as was the
case with those who were sanctified in the womb.
Reply to Objection 2: An internal member of the mother is something
of hers by continuity and material union of the part with the whole:
whereas a child while in its mother's womb is something of hers
through being joined with, and yet distinct from her. Wherefore there
is no comparison.
Reply to Objection 3: We should "not do evil that there may come
good" (Rm. 3:8). Therefore it is wrong to kill a mother that her child
may be baptized. If, however, the mother die while the child lives yet
in her womb, she should be opened that the child may be baptized.
Reply to Objection 4: Unless death be imminent, we should wait until
the child has entirely come forth from the womb before baptizing it.
If, however, the head, wherein the senses are rooted, appear first, it
should be baptized, in cases of danger: nor should it be baptized
again, if perfect birth should ensue. And seemingly the same should
be done in cases of danger no matter what part of the body appear
first. But as none of the exterior parts of the body belong to its
integrity in the same degree as the head, some hold that since the

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.68, C.12.

matter is doubtful, whenever any other part of the body has been
baptized, the child, when perfect birth has taken place, should be
baptized with the form: "If thou art not baptized, I baptize thee," etc.