If, however, anything is found in the teachings of the philosophers contrary to faith, this error
does not properly belong to philosophy, but is due to an abuse of philosophy owing to the
insufficiency of reason. Therefore also it is possible from the principles of philosophy to refute
an error of this kind, either by showing it to be altogether impossible, or not to be necessary. For
just as those things which are of faith cannot be demonstratively proved, so certain things
contrary to them cannot be demonstratively shown to be false, but they can be shown not to be
necessary.

Thus, in sacred doctrine we are able to make a threefold use of philosophy:

1. First, to demonstrate those truths that are preambles of faith and that have a necessary place in
the science of faith. Such are the truths about God that can be proved by natural reasonÑthat
God exists, that God is one; such truths about God or about His creatures, subject to
philosophical proof, faith presupposes.

2. Secondly, to give a clearer notion, by certain similitudes, of the truths of faith, as Augustine in
his book, De Trinitate, employed any comparisons taken from the teachings of the philosophers
to aid understanding of the Trinity.

3. In the third place, to resist those who speak against the faith, either by showing that their
statements are false, or by showing that they are not necessarily true.

Nevertheless, in the use of philosophy in sacred Scripture, there can be a twofold error:

In one way, by using doctrines contrary to faith, which are not truths of philosophy, but rather
error, or abuse of philosophy, as Origen did.

In another way, by using them in such manner as to include under the measure of philosophy
truths of faith, as if one should be willing to believe nothing except what could be held by
philosophic reasoning; when, on the contrary, philosophy should be subject to the measure of
faith, according to the saying of the Apostle (2 Cor. 10:5), "Bringing into captivity every

understanding unto the obedience of Christ."

#### Answers to objections

1. It may be said: From all these words it is shown that philosophical doctrine ought not to be
used as if it had first place, as if on account of it one believed by faith; nevertheless the fact is not
disproved that doctors of sacred learning may employ philosophy, as it were, secondarily.
Wherefore, on the saying (1 Cor. 1:19), "I will destroy the wisdom of the wise," the gloss adds:
"This he does not say because the understanding of truth can be worthy of God's anger, but
because the false prudence of those who trusted in their erudition is worthy of reproof."

Nevertheless, in order that all that is of faith might be attributed not to human power or wisdom
but to God, God willed that the primitive preaching of the apostles should be in infirmity and
simplicity; though, on the other hand, with the later advent of power and secular wisdom, He
manifested by the victory of the faith that the world is subject to God as much by wisdom as by
power.