John 4:46
"So Jesus came again into Cana of Galilee, where He made the water wine."
The Evangelist reminds the hearer of the miracle to exalt the praise of the
Samaritans. The men of Cana received Him by reason of the miracles which He
had done in Jerusalem and in that place; but not so the Samaritans, they received
Him through His teaching alone.
That He came then "to Cana," the Evangelist has said, but he has not added
the cause why He came. Into Galilee He had come because of the envy of the
Jews; but wherefore to Cana? At first He came, being invited to a marriage; but
wherefore now? Methinks to confirm by His presence the faith which had been
implanted by His miracle, and to draw them to Him the more by coming to them
self-invited, by leaving His own country, and by preferring them.
"And there was a certain nobleman whose son was sick at Capernaum."

John 4:47
"When he heard that Jesus had come out of Judæa into Galilee, he went unto
Him and besought Him that He would come down and heal his son."
This person certainly was of royal race, or possessed some dignity from his
office, to which the title "noble" was attached. Some indeed think that this is the
man mentioned by Matthew [Matthew 8:5], but he is shown to be a different
person, not only from his dignity, but also from his faith. That other, even when
Christ was willing to go to him, entreats Him to tarry; this one, when He had
made no such offer, draws Him to his house. The one says, "I am not worthy that
You should come under my roof"; but this other even urges Him, saying, "Come
down ere my son die." In that instance He came down from the mountain, and
entered into Capernaum; but here, as He came from Samaria, and went not into
Capernaum but into Cana, this person met Him. The servant of the other was
possessed by the palsy, this one's son by a fever.
"And he came and besought Him that He would heal his son: for he was at
the point of death." What says Christ?

John 4:48
"Unless you see signs and wonders, you will not believe."
Yet the very coming and beseeching Him was a mark of faith. And besides,
after this the Evangelist witnesses to him, declaring that when Jesus said, "Go,
your son lives," he believed His word, and went. What then is that which He
says here? Either He uses the words as approving of the Samaritans because they
believed without signs; or, to touch Capernaum which was thought to be His
own city, and of which this person was. Moreover, another man in Luke, who
says, "Lord, I believe," said besides, "help my unbelief." And so if this ruler also
believed, yet he believed not entirely or soundly, as is clear from his enquiring
"at what hour the fever left him," since he desired to know whether it did so of
its own accord, or at the bidding of Christ. When therefore he knew that it was
"yesterday at the seventh hour," then "himself believed and his whole house."
Do you see that he believed when his servants, not when Christ spoke?
Therefore He rebukes the state of mind with which he had come to Him, and
spoken as he did, (thus too He the more drew him on to belief,) because that
before the miracle he had not believed strongly. That he came and entreated was
nothing wonderful, for parents in their great affection are also wont to resort not
only to physicians in whom they have confidence, but also to talk with those in
whom they have no confidence, desiring to omit nothing whatever. Indeed, that
he came without any strong purpose appears from this, that when Christ had
come into Galilee, then he saw Him, whereas if he had firmly believed in Him,
he would not, when his child was on the point of death, have hesitated to go into
Judæa. Or if he was afraid, this is not to be endured either.
Observe how the very words show the weakness of the man; when he
ought, after Christ had rebuked his state of mind, to have imagined something
great concerning Him, even if he did not so before, listen how he drags along the
ground.