out—that there is no other one who can confer upon the elder and younger church the [power of]
giving birth to children, besides our Father. Now the father of the human race is the Word of God,
as Moses points out when he says, "Is not He thy father who hath obtained thee [by generation],
and formed thee, and created thee?" At what time, then, did He pour out upon the human race
the life-giving seed—that is, the Spirit of the remission of sins, through means of whom we are
quickened? Was it not then, when He was eating with men, and drinking wine upon the earth? For
it is said, "The Son of man came eating and drinking;" and when He had lain down, He fell
asleep, and took repose. As He does Himself say in David, "I slept, and took repose." And
because He used thus to act while He dwelt and lived among us, He says again, "And my sleep
became sweet unto me." Now this whole matter was indicated through Lot, that the seed of the
Father of all—that is, of the Spirit of God, by whom all things were made—was commingled and
united with flesh— that is, with His own workmanship; by which commixture and unity the two
synagogues—that is, the two churches—produced from their own father living sons to the living
God.
3. And while these things were taking place, his wife remained in [the territory of] Sodore, no
longer corruptible flesh, but a pillar of salt which endures for ever; and by those natural
processes which appertain to the human race, indicating that the Church also, which is the salt
of the earth, has been left behind within the confines of the earth, and subject to human sufferings;
and while entire members are often taken away from it, the pillar of salt still endures, thus

Deut. xxxii. 6, LXX. [Let us reflect that this effort to spiritualize this awful passage in the history of Lot is an innocent
but unsuccessful attempt to imitate St. Paul's allegory, Gal. iv. 24.]

Ps. iii. 6.
"Dicitur et vivens, alio jam corpore, sexus
Munificos solito dispungere sanguine menses."
Durat adhuc, et enim nuda statione sub æthram
Nec pluviis dilapsa situ, nec diruta ventis.
Quin etiam si quis mutilaverit advena formam,
Protinus ex sese suggestu vulnera complet."

typifying the foundation of the faith which maketh strong, and sends forward, children to their
Father.

### Chapter XXXII.—That one God was the author of both Testaments, is confirmed by the
authority of a presbyter who had been taught by the apostles.

1. After this fashion also did a presbyter, a disciple of the apostles, reason with respect to
the two testaments, proving that both were truly from one and the same God. For [he maintained]
that there was no other God besides Him who made and fashioned us, and that the discourse of
those men has no foundation who affirm that this world of ours was made either by angels, or by
any other power whatsoever, or by another God. For if a man be once moved away from the Creator
of all things, and if he grant that this creation to which we belong was formed by any other or
through any other [than the one God], he must of necessity fall into much inconsistency, and many
contradictions of this sort; to which he will [be able to] furnish no explanations which can be
regarded as either probable or true. And, for this reason, those who introduce other doctrines conceal
from us the opinion which they themselves hold respecting God, because they are aware of the
untenable and absurd nature of their doctrine, and are afraid lest, should they be vanquished,
they should have some difficulty in making good their escape. But if any one believes in [only]
one God, who also made all things by the Word, as Moses likewise says, "God said, Let there be
light: and there was light;" and as we read in the Gospel, "All things were made by Him; and
without Him was nothing made;" and the Apostle Paul [says] in like manner, "There is one Lord,
one faith, one baptism, one God and Father, who is above all, and through all, and in us all"—this
man will first of all "hold the head, from which the whole body is compacted and bound together,
and, through means of every joint according to the measure of the ministration of each several part,
maketh increase of the body to the edification of itself in love." And then shall every word also