said. For this cause, you see, neither did He say, "Be thou cleansed," but, "I will,
be thou clean;" that the doctrine might no longer be a thing of the other's
surmising, but of His own approval.
But the apostles not so: rather in what way? The whole people being in
amazement, they said, "Why give heed to us, as though by our own power or
authority we had made him to walk?" But the Lord, though He spoke oftentimes
many things modestly, and beneath His own glory, what says He here, to
establish the doctrine of them that were amazed at Him for His authority? "I will,
be thou clean." Although in the many and great signs which He wrought, He
nowhere appears to have uttered this word. Here however, to confirm the
surmise both of all the people and of the leper touching His authority, He
purposely added, "I will."
And it was not that He said this, but did it not; but the work also followed
immediately. Whereas, if he had not spoken well, but the saying had been a
blasphemy, the work ought to have been interrupted. But now nature herself
gave way at His command, and that speedily, as was meet, even more speedily
than the evangelist has said. For the word, "immediately," falls far short of the
quickness that there was in the work.
But He did not merely say, "I will, be thou clean," but He also "put forth
His hand, and touched him;" a thing especially worthy of inquiry. For wherefore,
when cleansing him by will and word, did He add also the touch of His hand? It
seems to me, for no other end, but that He might signify by this also, that He is
not subject to the law, but is set over it; and that to the clean, henceforth, nothing
is unclean. [Titus 1:15] For this cause, we see, Elisha did not so much as see
Naaman, but though he perceived that he was offended at his not coming out and
touching him, observing the strictness of the law, he abides at home, and sends
him to Jordan to wash. Whereas the Lord, to signify that He heals not as a
servant, but as absolute master, does also touch. For His hand became not
unclean from the leprosy, but the leprous body was rendered clean by His holy
hand.

Because, as we know, He came not to heal bodies only, but also to lead the
soul unto self-command. As therefore He from that time forward no more forbad
to eat with unwashen hands, introducing that excellent law, which relates to the
indifference of meats; just so in this case also, to instruct us for the future, that
the soul must be our care—that leaving the outward purifications, we must wipe
that clean, and dread the leprosy thereof alone, which is sin (for to be a leper is
no hindrance to virtue):— He Himself first touches the leper, and no man finds
fault. For the tribunal was not corrupt, neither were the spectators under the
power of envy. Therefore, so far from blaming, they were on the contrary
astonished at the miracle, and yielded thereto: and both for what He said, and for
what He did, they adored his uncontrollable power.
3. Having therefore healed his body, He bids him,
"Tell no man, but show himself to the priest, and offer the gift that Moses
commanded, for a testimony unto them." [Matthew 8:4]
Now some say, that for this intent He bade him tell no man, that they might
practise no craft about the discerning of his cure; a very foolish suspicion on
their part. For He did not so cleanse as to leave the cleansing questionable, but
He bids him "tell no man," teaching us to avoid boasting and vainglory. And yet
He well knew that the other would not obey, but would proclaim his benefactor:
nevertheless He does His own part.
"How then elsewhere does He bid them tell of it?" one may ask. Not as
jostling with or opposing Himself, but as teaching men to be grateful. For neither
in that place did He give command to proclaim Himself, but to "give glory to
God;" by this leper training us to be clear of pride and vainglory, by the other to
be thankful and grateful; and instructing on every occasion to offer to the Lord
the praise of all things that befall us. That is, because men for the most part
remember God in sickness, but grow slacker after recovery; He bids them
continually both in sickness and in health to give heed to the Lord, in these
words, "give glory to God."
But wherefore did He command him also to show himself to the priest, and