2 Corinthians 8:8
"I speak not by way of commandment."
See how constantly he humors them, how he avoids offensiveness, and is
not violent nor compulsory; or rather what he says has both these, with the
inoffensiveness of that which is uncompelled. For after he had repeatedly
exhorted them and had greatly commended the Macedonians, in order that this
might not seem to constitute a necessity, he says,
"I speak not by way of commandment, but as proving through the
earnestness of others, the sincerity also of your love."
'Not as doubting it,' (for that is not what he would here imply,) 'but to make
it approved, display it and frame it unto greater strength. For I therefore say
these things that I may provoke you to the same forwardness. And I mention
their zeal to brighten, to cheer, to stimulate your inclinations.' Then from this he
proceeded to another and a greater point. For he lets slip no mode of persuasion,
but moves heaven and earth in handling his argument. For he exhorted them both
by other men's praises, saying, You know "the grace of God which has been
given in the Churches of Macedonia;" and by their own, "therefore that you
abound in everything, in utterance and knowledge." For this has power to sting
man more that he falls short of himself, than that he does so of others. Then he
proceeds afterwards to the head and crown of his persuasion.

2 Corinthians 8:9
"For you know the grace of our Lord, that though He was rich, yet for our
sakes He became poor, that we through His poverty might become rich."
'For have in mind,' says he, 'ponder and consider the grace of God and do
not lightly pass it by, but aim at realizing the greatness of it both as to extent and
nature , and you will grudge nothing of yours. He emptied Himself of His glory
that you, not through His riches but through His poverty, might be rich. If you
believe not that poverty is productive of riches, have in mind your Lord and you
will doubt no longer. For had He not become poor, you would not have become
rich. For this is the marvel, that poverty has made riches rich.' And by riches
here he means the knowledge of godliness, the cleansing away of sins,
justification, sanctification, the countless good things which He bestowed upon
us and purposes to bestow. And all these things accrued to us through His
poverty. What poverty? Through His taking flesh on Him and becoming man
and suffering what He suffered. And yet he owed not this, but thou dost owe to
Him.

2 Corinthians 8:10
"And herein I give you my advice for your profit."
See how again he is careful to give no offense and softens down what he
says, by these two things, by saying, "I give advice," and, "for your profit." 'For,
neither do I compel and force you,' says he, 'or demand it from unwilling
subjects; nor do I say these things with an eye so much to the receivers benefit as
to yours.' Then the instance also which follows is drawn from themselves, and
not from others.
"Who were the first to make a beginning a year ago, not only to do, but also
to will."
See how he shows both that themselves were willing, and had come to this
resolution without persuasion. For since he had borne this witness to the
Thessalonians, that "of their own accord with much intreaty," they had
prosecuted this giving of alms; he is desirous of showing of these also that this
good work is their own. Wherefore he said, "not only to do, but also to will," and
not "begun," but "begun before, a year ago." Unto these things therefore I exhort
you, whereunto ye beforehand bestirred yourselves with all forwardness.