upon them.
4. When therefore He had caught them, then He begins in their presence to
work miracles, by His deeds confirming the words of John concerning Him. And
He was continually frequenting their synagogues, even by this instructing them
that He was not a sort of adversary of God and deceiver, but that He had come in
accordance with the Father.
And while frequenting them, He did not preach only, but also showed forth
miracles. And this, because on every occasion, whenever anything is done
strange and surprising, and any polity is introduced, God is wont to work
miracles as pledges of his power, which He affords to them that are to receive
His laws. Thus, for instance, when He was about to make man, He created a
whole world, and then gave him that law which he had in Paradise. And when
He was to give laws to Noah, He showed forth anew great miracles, in that He
reduced again the whole creation to its elements, and made that fearful sea to
prevail for a full year; and in that, amid so great a tempest, He preserved that
righteous man. And in the time of Abraham too He vouchsafed many signs; as
his victory in the war, the plague upon Pharaoh, his deliverance from dangers.
And when about to legislate for the Jews, He showed forth those marvellous and
great prodigies, and then gave the law. Just so in this case also, being to
introduce a certain high polity, and to tell them what they had never heard, by the
display of the miracles He confirms what He says.
Thus because the kingdom He was preach ing appeared not, by the things
that appear, He makes it, though invisible, manifest.
And mark the evangelist's care to avoid superfluity of words; how he tells
us not of every one of them that are healed, but in a few words speeds over
showers of miracles.
For "they brought unto Him," says he, "all that were sick with various
diseases, and torments, and those which were possessed with devils, and those
which were lunatic, and those that had the palsy, and He healed them."
But our inquiry is this; why it can have been that He demanded faith of

none of them? For He said not, what we find Him saying after this, "Believe ye
that I am able to do this?" [Matthew 9:28] because He had not as yet given proof
of His power. And besides, the very act of approaching Him, and of bringing
others to Him, exhibited no common faith. For they brought them even from far;
whereas they would never have brought them, unless they had persuaded
themselves of great things concerning Him.
Now then, let us too follow Him; for we also have many diseases of our
soul, and these especially He would fain heal. Since with this intent He corrects
that other sort, that He may banish these out of our soul.
5. Let us therefore come unto Him, and let us ask nothing pertaining to this
life, but rather remission of sins. For indeed He gives it even now, if we be in
earnest. Since as then "His fame went out into Syria," so now into the whole
world. And they indeed ran together on hearing that He healed persons
possessed: and you, after having much more and greater experience of His
power, do you not rouse yourself and run?
But whereas they left both country, and friends, and kinsfolk; do you not
endure so much as to leave your house for the sake of drawing near, and
obtaining far greater things? Or rather we do not require of you so much as this,
but leave your evil habits only, and you can easily be made whole, remaining at
home with your friends.
But as it is, if we have any bodily ailment, we do and contrive everything to
be rid of what pains us; but when our soul is indisposed, we delay, and draw
back. For which cause neither from the other sort are we delivered: since the
things that are indispensable are becoming to us secondary, and the secondary
indispensable; and letting alone the fountain of our ills, we would fain cleanse
out the streams.
For that our bodily ills are caused by the wickedness of the soul, is shown
both by him that had the palsy thirty and eight years, and by him that was let
down through the roof, and by Cain also before these; and from many other
things likewise one may perceive this. Let us do away then with the well-spring