possible there should be peace where virtue is not already put in practice
beforehand. Let us form, if you please, a city entirely of covetous men, give
them equal privileges, and let no one bear to be wronged, but let all wrong one
another. Can that city possibly hold together? It is impossible. Again, is there
peace among adulterers? No, not any two will you find of the same mind.
So then, to return, there is no other reason for this, than that "love has
waxed cold;" and the cause again why love has waxed cold, is that "iniquity
abounds." For this leads to selfishness, and divides and severs the body, and
relaxes it and rends it to pieces. But where virtue is, it does the reverse. Because
the man that is virtuous is also above money; so that were there ten thousand
such in poverty they would still be peaceable; while the covetous, where there
are but two, can never be at peace. Thus then if we are virtuous, love will not
perish, for virtue springs from love, and love from virtue. And how this is, I will
tell you. The virtuous man does not value money above friendship, nor does he
remember injuries, nor does wrong to his neighbor; he is not insolent, he endures
all things nobly. Of these things love consists. Again, he who loves submits to all
these things, and thus do they reciprocally produce one another. And this indeed,
that love springs from virtue, appears from hence, because our Lord when He
says, "because iniquity shall be multiplied, the love of the many shall wax cold,"
plainly tells us this. And that virtue springs from love, Paul tells us, saying, "He
that loves his neighbor has fulfilled the law." [Romans 13:10] So then a man
must be one of the two, either very affectionate and much beloved, or else very
virtuous; for he who has the one, of necessity possesses the other; and, on the
contrary, he who knows not how to love, will therefore commit many evil
actions; and he who commits evil actions, knows not what it is to love.
Moral. Let us therefore follow after charity; it is a safeguard which will not
allow us to suffer any evil. Let us bind ourselves together. Let there be no deceit
among us, no hollowness. For where friendship is, there nothing of the sort is
found. This too another certain wise man tells us. "Though you drew a sword at
your friend, yet despair not: for there may be a returning again to favor. If you

have opened your mouth against your friend, fear not; for there may be a
reconciliation: except for upbraiding, or disclosing of secrets, or a treacherous
wound: for for these things a friend will depart." [Sirach 22:21-22] For
"disclosing," says he, "of secrets." Now if we be all friends, there is no need of
secrets; for as no man has any secret with himself and cannot conceal anything
from himself, so neither will he from his friends. Where then no secrets exist,
separation arising from this is impossible. For no other reason have we secrets,
than because we have not confidence in all men. So then it is the waxing cold of
love, which has produced secrets. For what secret have you? Do you desire to
wrong your neighbor? Or, are you hindering him from sharing some benefit, and
on this account concealest it? But, no, perhaps it is none of these things. What
then, is it that you are ashamed? If so, then this is a token of want of confidence.
Now then if there be love, there will be no "revealing of secrets," neither any
"upbraiding." For who, tell me, would ever upbraid his own soul? And suppose
even such a thing were done, it would be for some good; for we upbraid
children, we know, when we desire to make them feel. And so Christ too on that
occasion began to upbraid the cities, saying, "Woe unto you, Chorazin! Woe unto
you, Bethsaida!" [Luke 10:13] in order that He might deliver them from
upbraidings. For nothing has such power to lay hold of the mind, or can more
strongly arouse it, or brace it up when relaxed. Let us then never use upbraiding
to one another merely for the sake of upbraiding. For what? Will you upbraid
your friend on the score of money? Surely not, if at least you possess what you
have in common. Will you then for his faults? No nor this, but you will rather in
that case correct him. Or, as it goes on, "for a treacherous wound;" who in the
world will kill himself, or who wound himself? No one.
Let us then "follow after love;" he says not simply let us love; but let us
"follow after love." [1 Corinthians 14:1] There is need of much eagerness: she is
soon out of sight, she is most rapid in her flight; so many things are there in life
which injure her. If we follow her, she will not outstrip us and get away, but we
shall speedily recover her. The love of God is that which united earth to Heaven.