only, and of enduring ill-treatment, and of receiving nothing good; for instance,
what is mentioned in the case of Abraham, in the case of Abel. But others are
[examples] of Faith, as in the case of Noah, that there is a God, that there is a
recompense. (For Faith in this place is manifold, both of there being a
recompense, and of awaiting it, not under the same conditions, and of wrestling
before the prizes.) And the things also which concern Joseph are of Faith only.
Joseph heard that [God] had made a promise to Abraham, that He had engaged
His word "to you and to your seed will I give this land;" and though in a strange
land, and not yet seeing the engagement fulfilled, but never faltered even so, but
so believed as even to "speak of the Exodus, and to give commandment
concerning his bones." He then not only believed himself, but led on the rest
also to Faith: that having the Exodus always in mind (for he would not have
"given commandment concerning his bones," unless he had been fully assured
[of this]), they might look for their return [to Canaan].
Wherefore, when some men say, 'See! Even righteous men had care about
their sepulchers,' let us reply to them, that it was for his reason: for he knew that
"the earth is the Lord's and all that therein is." [Psalm 24:1] He could not indeed
have been ignorant of this, who lived in so great philosophy, who spent his
whole life in Egypt. And yet if he had wished, it was possible for him to return,
and not to mourn or vex himself. But when he had taken up his father there, why,
did he enjoin them to carry up thence his own bones also? Evidently for this
reason.
But what? Tell me, are not the bones of Moses himself laid in a strange
land? And those of Aaron, of Daniel, of Jeremiah? And as to those of the
Apostles we do not know where those of most of them are laid. For of Peter
indeed, and Paul, and John, and Thomas, the sepulchers are well known; but
those of the rest, being so many, have nowhere become known. Let us not
therefore lament at all about this, nor be so little-minded. For whereever we may
be buried, "the earth is the Lord's and all that therein is." [Psalm 24:1] Certainly
what must take place, does take place: to mourn however, and lament, and

bewail the departed, arises from littleness of mind.

Hebrews 11:23
3. [Hebrews 11:23] "By faith, Moses when he was born, was hid three
months of his parents." Do you see that in this case they hoped for things on the
earth after their death? And many things were fulfilled after their death. This is
for some who say, 'After death those things were done for them, which they did
not obtain while alive; nor did they believe [would be] after their death.'
Moreover Joseph did not say, He gave not the land to me in my life-time,
nor to my father, nor to my grandfather, whose excellence too ought to have
been reverenced; and will He vouchsafe to these wretched people what He did
not vouchsafe to them? He said nothing of all this, but by Faith he both
conquered and went beyond all these things.
He has named Abel, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, all illustrious
and admirable men. Again he makes the encouragement greater, by bringing
down the matter to ordinary persons. For that the admirable should feel thus, is
nothing wonderful, and to appear inferior to them, is not so dreadful: but to show
oneself inferior even to people without names, this is the dreadful thing. And he
begins with the parents of Moses, obscure persons, who had nothing so great as
their son [had]. Therefore also he goes on to increase the strangeness of what he
says by enumerating even women that were harlots, and widows. For "by Faith"
(he says) "the harlot Rahab perished not with them that believed not, when she
had received the spies with peace." And he mentions the rewards not only of
belief but also of unbelief; as in [the case of] Noah.
But at present we must speak of the parents of Moses. Pharaoh gave orders
that all the male children should be destroyed, and none had escaped the danger.
Whence did these expect to save their child? From faith. What sort of Faith?
"They saw" (he says) "that he was a proper child." The very sight drew them on
to Faith: thus from the beginning, yea from the very swaddling-clothes, great