SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.161, C.5.

obeying under difficult and contrary circumstances," to which is
opposed "deceitful confession," whereby a man being unwilling to
be punished for his sins confesses them deceitfully. The tenth
degree of humility is "obedience," to which is opposed
"rebelliousness." The eleventh degree of humility is "not to delight in
fulfilling one's own desires"; to this is opposed "license," whereby a
man delights in doing freely whatever he will. The last degree of
humility is "fear of God": to this is opposed "the habit of sinning,"
which implies contempt of God.
In these twelve degrees not only are the species of pride indicated,
but also certain things that precede and follow them, as we have
stated above with regard to humility (Question 161, Article 6).

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.161, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether pride is a mortal sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that pride is not a mortal sin. For a gloss
on Ps. 7:4, "O Lord my God, if I have done this thing," says: "Namely,
the universal sin which is pride." Therefore if pride were a mortal sin,
so would every sin be.
Objection 2: Further, every mortal sin is contrary to charity. But pride
is apparently not contrary to charity, neither as to the love of God,
nor as to the love of one's neighbor, because the excellence which,
by pride, one desires inordinately, is not always opposed to God's
honor, or our neighbor's good. Therefore pride is not a mortal sin.
Objection 3: Further, every mortal sin is opposed to virtue. But pride
is not opposed to virtue; on the contrary, it arises therefrom, for as
Gregory says (Moral. xxxiv, 23), "sometimes a man is elated by
sublime and heavenly virtues." Therefore pride is not a mortal sin.
On the contrary, Gregory says (Moral. xxxiv, 23) that "pride is a most
evident sign of the reprobate, and contrariwise, humility of the elect."
But men do not become reprobate on account of venial sins.
Therefore pride is not a venial but a mortal sin.
I answer that, Pride is opposed to humility. Now humility properly
regards the subjection of man to God, as stated above (Question
161, Article 1, ad 5). Hence pride properly regards lack of this
subjection, in so far as a man raises himself above that which is
appointed to him according to the Divine rule or measure, against
the saying of the Apostle (2 Cor. 10:13), "But we will not glory
beyond our measure; but according to the measure of the rule which
God hath measured to us." Wherefore it is written (Ecclus. 10:14):
"The beginning of the pride of man is to fall off from God" because,
to wit, the root of pride is found to consist in man not being, in some
way, subject to God and His rule. Now it is evident that not to be
subject to God is of its very nature a mortal sin, for this consists in
turning away from God: and consequently pride is, of its genus, a
mortal sin. Nevertheless just as in other sins which are mortal by
their genus (for instance fornication and adultery) there are certain
motions that are venial by reason of their imperfection (through
forestalling the judgment of reason, and being without its consent),
so too in the matter of pride it happens that certain motions of pride