2 Corinthians 4:13
2. "But having the same spirit of faith, according to that which is written, I
believed, and therefore did I speak; we also believe, and therefore also we speak;
that He which raised up the Lord Jesus, shall raise up us also by Jesus." [Psalm
116:10]
He has reminded us of a Psalm which abounds in heavenly wisdom , and is
especially fitted to encourage in dangers. For this saying that just man uttered
when he was in great dangers, and from which there was no other possibility of
recovery than by the aid of God. Since then kindred circumstances are most
effective in comforting, therefore he says, "having the same Spirit;" that is, 'by
the same succor by which he was saved, we also are saved; by the Spirit through
which he spoke, we also speak.' Whence he shows, that between the New and
Old Covenants great harmony exists, and that the same Spirit wrought in either;
and that not we alone are in dangers, but all those of old were so too; and that we
must find a remedy through faith and hope, and not seek at once to be released
from what is laid upon us. For having showed by arguments the resurrection and
the life, and that the danger was not a mark of helplessness or destitution; he
thenceforward brings in faith also, and to it commits the whole. But still of this
also, he furnishes a proof, the resurrection, namely, of Christ, saying, "we also
believe, and therefore also we speak." What do we believe? Tell me.

2 Corinthians 4:14-15
"That He which raised up Jesus, shall raise up also, and shall present us
with you. For all things are for your sakes, that the grace, being multiplied
through the many, may cause the thanksgiving to abound unto the glory of God."
Again, he fills them with lofty thoughts , that they may not hold themselves
indebted to men, I mean to the false Apostles. For the whole is of God Who wills
to bestow upon many, so that the grace may appear the greater. For your sakes,
therefore, was the resurrection and all the other things. For He did not these
things for the sake of one only, but of all.

2 Corinthians 4:16
"Wherefore we faint not; but though our outward man is decaying, yet the
inward man is renewed day by day."
How does it decay? Being scourged, being persecuted, suffering ten
thousand extremities. "Yet the inward man is renewed day by day." How is it
renewed? By faith, by hope, by a forward will, finally, by braving those
extremities. For in proportion as the body suffers ten thousand things, in the like
proportion has the soul goodlier hopes and becomes brighter, like gold refined in
the fire more and more. And see how he brings to nothing the sorrows of this
present life.

2 Corinthians 4:17-18
"For the light affliction," he says, "which is for the moment, works more
and more exceedingly an eternal weight of glory; while we look not at the things
which are seen, but at the things which are not seen."
Having closed the question by a reference to hope, (and, as he said in his
Epistle to the Romans, "We are saved by hope, but hope that is seen is not hope;"
[Romans 8:24] establishing the same point here also,) he sets side by side the
things present with the things to come, the momentary with the eternal, the light
with the weighty, the affliction with the glory. And neither is he content with
this, but he adds another expression, doubling it and saying, "more and more
exceedingly. " Next he also shows the mode how so great afflictions are light.
How then light? "While we look not at the things that are seen, but at the things
that are not seen." So will both this present be light and that future great, if we
withdraw ourselves from the things that are seen. "For the things that are seen
are temporal." [2 Corinthians 4:18] Therefore the afflictions are so too. "But the
things that are not seen are eternal." Therefore the crowns are so also. And he
said not the afflictions are so, but "the things that are seen;" all of them, whether
punishment or rest, so that we should be neither puffed up by the one nor
overborne by the other. And therefore when speaking of the things to come, he
said not the kingdom is eternal; but, "the things which are not seen are eternal,"
whether they be a kingdom, or again punishment; so as both to alarm by the one
and to encourage by the other.
3. Since then "the things that are seen are temporal, but the things that are
not seen are eternal," let us look to them. For what excuse even can we have, if
we choose the temporal instead of the eternal? For even if the present be
pleasurable, yet it is not abiding; while the woe it entails is abiding and
irremissible. For what excuse will they have who have been counted worthy of