God above those that others appear to have received from Him; thus
the Apostle says (Eph. 3:5): "(The mystery of Christ) was not known
to the sons of men as it is now revealed to His holy apostles." In like
manner. humility does not require a man to subject that which he
has of his own to that which his neighbor has of man's: otherwise
each one would have to esteem himself a greater sinner than anyone
else: whereas the Apostle says without prejudice to humility (Gal.
2:15): "We by nature are Jews, and not of the Gentiles, sinners."
Nevertheless a man may esteem his neighbor to have some good
which he lacks himself, or himself to have some evil which another
has not: by reason of which, he may subject himself to him with
humility.
Reply to Objection 1: We must not only revere God in Himself, but
also that which is His in each one, although not with the same
measure of reverence as we revere God. Wherefore we should
subject ourselves with humility to all our neighbors for God's sake,
according to 1 Pt. 2:13, "Be ye subject . . . to every human creature
for God's sake"; but to God alone do we owe the worship of latria.
Reply to Objection 2: If we set what our neighbor has of God's above
that which we have of our own, we cannot incur falsehood.
Wherefore a gloss [St. Augustine, Questions. lxxxiii, qu. 71] on Phil.
2:3, "Esteem others better than themselves," says: "We must not
esteem by pretending to esteem; but we should in truth think it
possible for another person to have something that is hidden to us
and whereby he is better than we are, although our own good
whereby we are apparently better than he, be not hidden."
Reply to Objection 3: Humility, like other virtues, resides chiefly
inwardly in the soul. Consequently a man, by an inward act of the
soul, may subject himself to another, without giving the other man
an occasion of detriment to his spiritual welfare. This is what
Augustine means in his Rule (Ep. ccxi): "With fear, the superior
should prostrate himself at your feet in the sight of God." On the
other hand, due moderation must be observed in the outward acts of
humility even as of other virtues, lest they conduce to the detriment
of others. If, however, a man does as he ought, and others take
therefrom an occasion of sin, this is not imputed to the man who
acts with humility; since he does not give scandal, although others
take it.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.160, C.4.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.160, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether humility is a part of modesty or

temperance?
Objection 1: It would seem that humility is not a part of modesty or
temperance. For humility regards chiefly the reverence whereby one
is subject to God, as stated above (Article 3). Now it belongs to a
theological virtue to have God for its object. Therefore humility
should be reckoned a theological virtue rather than a part of
temperance or modesty.
Objection 2: Further, temperance is in the concupiscible, whereas
humility would seem to be in the irascible, just as pride which is
opposed to it, and whose object is something difficult. Therefore
apparently humility is not a part of temperance or modesty.
Objection 3: Further, humility and magnanimity are about the same
object, as stated above (Article 1, ad 3). But magnanimity is
reckoned a part, not of temperance but of fortitude, as stated above
(Question 129, Article 5). Therefore it would seem that humility is not
a part of temperance or modesty.
On the contrary, Origen says (Hom. viii super Luc.): "If thou wilt hear
the name of this virtue, and what it was called by the philosophers,
know that humility which God regards is the same as what they
called metriotes, i.e. measure or moderation." Now this evidently
pertains to modesty or temperance. Therefore humility is a part of
modesty or temperance.
I answer that, As stated above (Question 137, Article 2, ad 1;
Question 157, Article 3, ad 2), in assigning parts to a virtue we
consider chiefly the likeness that results from the mode of the virtue.
Now the mode of temperance, whence it chiefly derives its praise, is
the restraint or suppression of the impetuosity of a passion. Hence
whatever virtues restrain or suppress, and the actions which
moderate the impetuosity of the emotions, are reckoned parts of
temperance. Now just as meekness suppresses the movement of
anger, so does humility suppress the movement of hope, which is
the movement of a spirit aiming at great things. Wherefore, like
meekness, humility is accounted a part of temperance. For this
reason the Philosopher (Ethic. iv, 3) says that a man who aims at
small things in proportion to his mode is not magnanimous but