by their own answers. For when, on being asked, "Whose is the image?" they
said, "Cæsar's;" He says, "Render unto Cæsar the things that are Cæsar's." For
this is not to give but to render, and this He shows both by the image, and by the
superscription.
Then that they might not say, You are subjecting us to men, He added, "And
unto God the things that are God's." For it is possible both to fulfill to men their
claims and to give unto God the things that are due to God from us. Wherefore
Paul also says, "Render unto all their dues; tribute to whom tribute is due,
custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear." [Romans 13:7]
But you, when you hear, "Render unto Cæsar the things which are
Cæsar's," know that He is speaking only of those things, which are no detriment
to godliness; since if it be any such thing as this, such a thing is no longer
Cæsar's tribute, but the devil's.
When they heard these things, their mouths were stopped, and they
"marvelled" at His wisdom. Ought they not then to have believed, ought they not
to have been amazed. For indeed, He gave them proof of His Godhead, by
revealing the secrets of their hearts, and with gentleness did He silence them.
What then? Did they believe? By no means, but they "left Him, and went
their way;" and after them, "came to Him the Sadducees."
O folly! When the others had been put to silence, these made the attack,
when they ought to have been the more backward. But such is the nature of
rashness, shameless, and importunate, and attempting things impossible.
Therefore the evangelist also, amazed at their folly, signified this very thing, by
saying, "On that day came to Him." On that day. On what day? In which He had
convicted their craftiness, and put them to shame. But who are these? A sect of
the Jews different from the Pharisees, and much worse than they, who said, "that
there is no resurrection, nor angel, nor spirit." [Acts 23:8] For these were some
of a grosser sort, and eager after the things of the body. For there were many
sects even among the Jews. Wherefore Paul also says, "I am a Pharisee, of the
strictest sect among us."

And they say nothing indeed directly about a resurrection; but they feign a
story, and make up a case, which, as I suppose, never so much as had an
existence; thinking to drive Him to perplexity, and desiring to overthrow both
things, both the existence of a resurrection, and of such a resurrection.
And again, these too attack Him with a show of moderation, saying,
"Master, Moses said, If a man die, not having children, his brother shall marry
his wife, and raise up seed unto his brother. Now there were with us seven
brethren: and the first, when he had married a wife, deceased; and, having no
issue, left his wife unto his brother. Likewise the second also, and the third, unto
the seventh. And last of all the woman died also. Therefore, in the resurrection,
whose wife shall she be of the seven?"
See Him answering these like a teacher. For though out of craft they came
unto Him, yet was their question rather one of ignorance. Therefore neither does
He say unto them, "You hypocrites."
Moreover, in order that He might not blame, saying, "Wherefore had seven
one wife?" they add the authority of Moses; although, as I have said before, it
was a fiction, in my judgment at least. For the third would not have taken her,
when he saw the two bridegrooms dead; or if the third, yet not the fourth or the
fifth; and if even these, much more the sixth or the seventh would not have come
unto the woman, but have shrunk from her. For such is the nature of the Jews.
For if now many have this feeling, much more then had they; when at least, even
without this, they often avoided marrying in this way, and that when the law was
constraining them. Thus, at any rate, Ruth, that Moabitish woman, was thrust off
to him that was further off from her kindred; and Tamar too was thus compelled
to obtain, by stealth, seed from her husband's kinsman.
And wherefore did they not feign two or three, but seven? In order the more
abundantly to bring derision, as they thought, upon the resurrection. Wherefore
they further say, "they all had her," as driving Him into some difficulty.
What then says Christ? He replies unto both, as taking His stand not against
the words, but the purpose, and on every occasion revealing the secrets of their