sickle, they required no other art, I mean of weaving or building or supplying
shoes: but the word of God was everything to them. And they had a table
prepared off hand, free of all toil and labour. For such was the nature of the
manna; it was new and fresh, nowhere costing them any trouble, nor straining
them by labour. And their clothes, and shoes, and even their physical frame
forgot their natural infirmity: for the former did not wear out in the course of so
long a time nor did their feet swell although they made such long marches. Of
physicians, and medicine, and all other concern about that kind of art, there was
no mention at all among them; so completely banished was infirmity of every
kind: for it is said "He brought them out with silver and gold; and there was not
one feeble person among their tribes." But like men who had quitted this world,
and were transplanted to another and a better one, even so did they eat and drink,
neither did the sun's ray when it waxed hot smite their heads; for the cloud
parted them from the fiery beam, hovering all round them, and serving like a
portable shelter for the whole body of the people. Neither at night did they need
a torch to disperse the darkness, but they had the pillar of fire, a source of
unspeakable light, supplying two wants, one by its shining, the other by directing
the course of their journey; for it was not only luminous, but also conducted that
countless host along the wilderness with more certainty than any human guide.
And they journeyed not only upon land but also upon sea as if it had been dry
land; and they made an audacious experiment upon the laws of nature by
treading upon that angry sea, marching through it as if it had been the hard and
resisting surface of a rock; and indeed when they placed their feet upon it the
element became like solid earth, and gently sloping plains and fields; but when it
received their enemies it wrought after the nature of sea; and to the Israelites
indeed it served as a chariot, but to their enemies it became a grave; conveying
the former across with ease, but drowning the latter with great violence. And the
disorderly flood of water displayed the good order and subordination which
marks reasonable and highly intelligent men, fulfilling the part at one time of a
guardian, at another of an executioner, and exhibiting these opposites together on

one day. What shall one say of the rocks which gave forth streams of water?
What of the clouds of birds which covered the whole face of the earth by the
number of their carcasses? What of the wonders in Egypt? What of the marvels
in the wilderness? What of the triumphs and bloodless victories? For they
subdued those who opposed them like men keeping holiday rather than making
war. And they vanquished their own masters without the use of arms; and
overcame those who fought with them after they left Egypt by means of singing
and music; and what they did was a festival rather than a campaign, a religious
ceremony rather than a battle. For all these wonders took place not merely for
the purpose of supplying their need, but also that the people might preserve more
accurately the doctrine which Moses inculcated of the knowledge of God; and
voices proclaiming the presence of their Master were uttered on all sides of
them. For the sea loudly declared this, by becoming a road for them to march
upon, and then turning into sea again: and the waters of the Nile uttered this
voice when they were converted into the nature of blood; and the frogs, and the
great army of locusts, and the caterpillar and blight declared the same thing to all
the people; and the wonders in the desert, the manna, the pillar of fire, the cloud,
the quails, and all the other incidents served them as a book, and writing which
could never be effaced, echoing daily in their memory and resounding in their
mind. Nevertheless after such great and remarkable providence, after all those
unspeakable benefits, after such mighty miracles, after care indescribable, after
continual teaching, after instruction by means of speech, and admonition by
means of deeds, after glorious victories, after extraordinary triumphs, after
abundant supply of food, after the plentiful production of water, after the
ineffable glory with which they were invested in the eyes of the human race,
being ungrateful and senseless they worshipped a calf, and paid reverence to the
head of a bull, even when the memorials of God's benefits in Egypt were fresh in
their minds, and they were still in actual enjoyment of many more.
14. But the Ninevites, although a barbarous and foreign people who had
never participated in any of these benefits, small or great, neither words, nor