## Homily 6 on Romans

Romans II. 17, 18
" Behold, you are called a Jew, and restest in the Law, and makest your
boast of God, and know His will, and approvest the things that are more
excellent, being instructed out of the Law."
After saying that the Gentile wants nothing appertaining to salvation if he
be a doer of the Law, and after making that wonderful comparison, he goes on to
set down the glories of the Jews, owing to which they thought scorn of the
Gentiles: and first the very name itself, which was of great majesty, as the name
Christian is now. For even then the distinction which the appellation made was
great. And so he begins from this, and see how he takes it down. For he does not
say, Behold, you are a Jew, but "art called" so, "and makest your boast in God;"
that is, as being loved by Him, and honored above all other men. And here he
seems to me to be gently mocking their unreasonableness, and great madness
after glory, because they misused this gift not to their own salvation, but to set
themselves up against the rest of mankind, and to despise them. "And know His
will, and approvest the things that are more excellent." Indeed this is a
disadvantage, if without working: yet still it seemed to be an advantage, and so
he states it with accuracy. For he does not say, you do, but know; and approvest,
not followest and doest.
Ver. 19. "And art confident that you yourself."
Here again he does not say that you are "a guide of the blind," but "you are
confident," so you boast, he says. So great was the unreasonableness of the Jews.
Wherefore he also repeats nearly the very words, which they used in their
boastings. See for instance what they say in the Gospels. "You were altogether
([ὅ] [λος] 4 manuscripts [ὅ] [λως]) born in sin, and do you teach us?" [John
9:34] And all men they utterly looked down upon, to convince them of which,

Paul keeps extolling them and lowering the others, that so he may get more hold
on them, and make his accusation the weightier. Wherefore he goes on adding
the like things, and making more of them by different ways of relating them. For
"You are confident," he says, "that you yourself art a leader of the blind,"
Ver. 20. "An instructor of the foolish, a teacher of babes, which hast the
form of knowledge and truth, which is in the Law."
Here again he says not, in the conscience and in actions and in well-doings,
but "in the Law;" and after saying so, he does here also what he did with regard
to the Gentiles. For as there he says, "for wherein you judge another, you
condemn yourself," so says he here also.
Ver. 21. "You therefore who teaches another, do you not teach yourself?"
But there he frames his speech with more of sharpness, here with more of
gentleness. For he does not say, However on this score you deserve greater
punishment, because though entrusted with so great things you have not made a
good use of any of them, but he carries his discourse on by way of question,
turning them on themselves ([ἐ] [ντρέπων]), and saying, "Thou that teachest
another, do you not teach yourself?" And here I would have you look at the
discretion of Paul in another case. For he sets down such advantages of the Jews,
as came not of their own earnestness, but by a gift from above, and he shows not
only that they are worthless to them if neglectful, but that they even bring with
them increase of punishment. For neither is the being called a Jew any well
doing of theirs, nor yet is the receiving of the Law, nor the other things he has
just enumerated, but of the grace from above. And towards the beginning he had
said, that the hearing of the Law is valueless unless the doing be thereto added
("for not the hearers of the Law," he says, "are just before God,") but now he
shows further still, that not only the hearing, but, what is more than the hearing,
the teaching of the Law itself will not be able to screen the teacher, unless he do
what he says; and not only will it not screen him, but will even punish him the
more. And he has used his expressions well too, since he does not say, You have
received the Law, but "You rest in the Law." For the Jew was not wearied with