from himself to a great distance, so likewise we say that the Propator sent forth a ray beyond, and
to a great distance from, Himself. But what can be conceived of beyond, or at a distance from, God,
into which He sent forth this ray?
6. If, again, they affirm that that [intelligence] was not sent forth beyond the Father, but within
the Father Himself, then, in the first place, it becomes superfluous to say that it was sent forth at
all. For how could it have been sent forth if it continued within the Father? For an emission is the
manifestation of that which is emitted, beyond him who emits it. In the next place, this [intelligence]
being sent forth, both that Logos who springs from Him will still be within the Father, as will also
be the future emissions proceeding from Logos. These, then, cannot in such a case be ignorant of
the Father, since they are within Him; nor, being all equally surrounded by the Father, can any one
know Him less [than another] according to the descending order of their emission. And all of them
must also in an equal measure continue impassible, since they exist in the bosom of their Father,
and none of them can ever sink into a state of degeneracy or degradation. For with the Father there
is no degeneracy, unless perchance as in a great circle a smaller is contained, and within this one
again a smaller; or unless they affirm of the Father, that, after the manner of a sphere or a square,
He contains within Himself on all sides the likeness of a sphere, or the production of the rest of the
Æons in the form of a square, each one of these being surrounded by that one who is above him in
greatness, and surrounding in turn that one who is after him in smallness; and that on this account,
the smallest and the last of all, having its place in the centre, and thus being far separated from the
Father, was really ignorant of the Propator. But if they maintain any such hypothesis, they must
shut up their Bythus within a definite form and space, while He both surrounds others, and is
surrounded by them; for they must of necessity acknowledge that there is something outside of
Him which surrounds Him. And none the less will the talk concerning those that contain, and those
that are contained, flow on into infinitude; and all [the Æons] will most clearly appear to be bodies
enclosed [by one another].
7. Further, they must also confess either that He is mere vacuity, or that the entire universe is
within Him; and in that case all will in like degree partake of the Father. Just as, if one forms circles
in water, or round or square figures, all these will equally partake of water; just as those, again,
which are framed in the air, must necessarily partake of air, and those which [are formed] in light,
of light; so must those also who are within Him all equally partake of the Father, ignorance having
no place among them. Where, then, is this partaking of the Father who fills [all things]? If, indeed,
He has filled [all things], there will be no ignorance among them. On this ground, then, their work
of [supposed] degeneracy is brought to nothing, and the production of matter with the formation
of the rest of the world; which things they maintain to have derived their substance from passion
and ignorance. If, on the other hand, they acknowledge that He is vacuity, then they fall into the
greatest blasphemy; they deny His spiritual nature. For how can He be a spiritual being, who cannot
fill even those things which are within Him?
8. Now, these remarks which have been made concerning the emission of intelligence are in
like manner applicable in opposition to those who belong to the school of Basilides, as well as in