whatever way it is held pricks the holder, so the things of this life, on whatever
side they be laid hold of, give pain to him who hugs and cherishes them. Not
such are spiritual things; they resemble a pearl, whichever way thou turn it, it
delights the eyes. As thus. A man has done a deed of mercy; he not only is fed
with hopes of the future, but also is cheered by the good things here, being
everywhere full of confidence, and doing all with much boldness. He has got the
better of an evil desire; even before obtaining the Kingdom, he has already
received the fruit here, being praised and approved, before all others, by his own
conscience. And every good work is of this nature; just as conscience also
punishes wicked deeds here, even before the pit. For if, after sinning, you
consider the future, you become afraid and tremblest, though no man punish
you; if the present, you have many enemies, and livest in suspicion, and canst
not henceforth even look in the face those who have wronged you, or rather,
those who have not wronged you. For we do not in the case of those evil deeds
reap so much pleasure, as we do despondency, when conscience cries out against
us, men, without, condemn us, God is angered, the pit travailing to receive us,
our thoughts not at rest. A heavy, a heavy and a burdensome thing is sin, harder
to bear than any lead. He at least who has any sense of it will not be able to look
up ever so little, though he be very dull. Thus, for instance, Ahab, though very
impious, when he felt this, walked bending downwards, crushed and afflicted.
On this account he clothed himself in sackcloth, and shed fountains of tears. [1
Kings 21:27] If we do this, and grieve as he did, we shall put off our faults as did
Zacchæus, and we too shall obtain some pardon. [Luke 19:9] For as in the case
of tumors, and fistulous ulcers, if one stay not first the discharge which runs over
and inflames the wound, how many soever remedies he applies, while the source
of the evil is not stopped, he does all in vain; so too if we stay not our hand from
covetousness, and check not that evil afflux of wealth, although we give alms,
we do all to no purpose. For that which was healed by it, covetousness coming
after is wont to overwhelm and spoil, and to make harder to heal than before. Let
us then cease from rapine, and so do alms. But if we betake ourselves to

precipices, how shall we be able to recover ourselves? for if one party (that is,
alms-doing) were to pull at a falling man from above, while another was forcibly
dragging him from below, the only result of such a struggle would be, that the
man would be torn asunder. That we may not suffer this, nor, while covetousness
weighs us down from below, alms-doing depart and leave us, let us lighten
ourselves, and spread our wings, that having been perfected by the riddance of
evil things, and the practice of good, we may obtain the goods everlasting,
through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom to the
Father and the Holy Ghost be glory, dominion, and honor, now and ever and
world without end. Amen.