It was the love of God that seated man upon the kingly throne. It was the love of
God that manifested God upon earth. It was the love of God that made the Lord
a servant. It was the love of God that caused the Beloved to be delivered up for
His enemies, the Son for them that hated Him, the Lord for His servants, God for
men, the free for slaves. Nor did it stop here, but called us to yet greater things.
Yes, not only did it release us from our former evils, but promised, moreover, to
bestow upon us other much greater blessings. For these things then let us give
thanks to God, and follow after every virtue; and before all things, let us with all
strictness practice love, that we may be counted worthy to attain the promised
blessings; through the grace and loving-kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with
whom, to the Father together with the Holy Ghost, be glory, might, and honor,
now and for ever and ever. Amen.

## Homily 10 on Ephesians

Ephesians 4:4
"There is one body, and one Spirit, even as you are called in one hope of
your calling."
When the blessed Paul exhorts us to anything of special importance, so
truly wise and spiritual as he is, he grounds his exhortation upon things in
Heaven: this itself being a lesson he had learned from the Lord. Thus he says
also elsewhere, "Walk in love, even as Christ also has loved us." [Ephesians 5:2]
And again, "Have this mind in you, which was also in Christ Jesus, who being in
the form of God, counted it not a prize to be on an equality with God."
[Philippians 2:5-6] This is what he is doing here also, for whenever the examples
he is setting before us are great, he is intense in his zeal and feeling. What then
does he say, now he is inciting us to unity? "There is one body, and one Spirit,
even as you are called in one hope of your calling:"
Ver. 5. "One Lord, one faith, one baptism."
Now what is this one body? The faithful throughout the whole world, both
which are, and which have been, and which shall be. And again, they that before
Christ's coming pleased God, are "one body." How so? Because they also knew
Christ. Whence does this appear? "Your father Abraham," says He, "rejoiced to
see My day, and he saw it, and was glad." [John 8:56] And again, "If you had
believed Moses," He says, "ye would have believed Me, for he wrote of Me."
[John 5:46] And the prophets too would not have written of One, of whom they
knew not what they said; whereas they both knew Him, and worshipped Him.
Thus then were they also "one body."
The body is not disjoined from the spirit, for then would it not be a body.
Thus it is customary also with us, touching things which are united, and which
have any great consistency or coherence, to say, they are one body. And thus

again, touching union, we take that to be a body which is under one head. If
there be one head, then is there one body. The body is composed of members
both honorable and dishonorable. Only the greater is not to rise up even against
the meanest, nor this latter to envy the other. They do not all indeed contribute
the same share, but severally according to the proportion of need. And
forasmuch as all are formed for necessary and for different purposes, all are of
equal honor. Some indeed there are, which are more especially principal
members, others less so: for example, the head is more a principal member than
all the rest of the body, as containing within itself all the senses, and the
governing principle of the soul. And to live without the head is impossible;
whereas many persons have lived for a long time with their feet cut off. So that it
is better than they, not only by its position, but also by its very vital energy and
its function.
Now why am I saying this? There are great numbers in the Church; there
are those who, like the head, are raised up to a height; who, like the eyes that are
in the head, survey heavenly things, who stand far aloof from the earth, and have
nothing in common with it, while others occupy the rank of feet, and tread upon
the earth; of healthy feet indeed, for to tread upon the earth is no crime in feet,
but to run to evil. "Their feet," says the Prophet, "run to evil." [Isaiah 59:7]
Neither then let these, the head, says he, be high-minded against the feet, nor the
feet look with evil eye at them. For thus the peculiar beauty of each is destroyed,
and the perfectness of its function impeded. And naturally enough; inasmuch as
he who lays snares for his neighbor will be laying snares first of all for himself.
And should the feet therefore not choose to convey the head anywhere upon its
necessary journey, they will at the same time be injuring themselves by their
inactivity and sloth. Or again, should the head not choose to take any care of the
feet, itself will be the first to sustain the damage. However, those members do
not rise up one against the other; it is not likely, for it has been so ordered by
nature that they should not. But with man, how is it possible for him not to rise
up against man? No one, we know, ever rises up against Angels; since neither do