not tell them at the beginning? That none might say that He spoke guessing from
the ordinary course of events. And why did He enter on a matter of such
unpleasantness? "I knew these things," He says, "from the beginning, and spoke
not of them; not because I did not know them, but 'because I was with you.'" And
this again was spoken after a human manner, as though He had said, "Because
you were in safety, and it was in your power to question Me when you would,
and all the storm blew upon Me, and it was superfluous to tell you these things
at the beginning." "But did He not tell them this? Did He not call the twelve, and
say unto them, 'You shall be brought before governors and kings for My sake,'
and, 'they shall scourge you in the synagogues'? [Matthew 10:18]. How then
says He, 'I told you not at the beginning'?" Because He had proclaimed before
the scourgings and bringing before princes, still not that their death should
appear so desirable that the action should even be deemed a service to God. For
this more than anything was suited to terrify them, that they were to be judged as
impious and corrupters. This too may be said, that in that place He spoke of what
they should suffer from the Gentiles, but here He has added in a stronger way the
acts of the Jews also, and told them that it was at their doors.
"But now I go to Him that sent Me, and no man of you says, Where are You
going? But because I have said these things unto you, sorrow has filled your
heart." It was no slight comfort to them to learn that He knew the excess of their
despondency. For they were beside themselves from the anguish caused by their
being left by Him, and from their awaiting the terrible things which were to
come, since they knew not whether they should be able to bear them manfully.
"Why then after this did He not tell them that they had been vouchsafed the
Spirit?" That you might learn that they were exceedingly virtuous. For if, when
they had not yet been vouchsafed the Spirit, they started not back, though
overwhelmed with sorrow, consider what sort of men they were likely to be after
having enjoyed the grace. If they had heard this at that time, and so had endured,
we should have attributed the whole to the Spirit, but now it is entirely the fruit
of their own state of mind, it is a clear manifestation of their love for Christ, who

applies a touchstone to their mind as yet defenseless.

John 16:7
"But I tell you the truth."
Observe how He consoles them again. "I speak not," He says, "to please
you, and although you be grieved ten thousand fold, yet must ye hear what is for
your good; it is indeed to your liking that I should be with you, but what is
expedient for you is different. And it is the part of one caring for others, not to be
over gentle with his friends in matters which concern their interests, or to lead
them away from what is good for them."
"For if I go not away, the Comforter will not come."
What here say those who hold not the fitting opinion concerning the Spirit?
Is it "expedient" that the master depart, and the servant come? Do you see how
great is the honor of the Spirit?
"But if I depart, I will send Him unto you." And what the gain?