between agent and patient. Now the diversity of spiritual and
corporeal nature does not hinder the soul from being the form of the
body. Therefore neither is it an obstacle to its suffering from a body.
I answer that, Given that the fire of hell is not so called
metaphorically, nor an imaginary fire, but a real corporeal fire, we
must needs say that the soul will suffer punishment from a corporeal
fire, since our Lord said (Mt. 25:41) that this fire was prepared for the
devil and his angels, who are incorporeal even as the soul. But how
it is that they can thus suffer is explained in many ways.
For some have said that the mere fact that the soul sees the fire
makes the soul suffer from the fire: wherefore Gregory (Dial. iv, 29)
says: "The soul suffers from the fire by merely seeing it." But this
does not seem sufficient, because whatever is seen, from the fact
that it is seen, is a perfection of the seer. wherefore it cannot
conduce to his punishment, as seen. Sometimes, however, it is of a
penal or unpleasant nature accidentally, in so far, to wit, as it is
apprehended as something hurtful, and consequently, besides the
fact that the soul sees the fire, there must needs be some relation of
the soul to the fire, according to which the fire is hurtful to the soul.
Hence others have said that although a corporeal fire cannot burn
the soul, the soul nevertheless apprehends it as hurtful to itself, and
in consequence of this apprehension is seized with fear and sorrow,
in fulfillment of Ps. 13:5, "They have trembled for fear, where there
was no fear." Hence Gregory says (Dial. iv, 29) that "the soul burns
through seeing itself aflame." But this, again, seems insufficient,
because in this case the soul would suffer from the fire, not in reality
but only in apprehension: for although a real passion of sorrow or
pain may result from a false imagination, as Augustine observes
(Gen. ad lit. xii), it cannot be said in relation to that passion that one
really suffers from the thing, but from the image of the thing that is
present to one's fancy. Moreover, this kind of suffering would be
more unlike real suffering than that which results from imaginary
vision, since the latter is stated to result from real images of things,
which images the soul carries about with it, whereas the former
results from false fancies which the erring soul imagines: and
furthermore, it is not probable that separated souls or demons, who
are endowed with keen intelligence, would think it possible for a
corporeal fire to hurt them, if they were nowise distressed thereby.
Hence others say that it is necessary to admit that the soul suffers

even really from the corporeal fire: wherefore Gregory says (Dial. iv,
29): "We can gather from the words of the Gospel, that the soul
suffers from the fire not only by seeing it, but also by feeling it."
They explain the possibility of this as follows. They say that this
corporeal fire can be considered in two ways. First, as a corporeal
thing, and thus it has not the power to act on the soul. Secondly, as
the instrument of the vengeance of Divine justice. For the order of
Divine justice demands that the soul which by sinning subjected
itself to corporeal things should be subjected to them also in
punishment. Now an instrument acts not only in virtue of its own
nature, but also in virtue of the principal agent: wherefore it is not
unreasonable if that fire, seeing that it acts in virtue of a spiritual
agent, should act on the spirit of a man or demon, in the same way
as we have explained the sanctification of the soul by the
sacraments (TP, Question 62, Articles 1,4).
But, again, this does not seem to suffice, since every instrument, in
acting on that on which it is used instrumentally, has its own
connatural action besides the action whereby it acts in virtue of the
principal agent: in fact it is by fulfilling the former that it effects the
latter action, even as, in Baptism, it is by laving the body that water
sanctifies the soul, and the saw by cutting wood produces the shape
of a house.
Hence we must allow the fire to exercise on the soul an action
connatural to the fire, in order that it may be the instrument of Divine
justice in the punishment of sin: and for this reason we must say
that a body cannot naturally act on a spirit, nor in any way be hurtful
or distressful to it, except in so far as the latter is in some way united
to a body: for thus we observe that "the corruptible body is a load
upon the soul" (Wis. 9:15). Now a spirit is united to a body in two
ways. In one way as form to matter, so that from their union there
results one thing simply: and the spirit that is thus united to a body
both quickens the body and is somewhat burdened by the body: but
it is not thus that the spirit of man or demon is united to the
corporeal fire. In another way as the mover is united to the things
moved, or as a thing placed is united to place, even as incorporeal
things are in a place. In this way created incorporeal spirits are
confined to a place, being in one place in such a way as not to be in
another. Now although of its nature a corporeal thing is able to
confine an incorporeal spirit to a place, it is not able of its nature to
detain an incorporeal spirit in the place to which it is confined, and
so to tie it to that place that it be unable to seek another, since a