## Homily 4 on Galatians

Verse 1-3
"But I say, that so long as the heir is a child, he differs nothing from a
bond-servant, though he is lord of all; but is under guardians and stewards, until
the term appointed of the father. So we also when we were children, were held in
bondage under the rudiments of the world."
The word "child" in this place denotes not age but understanding; meaning
that God had from the beginning designed for us these gifts, but, as we yet
continued childish, He let us be under the elements of the world, that is, new
moons and sabbaths, for these days are regulated by the course of sun and moon.
If then also now they bring you under law they do nothing else but lead you
backward now in the time of your perfect age and maturity. And see what is the
consequence of observing days; the Lord, the Master of the house, the Sovereign
Ruler, is thereby reduced to the rank of a servant.
Ver. 4, 5. "But when the fullness of the time came God sent forth His Son,
born of a woman, under the Law that he might redeem them which were under
the Law, that we might receive the adoption of sons."
Here he states two objects and effects of the Incarnation, deliverance from
evil and supply of good, things which none could compass but Christ. They are
these; deliverance from the curse of the Law, and promotion to sonship. Fitly
does he say, that we might "receive," "[be paid,]" implying that it was due; for
the promise was of old time made for these objects to Abraham, as the Apostle
has himself shown at great length. And how does it appear that we have become
sons? He has told us one mode, in that we have put on Christ who is the Son;
and now he mentions another, in that we have received the Spirit of adoption.
Ver. 6, 7. "And because you are sons, God sent forth the Spirit of His Son
into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father. So that you are no longer a bond-servant,

but a son; and if a son, then an heir through God."
Had not we been first made sons, we could not have called Him Father. If
then grace has made us freemen instead of slaves, men instead of children, heirs
and sons instead of aliens, is it not utter absurdity and stupidity to desert this
grace, and to turn away backwards?
Ver. 8, 9. "Howbeit at that time not knowing God, you were bondage to
them which by nature are no gods. But now, that you have come to know God, or
rather to be known of God, how turn ye back again to the weak and beggarly
rudiments whereunto you desire to be in bondage over again."
Here turning to the Gentile believers he says that it is an idolatry, this rigid
observance of days, and now incurs a severe punishment. To enforce this, and
inspire them with a deeper anxiety, he calls the elements "not by nature Gods."
And his meaning is—Then indeed, as being benighted and bewildered, you lay
grovelling upon the earth, but now that you have known God or rather are
known of Him, how great and bitter will be the chastisement you draw upon you,
if, after such a treatment, you relapse into the same disease. It was not by your
own pains that you found out God, but while you continued in error, He drew
you to Himself. He says "weak and beggarly rudiments," in that they avail
nothing towards the good things held out to us.
Ver. 10. "You observe days, and months, and seasons, and years."
Hence is plain that their teachers were preaching to them not only
circumcision, but also the feast-days and new-moons.
Ver. 11. "I am afraid of you, lest by any means I have bestowed labor upon
you in vain."
Observe the tender compassion of the Apostle; they were shaken and he
trembles and fears. And hence he has put it so as thoroughly to shame them, "I
have bestowed labor upon you," saying, as it were, make not vain the labors
which have cost me sweat and pain. By saying "I fear," and subjoining the word
"lest," he both inspires alarm, and encourages good hope. He says not "I have
labored in vain," but "lest," which is as much as to say, the wreck has not