183. Consequently, no one can demand that religion should be relegated to the inner sanctum of
personal life, without influence on societal and national life, without concern for the soundness of
civil institutions, without a right to offer an opinion on events affecting society. Who would claim to
lock up in a church and silence the message of Saint Francis of Assisi or Blessed Teresa of
Calcutta? They themselves would have found this unacceptable. An authentic faith – which is
never comfortable or completely personal – always involves a deep desire to change the world, to
transmit values, to leave this earth somehow better that we found it. We love this magnificent
planet on which God has put us, and we love the human family which dwells here, with all its
tragedies and struggles, its hopes and aspirations, its strengths and weaknesses. The earth is our
common home and all of us are brothers and sisters. If indeed “the just ordering of society and of
the state is a central responsibility of politics”, the Church “cannot and must not remain on the
sidelines in the fight for justice”. All Christians, their pastors included, are called to show
concern for the building of a better world. This is essential, for the Church’s social thought is
primarily positive: it offers proposals, it works for change and in this sense it constantly points to
the hope born of the loving heart of Jesus Christ. At the same time, it unites “its own commitment
to that made in the social field by other Churches and Ecclesial Communities, whether at the level
of doctrinal reflection or at the practical level”.

184. This is not the time or the place to examine in detail the many grave social questions
affecting today’s world, some of which I have dealt with in the second chapter. This Exhortation is
not a social document, and for reflection on those different themes we have a most suitable tool in
the Compendium of the Social Doctrine of the Church, whose use and study I heartily recommend.
Furthermore, neither the Pope nor the Church have a monopoly on the interpretation of social
realities or the proposal of solutions to contemporary problems. Here I can repeat the insightful
observation of Pope Paul VI: “In the face of such widely varying situations, it is difficult for us to
utter a unified message and to put forward a solution which has universal validity. This is not our
ambition, nor is it our mission. It is up to the Christian communities to analyze with objectivity the
situation which is proper to their own country”.

185. In what follows I intend to concentrate on two great issues which strike me as fundamental at
this time in history. I will treat them more fully because I believe that they will shape the future of
humanity. These issues are first, the inclusion of the poor in society, and second, peace and social
dialogue.