The double greeting is due to the fact that in the soul of this "daughter of Sion" there is
manifested, in a sense, all the "glory of grace," that grace which "the Father...has given us
in his beloved Son." For the messenger greets Mary as "full of grace"; he calls her thus as
if it were her real name. He does not call her by her proper earthly name: Miryam (=
Mary), but by this new name: "full of grace." What does this name mean? Why does the
archangel address the Virgin of Nazareth in this way?

In the language of the Bible "grace" means a special gift, which according to the New
Testament has its source precisely in the Trinitarian life of God himself, God who is love
(cf. 1 Jn. 4:8). The fruit of this love is "the election" of which the Letter to the Ephesians
speaks. On the part of God, this election is the eternal desire to save man through a
sharing in his own life in Christ: it is salvation through a sharing in
supernatural life. The effect of this eternal gift, of this grace of man's election by God, is
like a seed of holiness, or a spring which rises in the soul as a gift from God himself, who
through grace gives life and holiness to those who are chosen. In this way there is
fulfilled, that is to say there comes about, that "blessing" of man "with every spiritual
blessing," that "being his adopted sons and daughters...in Christ," in him who is eternally
the "beloved Son" of the Father.

When we read that the messenger addresses Mary as "full of grace," the Gospel context,
which mingles revelations and ancient promises, enables us to understand that among all
the "spiritual blessings in Christ" this is a special "blessing." In the mystery of Christ she
is present even "before the creation of the world," as the one whom the Father "has
chosen" as Mother of his Son in the Incarnation. And, what is more, together with the
Father, the Son has chosen her, entrusting her eternally to the Spirit of holiness. In an
entirely special and exceptional way Mary is united to Christ, and similarly she is
eternally loved in this "beloved Son," this Son who is of one being with the Father, in
whom is concentrated all the "glory of grace." At the same time, she is and remains
perfectly open to this "gift from above" (cf. Jas. 1:17). As the Council teaches, Mary
"stands out among the poor and humble of the Lord, who confidently await and receive
salvation from him."

9. If the greeting and the name "full of grace" say all this, in the context of the angel's
announcement they refer first of all to the election of Mary as Mother of the Son of God.
But at the same time the "fullness of grace" indicates all the supernatural munificence
from which Mary benefits by being chosen and destined to be the Mother of Christ. If
this election is fundamental for the accomplishment of God's salvific designs for
humanity, and if the eternal choice in Christ and the vocation to the dignity of adopted
children is the destiny of everyone, then the election of Mary is wholly exceptional and
unique. Hence also the singularity and uniqueness of her place in the mystery of Christ.