the Apostle also having stepped out of the subject of his own trials and toils and
contests, passes on into speaking of his love, and in this way touches them to the
quick. What then are the indications of his love? "Our mouth is open unto you, O
you Corinthians." And what kind of sign of love is this? Or what meaning even
have the words at all? 'We cannot endure,' he says, 'to be silent towards you, but
are always desiring and longing to speak to and converse with you;' which is the
wont of those who love. For what grasping of the hands is to the body, that is
interchange of language to the soul. And along with this he implies another thing
also. Of what kind then is this? That 'we discourse unto nothing.' For since
afterwards he proposes to rebuke, he asks forgiveness, using the rebuking them
with freedom as itself a proof of his loving them exceedingly. Moreover the
addition of their name is a mark of great love and warmth and affection; for we
are accustomed to be repeating continually the bare names of those we love.
"Our heart is enlarged." For as that which warms is wont to dilate; so also
to enlarge is the work of love. For virtue is warm and fervent. This both opened
the mouth of Paul and enlarged his heart. For, 'neither do I love with the mouth
only,' says he, 'but I have also a heart in union. Therefore I speak with openness,
with my whole mouth, with my whole mind.' For nothing is wider than was
Paul's heart which loved all the faithful with all the vehemence that one might
bear towards the object of his affection; this his love not being divided and
therefore weakened, but abiding in full entireness with each. And what marvel
that this was so in the case of the faithful, seeing that even in that of the
unfaithful, the heart of Paul embraced the whole world? Therefore he said not 'I
love you,' but with more emphasis, "Our mouth is open, our heart is enlarged,"
we have you all within it, and not this merely, but with much largeness of room.
For he that is beloved walks with great unrestraint within the heart of him that
loves. Wherefore he says, "You are not straitened in us, but you are straightened
in your own affections." And this reproof, see it administered with forbearance,
as is the wont of such as love exceedingly. He did not say, 'ye do not love us,'
but, 'not in the same measure,' for he does not wish to touch them too sensibly.

And indeed every where one may see how he is inflamed toward the faithful, by
selecting words out of every Epistle. For to the Romans he says, "I long to see
you;" and, "oftentimes I purposed to come unto you;" and, "If by any means now
at length I may be prospered to come unto you." [Romans 1:11-13] And to the
Galatians, he says, "My little children of whom I am again in travail." [Galatians
4:19] To the Ephesians again, "For this cause I bow my knees" for you.
[Ephesians 3:14] And to the Philippians, "For what is my hope, or joy, or crown
of rejoicing? Are not even ye?" and he said that he bare them about in his heart,
and in his bonds. [Philippians 1:7] And to the Colossians, "But I would that you
knew greatly I strive for you, and for as many as have not seen my face in the
flesh; that your hearts might be comforted." [Colossians 2:1-2] And to the
Thessalonians, "As when a nurse cherishes her children, even so being
affectionately desirous of you, we were well pleased to impart unto you, not the
Gospel only, but also our own souls." [1 Thessalonians 2:7-8] And to Timothy,
"Remembering your tears, that I may be filled with joy." [2 Timothy 1:4] And to
Titus, To my beloved son; [Titus 1:4] and to Philemon, in like manner.
[Philemon 1] And to the Hebrews too, he writes many other such-like things,
and ceases not to beseech them, and say, "A very little while, and he that comes
shall come, and shall not tarry:" [Hebrews 10:37] just like a mother to her
pettish children. And to themselves he says, "You are not straitened in us." But
he does not say only that he loves, but also that he is beloved by them, in order
that hereby also he may the rather win them. And indeed testifying to this in
them, he says, Titus came and "told us your longing, your mourning, your zeal."
[2 Corinthians 7:7] And to the Galatians, "If possible, you would have plucked
out your eyes and given them to me," [Galatians 4:15] And to the Thessalonians,
"What manner of entering in we had unto you." [1 Thessalonians 1:9] And to
Timothy also, "Remembering your tears, that I may be filled with joy." [2
Timothy 1:4] And also throughout his Epistles one may find him bearing this
testimony to the disciples, both that he loved and that he is loved, not however
equally. And here he says, "Though the more abundantly I love you, the less I be