There are, moreover, two kinds of effects: those which adequate the power of a cause, and
through such an effect the power of a cause is fully known, and consequently the essence of the
cause; and another kind of effect which is not completely equal to its cause. Through this latter
kind of effect it is not possible to comprehend the power of the agent, and consequently not its
essence either; but regarding the cause it can be known only that it exists. Thus the knowledge of
an effect stands as a principle whereby the existence of its cause is known, just as does the
quiddity of the cause when it is known through its own form. Now, it is according to this second
mode that every effect stands in relation to God; and hence we are not able in this life to attain to
any knowledge of Him, except that He is.

Nevertheless, of those knowing that He is, one will know Him more perfectly than another,
because a cause is more perfectly understood from its effect the more perfectly the relation of the
cause to its effect is apprehended. And in this relation of an effect not reaching in equality to its
cause, three things are noted: namely, the progression of the effect from its cause; secondly, the
consequent similitude of the effect to its cause; and thirdly, the failure on the part of the effect to
attairt to a perfect likeness of its cause. Thus the human mind grows in the knowledge of God,
even though it cannot attain to a knowledge of what He is, but only to a knowledge that He is, in
three ways.

Thus, in the first place, God is known as His productiveness and efficacy are more perfectly
known. Secondly inasmuch as He is known as the Cause of the nobler of His effects, since ihose
creatures which display being of a higher mode in their resemblance to Him manifest His
eminence more than others. In the third place, He is better recognized as differenhated from all
those things which appear in His effects.

Hence, in De divinis nominibus, Dionysius says that God is known inasmuch as He is the cause
of all things, by His transcending eminence in comparison to all things, and by denial (of all
created imperfection).

Moreover, in the attempt to arrive at some knowledge of God, the human mind is greatly assisted
when its natural light is fortified by a new illumination: namely, the light of faith and that of the
gifts of wisdom and of understanding, by which the mind is elevated above itself in
contemplation, inasmuch as it knows God to be above anything which it naturally apprehends.
But because even this new light does not suffice to penetrate to a vision of His essence, it is said
to be, in a certain way, turned back upon itself by His excellent light; and this is what is said in
Gregory's gloss regarding the statement in Gen. 32:30 ("I have seen God face to face"): "When
the vision of the soul is directed to God, it is reflected back upon itself, overwhelmed by the
brilliance of His immensity."