128. In this preaching, which is always respectful and gentle, the first step is personal dialogue,
when the other person speaks and shares his or her joys, hopes and concerns for loved ones, or
so many other heartfelt needs. Only afterwards is it possible to bring up God’s word, perhaps by
reading a Bible verse or relating a story, but always keeping in mind the fundamental message:
the personal love of God who became man, who gave himself up for us, who is living and who
offers us his salvation and his friendship. This message has to be shared humbly as a testimony
on the part of one who is always willing to learn, in the awareness that the message is so rich and
so deep that it always exceeds our grasp. At times the message can be presented directly, at
times by way of a personal witness or gesture, or in a way which the Holy Spirit may suggest in
that particular situation. If it seems prudent and if the circumstances are right, this fraternal and
missionary encounter could end with a brief prayer related to the concerns which the person may
have expressed. In this way they will have an experience of being listened to and understood; they
will know that their particular situation has been placed before God, and that God’s word really
speaks to their lives.

129. We should not think, however, that the Gospel message must always be communicated by
fixed formulations learned by heart or by specific words which express an absolutely invariable
content. This communication takes place in so many different ways that it would be impossible to
describe or catalogue them all, and God’s people, with all their many gestures and signs, are its
collective subject. If the Gospel is embedded in a culture, the message is no longer transmitted
solely from person to person. In countries where Christianity is a minority, then, along with
encouraging each of the baptized to proclaim the Gospel, particular Churches should actively
promote at least preliminary forms of inculturation. The ultimate aim should be that the Gospel, as
preached in categories proper to each culture, will create a new synthesis with that particular
culture. This is always a slow process and at we can be overly fearful. But if we allow doubts and
fears to dampen our courage, instead of being creative we will remain comfortable and make no
progress whatsoever. In this case we will not take an active part in historical processes, but
become mere onlookers as the Church gradually stagnates.

Charisms at the service of a communion which evangelizes

130. The Holy Spirit also enriches the entire evangelizing Church with different charisms. These
gifts are meant to renew and build up the Church. They are not an inheritance, safely secured

and entrusted to a small group for safekeeping; rather they are gifts of the Spirit integrated into the
body of the Church, drawn to the centre which is Christ and then channelled into an evangelizing
impulse. A sure sign of the authenticity of a charism is its ecclesial character, its ability to be
integrated harmoniously into the life of God’s holy and faithful people for the good of all.
Something truly new brought about by the Spirit need not overshadow other gifts and spiritualities
in making itself felt. To the extent that a charism is better directed to the heart of the Gospel, its
exercise will be more ecclesial. It is in communion, even when this proves painful, that a charism
is seen to be authentic and mysteriously fruitful. On the basis of her response to this challenge,
the Church can be a model of peace in our world.