Homily 54 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts XXVIII. 1
"And the barbarous people showed us no little kindness: for they kindled a
fire, and received us every one, because of the present rain, and because of the
cold. And when Paul had gathered a bundle of sticks, and laid them on the fire,
there came a viper out of the heat, and fastened on his hand."
"Showed," he says, "no little kindness to us— barbarians" (as they were )—
"having kindled a fire:" else it were of no use that their lives be saved, if the
wintry weather must destroy them. Then Paul having taken brushwood, laid it on
the fire. See how active he is; observe how we nowhere find him doing miracles
for the sake of doing them, but only upon emergency. Both during the storm
when there was a cause he prophesied, not for the sake of prophesying, and here
again in the first instance he lays on brushwood:— nothing for vain display, but
(with a simple view) to their being preserved, and enjoying some warmth. Then
a viper "fastened on his hand. And when the barbarians saw the venomous beast
hang on his hand, they said among themselves, No doubt this man is a murderer,
whom, though he has escaped the sea, yet vengeance suffers not to live." [Acts
28:4] Well also was this permitted, that they should both see the thing and utter
the thought, in order that, when the result ensued, there might be no disbelieving
the miracle. Observe their good feeling (towards the distressed), in saying this
(not aloud, but) among themselves— observe (also) the natural judgment clearly
expressed even among barbarians, and how they do not condemn without
assigning a reason. And these also behold, that they may wonder the more. "And
he shook off the beast into the fire, and felt no harm. Howbeit they looked when
he should have swollen, or fallen down dead suddenly: but after they had looked
a great while, and saw no harm come to him, they changed their minds, and said
that he was a god." (v. 5, 6.) They expected him, it says, to fall down dead: and

again, having seen that nothing of the kind happened to him, they said, He is a
god. Again [viz. as in Acts 14:11], another excess on the part of these men. "In
the same quarters were possessions of the chief man of the island, whose name
was Publius; who received us, and lodged us three days courteously. And it came
to pass, that the father of Publius lay sick of a fever and of a bloody flux: to
whom Paul entered in, and prayed, and laid his hands on him, and healed him."
(v. 7, 8.) Behold again another hospitable man, Publius, who was both rich and
of great possessions: he had seen nothing, but purely out of compassion for their
misfortune, he received them, and took care of them. So that he was worthy to
receive kindness: wherefore Paul as a requital for his receiving them, "healed
him. So when this was done, others also, which had diseases in the island, came,
and were healed: who also honored us with many honors; and when we
departed, they laded us with such things as were necessary" (v. 9, 10), both us
and the rest. See how when they were quit of the storm, they did not become
more negligent, but what a liberal entertainment was given to them for Paul's
sake: and three months were they there, all of them provided with sustenance.
See how all this is done for the sake of Paul, to the end that the prisoners should
believe, and the soldiers, and the centurion. For if they were very stone, yet from
the counsel they heard him giving, and from the prediction they had heard him
making, and from the miracles they knew him to have wrought, and from the
sustenance they by his means enjoyed, they must have got a very high notion of
him. See, when the judgment is right, and not preoccupied by some passion, how
immediately it gets right judgings, and gives sound verdicts. "And after three
months we departed in a ship of Alexandria, which had wintered in the isle,
whose sign was Castor and Pollux. And landing at Syracuse, we tarried there
three days. And from thence we fetched a compass, and came to Rhegium: and
after one day the south wind blew, and we came the next day to Puteoli: where
we found brethren, and were desired to tarry with them seven days: and so we
went toward Rome. And from thence, when the brethren heard of us, they came to
meet us as far as Appii forum, and the Three Taverns: whom when Paul saw, he