## CHAPTER LXXXVI--Of the Qualities of Glorified Bodies
BRIGHTNESS. Though by the merit of Christ the defect of nature [i.e., death] is taken
away from all, good and bad alike, at the resurrection, there will still remain a difference
between the good and bad in their personal attributes. It is of the essence of nature that
the human soul be the form of the body, quickening it and preserving it in being; while
by personal acts the soul deserves to be raised to the glory of the vision of God, or to be
shut out from the order of this glory through its own fault. The bodies of all men alike will
be organised as befits the soul, so that the soul shall be an imperishable form giving
imperishable being to the body, because to this effect the power of God will entirely
subject the matter of the human body to the human soul. But from the brightness
and excellence of the soul that is raised to the vision of God, the body, united to such a
soul, shall gain a further advantage. It will be entirely subject to the soul, God's power
so disposing, not in being only, but in all its actions, experiences, motions and bodily
qualities. As then the soul in the enjoyment of the vision of God will be replenished with
a spiritual brightness, so by an overflow from soul to body, the body itself, in its way, will
be clad in a halo and glory of brightness. Hence the Apostle says: It is sown in
dishonour, it shall rise in glory (1 Cor. xv, 43): because our body, which now has no light
of its own, shall then be bright and shining, according to the promise: The just shall
shine as the sun in the kingdom of their Father (Matt. xiii, 43).
II. Agility. The soul that shall enjoy the vision of God, being conjoined to its last end, will
find its desire fulfilled in all things. And because the body moves at the desire of the
soul, the body in this case will absolutely obey the beck of the spirit in its every
command to move: hence the bodies of the risen will be agile; and this is what the
Apostle means, when he says: It is sown in weakness: it shall rise in power (ib.) We
experience weakness in the body, in that it proves incapable of satisfying the soul in the
movements and actions which the soul commands. This weakness shall then be entirely
removed by virtue overflowing into the body from the soul united to God. Hence it is said
of the just that they shall run hither and thither like sparks in a dry bed of reeds (Wisd.
iii, 7).
III. Impassibility. As the soul that enjoys God will have its desire fulfilled in respect of the
gaining of all good, so also in respect of the removal of all evil. The body therefore,
being made perfect in proportion to the soul, shall be free from all evil, actual and
potential. As for actuality, there will be in the risen no corruption, no deformity, no
defect. In point of potentiality, the risen Saints will be beyond the possibility of suffering
aught that could give them pain: they will thus be impassible. Still this does not bar in
them that sensibility which is proper to sentient beings: for they will use the senses to
their delight in things that are not inconsistent with their state of incorruption. This
impassibility is declared by the Apostle: It is sown in corruption, it shall rise in
incorruption.
IV. Subtlety. As the soul enjoying God shall perfectly adhere to Him, and share in
His goodness to the full height of its capacity; so the body shall be perfectly subject to
the soul, and share in its attributes so far as possible, in clearness of sense, in