however, seems to be incorrectly said; for the words "in Him" seem
to imply the relation of final cause, which is first among the causes.
Therefore this relation of cause should be appropriated to the Father,
Who is "the principle from no principle."
Objection 5: Likewise, Truth is appropriated to the Son, according to
Jn. 14:6, "I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life"; and likewise "the
book of life," according to Ps. 39:9, "In the beginning of the book it is
written of Me," where a gloss observes, "that is, with the Father Who
is My head," also this word "Who is"; because on the text of Is. 65:1,
"Behold I go to the Gentiles," a gloss adds, "The Son speaks Who
said to Moses, I am Who am." These appear to belong to the Son,
and are not appropriated. For "truth," according to Augustine (De
Vera Relig. 36), "is the supreme similitude of the principle without
any dissimilitude." So it seems that it properly belongs to the Son,
Who has a principle. Also the "book of life" seems proper to the Son,
as signifying "a thing from another"; for every book is written by
someone. This also, "Who is," appears to be proper to the Son;
because if when it was said to Moses, "I am Who am," the Trinity
spoke, then Moses could have said, "He Who is Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, and the Holy Ghost sent me to you," so also he could
have said further, "He Who is the Father, and the Son, and the Holy
Ghost sent me to you," pointing out a certain person. This, however,
is false; because no person is Father, Son and Holy Ghost. Therefore
it cannot be common to the Trinity, but is proper to the Son.
I answer that, Our intellect, which is led to the knowledge of God
from creatures, must consider God according to the mode derived
from creatures. In considering any creature four points present
themselves to us in due order. Firstly, the thing itself taken
absolutely is considered as a being. Secondly, it is considered as
one. Thirdly, its intrinsic power of operation and causality is
considered. The fourth point of consideration embraces its relation
to its effects. Hence this fourfold consideration comes to our mind in
reference to God.
According to the first point of consideration, whereby we consider
God absolutely in His being, the appropriation mentioned by Hilary
applies, according to which "eternity" is appropriated to the Father,
"species" to the Son, "use" to the Holy Ghost. For "eternity" as
meaning a "being" without a principle, has a likeness to the property
of the Father, Who is "a principle without a principle." Species or
beauty has a likeness to the property of the Son. For beauty includes

three conditions, "integrity" or "perfection," since those things
which are impaired are by the very fact ugly; due "proportion" or
"harmony"; and lastly, "brightness" or "clarity," whence things are
called beautiful which have a bright color.
The first of these has a likeness to the property of the Son, inasmuch
as He as Son has in Himself truly and perfectly the nature of the
Father. To insinuate this, Augustine says in his explanation (De Trin.
vi, 10): "Where---that is, in the Son---there is supreme and primal
life," etc.
The second agrees with the Son's property, inasmuch as He is the
express Image of the Father. Hence we see that an image is said to
be beautiful, if it perfectly represents even an ugly thing. This is
indicated by Augustine when he says (De Trin. vi, 10), "Where there
exists wondrous proportion and primal equality," etc.
The third agrees with the property of the Son, as the Word, which is
the light and splendor of the intellect, as Damascene says (De Fide
Orth. iii, 3). Augustine alludes to the same when he says (De Trin. vi,
10): "As the perfect Word, not wanting in anything, and, so to speak,
the art of the omnipotent God," etc.
"Use" has a likeness to the property of the Holy Ghost; provided the
"use" be taken in a wide sense, as including also the sense of "to
enjoy"; according as "to use" is to employ something at the beck of
the will, and "to enjoy" means to use joyfully, as Augustine says (De
Trin. x, 11). So "use," whereby the Father and the Son enjoy each
other, agrees with the property of the Holy Ghost, as Love. This is
what Augustine says (De Trin. vi, 10): "That love, that delectation,
that felicity or beatitude, is called use by him" (Hilary). But the "use"
by which we enjoy God, is likened to the property of the Holy Ghost
as the Gift; and Augustine points to this when he says (De Trin. vi,
10): "In the Trinity, the Holy Ghost, the sweetness of the Begettor
and the Begotten, pours out upon us mere creatures His immense
bounty and wealth." Thus it is clear how "eternity," "species," and
"use" are attributed or appropriated to the persons, but not essence
or operation; because, being common, there is nothing in their
concept to liken them to the properties of the Persons.
The second consideration of God regards Him as "one." In that view
Augustine (De Doctr. Christ. i, 5) appropriates "unity" to the Father,