must not only have recourse to ancient example, but take our models from
present times. For even today by the grace of God, good deeds are done not less
than of old. Is a man incredulous? And does he think that the scriptures are
false? Does he not believe that Job was such as he was? Show him another man,
emulating the life of that righteous person. Thus will the Master also judge us:
He places fellow servants with fellow-servants, nor does he give sentence
according to his own judgment, in order that no one may begin to say again, as
that servant said, who was entrusted with the talent, and who instead of a talent
brought the accusation. "You are an austere man." For he ought to mourn,
because he did not double the talent, but rendered his sin the more grievous, by
adding to his own idleness, his accusation against the Master. For what says he?
"I knew you that you are an austere man." O miserable, and wretched, ungrateful
and lazy man! You ought to have accused your own idleness, and to have taken
away somewhat from your former sin. But thou in bringing an account against
the master hast doubled your sin instead of doubling your talent.
3. On this account God places together servants and servants in order that
the one set may judge the other, and that some being judged by the others may
not be able for the future to accuse the master. On this account, he saith "The Son
of Man comes in the glory of his Father." See the equality of the glory: he does
not say in glory like to the glory of the Father, but in the glory of the Father, and
will gather together all the nations. Terrible is the tribunal: terrible to the sinful,
and the accountable. Since to those who are conscious to themselves of good
works, it is desirable and mild. "And he will place the sheep on his right hand,
and the kids on his left." Both these and those are men. For what reason then are
those indeed sheep but these kids? Not that you may learn a difference in their
nature, but the difference in their purpose. But for what reason are they who did
not show compassion kids? Because that animal is unfruitful and is not able to
contribute services, either by its milk, or by progeny, or by its hair, to those who
possess it, being on all sides destitute of such a contribution as this, on account
of the immaturity of its age. On this account he has called those who bear no

fruit, by comparison, kids, but those on the right hand sheep. For from these the
offering is great, both of their natural wool, their progeny, and their milk. What
then does he say to them? "You saw me hungering and ye fed me, naked and ye
clothed me, a stranger and ye took me in." Again to those he says the contrary.
And yet both these and those were alike men, both these and those received the
same promises, the same rewards were assigned to both on doing right. The
same person came both to these and to those, with the same nakedness: and to
these and to those with the same hunger, and in the same way and a stranger. All
things were alike to those and to these.
How then was the end not the same? Because the purpose did not permit it.
For this alone made the difference. On this account the one set went to Gehenna,
but the other to the Kingdom. But if the Devil were the cause to them of their
sins, these would not be destined to be chastened, when another sinned and
drove them on. Do you see here both those who sin, and those who do good
works? Do you see how on seeing their fellow-servants they were silenced?
Come and let us bring our discourse to another example for your benefit. There
were ten virgins he says. Here again there are purposes which are upright, and
purposes which are sinful, in order you may see side by side, both the sins of the
one and the good works of the others. For the comparison makes these things the
plainer. And these and those were virgins; and these were five, and also those.
All awaited the bridegroom. How then did some enter in, and others did not
enter in? Because some indeed were churlish, and others were gentle and loving.
Do you see again that the purpose determined the nature of the end, not the
Devil? Do you see that the judgments were parallel, and that the verdict given
proceeds from those who are like each other? Fellow-servants will judge fellowservants. Do you wish that I should show you a comparison arising from
contrasts? For there is one also from contrasts so that the condemnation may
become the greater. "The men of Nineveh" he saith "shall rise up, and shall
condemn this generation." The judged are no longer alike, for the one are
barbarians, the others are Jews. The one enjoyed prophetic teaching, the others