suffering granted him with fuller measure, knowing that, if he repay it in equal
measure, he is thus at a disadvantage, in not having himself made the beginning,
but received the example from us. He will strive accordingly to exceed in
measure, in order to eclipse, by the excess of his recompense, the disadvantage
he himself sustains in having been second in making advances towards requital;
and the disadvantage again which accrues to the other from the time, if he was
the first sufferer, this he will make up by excess of kindness. For men, if they are
right-minded, are not so affected by evil as by the good treatment they may
receive at the hands of those whom they have injured. For it is a base sin, and it
is matter of reproach and scorn for a man who is well-treated not to return it;
while for a man who is ill-treated, not to go about to resent it, this has the praise
and applause, and the good word of all. And therefore they are more deeply
touched by this conduct than any.
So that if you have a wish to revenge yourself, revenge yourself in this
manner. Return good for evil, that you may render him even your debtor, and
achieve a glorious victory. Have you suffered evil? Do good; thus avenge you of
your enemy. For if you shall go about to resent it, all will blame both you and
him alike. Whereas if you shall endure it, it will be otherwise. You they will
applaud and admire; but him they will reproach. And what greater punishment
can there be to an enemy, than to behold his enemy admired and applauded by
all men? What more bitter to an enemy, than to behold himself reproached by all
before his enemy's face? If you shall avenge you on him, you will both be
condemned perhaps yourself, and will be the sole avenger; whereas, if you shall
forgive him, all will be avengers in your stead. And this will be far more severe
than any evil he can suffer, that his enemy should have so many to avenge him.
If you open your mouth, they will be silent; but if you are silent, not with one
tongue only, but with ten thousand tongues of others, you smite him, and art the
more avenged. And on you indeed, if you shall reproach him, many again will
cast imputations (for they will say that your words are those of passion); but
when others who have suffered no wrong from him thus overwhelm him with

reproaches, then is the revenge especially clear of all suspicion. For when they
who have suffered no mischief, in consequence of your excessive forbearance
feel and sympathize with you, as though they had been wronged themselves, this
is a vengeance clear of all suspicion. "But what then," you will say, "if no man
should take vengeance?" It cannot be that men will be such stones, as to behold
such wisdom and not admire it. And though they wreak not their vengeance on
him at the time; still, afterwards, when they are in the mood, they will do so, and
they will continue to scoff at him and abuse him. And if no one else admire you,
the man himself will most surely admire you, though he may not own it. For our
judgment of what is right, even though we be come to the very depth of
wickedness, remains impartial and unbiased. Why, suppose ye, did our Lord
Christ say, "Whosoever smites you on the right cheek, turn to him the other
also"? [Matthew 5:39] Is it not because the more long-suffering a man is, the
more signal the benefit he confers both on himself and on the other? For this
cause He charges us to "turn the other also," to satisfy the desire of the enraged.
For who is such a monster as not to be at once put to shame? The very dogs are
said to feel it; for if they bark and attack a man, and he throws himself on his
back and does nothing, he puts a stop to all their wrath. If they then reverence
the man who is ready to suffer evil from them, much more will the race of man
do so, inasmuch as they are more rational.
However, it is right not to overlook what a little before came into my
recollection, and was brought forward for a testimony. And what then was this?
We were speaking of the Jews, and of the chief rulers among them, how that they
were blamed, as seeking retaliation. And yet this the law permitted them; "eye
for eye, and tooth for tooth." [Leviticus 24:20] True, but not to the intent that
men should pluck out each other's eyes, but that they should check boldness in
aggression, by fear of suffering in return, and thus should neither do any evil to
others, nor suffer any evil from others themselves. Therefore it was said, "eye for
eye," to bind the hands of the aggressor, not to let yours loose against him; not to
ward off the hurt from your eyes only, but also to preserve his eyes safe and