prosper," whether much or little. Neither said he, "what any one may have
gained," but, "as he may prosper:" signifying that the supply is of God. And not
only so, but also by his not enjoining them to deposit all at once, he makes his
counsel easy: since the gathering little by little hinders all perception of the
burden and the cost. Here you see the reason too for his not enjoining them to
produce it immediately, but giving them a long day ; whereof adding the cause,
he says, "That there be no gatherings when I come:" which means, that you may
not when the season has come for paying in contributions just then be compelled
to collect them. And this too in no ordinary degree encouraged them again: the
expectation of Paul being sure to make them more earnest.

1 Corinthians 16:3
"And when I arrive, whomsoever you shall approve, them will I send with
letters to carry your bounty to Jerusalem."
He said not, "this person," and "that," but, "whomsoever you shall
approve," whomsoever you shall choose, thus freeing his ministration from
suspicion. Wherefore to them he leaves the right of voting in the choice of those
who are to convey it. He is far enough from saying, "The payment is yours, but
the privilege of selecting those who are to carry it is not yours." Next, that they
might not think him quite absent, he adds his letters, saying, "Whomsoever you
approve, I will send with letters." As if he had said, I also will be with them and
share in the ministration, by my letters. And he said not, "These will I send to
bear your alms," but, "your bounty;" to signify that they were doing great deeds;
to mark that they were gainers themselves. And elsewhere he calls it both "a
blessing" and "a distribution." [2 Corinthians 9:5-13] The one that he might not
make them less active, the other that he might not elate them. But in no case
whatever has he called it "alms."

1 Corinthians 16:4
"And if it be meet for me to go also, they shall go with me."
Here again he exhorts them to liberality. As thus: "if it be so much," says he,
"as to require my presence also, neither will I decline this." But he did not in the
first instance promise this, nor say, "When I have come I will carry it." For he
would not have made so much of it, if he had so set it down from the first.
Afterwards however he adds it well and seasonably. Here then you have the
reason why he did not immediately promise, nor yet altogether hold his peace
concerning it: but having said, "I will send," then at length he adds himself also.
And here too again he leaves it to their own decision; in saying, "If it be meet for
me to go also:" whereas this rested with them, namely, to make their collection
large; so large even, as to affect his plans and cause him in person to make the
journey.

1 Corinthians 16:5
5. "But I will come to you," says he, "when I shall have passed through
Macedonia." This he had said also above; then however with anger: at least he
added, [1 Corinthians 4:19] "And I will know not the speech of them that are
puffed up, but the power:" but here, more mildly; that they might even long for
his coming. Then, that they might not say, "Why is it that you honor the
Macedonians above us?" he said not, "When I depart," but, "When I shall have
passed through Macedonia; for I do pass through Macedonia."