SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.140, C.3.

Reply to Objection 1: Man's appetite is corrupted chiefly by those
things which seduce him into forsaking the rule of reason and Divine
law. Wherefore integrity, which Augustine ascribes to temperance,
can, like the latter, be taken in two ways: first, in a general sense,
and secondly in a sense of excellence.
Reply to Objection 2: The things about which temperance is
concerned have a most disturbing effect on the soul, for the reason
that they are natural to man, as we shall state further on (Articles
4,5). Hence tranquillity of soul is ascribed to temperance by way of
excellence, although it is a common property of all the virtues.
Reply to Objection 3: Although beauty is becoming to every virtue, it
is ascribed to temperance, by way of excellence, for two reasons.
First, in respect of the generic notion of temperance, which consists
in a certain moderate and fitting proportion, and this is what we
understand by beauty, as attested by Dionysius (Div. Nom. iv).
Secondly, because the things from which temperance withholds us,
hold the lowest place in man, and are becoming to him by reason of
his animal nature, as we shall state further on (Articles 4,5; Question
142, Article 4), wherefore it is natural that such things should defile
him. In consequence beauty is a foremost attribute of temperance
which above all hinders man from being defiled. In like manner
honesty is a special attribute of temperance: for Isidore says (Etym.
x): "An honest man is one who has no defilement, for honesty means
an honorable state." This is most applicable to temperance, which
withstands the vices that bring most dishonor on man, as we shall
state further on (Question 142, Article 4).

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.140, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether temperance is only about desires and

pleasures?
Objection 1: It would seem that temperance is not only about desires
and pleasures. For Tully says (De Invent. Rhet. ii, 54) that
"temperance is reason's firm and moderate mastery of lust and other
wanton emotions of the mind." Now all the passions of the soul are
called emotions of the mind. Therefore it seems that temperance is
not only about desires and pleasures.
Objection 2: Further, "Virtue is about the difficult and the
good" [Ethic. ii, 3]. Now it seems more difficult to temper fear,
especially with regard to dangers of death, than to moderate desires
and pleasures, which are despised on account of deadly pains and
dangers, according to Augustine (Questions 83, qu. 36). Therefore it
seems that the virtue of temperance is not chiefly about desires and
pleasures.
Objection 3: Further, according to Ambrose (De Offic. i, 43) "the
grace of moderation belongs to temperance": and Tully says (De
Offic. ii, 27) that "it is the concern of temperance to calm all
disturbances of the mind and to enforce moderation." Now
moderation is needed, not only in desires and pleasures, but also in
external acts and whatever pertains to the exterior. Therefore
temperance is not only about desires and pleasures.
On the contrary, Isidore says (Etym.) [De Summo Bono xxxvii, xlii,
and De Different. ii, 39]: that "it is temperance whereby lust and
desire are kept under control."
I answer that, As stated above (Question 123, Article 12; Question
136, Article 1), it belongs to moral virtue to safeguard the good of
reason against the passions that rebel against reason. Now the
movement of the soul's passions is twofold, as stated above (FS,
Question 23, Article 2), when we were treating of the passions: the
one, whereby the sensitive appetite pursues sensible and bodily
goods, the other whereby it flies from sensible and bodily evils.
The first of these movements of the sensitive appetite rebels against
reason chiefly by lack of moderation. Because sensible and bodily
goods, considered in their species, are not in opposition to reason,