the prisoner, when you see him with irons on his back, on his hands, and often
on his feet too, you therefore most of all account him miserable; so also as to the
rich man, when you see him encompassed with innumerable affairs, let him not
be therefore rich, but rather for these very things wretched, in your account. For
together with these bonds, he has a cruel jailor too, the wicked love of riches;
which suffers him not to pass out of this prison, but provides for him thousands
of fetters, and guards, and doors, and bolts; and when he has cast him into the
inner prison, persuades him even to feel pleasure in these bonds; that he may not
find so much as any hope of deliverance from the evils which press on him.
And if in thought you were to lay open that man's soul, you would see it not
bound only, but squalid, and filthy, and teeming with vermin. For no better than
vermin are the pleasures of luxury, but even more abominable, and destroy the
body more, together with the soul also; and upon the one and upon the other they
bring ten thousand scourges of sickness.
On account then of all these things let us entreat the Redeemer of our souls,
that He would both burst asunder our bands, and remove this our cruel jailor, and
having set us free from the burden of those iron chains, He would make our
spirits lighter than any wing. And as we entreat Him, so let us contribute our
own part, earnestness, and consideration, and an excellent zeal. For thus we shall
be able both in a short time to be freed from the evils which now oppress us, and
to learn in what condition we were before, and to lay hold on the liberty which
belongs to us; unto which God grant we may all attain, by the grace and love
towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and power forever and
ever. Amen.

## Homily 15 on Matthew

Matthew 5:1-2.
"And Jesus seeing the multitudes went up into the mountain, and when He
was set, His disciples came unto Him. And He opened His mouth, and taught
them saying, Blessed," etc.
See how unambitious He was, and void of boasting: in that He did not lead
people about with Him, but whereas, when healing was required, He had
Himself gone about everywhere, visiting both towns and country places; now
when the multitude has become very great, He sits in one spot: and that not in
the midst of any city or forum, but on a mountain and in a wilderness; instructing
us to do nothing for display, and to separate ourselves from the tumults of
ordinary life, and this most especially, when we are to study wisdom, and to
discourse of things needful to be done.
But when He had gone up into the mount, and "was set down, His disciples
came unto Him." Do you see their growth in virtue? And how in a moment they
became better men? Since the multitude were but gazers on the miracles, but
these from that hour desired also to hear some great and high thing. And indeed
this it was set Him on His teaching, and made Him begin this discourse.
For it was not men's bodies only that He was healing, but He was also
amending their souls; and again from the care of these He would pass to
attendance on the other. Thus He at once varied the succor that He gave, and
likewise mingled with the instruction afforded by His words, the manifestation
of His glory from His works; and besides, He stopped the shameless mouths of
the heretics, signifying by this His care of both parts of our being, that He
Himself is the Maker of the whole creation. Therefore also on each nature He
bestowed abundant providence, now amending the one, now the other.
And in this way He was then employed. For it is said, that "He opened His