in vain? For if we did not trust in the living God, on what account did we submit
to these things? But if God is here the Saviour of the unbelieving, much more is
He of the faithful hereafter. What salvation does he speak of? That to come?
"Who is the Saviour," he says, "of all men, specially of them that believe." At
present he is speaking of that which is here. But how is He the Saviour of the
faithful? Had he not been so, they must long since have been destroyed, for all
men have made war upon them. He calls him here to endure perils, that having
God for his Saviour he may not faint nor need any aid from others, but willingly
and with fortitude endure all things. Even those who eagerly grasp at worldly
advantages, supported by the hope of gain, cheerfully undertake laborious
enterprises.
It is then the last time. For "in the latter times," he says, "some shall depart
from the faith." "Forbidding to marry." And do not we forbid to marry? God
forbid. We do not forbid those who wish to marry, but those who do not wish to
marry, we exhort to virginity. It is one thing to forbid, and another to leave one to
his own free choice. He that forbids, does it once for all, but he who
recommends virginity as a higher state, does not forbid marriage, because he
prefers virginity.
"Forbidding to marry," he says, "and commanding to abstain from meats,
which God has created to be received with thanksgiving of them which believe
and know the truth." It is well said, "who know the truth." The former things
then were a type. For nothing is unclean by nature, but it becomes so through the
conscience of him that partakes of it. And what was the object of the prohibition
of so many meats? To restrain excessive luxury. But had it been said, "eat not for
the sake of luxury," it would not have been borne. They were therefore shut up
under the necessity of the law, that they might abstain from the stronger principle
of fear. The fish was not forbidden, though it was manifestly more unclean than
the swine. But they might have learned how pernicious luxury was from that
saying of Moses, "Jeshurun waxed fat, and kicked." [Deuteronomy 32:15]
Another cause of these prohibitions might be, that being straitened for other

food, they might be reduced to slaughter sheep and oxen; he therefore restrained
them from other things, on account of Apis and the calf, which was an
abomination, ungrateful, polluted, and profane.
"Put them in remembrance of these things, meditate upon these things," for
by the expression, "nourished up in the words of faith and sound doctrine," is
implied that he should not only recommend these things to others, but himself
practice them. For he says, "Nourished up in the words of faith, and of good
doctrine, whereunto you have attained. But refuse profane and old wives'
fables." Why does he not say, abstain from them, but "refuse"? He thus intimates
that they should be utterly rejected. His meaning is, that he should not enter into
any disputation with the teachers of them, but recommend to his own people the
things prescribed above. For nothing is to be gained by contending with perverse
men, unless where it might have an injurious effect, if we were supposed from
weakness to decline arguing with them.
"But exercise yourself unto godliness," that is, unto a pure life, and the most
virtuous conversation. He that exercises himself, even when it is not the season
of contest, acts always as if he were contending, practices abstinence, endures all
toils, is always anxious, endures much labor. "Exercise yourself," he says, "unto
godliness; for bodily exercise profits little, but godliness is profitable for all
things, having the promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come."
And why, says one, does he mention this bodily exercise? To show by
comparison the superiority of the other, in that the former is of no solid
advantage, though it is attended with many toils, while the latter has a lasting
and abundant good. As when he bids women "adorn themselves, not with
broidered hair, or gold, or costly array: but which becomes women possessing
godliness; with good works." [1 Timothy 2:9-10]
Moral. "This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation. For
therefore we both labor and suffer reproach." Did Paul then suffer reproach, and
are you impatient? Did Paul labor, and would you live luxuriously? But had he
lived luxuriously, he would never have attained such great blessings. For if