which imply studied ornament, as painting, coloring the eyes, a mincing gait, the
affected voice, a languishing and wanton look; the exquisite care in putting on
the cloak and bodice, the nicely wrought girdle, and the closely-fitted shoes? For
he glances at all these things, in speaking of "modest apparel" and
"shamefacedness." For such things are shameless and indecent.
Bear with me, I beseech you, for it is not my aim by this plain reproof to
wound or pain you, but to remove from my flock all that is unbecoming to them.
But if these prohibitions are addressed to those who have husbands, who are
rich, and live luxuriously; much more to those who have professed virginity. But
what virgin, you say, wears gold, or broidered hair? Yet there may be such a
studied nicety in a simple dress, as that these are nothing to it. You may study
appearance in a common garment more than those who wear gold. For when a
very dark colored robe is drawn closely round the breast with the girdle (as
dancers on the stage are attired), with such nicety that it may neither spread into
breadth nor shrink into scantiness, but be between both; and when the bosom is
set off with many folds, is not this more alluring than any silken robes? And
when the shoe, shining through its blackness, ends in a sharp point, and imitates
the elegance of painting, so that even the breadth of the sole is scarce visible—
or when, though you do not indeed paint the face, you spend much time and
pains on washing it, and spread a veil across the forehead, whiter than the face
itself— and above that put on a hood, of which the blackness may set off the
white by contrast— is there not in all this the vanity of dress? What can one say
to the perpetual rolling of the eyes? To the putting on of the stomacher; so
artfully as sometimes to conceal, sometimes to disclose, the fastening? For this
too they sometimes expose, so as to show the exquisiteness of the cincture,
winding the hood entirely round the head. Then like the players, they wear
gloves so closely fitted, that they seem to grow upon the hands: and we might
speak of their walk, and other artifices more alluring than any ornament of gold.
Let us fear, beloved, lest we also hear what the Prophet said to the Hebrew
women who were so studious of outward ornament; "Instead of a girdle, you

shall be girded with a halter, instead of well-set hair, baldness." [Isaiah 3:24,
Septuagint] These things and many others, invented only to be seen and to attract
beholders, are more alluring than golden ornaments. These are no trifling faults,
but displeasing to God, and enough to mar all the self-denial of virginity.
You have Christ for your Bridegroom, O virgin, why do you seek to attract
human lovers? He will judge you as an adulteress. Why do you not wear the
ornament that is pleasing to Him; modesty, chastity, orderliness, and sober
apparel? This is meretricious, and disgraceful. We can no longer distinguish
harlots and virgins, to such indecency have they advanced. A virgin's dress
should not be studied, but plain, and without labor; but now they have many
artifices to make their dress conspicuous. O woman, cease from this folly.
Transfer this care to your soul, to the inward adorning. For the outward ornament
that invests you, suffers not that within to become beautiful. He that is concerned
for that which is without, despises that which is within, even as he that is
unconcerned about the exterior, bestows all his care upon the interior. Say not,
"Alas! I wear a threadbare garment, mean shoes, a worthless veil; what is there
of ornament in these?" Do not deceive yourself. It is impossible, as I said, to
study appearance more by these than by costlier dresses; especially when they
are close-fitted to the body, fashioned to an immodest show, and of shining
neatness. You excuse yourself to me, but what can you say to God, who knows
the heart and the spirit with which you do these things? "It is not done for
fornication!" Perhaps not, but for admiration; and do you not blush for shame to
be admired for such things? But you say, "It is but chance I am so dressed, and
for no motive of this kind." God knows what you say to me: is it to me you must
give account? Nay, it is to Him who is present at your actions, and will one day
inquire into them, to whom all things are naked and open. It is on this account
that we now urge these things, that we may not let you be amenable to those
severe judgments. Let us fear, therefore, lest He reprove you in the words of the
Prophet to the Jewish women. "They come to be seen of me wantoning and
mincing as they go, and making a tinkling with their feet." [Isaiah 3:16]