FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.32, C.2.

every pleasure is traced to some operation as its cause.
Reply to Objection 2: Even when it is not an operation, but the effect
of an operation, that is the end, this effect is pleasant in so far as
possessed or effected: and this implies use or operation.
Reply to Objection 3: Operations are pleasant, in so far as they are
proportionate and connatural to the agent. Now, since human power
is finite, operation is proportionate thereto according to a certain
measure. Wherefore if it exceed that measure, it will be no longer
proportionate or pleasant, but, on the contrary, painful and irksome.
And in this sense, leisure and play and other things pertaining to
repose, are pleasant, inasmuch as they banish sadness which
results from labor.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.32, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether movement is a cause of pleasure?

Objection 1: It would seem that movement is not a cause of pleasure.
Because, as stated above (Question 31, Article 1), the good which is
obtained and is actually possessed, is the cause of pleasure:
wherefore the Philosopher says (Ethic. vii, 12) that pleasure is not
compared with generation, but with the operation of a thing already
in existence. Now that which is being moved towards something has
it not as yet; but, so to speak, is being generated in its regard,
forasmuch as generation or corruption are united to every
movement, as stated in Phys. viii, 3. Therefore movement is not a
cause of pleasure.
Objection 2: Further, movement is the chief cause of toil and fatigue
in our works. But operations through being toilsome and fatiguing
are not pleasant but disagreeable. Therefore movement is not a
cause of pleasure.
Objection 3: Further, movement implies a certain innovation, which
is the opposite of custom. But things "which we are accustomed to,
are pleasant," as the Philosopher says (Rhet. i, 11). Therefore
movement is not a cause of pleasure.
On the contrary, Augustine says (Confess. viii, 3): "What means this,
O Lord my God, whereas Thou art everlasting joy to Thyself, and
some things around Thee evermore rejoice in Thee? What means
this, that this portion of things ebbs and flows alternately displeased
and reconciled?" From these words we gather that man rejoices and
takes pleasure in some kind of alterations: and therefore movement
seems to cause pleasure.
I answer that, Three things are requisite for pleasure; two, i.e. the
one that is pleased and the pleasurable object conjoined to him; and
a third, which is knowledge of this conjunction: and in respect of
these three, movement is pleasant, as the Philosopher says (Ethic.
vii, 14 and Rhetor. i, 11). For as far as we who feel pleasure are
concerned, change is pleasant to us because our nature is
changeable: for which reason that which is suitable to us at one time
is not suitable at another; thus to warm himself at a fire is suitable to
man in winter but not in summer. Again, on the part of the pleasing
good which is united to us, change is pleasant. Because the