your husband brought not in unto you an Hebrew servant to plot against you, but
the wicked spirit brought in that unclean lasciviousness; he it was that mocked
you.
What then did Joseph? He held his peace, and thus is condemned, even as
Christ is also.
For all those things are types of these. And he indeed was in bonds, and she
in royal courts. Yet what is this? For he was more glorious than any crowned
victor, even while continuing in his bonds, but she was in a more wretched
condition than any prisoner, while abiding in royal chambers.
But not hence alone may one see the victory, and the defeat, but by the end
itself. For which accomplished his desired object? The prisoner, not the high
born lady? For he strove to keep his chastity, but she to destroy it. Which then
accomplished what he desired? He who suffered wrong, or she who did the
wrong. It is quite plain, that it is he who suffered. Surely then this is the one who
has conquered.
Knowing then these things, let us follow after this victory, which is
obtained by suffering wrong, let us flee from that which is got by doing wrong.
For so shall we both live this present life in all tranquility, and great quietness,
and shall attain unto the good things to come, by the grace and love towards man
of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and might world without end. Amen.

## Homily 85 on Matthew

Matthew 26:67-68.
" Then did they spit in His face, and buffeted Him, and others smote Him
with the palms of their hands, saying, Prophesy unto us, you Christ, who is he
that smote you?"
Wherefore did they these things, when they were to put Him to death? What
need of this mockery? That you might learn their intemperate spirit by all things,
and that having taken Him like a prey, they thus showed forth their intoxication,
and gave full swing to their madness; making this a festival, and assaulting Him
with pleasure, and showing forth their murderous disposition.
But admire, I pray you, the self command of the disciples, with what
exactness they relate these things. Hereby is clearly shown their disposition to
love the truth, because they relate with all truthfulness the things that seem to be
opprobrious, disguising nothing, nor being ashamed thereof, but rather
accounting it very great glory, as indeed it was, that the Lord of the universe
should endure to suffer such things for us. This shows both His unutterable
tenderness, and the inexcusable wickedness of those men, who had the heart to
do such things to Him that was so mild and meek, and was charming them with
such words, as were enough to change a lion into a lamb. For neither did He fail
in any things of gentleness, nor they of insolence and cruelty, in what they did, in
what they said. All which things the prophet Isaiah foretold, thus proclaiming
beforehand, and by one word intimating all this insolence. For "like as many
were astonished at you," he says, "so shall your form be held inglorious of men,
and your glory of the sons of men."
For what could be equal to this insolence? On that face which the sea, when
it saw it, had reverenced, from which the sun, when it beheld it on the cross,
turned away his rays, they did spit, and struck it with the palms of their hands,