look ye out among you seven men of honest report, full of the Holy Ghost and
wisdom, whom we may appoint over this business. But we will give ourselves
continually to prayer, and to the ministry of the word. And the saying pleased the
whole multitude: and they chose Stephen, a man full of faith and of the Holy
Ghost" [Acts 6:3-5] so were the others also full of faith; not to have the same
things happening as in the case of Judas, as in the case of Ananias and Sapphira
— "and Philip, and Prochoras, and Nicanor, and Timon, and Parmenas, and
Nicolas a proselyte of Antioch: whom they set before the Apostles: and when
they had prayed, they laid their hands on them. And the word of God increased;
and the number of the disciples multiplied in Jerusalem greatly; and a great
company of the priests were obedient to the faith." [Acts 6:5-7]
But let us look over again what has been spoken. "You men of Israel take
heed to yourselves." [Recapitulation, Acts 5:35] See here, I pray you, how
mildly Gamaliel reasons, and how he says but a few words to them, and does not
recount ancient histories, although he might have done so, but more recent
instances, which are most powerful to produce belief. With this view he throws
out a hint himself, saying, "For before these days" [Acts 5:36]: meaning, not
many days before. Now had he at once said, "Let these men go," both himself
would have fallen into suspicion, and his speech would not have been so
effective: but after the examples, it acquired its own proper force. And he
mentions not one instance, but a second also: "for," says the Scripture, "in the
mouth of two witnesses" [Matthew 18:16]: and yet he had it in his power to
mention even three. "Refrain from these men." [Acts 5:38] See how mild his
manner is, and his speech not long, but concise, and his mention even of those
(impostors) how free from passion: "And all, as many as obeyed him, were
scattered." And for all this he does not blaspheme Christ. They heard him, all
these unbelievers, heard him, these Jews. ["For if this council or this work be of
men, it will come to naught."] Well then, since it did not come to nought, it is not
of men. ["But if it be of God, you cannot overthrow it."] [Acts 5:39] Once more
he checks them by the impossibility and the inexpediency of the thing, saying,

"Lest haply ye be found even to fight against God." And he does not say, If
Christ be God; but the work (itself) declares (this). He does not pronounce upon
it, either that, it is "of men," or that it is "of God;" but he leaves the proof to the
future. "They were persuaded [by him]." [Acts 5:40] Then why, it may be asked,
do ye scourge them? Such was the incontrovertible justness of his speech, they
could not look it in the face; nevertheless, they sated their own animosity; and
again they expected to terrify them in this way. By the fact also of his saying
these things not in the presence of the Apostles, he gained a hearing more than
he would otherwise have done; and then the suavity of his discourse and the
justness of what was said, helped to persuade them. In fact, this man all but
preached the Gospel. " You were persuaded," one may say, "that you had not
strength to overthrow it. Wherefore did ye not believe?" Such is the witness
borne even by enemies. There it is four hundred, there, four thousand: and here
the first movers were twelve. Let not the number which added itself affright you.
[ch. 2:41; 4:4] He might also have mentioned another instance, that of the
Egyptian, but what he has spoken is fully sufficient. And he closes his speech
with an alarming topic: "Lest haply," etc. And he does not pronounce upon it,
lest he should seem to be pleading their cause; but he reasons by way of
syllogism from the issue of the matter. And he does not venture to pronounce
that it is not of men, nor yet that it is of God; for had he said that it was of God,
they would have gainsaid him: but had he said that it was of men, they would
again have taken prompt measures. Therefore he bids them wait for the end,
saying, "Refrain." But they once more threaten knowing indeed that they avail
nothing, but doing after their manner. Such is the nature of wickedness: it
attempts even impossibilities.— "And after this man rose up Judas," etc. These
things Josephus relates in detail. (Ant. xx. 8; ib. v. 2; xviii. 1. B. J. ii. 8. 1.) But
what a great thing it was that he ventured to affirm: that it was of God, when in
the sequel it received its proof from the events! Great boldness of speech, great
freedom from all respect of persons! And he does not say, "But if you do not
overthrow it, it is of God;" but, "If it be of God, it will not be overthrown." "And