recent, was repeated of all. Themselves, for instance, say, "Does not Christ come
of the seed of David, and out of Bethlehem, the town where David was?"
[John 7:42] And no man called Him Son of Abraham, but all Son of David; and
that because this last was more in the recollection of all, both on account of the
time, as I have already said, and because of his royalty. On this principle again
all the kings whom they had in honor after his time were named from him, both
by the people themselves and by God. For both Ezekiel and other prophets
besides speak of David as coming and rising again; not meaning him that was
dead, but them who were emulating his virtue. And to Hezekiah He says, "I will
defend this city, for my own sake and for my servant David's sake."
[2 Kings 19:34] And to Solomon too He said, that for David's sake He rent not
the kingdom during his lifetime. For great was the glory of the man, both with
God and with men.
On account of this he makes the beginning at once from him who was more
known, and then runs up to his father; accounting it superfluous, as far as regards
the Jews, to carry the genealogy higher up. For these were principally the
persons held in admiration; the one as a prophet and a king, the other as a
patriarch and a prophet.
7. "But whence is it manifest that He is of David?" one may say. For if He
was not sprung of a man, but from a woman only, and the Virgin has not her
genealogy traced, how shall we know that He was of David's race? Thus, there
are two things inquired; both why His mother's genealogy is not recited, and
wherefore it can be that Joseph is mentioned by them, who has no part in the
birth: since the latter seems to be superfluous, and the former a defect.
Of which then is it necessary to speak first? How the Virgin is of David.
How then shall we know that she is of David? Hearken unto God, telling Gabriel
to go unto "a virgin betrothed to a man (whose name was Joseph), of the house
and lineage of David." What now would you have plainer than this, when you
have heard that the Virgin was of the house and lineage of David?
Hence it is evident that Joseph also was of the same. Yes, for there was a

law, which bade that it should not be lawful to take a wife from any other stock,
but from the same tribe. And the patriarch Jacob also foretold that He should
arise out of the tribe of Judah, saying on this wise: "there shall not fail a ruler
out of Judah, nor a governor out of his loins, until He come for whom it is
appointed, and He is the expectation of the Gentiles."
"Well; this prophecy does indeed make it clear that He was of the tribe of
Judah, but not also that He was of the family of David. Was there then in the
tribe of Judah one family only, even that of David, or were there not also many
others? And might it not happen for one to be of the tribe of Judah, but not also
of the family of David?"
Nay, lest you should say this, the evangelist has removed this suspicion of
yours, by saying, that He was "of the house and lineage of David."
And if you wish to learn this from another reason besides, neither shall we
be at a loss for another proof. For not only was it not allowed to take a wife out
of another tribe, but not even from another lineage, that is, from another kindred.
So that if either we connect with the Virgin the words, "of the house and lineage
of David," what has been said stands good; or if with Joseph, by that fact this
also is proved. For if Joseph was of the house and lineage of David, he would
not have taken his wife from another than that whence he himself was sprung.
"What then," one may say, "if he transgressed the law?" Why, for this cause
he has by anticipation testified that Joseph was righteous, on purpose that you
might not say this, but having been told his virtue, might be sure also that he
would not have transgressed the law. For he who was so benevolent, and free
from passion, as not to wish, even when urged by suspicion, to attempt inflicting
punishment on the Virgin, how should he have transgressed the law for lust? He
that showed wisdom and self-restraint beyond the law (for to put her away, and
that privily, was to act with self-restraint beyond the law), how should he have
done anything contrary to the law; and this when there was no cause to urge
him?
8. Now that the Virgin was of the race of David is indeed from these things