Him."
"And when He drew near unto Jerusalem, and had come to Bethphage, unto
the Mount of Olives, He sent two of His disciples, saying, Go into the village
over against you, and you shall find an ass tied, and a colt with her: loose them,
and bring them unto me. And if any man say anything unto you, you shall say,
The Lord has need of them; and straightway he sends them. And this was done,
that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Zechariah the prophet, Tell ye the
daughter of Sion, Behold, your King comes to you, meek, and sitting upon an
ass, and a colt the foal of an ass."
And yet He had often entered Jerusalem before, but never with so much
circumstance. What then is the cause? It was the beginning then of the
dispensation; and neither was He very well known, nor the time of His passion
near; wherefore He mixed with them with less distinction, and more disguising
Himself. For He would not have been held in admiration, had He so appeared,
and He would have excited them to greater anger. But when He had both given
them sufficient proof of His power, and the cross was at the doors, He makes
Himself then more conspicuous, and does with greater circumstance all the
things that were likely to inflame them. For it was indeed possible for this to
have been done at the beginning also; but it was not profitable nor expedient it
should be so.
But do thou observe, I pray you, how many miracles are done, and how
many prophecies are fulfilled. He said, "You shall find an ass;" He foretold that
no man should hinder them, but that all, when they heard, should hold their
peace.
But this is no small condemnation of the Jews, if them that were never
known to Him, neither had appeared before Him, He persuades to give up their
own property, and to say nothing against it, and that by His disciples, while
these, being present with Him at the working of His miracles, were not
persuaded.
2. And do not account what was done to be a small thing. For who

persuaded them, when their own property was taken from them, and that, when
they were perhaps poor men and husbandmen, not to forbid it? Why say I not to
forbid it? Not to ask, or even if they asked, to hold their peace, and give it up.
For indeed both things were alike marvellous, as well, if they said nothing, when
their beasts were dragged away, or if having spoken, and heard, "The Lord has
need of them," they yielded and withstood not, and this when they see not Him,
but His disciples.
By these things He teaches them, that it was in His power to have entirely
hindered the Jews also, even against their will, when they were proceeding to
attack Him, and to have made them speechless, but He would not.
And another thing again together with these does He teach the disciples, to
give whatever He should ask; and, though he should require them to yield up
their very life, to give even this, and not to gainsay. For if even strangers gave up
to Him, much more ought they to strip themselves of all things.
And besides what we have said, He was fulfilling also another prophecy,
one which was twofold, one part in words, and another in deeds. And that in
deeds was, by the sitting on the ass; and that by words, the prediction of
Zacharias; because he had said, that the King should sit on an ass. And He,
having sat and having fulfilled it, gave to the prophecy another beginning again,
by what He was doing typifying beforehand the things to come.
How and in what manner? He proclaimed beforehand the calling of the
unclean Gentiles, and that He should rest upon them, and that they should yield
to Him and follow Him, and prophecy succeeded to prophecy.
But to me He seems not for this object only to sit on the ass, but also as
affording us a standard of self-denial. For not only did He fulfill prophecies, nor
did He only plant the doctrines of the truth, but by these very things He was
correcting our practice for us, everywhere setting us rules of necessary use, and
by all means amending our life.
For this cause, I say, even when He was to be born He sought not a splendid
house, nor a mother rich and distinguished, but a poor woman, and one that had