1 Corinthians 11:31
"For if we discerned ourselves," says he, "we should not be judged."
And he said not, "if we punished ourselves, if we were revenged on
ourselves," but if we were only willing to acknowledge our offense, to pass
sentence on ourselves, to condemn the things done amiss, we should be rid of the
punishment both in this world and the next. For he that condemns himself
propitiates God in two ways, both by acknowledging his sins, and by being more
on his guard for the future. But since we are not willing to do even this light
thing, as we ought to do it, not even thus does He endure to punish us with the
world, but even thus spares us, exacting punishment in this world, where the
penalty is for a season and the consolation great; for the result is both
deliverance from sins, and a good hope of things to come, alleviating the present
evils. And these things he says, at the same time comforting the sick and
rendering the rest more serious. Wherefore he says,

1 Corinthians 11:32
"But when we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord."
He said not, we are punished, he said not, we have vengeance taken on us,
but, "we are chastened." For what is done belongs rather to admonition than
condemnation, to healing than vengeance, to correction than punishment. And
not so only but by the threat of a greater evil he makes the present light, saying,
"that we may not be condemned with the world." Do you see how he brings in
hell also and that tremendous judgment-seat, and signifies that that trial and
punishment is necessary and by all means must be? For if the faithful, and such
as God especially cares for, escape not without punishment in whatsoever things
they offend, (and this is evident from things present,) much more the unbelieving
and they who commit the unpardonable and incurable sins.

1 Corinthians 11:33
3. "Wherefore when you come together to eat, wait one for another."
Thus, while their fear was yet at its height and the terror of hell remained,
he chooses again to bring in also the exhortation in behalf of the poor, on
account of which he said all these things; implying that if they do not this they
must partake unworthily. But if the not imparting of our goods excludes from
that Table, much more the violently taking away. And he said not, "wherefore,
when you come together, impart to them that need," but, which has a more
reverential sound, "wait one for another." For this also prepared the way for and
intimated that, and in a becoming form introduced the exhortation. Then further
to shame them,

1 Corinthians 11:34
"And if any man is hungry, let him eat at home."
By permitting, he hinders it, and more strongly than by an absolute
prohibition. For he brings him out of the church and sends him to his house,
hereby severely reprimanding and ridiculing them, as slaves to the belly and
unable to contain themselves. For he said not, "if any despise the poor," but, "if
any hunger," discoursing as with impatient children; as with brute beasts which
are slaves to appetite. Since it would be indeed very ridiculous, if, because they
were hungry they were to eat at home.
Yet he was not content with this, but added also another more fearful thing,
saying, "that your coming together be not unto judgment:" that you come not
unto chastisement, unto punishment, insulting the Church, dishonoring your
brother. "For for this cause ye come together," says he, "that you may love one
another, that you may profit and be profited. But if the contrary happen, it were
better for you to feed yourselves at home."
This, however, he said, that he might attract them to him the more. Yea, this
was the very purpose both of his pointing out the injury that would arise from
hence, and of his saying that condemnation was no trifling one, and terrifying
them in every way, by the Mysteries, by the sick, by those that had died, by the
other things before mentioned.
Then also he alarms them again in another way, saying, "and the rest will I
set in order whenever I come:" with reference either to some other things, or to
this very matter. For since it was likely that they would yet have some reasons to
allege, and it was not possible to set all to rights by letter, "the things which I
have charged you, let them be observed for the present," says he; "but if you
have any thing else to mention, let it be kept for my coming;" speaking either of
this matter, as I said, or of some other things not very urgent. And this he does