anyone doubt that God can immediately reveal things to men without
the help of the angels, and the superior angels without the inferior.
From this standpoint some have said that according to the general
law the superior angels are not sent, but only the inferior; yet that
sometimes, by Divine dispensation, the superior angels also are
sent.
It may also be said that the Apostle wishes to prove that Christ is
greater than the angels who were chosen as the messengers of the
law; in order that He might show the excellence of the new over the
old law. Hence there is no need to apply this to any other angels
besides those who were sent to give the law.
Reply to Objection 2: According to Dionysius (Coel. Hier. xiii), the
angel who was sent to purify the prophet's lips was one of the
inferior order; but was called a "Seraph," that is, "kindling " in an
equivocal sense, because he came to "kindle" the lips of the
prophet. It may also be said that the superior angels communicate
their own proper gifts whereby they are denominated, through the
ministry of the inferior angels. Thus one of the Seraphim is
described as purifying by fire the prophet's lips, not as if he did so
immediately, but because an inferior angel did so by his power; as
the Pope is said to absolve a man when he gives absolution by
means of someone else.
Reply to Objection 3: The Divine Persons are not sent in ministry,
but are said to be sent in an equivocal sense, as appears from what
has been said (Question 43, Article 1).
Reply to Objection 4: A manifold grade exists in the Divine
ministries. Hence there is nothing to prevent angels though unequal
from being sent immediately in ministry, in such a manner however
that the superior are sent to the higher ministries, and the lower to
the inferior ministries.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether all the angels who are sent, assist?

Objection 1: It would seem that the angels who are sent also assist.
For Gregory says (Hom. xxxiv in Evang.): "So the angels are sent,
and assist; for, though the angelic spirit is limited, yet the supreme
Spirit, God, is not limited."
Objection 2: Further, the angel was sent to administer to Tobias. Yet
he said, "I am the angel Raphael, one of the seven who stand before
the Lord" (Tob. 12:15). Therefore the angels who are sent, assist.
Objection 3: Further, every holy angel is nearer to God than Satan is.
Yet Satan assisted God, according to Job 1:6: "When the sons of
God came to stand before the Lord, Satan also was present among
them." Therefore much more do the angels, who are sent to minister,
assist.
Objection 4: Further, if the inferior angels do not assist, the reason is
because they receive the Divine enlightenment, not immediately, but
through the superior angels. But every angel receives the Divine
enlightenment from a superior, except the one who is highest of all.
Therefore only the highest angel would assist; which is contrary to
the text of Dan. 7:10: "Ten thousand times a hundred thousand stood
before Him." Therefore the angels who are sent also assist.
On the contrary, Gregory says, on Job 25:3: "Is there any numbering
of His soldiers?" (Moral. xvii): "Those powers assist, who do not go
forth as messengers to men." Therefore those who are sent in
ministry do not assist.
I answer that, The angels are spoken of as "assisting" and
"administering," after the likeness of those who attend upon a king;
some of whom ever wait upon him, and hear his commands
immediately; while others there are to whom the royal commands are
conveyed by those who are in attendance---for instance, those who
are placed at the head of the administration of various cities; these
are said to administer, not to assist.
We must therefore observe that all the angels gaze upon the Divine
Essence immediately; in regard to which all, even those who
minister, are said to assist. Hence Gregory says (Moral. ii) that