Christ died"); and from the Father, for that neither to Him does it seem good that
one should perish; and from common custom, because the shepherd leaves them
that are safe, and seeks what is lost; and when he has found what had gone
astray, he is greatly delighted at the finding and the saving of this.
5. If then God thus rejoices over the little one that is found, how do you
despise them that are the objects of God's earnest care, when one ought to give
up even one's very life for one of these little ones? But is he weak and mean?
Therefore for this very cause most of all, one ought to do everything in order to
preserve him. For even He Himself left the ninety and nine sheep, and went after
this, and the safety of so many availed not to throw into the shade the loss of
one. But Luke says, that He even brought it on his shoulders, and that "There
was greater joy over one sinner that repents, than over ninety and nine just
persons." [Luke 15:7] And from His forsaking those that were saved for it, and
from His taking more pleasure in this one, He showed His earnestness about it to
be great.
Let us not then be careless about such souls as these. For all these things are
said for this object. For by threatening, that he who has not become a little child
should not so much as at all set foot in the Heavens, and speaking of "the
millstone," He has brought down the haughtiness of the boastful; for nothing is
so hostile to love as pride; and by saying, "It must needs be that offenses come,"
He made them to be wakeful; and by adding, "Woe unto him by whom the offense
comes," He has caused each to endeavor that it be not by him. And while by
commanding to cut off them that offend He made salvation easy; by enjoining
not to despise them, and not merely enjoining, but with earnestness (for "take
heed," says He, "that you despise not one of these little ones"), and by saying,
"Their angels behold the face of my Father," and, "For this end am I come," and
"my Father wills this," He has made those who should take care of them more
diligent.
Do you see what a wall He has set around them, and what earnest care He
takes of them that are contemptible and perishing, at once threatening incurable

ills to them that make them fall, and promising great blessings to them that wait
upon them, and take care of them, and bringing an example from Himself again
and from the Father?
Him let us also imitate, refusing none of the tasks that seem lowly and
troublesome for our brethren's sake; but though we have to do service, though he
be small, though he be mean for whom this is done, though the work be
laborious, though we must pass over mountains and precipices, let all things be
held endurable for the salvation of our brother. For a soul is an object of such
earnest care to God, that "He spared not His own Son." [Romans 8:32]
Wherefore I entreat, when morning has appeared, straightway as we come
out of our house, let us have this one object in view, this earnest care above all,
to rescue him that is in danger; I do not mean this danger only that is known by
sense, for this is not danger at all, but the danger of the soul, that which is
brought upon men by the devil.
For the merchant too, to increase his wealth, crosses the sea; and the artisan,
to add to his substance, does all things. Let us also then not be satisfied with our
own salvation only, since else we destroy even this. For in a war too, and in an
engagement, the soldier who is looking to this only how he may save himself by
flight, destroys the rest also with himself; much as on the other hand the nobleminded one, and he who stands in arms in defense of the others, with the others
preserves himself also. Since then our state too is a war, and of all wars the
bitterest, and an engagement and a battle, even as our King commanded us, so
let us set ourselves in array in the engagement, prepared for slaughter, and blood,
and murders, looking to salvation in behalf of all, and cheering them that stand,
and raising up them that are down. For indeed many of our brethren lie fallen in
this conflict, having wounds, wallowing in blood, and there is none to heal, not
any one of the people, not a priest, no one else, no one to stand by, no friend, no
brother, but we look every man to his own things.
By reason of this we maim our own interests also. For the greatest
confidence and means of approval is the not looking to our own things.