She cooperated, as the Second Vatican Council teaches, with a maternal love. Here we
perceive the real value of the words spoken by Jesus to his Mother at the hour of the
Cross: "Woman, behold your son" and to the disciple: "Behold your mother" (Jn. 19:26-
27). They are words which determine Mary's place in the life of Christ's disciples and
they express-as I have already said-the new motherhood of the Mother of the Redeemer:
a spiritual motherhood, born from the heart of the Paschal Mystery of the Redeemer of
the world. It is a motherhood in the order of grace, for it implores the gift of the Spirit,
who raises up the new children of God, redeems through the sacrifice of Christ that Spirit
whom Mary too, together with the Church, received on the day of Pentecost.

Her motherhood is particularly noted and experienced by the Christian people at the
Sacred Banquet-the liturgical celebration of the mystery of the Redemption-at which
Christ, his true body born of the Virgin Mary, becomes present.

The piety of the Christian people has always very rightly sensed a profound link between
devotion to the Blessed Virgin and worship of the Eucharist: this is a fact that can be seen
in the liturgy of both the West and the East, in the traditions of the Religious Families, in
the modern movements of spirituality, including those for youth, and in the pastoral
practice of the Marian Shrines. Mary guides the faithful to the Eucharist.

45. Of the essence of motherhood is the fact that it concerns the person. Motherhood
always establishes a unique and unrepeatable relationship between two people: between
mother and child and between child and mother. Even when the same woman is the
mother of many children, her personal relationship with each one of them is of the very
essence of motherhood. For each child is generated in a unique and unrepeatable way,
and this is true both for the mother and for the child. Each child is surrounded in the same
way by that maternal love on which are based the child's development and coming to
maturity as a human being.

It can be said that motherhood "in the order of grace" preserves the analogy with what "in
the order of nature" characterizes the union between mother and child. In the light of this
fact it becomes easier to understand why in Christ's testament on Golgotha his Mother's
new motherhood is expressed in the singular, in reference to one man: "Behold your son."

lt can also be said that these same words fully show the reason for the Marian dimension
of the life of Christ's disciples. This is true not only of John, who at that hour stood at the
foot of the Cross together with his Master's Mother, but it is also true of every disciple of

Christ, of every Christian. The Redeemer entrusts his mother to the disciple, and at the
same time he gives her to him as his mother. Mary's motherhood, which becomes man's
inheritance, is a gift: a gift which Christ himself makes personally to every individual.
The Redeemer entrusts Mary to John because he entrusts John to Mary. At the foot of the
Cross there begins that special entrusting of humanity to the Mother of Christ, which in
the history of the Church has been practiced and expressed in different ways. The same
Apostle and Evangelist, after reporting the words addressed by Jesus on the Cross to his
Mother and to himself, adds: "And from that hour the disciple took her to his own home"
(Jn. 19:27). This statement certainly means that the role of son was attributed to the
disciple and that he assumed responsibility for the Mother of his beloved Master. And
since Mary was given as a mother to him personally, the statement indicates, even though
indirectly, everything expressed by the intimate relationship of a child with its mother.
And all of this can be included in the word "entrusting." Such entrusting is the response
to a person's love, and in particular to the love of a mother.