enemy and an adversary, as was clearly proved by all which occurred both
before and after, dispatched certain bishops to him, Demetrius of Pesinus,
Eulysius of Apamea, Lupicinus of Appiaria, and the presbyters Germanus and
Severus, who replied with the moderation which became us, and said, that we
did not decline to be judged, but to appear before an open enemy, and manifest
adversary. For how could one who had not yet received any bills of indictment
against me, and had acted from the outset in the manner described, and severed
himself from the Church, from communion, and from prayer, and was training
accusers, and seducing the clergy, and desolating the Church, how, I say, could
he with justice mount the throne of the judge which was not in any sense
befitting him? For it is not suitable that one who belongs to Egypt should act as
judge of those who are in Thrace, and this a man who is himself under an
accusation, and an enemy and adversary. Nevertheless he, in no way abashed,
but hurrying on to the completion of his design, although we had declared our
readiness to clear ourselves of the charges in the presence of a hundred yea or a
thousand bishops, and to prove ourselves innocent as indeed we are, would not
consent: but in our absence, when we were appealing to a synod, and demanding
a trial, and not shrinking from a hearing of our cause, but only from open enmity,
he both received our accusers and absolved those who had been
excommunicated by me, and from them, who had not yet cleared themselves of
the offenses laid to their charge, he received complaints against me, and had
minutes made of the proceedings, all which things are contrary to law, and the
order of the canons. But what need is there of a long story? He did not cease
doing and contriving everything until, with all possible display of arbitrary
power and authority, he ejected us from the city and the church, when the
evening was far advanced and all the people were streaming after us. Being
drawn by the public informer through the midst of the city, and dragged along by
force I was taken down to the sea, and thrust on board ship, and made a night
voyage, because I appealed to a synod for a just hearing of my cause. Who could
hear these things without tears, even if he had a heart of stone?

But seeing, as I said before, that we ought not merely to lament the evils
which have been done, but also to amend them, I beseech your Charity to rouse
yourself and have compassion, and do everything so as to put a stop to the
mischief at this point. For even after what I have mentioned he did not desist
from his deeds of iniquity, but sought to renew the former attack. For when the
most devout Emperor had turned out those who shamelessly rushed into the
Church, and many of the Bishops present seeing their iniquity had retreated into
their own dioceses, flying from the incursion of these men as from a fire
devouring all things, we were again invited to the city, and to the Church, from
which we had been unjustly expelled, more than thirty bishops introducing us,
and our most pious Emperor sending a notary for this purpose, while Theophilus
immediately took to flight. For what purpose, and from what cause? When we
entered the city we besought our most pious Emperor to convene a synod for
prosecuting the offenders in the late transactions. Being conscious therefore of
what he had done, and dreading conviction, the imperial letters having been sent
in every direction, convoking all men from all quarters, Theophilus secretly at
midnight flung himself into a boat, and so made his escape, taking all his
company with him.
3. But even then we did not desist, supported as we were by a clear
conscience, from making the same supplication again to the most devout
Emperor: and he, acting as became his piety, sent to Theophilus again,
summoning him from Egypt, and his associates, in order to give an account of
the late proceedings, and informing him that he was not to suppose that the onesided deeds which he had so unjustly perpetrated in our absence, and in violation
of so many canons, would suffice for his defence. He did not however submit to
the royal mandate, but remained at home, alleging an insurrection of the people
in excuse, and the unseasonable zeal of certain persons who were attached to
him, as he pretended: and yet before the arrival of the imperial letters this same
people had deluged him with abuse. But we do not make much of these matters
now, but have said what we have said as wishing to prove the fact that he was