influenced by those who do well, but one of bad principles by those who do not
do well; the one by the consideration of honor, the other of punishment.
Wherefore also writing to the Hebrews, he said, bringing forward the example of
Esau, "Who for one mess of meat sold his own birthright" [Hebrews 12:16]; and
again, "if he shrink back, my soul has no pleasure in him." [Hebrews 10:38] And
among the Corinthians were many who had been guilty of fornication. Therefore
he said, "Lest when I come again my God should humble me before you, and I
should mourn for many that have sinned heretofore, and repented not of the
uncleanness, and fornication, and lasciviousness which they committed. [2
Corinthians 12:21] That you may be blameless," says he, "and harmless"; i.e.
irreproachable, unsullied; for murmuring occasions no slight stain. And what
means "without disputing"? Is it good, or not good? Do not dispute, he says,
though it be trouble, or labor, or any thing else whatever. He did not say, "that
you be not punished," for punishment is reserved for the thing; and this he made
evident in the Epistle to the Corinthians; but here he said nothing of the sort; but
he says, "That you may be blameless and harmless, children of God without
blemish, in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation, among whom you
are seen as lights in the world, holding forth the word of life, that I may have
whereof to glory in the day of Christ." Observest thou that he is instructing these
not to murmur? So that murmuring is left for unprincipled and graceless slaves.
For tell me, what manner of son is that, who murmurs at the very time that he is
employed in the affairs of his father, and is working for his own benefit?
Consider, he says, that you are laboring for yourself, that it is for yourself that
you are laying up; it is for those to murmur, when others profit by their labors,
others reap the fruit, while they bear the burden; but he that is gathering for
himself, why should he murmur? Because his wealth does not increase? But it is
not so. Why does he murmur who acts of free-will, and not by constraint? It is
better to do nothing than to do it with murmuring, for even the very thing itself is
spoilt. And do you not remark that in our own families we are continually saying
this; "it were better for these things never to be done, than to have them done

with murmuring"? And we had often rather be deprived of the services some one
owes us, than submit to the inconvenience of his murmuring. For murmuring is
intolerable, most intolerable; it borders upon blasphemy. Otherwise why had
those men to pay a penalty so severe? It is a proof of ingratitude; the murmurer
is ungrateful to God, but whoso is ungrateful to God does thereby become a
blasphemer. Now there were at that time, if ever, uninterrupted troubles, and
dangers without cessation: there was no pause, no remission: innumerable were
the horrors, which pressed upon them from all quarters; but now we have
profound peace, a perfect calm.
Wherefore then murmur? Because you are poor? Yet think of Job. Or
because sickness is your lot? What then if, with the consciousness of as many
excellencies and as high attainments as that holy man, you had been so afflicted?
Again reflect on him, how that for a long time he never ceased to breed worms,
sitting upon a dunghill and scraping his sores; for the account says that "(after a
long time had passed,) then said his wife unto him, How long will you persist,
saying, Yet a little while I bide in expectation? Speak some word against the
Lord, and die." [Job 2:9, Septuagint] But your child is dead? What then if you
had lost all your children, and that by an evil fate, as he did? For you know, you
know well, that it is no slight alleviation to take our place beside the sick man, to
close the mouth, to shut the eyes, to stroke the beard, to hear the last accents; but
that just man was vouchsafed none of these consolations, they all being
overwhelmed at once. And what do I say? Had you, your own self, been bidden
to slay and offer up your own son, and to see the body consumed, like that
blessed Patriarch, what then would you have felt while erecting the altar, laying
on the wood, binding the child? But there are some who revile you? What then
would be your feelings did your friends, come to administer consolation to you,
speak like Job's? For, as it is, innumerable are our sins, and we deserve to be
reproached; but in that case he who was true, just, godly, who kept himself from
every evil deed, heard the contrary of those laid to his charge by his friends.
What then, tell me, if you had heard your wife exclaiming in accents of