invest iniquity with a good repute, whereby it becomes hard to blot out. For I
have often heard men taking credit to themselves at their not going near those
who are averse to them. And yet your Master found a glory in this. How often do
not men despise ([διέπτυσαν]) Him? How often show aversion to Him? Yet He
ceases not to run unto them. Say not then that "I cannot bear to come near those
that hate me," but say, that "I cannot bear to despise ([διαπτύσαι]) those that
despise me." This is the language of Christ's disciple, as the other is of the
devil's. This makes men honorable and glorious, as the other does shameful and
ridiculous. It is on this ground we feel admiration for Moses, because even when
God said, "Let Me alone, that I may destroy them in Mine anger," [Exodus
32:10] he could not bear to despise those who had so often shown aversion to
him, but said, "If you will forgive them their trespass, forgive it; else blot out me
also." [Exodus 32:32] This was owing to his being a friend of God, and a copyer
of Him. And let us not pride ourselves in things for which we ought to hide our
faces. Nor let us use the language of these lewd fellows, that are the scum of
men, I know how to scorn ([καταπτύσαι], spit at) thousands. But even if another
use it, let us laugh him down, and stop his mouth for taking a delight in what he
ought to feel ashamed of. What say you, pray, do you scorn a man that believes,
whom when unbelieving Christ scorned not? Why do I say scorned not? Why He
had such love towards him, when he was vile and unsightly, as even to die for
him. He then so loved, and that such a person, and do you now, when he has
been made fair and admirable, scorn him; now he is made a member of Christ,
and has been made your Master's body? Do you not consider what you are
uttering, nor perceive what you are venturing to do? He has Christ as a Head,
and a Table, and a Garment, and Life, and Light, and a Bridegroom, and He is
everything to him, and do you dare to say, "this fellow I despise?" and not this
only, but thousands of others along with him? Stay you, O man, and cease from
your madness; get to know your brother. Learn that these be words of
unreasonableness, and frenzy, and say on the contrary, though he despise me ten
thousand times, yet will I never stand aloof from him. In this way you will both

gain your brother, and wilt live to the glory of God, and wilt share the good
things to come. To which God grant that we may all attain, by the grace and love
toward man, etc.

## Homily 28 on Romans

Rom. XV. 8
"Now I say that Jesus Christ was a minister of the circumcision for the truth
of God, to confirm the promises made unto the fathers."
Again, he is speaking of Christ's concern for us, still holding to the same
topic, and showing what great things He has done for us, and how "He pleased
not Himself." [Romans 15:3] And besides this, there is another point which he
makes good, that those of the Gentiles are debtors to a larger amount unto God.
And if to a larger amount, then they ought to bear with the weak among the
Jews. For since he had spoken very sharply to such, lest this should make these
elated, he humbles their unreasonableness, by showing that it was by "promise
made to the fathers" that they had the good things given them, while they of the
Gentiles had them out of pity and love toward man only. And this is the reason
of his saying, "And that the Gentiles might glorify God for his mercy." But that
what is said may be made plainer, it is well to listen once more to the words
themselves, that you may see what Christ's having been made "a Minister of the
circumcision for the truth of God, to confirm the promises made unto the
fathers," means. What then is that which is stated? There had been a promise
made to Abraham, saying, "Unto you will I give the earth, and to your seed, and
in your seed shall all the nations be blessed." [Genesis 12:7; 22:18] But after
this, they of the seed of Abraham all became subject to punishment. For the Law
wrought wrath unto them by being transgressed, and thenceforward deprived
them of that promise made unto the fathers. Therefore the Son came and
wrought with the Father, in order that those promises might come true, and have
their issue. For having fulfilled the whole Law in which He also fulfilled the
circumcision, and having by it, and by the Cross, freed them from the curse of
the transgression, He suffered not this promise to fall to the ground. When then