universality, the privation of being has its foundation in being; which
is not the case in privations of special forms, as of sight, or of
whiteness and the like. And what applies to being applies also to one
and to good, which are convertible with being, for the privation of
good is founded in some good; likewise the removal of unity is
founded in some one thing. Hence it happens that multitude is some
one thing; and evil is some good thing, and non-being is some kind
of being. Nevertheless, opposite is not predicated of opposite;
forasmuch as one is absolute, and the other is relative; for what is
relative being (as a potentiality) is non-being absolutely, i.e. actually;
or what is absolute being in the genus of substance is non-being
relatively as regards some accidental being. In the same way, what is
relatively good is absolutely bad, or vice versa; likewise what is
absolutely "one" is relatively "many," and vice versa.
Reply to Objection 2: A "whole" is twofold. In one sense it is
homogeneous, composed of like parts; in another sense it is
heterogeneous, composed of dissimilar parts. Now in every
homogeneous whole, the whole is made up of parts having the form
of the whole; as, for instance, every part of water is water; and such
is the constitution of a continuous thing made up of its parts. In
every heterogeneous whole, however, every part is wanting in the
form belonging to the whole; as, for instance, no part of a house is a
house, nor is any part of a man a man. Now multitude is such a kind
of a whole. Therefore inasmuch as its part has not the form of the
multitude, the latter is composed of unities, as a house is composed
of not houses; not, indeed, as if unities constituted multitude so far
as they are undivided, in which way they are opposed to multitude;
but so far as they have being, as also the parts of a house make up
the house by the fact that they are beings, not by the fact that they
are not houses.
Reply to Objection 3: "Many" is taken in two ways: absolutely, and in
that sense it is opposed to "one"; in another way as importing some
kind of excess, in which sense it is opposed to "few"; hence in the
first sense two are many but not in the second sense.
Reply to Objection 4: "One" is opposed to "many" privatively,
inasmuch as the idea of "many" involves division. Hence division
must be prior to unity, not absolutely in itself, but according to our
way of apprehension. For we apprehend simple things by compound
things; and hence we define a point to be, "what has no part," or "the
beginning of a line." "Multitude" also, in idea, follows on "one";

because we do not understand divided things to convey the idea of
multitude except by the fact that we attribute unity to every part.
Hence "one" is placed in the definition of "multitude"; but
"multitude" is not placed in the definition of "one." But division
comes to be understood from the very negation of being: so what
first comes to mind is being; secondly, that this being is not that
being, and thus we apprehend division as a consequence; thirdly,
comes the notion of one; fourthly, the notion of multitude.