we see in many instances the wicked suffering vengeance, and punishments,
which things are figures of Hell.
For lest we should slumber and be slothful, and forget His word, He
awakens our minds by deeds; showing us, even here, courts of justice, judgment
seats, and trials. Is there then among men so great a regard for justice, and does
God, whose ordinance even these things are, make no account of it? Is this
credible? In a house, in a market-place, there is a court of justice. The master
daily sits in judgment upon his slaves, calls them to account for their offenses,
punishes some and pardons others. In the country, the husbandman and his wife
are daily at law. In a ship, the master is judge, and in a camp the general over his
soldiers, and everywhere one may see judicial proceedings. In trades, the master
judges the learner. In short all, publicly and privately, are judges to one another.
In nothing is the consideration of justice overlooked, and all in every place give
account of their actions. And is the inquisition for justice here thus spread
through cities, through houses, and among individuals; and is there no regard for
what is justice there, where "the right hand of God is full of righteousness"
[Psalm 48:10], and "His righteousness is as the mountains of God"? [Psalm
36:6]
How is it then that God, "the righteous Judge, strong and patient" [Psalm
7:11, Septuagint], bears thus with men, and does not exact punishment? Here
you have the cause, He is longsuffering, and thereby would lead you to
repentance. But if you continue in sin, thou "after your hardness and impenitent
heart treasurest up unto yourself wrath." [Romans 2:5] If then He is just, He
repays according to desert, and does not overlook those who suffer wrongfully,
but avenges them. For this is the part of one who is just. If He is powerful, He
requites after death, and at the Resurrection: for this belongs to him who is
powerful. And if because He is longsuffering He bears with men, let us not be
disturbed, nor ask, why He does not prosecute vengeance here? For if this were
done, the whole human race before this would have been swept away, if every
day He should call us to account for our transgressions, since there is not, there

is not indeed, a single day pure from sin, but in something greater or less we
offend; so that we should not one of us have arrived at our twentieth year, but for
His great long-suffering, and His goodness, that grants us a longer space for
repentance, that we may put off our past transgressions.
Let each therefore, with an upright conscience, entering into a review of
what he has done, and bringing his whole life before him, consider, whether he is
not deserving of chastisements and punishments without number? And when he
is indignant that some one, who has been guilty of many bad actions, escapes
with impunity; let him consider his own faults, and his indignation will cease.
For those crimes appear great, because they are in great and notorious matters;
but if he will enquire into his own, he will perhaps find them more numerous.
For to rob and to defraud is the same thing, whether it be done for gold or silver;
since both proceed from the same mind. He that will steal a little would not
refuse to steal much, if it fell in his way; and that it does not, is not his own
choice, but an accidental circumstance. A poor man, who robs a poorer, would
not hesitate to rob the rich if he could. His forbearance arises from weakness,
and not from choice. Such an one, you say, is a ruler; and takes away the
property of those who are under his rule. And say, dost not thou steal? For tell
me not that he steals talents, and you as many pence. In giving alms, some cast
in gold, while the widow threw in two mites, yet she contributed not less than
they. Wherefore? Because the intention is considered, and not the amount of the
gift. And then, in the case of alms, you will have God judge thus, and wouldest,
because of your poverty, receive no less a reward for giving two mites than he
who lays down many talents of gold? And is not the same rule applicable to
wrongful dealings? How is this consistent? As she who contributed two mites
was considered equal to the greatest givers, because of her good intention, so
thou, who stealest two mites, art as culpable as those mightier robbers. Nay, if I
may give utterance to something strange, you are a worse robber than they. For a
man would be equally an adulterer, whether he committed the sin with the wife
of a king, or of a poor man, or of a slave: since the offense is not judged by the