say that man cannot be subject to God, but, wicked doing cannot be good. As if
he had said, fornication cannot be chastity, nor vice virtue. And this it says in the
Gospel also, "A corrupt tree cannot bring forth good fruit" [Matthew 7:18], not
to bar the change from virtue to vice, but to say how incapable continuance in
vice is of bringing forth good fruits. For He does not say that an evil tree cannot
become a good one, but that bring forth good fruit it cannot, while it continues
evil. For that it can be changed, He shows from this passage, and from another
parable, when He introduces the tares as becoming wheat, on which score also
He forbids their being rooted up; "Lest," He says, "ye root up also the wheat with
them" [Matthew 13:29]; that is, that which will spring ([γίνεσθαι], 4 manuscripts
[τίκτεσθαι]) from them. It is vice then he means by carnal mindedness, and by
spiritual mindedness the grace given, and the working of it discernible in the
right determination of mind, not discussing in any part of this passage, a
substance and an entity, but virtue and vice. For that which you had no power to
do under the Law, now, he means, you will be able to do, to go on uprightly, and
with no intervening fall, if you lay hold of the Spirit's aid. For it is not enough
not to walk after the flesh, but we must also go after the Spirit, since turning
away from what is evil will not secure our salvation, but we must also do what is
good. And this will come about, if we give our souls up to the Spirit, and
persuade our flesh to get acquainted with its proper position, for in this way we
shall make it also spiritual; as also if we be listless we shall make our soul
carnal. For since it was no natural necessity which put the gift into us, but the
freedom of choice placed it in our hands, it rests with you henceforward whether
this shall be or the other. For He, on His part, has performed everything. For sin
no longer wars against the law of our mind, neither does it lead us away captive
as heretofore, for all that state has been ended and broken up, and the affections
cower in fear and trembling at the grace of the Spirit. But if you will quench the
light, and cast out the holder of the reins, and chase the helmsman away, then
charge the tossing thenceforth upon yourself. For since virtue has been now
made an easier thing (for which cause also we are under far stricter obligations

of religious living), consider how men's condition lay when the Law prevailed,
and how at present, since grace has shone forth. The things which aforetime
seemed not possible to any one, virginity, and contempt of death, and of other
stronger sufferings, are now in full vigor through every part of the world, and it
is not with us alone, but with the Scythians, and Thracians, and Indians, and
Persians, and several other barbarous nations, that there are companies of
virgins, and clans of martyrs, and congregations of monks, and these now grown
even more numerous than the married, and strictness of fasting, and the utmost
renunciation of property. Now these are things which, with one or two
exceptions, persons who lived under the Law never conceived even in a dream.
Since you see then the real state of things voiced with a shriller note than any
trumpet, let not yourself grow soft and treacherous to so great a grace. Since not
even after the faith is it possible for a listless man to be saved! For the wrestlings
are made easy that you may strive and conquer, nor that you should sleep, or
abuse the greatness of the grace by making it a reason for listlessness, so
wallowing again in the former mire. And so he goes on to say,
Ver. 8. "So then they that are in the flesh cannot please God."
What then? Are we, it will be said, to cut our bodies in pieces to please
God, and to make our escape from the flesh? And would you have us be
homicides, and so lead us to virtue? You see what inconsistencies are gendered
by taking the words literally. For by "the flesh" in this passage, he does not mean
the body, or the essence of the body, but that life which is fleshly and worldly,
and uses self-indulgence and extravagance to the full, so making the entire man
flesh. For as they that have the wings of the Spirit, make the body also spiritual,
so do they who bound off from this, and are the slaves of the belly, and of
pleasure, make the soul also flesh, not that they change the essence of it, but that
they mar its noble birth. And this mode of speaking is to be met with in many
parts of the Old Testament also, to signify by flesh the gross and earthly life,
which is entangled in pleasures that are not convenient. For to Noah He says,
"My Spirit shall not always make its abode in these men, because they are flesh."