a clean heart, O God" [Psalm 51:10], and one may often see that it [the soul] is
called spirit.
"And upholding all things by the word of His power." Tell me, "God said"
(it is written), "Let there be light" [Genesis 1:3]: "the Father, says one,
commanded, and the Son obeyed"? But behold here He also [the Son] acts by
word. For (says he), "And upholding all things"— that is, governing; He holds
together what would fall to pieces; For, to hold the world together, is no less than
to make it, but even greater (if one must say a strange thing). For the one is to
bring forward something out of things which are not: but the other, when things
which have been made are about to fill back into non-existence, to hold and
fasten them together, utterly at variance as they are with each other: this is
indeed great and wonderful, and a certain proof of exceeding power.
Then showing the easiness, he said, "upholding": (he did not say,
governing, from the figure of those who simply with their finger move anything,
and cause it to go round.) Here he shows both the mass of the creation to be
great, and that this greatness is nothing to Him. Then again he shows the
freedom from the labor, saying, "By the word of His power." Well said he, "By
the word." For since, with us, a word is accounted to be a bare thing, he shows
that it is not bare with God. But, how "He upholds by the word," he has not
further added: for neither is it possible to know. Then he added concerning His
majesty: for thus John also did: having said that "He is God" [John 1:1], he
brought in the handiwork of the Creation. For the same thing which the one
indirectly expressed, saying, "In the beginning was the Word," and "All things
were made by Him" [John 1:3], this did the other also openly declare by "the
Word," and by saying "by whom also He made the worlds." For thus he shows
Him to be both a Creator, and before all ages. What then? When the prophet
says, concerning the Father, "You are from everlasting and to everlasting"
[Psalm 90:2], and concerning the Son, that He is before all ages, and the maker
of all things— what can they say? Nay rather, when the very thing which was
spoken of the Father—"He which was before the worlds,"— this one may see

spoken of the Son also? And that which one says, "He was life" [John 1:4],
pointing out the preservation of the creation, that Himself is the Life of all things
—so also says this other, "and upholding all things by the word of His power":
not as the Greeks who defraud Him, as much as in them lies, both of Creation
itself, and of Providence, shutting up His power, to reach only as far as to the
Moon.
"By Himself" (says he) "having purged our sins." Having spoken
concerning those marvelous and great matters, which are most above us, he
proceeds to speak also afterwards concerning His care for men. For indeed the
former expression, "and upholding all things," also was universal: nevertheless
this is far greater, for it also is universal: for, for His part, "all" men believed. As
John also, having said, "He was life," and so pointed out His providence, says
again, and "He was light."
"By Himself," says he, "having purged our sins, He sat down on the right
hand of the Majesty on high." He here sets down two very great proofs of His
care: first the "purifying us from our sins," then the doing it "by Himself." And in
many places, you see him making very much of this—not only of our
reconciliation with God, but also of this being accomplished through the Son.
For the gift being truly great, was made even greater by the fact that it was
through the Son.
For in saying, "He sat on the right hand," and, "having by Himself purged
our sins,"— though he had put us in mind of the Cross, he quickly added the
mention of the resurrection and ascension. And see his unspeakable wisdom: he
said not, "He was commanded to sit down," but "He sat down." Then again, lest
you should think that He stands, he subjoins, "For to which of the angels said He
at any time, Sit on My right hand."
"He sat" (says he) "on the right hand of the Majesty on high." What is this
"on high"? Does he enclose God in place? Away with such a thought! But just
as, when he says, "on the right hand," he did not describe Him as having figure,
but showed His equal dignity with the Father; so, in saying "on high," he did not