John 4:20
"Our fathers worshipped in this mountain," (meaning Abraham and his family,
for there they say that he led up his son,) "and how say ye that in Jerusalem is
the place where men ought to worship?"
3. Do you see how much more elevated in mind she has become? She who
was anxious that she might not be troubled for thirst, now questions concerning
doctrines. What then does Christ? He does not resolve the question, (for to
answer simply to men's words was not His care, for it was needless, ) but leads
the woman on to the greater height, and does not converse with her on these
matters, until she has confessed that He was a Prophet, so that afterwards she
might hear His Word with abundant belief; for having been persuaded of this,
she could no longer doubt concerning what should be said to her.
Let us now after this be ashamed, and blush. A woman who had had five
husbands, and who was of Samaria, was so eager concerning doctrines, that
neither the time of day, nor her having come for another purpose, nor anything
else, led her away from enquiring on such matters; but we not only do not
enquire concerning doctrines, but towards them all our dispositions are careless
and indifferent. Therefore everything is neglected. For which of you when in his
house takes some Christian book in hand and goes over its contents, and
searches the Scriptures? None can say that he does so, but with most we shall
find draughts and dice, but books nowhere, except among a few. And even these
few have the same dispositions as the many; for they tie up their books, and keep
them always put away in cases, and all their care is for the fineness of the
parchments, and the beauty of the letters, not for reading them. For they have not
bought them to obtain advantage and benefit from them, but take pains about
such matters to show their wealth and pride. Such is the excess of vainglory. I do
not hear any one glory that he knows the contents, but that he has a book written
in letters of gold. And what gain, tell me, is this? The Scriptures were not given

us for this only, that we might have them in books, but that we might engrave
them on our hearts. For this kind of possession, the keeping the commandments
merely in letter, belongs to Jewish ambition; but to us the Law was not so given
at all, but in the fleshy tables of our hearts. And this I say, not to prevent you
from procuring Bibles, on the contrary, I exhort and earnestly pray that you do
this, but I desire that from those books you convey the letters and sense into your
understanding, that so it may be purified when it receives the meaning of the
writing. For if the devil will not dare to approach a house where a Gospel is
lying, much less will any evil spirit, or any sinful nature, ever touch or enter a
soul which bears about with it such sentiments as it contains. Sanctify then your
soul, sanctify your body, by having these ever in your heart, and on your tongue.
For if foul speech defiles and invites devils, it is clear that spiritual reading
sanctifies and draws down the grace of the Spirit. The Scriptures are divine
charms, let us then apply to ourselves and to the passions of our souls the
remedies to be derived from them. For if we understand what it is that is read,
we shall hear it with much readiness. I am always saying this, and will not cease
to say it. Is it not strange that those who sit by the market can tell the names, and
families, and cities of charioteers, and dancers, and the kinds of power possessed
by each, and can give exact account of the good or bad qualities of the very
horses, but that those who come hither should know nothing of what is done
here, but should be ignorant of the number even of the sacred Books? If you
pursue those worldly things for pleasure, I will show you that here is greater
pleasure. Which is sweeter, tell me, which more marvelous, to see a man
wrestling with a man, or a man buffering with a devil, a body closing with an
incorporeal power, and him who is of your race victorious? These wrestlings let
us look on, these, which also it is seemly and profitable to imitate, and which
imitating, we may be crowned; but not those in which emulation brings shame to
him who imitates them. If you behold the one kind of contest, you behold it with
devils; the other, with Angels and Archangels, and the Lord of Archangels. Say
now, if you were allowed to sit with governors and kings, and to see and enjoy