and assuredly, in working, He remains within Himself; for He Himself is
not changed and turned into any of the things which He works. And see
what it is that He works: "But the manifestation of the Spirit," he says, "is
given to every man to profit withal. For to one is given by the Spirit the
word of wisdom; to another the word of knowledge by the same Spirit; to
another faith by the same Spirit; to another the gifts of healing by the
same Spirit; to another the working of miracles; to another prophecy; to
another the discerning of spirits; to another divers kinds of tongues; to
another the interpretation of tongues: but all these worketh that one and
the self-same Spirit, dividing to every man severally as He will;" certainly
as God—for who can work such great things but God?—but "it is the same
God which worketh all in all." For if we are asked point by point
concerning the Holy Spirit, we answer most truly that He is God; and
with the Father and the Son together He is one God. Therefore, God is
spoken of as one Beginning in respect to the creature, not as two or three
beginnings.

### CHAP. 14.—THE FATHER AND THE SON THE ONLY BEGINNING (PRINCIPIUM) OF THE HOLY SPIRIT.

15. But in their mutual relation to one another in the Trinity itself, if the
begetter is a beginning in relation to that which he begets, the Father is a
beginning in relation to the Son, because the begets Him; but whether the
Father is also a beginning in relation to the Holy Spirit, since it is said,
"He proceeds from the Father," is no small question. Because, if it is so,
He will not only be a beginning to that thing which He begets or makes,
but also to that which He gives. And here, too, that question comes to
light, as it can, which is wont to trouble many, Why the Holy Spirit is not
also a son, since He, too, comes forth from the Father, as it is read in the
Gospel. For the Spirit came forth, not as born, but as given; and so He is
not called a son, because He was neither born, as the Only-begotten, nor
made, so that by the grace of God He might be born into adoption, as we
are. For that which is born of the Father, is referred to the Father only
when called Son, and so the Son is the Son of the Father, and not also our
Son; but that which is given is referred both to Him who gave, and to
those to whom He gave; and so the Holy Spirit is not only the Spirit of the
Father and of the Son who gave Him, but He is also called ours, who have

received Him: as "The salvation of the Lord," who gives salvation, is said
also to be our salvation, who have received it. Therefore, the Spirit is both
the Spirit of God who gave Him, and ours who have received Him. Not,
indeed, that spirit of ours by which we are, because that is the spirit of a
man which is in him; but this Spirit is ours in another mode, viz. that in
which we also say, "Give us this day our bread." Although certainly we
have received that spirit also, which is called the spirit of a man. "For
what hast thou," he says, "which thou didst not receive?" But that is one
thing, which we have received that we might be; another, that which we
have received that we might be holy. Whence it is also written of John,
that he "came in the spirit and power of Elias;" and by the spirit of Elias is
meant the Holy Spirit, whom Elias received. And the same thing is to be
understood of Moses, when the Lord says to him, "And I will take of thy
spirit, and will put it upon them;" that is, I will give to them of the Holy
Spirit, which I have already given to thee. If, therefore, that also which is
given has him for a beginning by whom it is given, since it has received
from no other source that which proceeds from him; it must be admitted
that the Father and the Son are a Beginning of the Holy Spirit, not two
Beginnings; but as the Father and Son are one God, and one Creator, and
one Lord relatively to the creature, so are they one Beginning relatively to
the Holy Spirit. But the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit is one
Beginning in respect to the creature, as also one Creator and one God.