THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.60, C.9.

the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, and of the Blessed
Virgin Mary," the baptism would be void; because it is written (1 Cor.
1:13): "Was Paul crucified for you or were you baptized in the name
of Paul?" But this is true if the intention be to baptize in the name of
the Blessed Virgin as in the name of the Trinity, by which baptism is
consecrated: for such a sense would be contrary to faith, and would
therefore render the sacrament invalid: whereas if the addition, "and
in the name of the Blessed Virgin" be understood, not as if the name
of the Blessed Virgin effected anything in baptism, but as intimating
that her intercession may help the person baptized to preserve the
baptismal grace, then the sacrament is not rendered void.
Reply to Objection 1: It is not lawful to add anything to the words of
Holy Scripture as regards the sense; but many words are added by
Doctors by way of explanation of the Holy Scriptures. Nevertheless,
it is not lawful to add even words to Holy Scripture as though such
words were a part thereof, for this would amount to forgery. It would
amount to the same if anyone were to pretend that something is
essential to a sacramental form, which is not so.
Reply to Objection 2: Words belong to a sacramental form by reason
of the sense signified by them. Consequently any addition or
suppression of words which does not add to or take from the
essential sense, does not destroy the essence of the sacrament.
Reply to Objection 3: If the words are interrupted to such an extent
that the intention of the speaker is interrupted, the sacramental
sense is destroyed, and consequently, the validity of the sacrament.
But this is not the case if the interruption of the speaker is so slight,
that his intention and the sense of the words is not interrupted.
The same is to be said of a change in the order of the words.
Because if this destroys the sense of the words, the sacrament is
invalidated: as happens when a negation is made to precede or
follow a word. But if the order is so changed that the sense of the
words does not vary, the sacrament is not invalidated, according to
the Philosopher's dictum: "Nouns and verbs mean the same though
they be transposed" (Peri Herm. x).

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.60, C.9.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.61, C.1.

## QUESTION 61 — OF THE NECESSITY OF THE SACRAMENTS

Prologue
We must now consider the necessity of the sacraments; concerning
which there are four points of inquiry:
(1) Whether sacraments are necessary for man's salvation?
(2) Whether they were necessary in the state that preceded sin?
(3) Whether they were necessary in the state after sin and before
Christ?
(4) Whether they were necessary after Christ's coming?

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.61, C.2.