Homily on First Corinthians
(Argument)
As Corinth is now the first city of Greece, so of old it prided itself on many
temporal advantages, and more than all the rest, on excess of wealth. And on this
account one of the heathen writers entitled the place 'the rich.' For it lies on the
isthmus of the Peloponnesus, and had great facilities for traffic. The city was
also full of numerous orators, and philosophers, and one.' I think, of the seven
called wise men, was of this city. Now these things we have mentioned, not for
ostentation's sake, nor to make, a display of great learning: (for indeed what is
there in knowing these things?) but they are of use to us in the argument of the
Epistle.
Paul also himself suffered many things in this city; and Christ, too, in this
city appears to him and says, (Act. xviii. 10), 'Be not silent, but speak; for I have
much people in this city:' and he remained there two years. In this city [Acts xix.
16. Corinth put here, by lapse of memory, for Ephesus]. also the devil went out,
whom the Jews endeavoring to exorcise, suffered so grievously. In this city did
those of the magicians, who repented, collect together their books and burn
them, and there appeared to be fifty thousand. (Acts xix. 18. arguriou omitted.)
In this city also, in the time of Gallio the Proconsul, Paul was beaten before the
judgment seat.
The devil, therefore, seeing that a great and populous city had laid hold of
the truth, a city admired for wealth and wisdom, and the head of Greece; (for
Athens and Lacedaemon were then and since in a miserable state, the dominion
having long ago fallen away from them;) and seeing that with great readiness
they had received the word of God; what does he do? He divides the men. For he
knew that even the strongest kingdom of all, divided against itself, shall not
stand. He had a vantage ground too, for this device in the wealth, the wisdom of

the inhabitants. Hence certain men, having made parties of their own, and having
become self-elected made themselves leaders of the people, and some sided with
these, and some with those; with one sort, as being rich; with another, as wise
and able to teach something out of the common. Who on their part, receiving
them, set themselves up forsooth to teach more than the Apostle did: at which he
was hinting, when he said, 'I was not able to speak unto you as unto spiritual'
(ch. iii. 1.); evidently not his inability, but their infirmity, was the cause of their
not having been abundantly instructed. And this, (ch. iv. 8.) 'You have become
rich without us,' is the remark of one pointing that way. And this was no small
matter, but of all things most pernicious; that the Church should be torn asunder.
And another sin, too, besides these, was openly committed there: namely, a
person who had had intercourse with his step-mother not only escaped rebuke,
but was even a leader of the multitude, and gave occasion to his followers to be
conceited. Wherefore he says, (ch. 5. 2.) 'And you are puffed up, and have not
rather mourned.' And after this again, certain of those who as they pretended
were of the more perfect sort, and who for gluttony's sake used to eat of things
offered unto idols, and sit at meat in the temples, Were bringing all to ruin.
Others again, having contentions and strifes about money, committed unto the
heathen courts (tois exwqen sicadthriois) all matters of that kind. Many persons
also wearing long hair used to go about among them; whom he orders to be
shorn. There was another fault besides, no trifling one; their eating in the
churches apart by themselves, and giving no share to the needy.
And again, they were erring in another point, being puffed up with the gifts;
and hence jealous of one another; which was also the chief cause of the
distraction of the Church. The doctrine of the Resurrection, too, was lame
(ekwleue) among them: for some of them had no strong belief that there is any
resurrection of bodies, having still on them the disease of Grecian foolishness.
For indeed all these things were the progeny of the madness which belongs to
Heathen Philosophy, and she was the mother of all mischief. Hence, likewise,
they had become divided; in this respect also having learned of the philosophers.