there be no fornication. We should not say, Let there be no belly, but let there be
no gluttony; for the belly makes not the gluttony, but our negligence. We should
not say, that it is because of eating and drinking that all these evils exist; for it is
not because of this, but because of our carelessness and insatiableness. Thus the
devil neither ate nor drank, and yet he fell! Paul ate and drank, and ascended up
to heaven! How many do I hear say, Let there be no poverty! Therefore let us
stop the mouths of those who murmur at such things. For it is blasphemy to utter
such complaints. To such then, let us say, Let there be no meanness of spirit. For
poverty brings innumerable good things into our state of life, and without
poverty riches would be unprofitable. Hence we should accuse neither the one
nor the other of these; for poverty and riches are both alike weapons which will
tend to virtue, if we are willing. As then the courageous soldier, whichever
weapon he takes, displays his own virtue, so the unmanly and cowardly one is
encumbered by either. And that you may learn that this is true, remember, I pray,
the case of Job; who became both rich, and likewise poor, and handled both
these weapons alike, and conquered in both. When he was rich, he said, "My
door was open to every comer." [Job 31:32] But when he had become poor, "The
Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away. As it seemed good unto the Lord, so has
it come to pass." When he was rich, he showed much hospitality; when he was
poor, much patience. And thou, then—are you rich? Display much
bountifulness! Have you become poor? Show much endurance and patience! For
neither is wealth an evil, nor poverty in itself; but these things, either of them,
become so according to the free choice of those who make use of them. Let us
school ourselves then to entertain no such opinions on these subjects; nor let us
accuse the works of God, but the wicked choice of men. Riches are not able to
profit the little-minded: nor is poverty able ever to injure the magnanimous.
11. Let us then discern the snares, and walk far off from them! Let us
discern the precipices, and not even approach them! This will be the foundation
of our greatest safety not only to avoid things sinful, but those things which
seem indeed to be indifferent, and yet are apt to make us stumble towards sin.

For example; to laugh, to speak jocosely, does not seem an acknowledged sin,
but it leads to acknowledged sin. Thus laughter often gives birth to foul
discourse, and foul discourse to actions still more foul. Often from words and
laughter proceed railing and insult; and from railing and insult, blows and
wounds; and from blows and wounds, slaughter and murder. If, then, you would
take good counsel for yourself, avoid not merely foul words, and foul deeds, or
blows, and wounds, and murders, but unseasonable laughter, itself, and the very
language of banter; since these things have proved the root of subsequent evils.
Therefore Paul says, "Let no foolish talking nor jesting proceed out of your
mouth." For although this seems to be a small thing in itself, it becomes,
however, the cause of much mischief to us. Again, to live in luxury does not
seem to be a manifest and admitted crime; but then it brings forth in us great
evils—drunkenness, violence, extortion, and rapine. For the prodigal and
sumptuous liver, bestowing extravagant service upon the belly, is often
compelled to steal, and to seize the property of others, and to use extortion and
violence. If, then, you avoid luxurious living, you remove the foundation of
extortion, and rapine, and drunkenness, and a thousand other evils; cutting away
the root of iniquity from its extremity. Hence Paul says, that "she who lives in
pleasure is dead while she lives." [1 Timothy 5:6] Again, to go to the theatres, or
to survey the horse-race, or to play at dice, does not seem, to most men, to be an
admitted crime; but it introduces into our life an infinite host of miseries. For
spending time in the theatres produces fornication, intemperance, and every kind
of impurity. The spectacle of the horse-race also brings about fightings, railings,
blows, insults, and lasting enmities. And a passion for dice-playing has often
caused blasphemies, injuries, anger, reproaches, and a thousand other things
more fearful still.
12. Therefore, let us not only avoid sins, but those things too which seem to
be indifferent, yet by degrees lead us into these misdeeds. He, indeed, who walks
by the side of a precipice, even though he may not fall over, trembles; and very
often he is overset by this same trembling, and falls to the bottom. So also he