particular person of that day, and what was profitable for all the whole Church
alike, he was the appointed person to ask for in behalf of all, and the instructor of
the rest. Spirit then is the name that he gives here to the grace of this character,
and the soul that receives the grace, and intercedes to God, and groans. For he
that was counted worthy of such grace as this, standing with much compunction,
and with many mental groanings falling before God, asked the things that were
profitable for all. And of this the Deacon of the present day is a symbol when he
offers up the prayers for the people. This then is what Paul means when he says,
"the Spirit itself makes intercession for us with groanings that cannot be
uttered."
Ver. 27. "But He that searches the hearts."
You see that it is not about the Comforter that he is speaking, but about the
spiritual heart. Since if this were not so, he ought to have said, "He that
searches" the Spirit. But that you may learn that the language is meant of a
spiritual man, who has the gift of prayer, he proceeds, "And he that searches the
hearts knows what is the mind of the Spirit," that is, of the spiritual man.
"Because he makes intercession for the saints according to the will of God."
Not (he means) that he informs God as if ignorant, but this is done that we
may learn to pray for proper things, and to ask of God what is pleasing to Him.
For this is what the "according to God" is. And so this was with a view to solace
those that came to Him, and to yield them excellent instruction. For He that
furnished the gifts, and gave besides blessings without number, was the
Comforter. Hence it says, "all these things works one and the self-same Spirit."
[1 Corinthians 12:11] And it is for our instruction that this takes place, and to
show the love of the Spirit, it condescends even to this. And it is from this that
the person praying gets heard, because the prayer is made "according to the will
of God."
You see from how many points he instructs them in the love that was shown
them and the honor that was done them. And what is there that God has not done
for us? The world He has made corruptible for us, and again for us incorruptible.

He suffered His Prophets to be ill-treated for our sake, sent them into captivity
for us, let them fall into the furnace, and undergo ills without number. Nay, He
made them prophets for us, and the Apostles also He made for us. He gave up
for us His Only-Begotten, He punishes the devil for us, He has seated us on the
Right Hand, He was reproached for us. "For the reproaches of them that
reproached you," it says, "fell upon me." [Psalm 69:9] Yet still, when we are
drawing back after so great favor, He leaves us not, but again entreats, and on
our account incites others to entreat for us, that He may show us favor. And so it
was with Moses. For to him He says, "Let Me alone, that I may blot them out"
[Exodus 32:10], that He might drive him upon supplicating on their behalf. And
now He does the same thing. Hence He gave the gift of prayer. But this He does,
not as Himself standing in need of entreaty, but that we might not, from being
saved without effort ([ἁ] [πλὥς]), grow indifferent. For this cause it is on account
of David, and of this person and that, He often says, that He is reconciled with
them, to establish again this very thing, that the reconciliation may be with all
due formality. Still He would have looked more loving toward man, if it had not
been through this and the other prophet, but of Himself, that He told them that
He ceased to be angry. But the reason of His not holding to that point was, that
this ground of reconciliation might not become an occasion for listlessness.
Wherefore to Jeremiah also He said, "Pray not for this people, for I will not hear
you" [Jeremiah 11:14], not as wishing to stop his praying (for He earnestly longs
for our salvation), but to terrify them: and this the prophet also seeing did not
cease praying. And that you may see that it was not through a wish to turn him
from it, but to shame them that He said this, hear what it says. "Do you see not
what these are doing?" [Ezekiel 8:6, not verbally from Septuagint] And when
He says to the city "Though thou wash you with nitre, and take you much soap
(Gr. herb), yet you are stained before Me" [Jeremiah 2:22], it is not that He may
cast them into despair that He so speaks, but that He may rouse them to
repentance. For as in the case of the Ninevites, by giving the sentence without
limitation, and holding out no good hope, He scared them the more, and led