this alone does not make a man righteous, but the performance of good actions
besides. Hence those, who abstain from evil like slaves, do not come up to the
mark of the law. For it was appointed for the punishment of transgression. Such
men indeed use it, but it is to dread its punishment. It is said, "Will you not be
afraid of the power? Do that which is good" [Romans 13:3]: which implies, that
the law threatens punishment only to the wicked. But of what use is the law to
him whose actions deserve a crown? As the surgeon is of use only to him who
has some hurt, and not to the sound and healthy man. "But for the lawless and
disobedient, for the ungodly and for sinners." He calls the Jews "lawless and
disobedient" too. "The law (he says) works wrath," that is, to the evil doers. But
what to him who is deserving of reward? "By the law is the knowledge of sin."
[Romans 3:20] What then with respect to the righteous? "the law is not made,"
he says, "for a righteous man." Wherefore? Because he is exempted from its
punishment, and he waits not to learn from it what is his duty, since he has the
grace of the Spirit within to direct him. For the law was given that men might be
chastened by fear of its threatenings. But the tractable horse needs not the curb,
nor the man that can dispense with instruction the schoolmaster.
"But for the lawless and disobedient, for the ungodly and for sinners, for
the unholy and profane, for murderers of fathers and murderers of mothers."
Thus he does not stop at the mention of sins in general, nor of these only, but
goes over the several kinds of sin, to shame men, as it were, of being under the
direction of the law; and having thus particularized some, he adds a reference to
those omitted, though what he had enumerated were sufficient to withdraw men.
Of whom then does he say these things? Of the Jews, for they were "murderers
of fathers and murderers of mothers": they were "profane and unholy," for these
too he means when he says, "ungodly and sinners," and being such, the law was
necessarily given to them. For did they not repeatedly worship idols? Did they
not stone Moses? Were not their hands imbrued in the blood of their kindred? Do
not the prophets constantly accuse them of these things? But to those who are
instructed by a heavenly philosophy, these commandments are superfluous. "For

murderers of fathers and murderers of mothers, for manslayers, for
whoremongers, for them that defile themselves with mankind, for menstealers,
for liers, for perjured persons, and if there be any other thing that is contrary to
sound doctrine"; for all the things which he had mentioned were the passions of
a corrupted soul, and contrary, therefore, to sound doctrine.
Ver. 11. "According to the glorious Gospel of the blessed God, which was
committed to my trust."
Thus the Law is still necessary for the confirmation of the Gospel, yet to
those who obey it is unnecessary. And he calls the Gospel "glorious." There
were some who were ashamed of its persecutions, and of the sufferings of Christ,
and so for the sake of these, as well as for others, he has called it "the glorious
Gospel," thus showing that the sufferings of Christ are our glory. And perhaps he
glances too at the future. For if our present state is exposed to shame and
reproach, it will not be so hereafter; and it is to things future, and not to things
present, that the Gospel belongs. Why then did the Angel say, "Behold, I bring
you good tidings of great joy, for unto you is born a Saviour"? [Luke 2:10]
Because He was born to be their Saviour, though His miracles did not commence
from His birth. "According to the Gospel," he says, "of the blessed God." The
glory he means is either that of the service of God, or, in that if present things are
filled with its glory, yet much more will things future be so; when "His enemies
shall be put under His feet" [1 Corinthians 15:25], when there shall be nothing
opposed, when the just shall behold all those blessed things, which "eye has not
seen, nor ear heard, and which has not entered into the heart of man." [1
Corinthians 2:9] "For I will" says our Saviour, "that they also may be with Me,
where I am, that they may behold My glory, which You have given Me." [John
17:24]
Moral. Let us then learn who these are, and let us esteem them blessed,
considering what felicities they will then enjoy, of what light and glory they will
then participate. The glory of this world is worthless and not enduring, or if it
abides, it abides but till death, and after that is wholly extinguished. For "his