THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.47, C.2.

power, because it was united in unity of person with the Divine
Word, as Augustine says (De Trin. iv). Therefore, since Christ's soul
did not repel the injury inflicted on His body, but willed His corporeal
nature to succumb to such injury, He is said to have laid down His
life, or to have died voluntarily.
Reply to Objection 1: When we hear the words, "No man taketh away
My life from Me," we must understand "against My will": for that is
properly said to be "taken away" which one takes from someone
who is unwilling and unable to resist.
Reply to Objection 2: In order for Christ to show that the Passion
inflicted by violence did not take away His life, He preserved the
strength of His bodily nature, so that at the last moment He was able
to cry out with a loud voice: and hence His death should be
computed among His other miracles. Accordingly it is written (Mk.
15:39): "And the centurion who stood over against Him, seeing that
crying out in this manner, He had given up the ghost, said: Indeed,
this man was the Son of God." It was also a subject of wonder in
Christ's death that He died sooner than the others who were
tormented with the same suffering. Hence John says (19:32) that
"they broke the legs of the first, and of the other that was crucified
with Him," that they might die more speedily; "but after they were
come to Jesus, when they saw that He was already dead, they did
not break His legs." Mark also states (15:44) that "Pilate wondered
that He should be already dead." For as of His own will His bodily
nature kept its vigor to the end, so likewise, when He willed, He
suddenly succumbed to the injury inflicted.
Reply to Objection 3: Christ at the same time suffered violence in
order to die, and died, nevertheless, voluntarily; because violence
was inflicted on His body, which, however, prevailed over His body
only so far as He willed it.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.47, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether Christ died out of obedience?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ did not die out of obedience.
For obedience is referred to a command. But we do not read that
Christ was commanded to suffer. Therefore He did not suffer out of
obedience.
Objection 2: Further, a man is said to do from obedience what he
does from necessity of precept. But Christ did not suffer necessarily,
but voluntarily. Therefore He did not suffer out of obedience.
Objection 3: Further, charity is a more excellent virtue than
obedience. But we read that Christ suffered out of charity, according
to Eph. 5:2: "Walk in love, as Christ also has loved us, and delivered
Himself up for us." Therefore Christ's Passion ought to be ascribed
rather to charity than to obedience.
On the contrary, It is written (Phil. 2:8): "He became obedient" to the
Father "unto death."
I answer that, It was befitting that Christ should suffer out of
obedience. First of all, because it was in keeping with human
justification, that "as by the disobedience of one man, many were
made sinners: so also by the obedience of one, many shall be made
just," as is written Rm. 5:19. Secondly, it was suitable for reconciling
man with God: hence it is written (Rm. 5:10): "We are reconciled to
God by the death of His Son," in so far as Christ's death was a most
acceptable sacrifice to God, according to Eph. 5:2: "He delivered
Himself for us an oblation and a sacrifice to God for an odor of
sweetness." Now obedience is preferred to all sacrifices. according
to 1 Kgs. 15:22: "Obedience is better than sacrifices." Therefore it
was fitting that the sacrifice of Christ's Passion and death should
proceed from obedience. Thirdly, it was in keeping with His victory
whereby He triumphed over death and its author; because a soldier
cannot conquer unless he obey his captain. And so the Man-Christ
secured the victory through being obedient to God, according to
Prov. 21:28: "An obedient man shall speak of victory."
Reply to Objection 1: Christ received a command from the Father to
suffer. For it is written (Jn. 10:18): "I have power to lay down My life,
and I have power to take it up again: (and) this commandment have I