which he teaches, knowledge to this effect, that one may overcome those very angels that made
the world; for his disciples obtain the resurrection by being baptized into him, and can die no more,
but remain in the possession of immortal youth.

### Chapter XXIV.—Doctrines of Saturninus and Basilides.

1. Arising among these men, Saturninus (who was of that Antioch which is near Daphne) and
Basilides laid hold of some favourable opportunities, and promulgated different systems of
doctrine—the one in Syria, the other at Alexandria. Saturninus, like Menander, set forth one father
unknown to all, who made angels, archangels, powers, and potentates. The world, again, and all
things therein, were made by a certain company of seven angels. Man, too, was the workmanship
of angels, a shining image bursting forth below from the presence of the supreme power; and when
they could not, he says, keep hold of this, because it immediately darted upwards again, they
exhorted each other, saying, "Let us make man after our image and likeness." He was accordingly
formed, yet was unable to stand erect, through the inability of the angels to convey to him that
power, but wriggled [on the ground] like a worm. Then the power above taking pity upon him,
since he was made after his likeness, sent forth a spark of life, which gave man an erect posture,
compacted his joints, and made him live. He declares, therefore, that this spark of life, after the
death of a man, returns to those things which are of the same nature with itself, and the rest of the
body is decomposed into its original elements.
2. He has also laid it down as a truth, that the Saviour was without birth, without body, and
without figure, but was, by supposition, a visible man; and he maintained that the God of the Jews
was one of the angels; and, on this account, because all the powers wished to annihilate his father,
Christ came to destroy the God of the Jews, but to save such as believe in him; that is, those who
possess the spark of his life. This heretic was the first to affirm that two kinds of men were formed
by the angels,—the one wicked, and the other good. And since the demons assist the most wicked,
the Saviour came for the destruction of evil men and of the demons, but for the salvation of the
good. They declare also, that marriage and generation are from Satan. Many of those, too, who
belong to his school, abstain from animal food, and draw away multitudes by a feigned temperance
of this kind. They hold, moreover, that some of the prophecies were uttered by those angels who
made the world, and some by Satan; whom Saturninus represents as being himself an angel, the
enemy of the creators of the world, but especially of the God of the Jews.
3. Basilides again, that he may appear to have discovered something more sublime and plausible,
gives an immense development to his doctrines. He sets forth that Nous was first born of the unborn
father, that from him, again, was born Logos, from Logos Phronesis, from Phronesis Sophia and