1 Corinthians 8:10
"For if a man see you who hast knowledge, sitting at meat in an idol's
temple, will not his conscience if he is weak, be emboldened to eat things
sacrificed to idols?"
After having said, "Take heed lest this your liberty become a stumblingblock," he explains how and in what manner it becomes so: and he continually
employs the term "weakness," that the mischief may not be thought to arise from
the nature of the thing, nor demons appear formidable. As thus: "At present,"
says he, "a man is on the point of withdrawing himself entirely from all idols; but
when he sees you fond of loitering about them, he takes the circumstance for a
recommendation and abides there himself also. So that not only his weakness,
but also your ill-timed behavior, helps to further the plot against him; for it is
you who make him weaker."

1 Corinthians 8:11
"And through your meat he that is weak perishes, the brother for whose
sake Christ died."
For there are two things which deprive you of excuse in this mischief; one,
that he is weak, the other, that he is your brother: rather, I should say, there is a
third also, and one more terrible than all. What then is this? That whereas Christ
refused not even to die for him, you can not bear even to accommodate yourself
to him. By these means, you see, he reminds the perfect man also, what he too
was before, and that for him He died. And he said not, "For whom even to die
was your duty;" but what is much stronger, that even Christ died for his sake.
Did your Lord then not refuse to die for him, and do you so make him of none
account as not even to abstain from a polluted table for his sake? Yea, do you
permit him to perish, after the salvation so wrought, and, what is still more
grievous, 'for a morsel of meat?' For he said not, "for your perfectness," nor "for
your knowledge," but "for your meat." So that the charges are four, and these
extremely heavy: that it was a brother, that he was weak, and one of whom
Christ made so much account as even to die for him, and that after all this for a
"morsel of meat" he is destroyed.

1 Corinthians 8:12
"And thus sinning against the brethren, and wounding their weak
conscience, you sin against Christ."
Do you observe how quietly and gradually he has brought their offense up
to the very summit of iniquity? And again, he makes mention of the infirmity of
the other sort: and so, the very thing which these considered to make for them,
that he every where turns round upon their own head. And he said not, "Putting
stumbling-blocks in their way," but, "wounding;" so as by the force of his
expression to indicate their cruelty. For what can be more savage than a man
who wounds the sick? And yet no wound is so grievous as making a man to
stumble. Often, in fact, is this also the cause of death.
But how do they "sin against Christ?" In one way, because He considers
the concerns of His servants as His own; in another, because those who are
wounded go to make up His Body and that which is part of Him: in a third way,
because that work of His which He built up by His own blood, these are
destroying for their ambition's sake.