ashamed when they were naked, but you take a pride in it; "having," according
to that saying of the apostle, "your glory in your shame." [Philippians 3:19]
How then will your wife thenceforward look upon you, when you are
returned from such wickedness? How receive you? How speak to you, after you
have so publicly put to shame the common nature of woman, and art made by
such a sight the harlots' captive and slave?
Now if you grieve at hearing these things, I thank you much, for "who is he
that makes me glad, but he which is made sorry by me?" [2 Corinthians 2:2] Do
not then ever cease to grieve and be vexed for them, for the sorrow that comes of
such things will be to you a beginning of a change for the better. For this cause I
also have made my language the stronger, that by cutting deeper I might free you
from the venom of them that intoxicate you; that I might bring you back to a
pure health of soul; which God grant we may all enjoy by all means, and attain
unto the rewards laid up for these good deeds; by the grace and love towards
man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and dominion forever and ever.
Amen.

## Homily 7 on Matthew

Matthew 2:4-5.
"And when he had gathered all the chief priests and scribes of the people
together, he demanded of them where Christ should be born. And they said unto
him, in Bethlehem of Judæa."
Do you see how all things are done to convict the Jews? How, as long as He
was out of their sight, the envy had not yet laid hold of them, and they rehearsed
the testimonies of Him with truth; but when they saw the glory that arose from
the miracles, a grudging spirit possessed them, and thenceforth they betrayed the
truth.
However, the truth was exalted by all things, and strength was the more
gathered for it even by its enemies. See for example in this very case, how
wonderful and beyond expectation are the results secretly provided for. For both
the barbarians and the Jews do the same time alike learn something more of one
another, and teach one another. Thus the Jews, for their part, heard from the wise
men, that a star also had proclaimed Him in the land of the Persians; the wise
men, in their turn, were informed by the Jews that this Man, whom the star
proclaimed, prophets also had made known from a long time of old. And the
ground of their inquiry was made to both an occasion of setting forth clearer and
more perfect instruction; and the enemies of the truth are compelled even against
their will to read the writings in favor of the truth, and to interpret the prophecy;
although not all of it. For having spoken of Bethlehem, and how that out of it He
shall come that should rule Israel, they proceed not afterwards to add what
follows, out of flattery to the king. And what was this? That "His goings forth
are from of old, from everlasting."
2. "But why," one may say, "if He was to come from thence, did He live in
Nazareth after the birth, and obscure the prophecy?" Nay, He did not obscure it,