In view of all this, beloved brothers in Christ, we have no hesitation in presenting and publishing these Constitutions for your observance, backed as they are by such extensive deliberation and consensus. By authority of the most reverend vicar for Rome and of the master of the Sacred Palace, who have been placed in charge of the printing of books by the Supreme Pontiff, we present the Constitutions to you in printed form, thus obviating both the tiresome labor of making numerous copies by hand and the danger of errors creeping into such hand-copied texts. In this way we can ensure that the Constitutions reach you with greater ease and in a more correct form.

What need is there, brothers, for me to spur on and encourage men like yourselves already running of your own accord at full speed to the eager, perfect, and entire observance of these Constitutions? The grace of our vocation itself and our God-given decision to lead a holy life ought to be weighty motives once we have grasped the character of our profession and embraced it with our whole hearts for proceeding to fasten and weld this whole body together to be a dwelling for the heavenly Spirit and the grace of God, which is the real life of any religious order. Here we shall find the pattern we are to imitate, the way we are to pursue, the light we are to follow, the perfection towards which we are to aspire. Here we shall find the mirror in which to inspect our own lives. Beholding in the Constitutions the finished portrait of all virtue and perfection, each of us should do his best to present a living expression of it in his own holy manner of life.

Here each of us should eagerly seek out whatever applies to his own formation and to the fulfillment of the duties of his particular state. Here superiors ought to seek directives on how they should be an example to others; how they should govern those under them with conscientiousness and concern; how they should test the novices, educate the unlearned, strengthen the weak, and exercise the robust in sum, how by their word and example they should lead all forward to perfection. Here subjects should learn how to revere their superiors, loving them as fathers, respecting them as teachers, obeying them eagerly, trusting their advice, heeding their admonitions, and seeing in them Christ himself as the one who commands.

Finally, the Constitutions train us all for perfection, instructing us in the weapons to be used in combatting our three fierce and raging adversaries. They teach us how to counter the lust of the flesh with chastity, the lust of the eyes with poverty, and the pride of life with obedience. I shall say nothing of our observance of chastity (in which we should imitate the purity of the angels so far as our frailty allows), or of our observance of poverty (which is so strict that neither churches nor professed houses may acquire any rents, lands, or even perpetual endowments). As for obedience, however, by which we consecrate the chief and noblest part of ourselves to God, our Constitutions require of us that it be so prompt, eager, perfect, and integral that we do not swerve even a hairsbreadth from our superiors commands. In matters falling under obedience, not only must our action be guided by the superior's command and our will by his will, but even something much more difficult our understanding by his understanding. To sum up: men crucified to the world, and to whom the world itself is crucified such would our Constitutions have us to be; new men, I say, who have put off their affections to put on Christ; dead to themselves.