FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.72, C.3.

mutable good, for which man has an inordinate desire, and the
possession of which gives him inordinate pleasure. Now, as
explained above (Question 31, Article 3), pleasure is twofold. One
belongs to the soul, and is consummated in the mere apprehension
of a thing possessed in accordance with desire; this can also be
called spiritual pleasure, e.g. when one takes pleasure in human
praise or the like. The other pleasure is bodily or natural, and is
realized in bodily touch, and this can also be called carnal pleasure.
Accordingly, those sins which consist in spiritual pleasure, are
called spiritual sins; while those which consist in carnal pleasure,
are called carnal sins, e.g. gluttony, which consists in the pleasures
of the table; and lust, which consists in sexual pleasures. Hence the
Apostle says (2 Cor. 7:1): "Let us cleanse ourselves from all
defilement of the flesh and of the spirit."
Reply to Objection 1: As a gloss says on the same passage, these
vices are called works of the flesh, not as though they consisted in
carnal pleasure; but flesh here denotes man, who is said to live
according to the flesh, when he lives according to himself, as
Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xiv, 2,3). The reason of this is because
every failing in the human reason is due in some way to the carnal
sense.
This suffices for the Reply to the Second Objection.
Reply to Objection 3: Even in the carnal sins there is a spiritual act,
viz. the act of reason: but the end of these sins, from which they are
named, is carnal pleasure.
Reply to Objection 4: As the gloss says, "in the sin of fornication the
soul is the body's slave in a special sense, because at the moment of
sinning it can think of nothing else": whereas the pleasure of
gluttony, although carnal, does not so utterly absorb the reason. It
may also be said that in this sin, an injury is done to the body also,
for it is defiled inordinately: wherefore by this sin alone is man said
specifically to sin against his body. While covetousness, which is
reckoned among the carnal sins, stands here for adultery, which is
the unjust appropriation of another's wife. Again, it may be said that
the thing in which the covetous man takes pleasure is something
bodily, and in this respect covetousness is numbered with the carnal
sins: but the pleasure itself does not belong to the body, but to the

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.72, C.3.

spirit, wherefore Gregory says (Moral. xxxi, 17) that it is a spiritual
sin.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.72, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether sins differ specifically in reference to

their causes?
Objection 1: It would seem that sins differ specifically in reference to
their causes. For a thing takes its species from that whence it
derives its being. Now sins derive their being from their causes.
Therefore they take their species from them also. Therefore they
differ specifically in reference to their causes.
Objection 2: Further, of all the causes the material cause seems to
have least reference to the species. Now the object in a sin is like its
material cause. Since, therefore, sins differ specifically according to
their objects, it seems that much more do they differ in reference to
their other causes.
Objection 3: Further, Augustine, commenting on Ps. 79:17, "Things
set on fire and dug down," says that "every sin is due either to fear
inducing false humility, or to love enkindling us to undue ardor." For
it is written (1 Jn. 2:16) that "all that is in the world, is the
concupiscence of the flesh, or the concupiscence of the eyes, or the
pride of life." Now a thing is said to be in the world on account of sin,
in as much as the world denotes lovers of the world, as Augustine
observes (Tract. ii in Joan.). Gregory, too (Moral. xxxi, 17),
distinguishes all sins according to the seven capital vices. Now all
these divisions refer to the causes of sins. Therefore, seemingly,
sins differ specifically according to the diversity of their causes.
On the contrary, If this were the case all sins would belong to one
species, since they are due to one cause. For it is written (Ecclus.
10:15) that "pride is the beginning of all sin," and (1 Tim. 6:10) that
"the desire of money is the root of all evils." Now it is evident that
there are various species of sins. Therefore sins do not differ
specifically according to their different causes.
I answer that, Since there are four kinds of causes, they are
attributed to various things in various ways. Because the "formal"
and the "material" cause regard properly the substance of a thing;
and consequently substances differ in respect of their matter and
form, both in species and in genus. The "agent" and the "end"
regard directly movement and operation: wherefore movements and
operations differ specifically in respect of these causes; in different