Consubstantial? Then he has added the benefit in a marvelous way; and far more
marvelous than in the Epistle to the Romans. For there indeed he says,
"circumcision of the heart in the spirit, not in the letter" [Romans 2:29], but
here, in Christ.
Ver. 11. "In whom you were also circumcised with a circumcision not made
with hands, in the putting off of the body of the flesh in the circumcision of
Christ."
See how near he has come to the thing. He says, "In the putting" quite
away, not putting off merely. "The body of sins." He means, "the old life." He is
continually adverting to this in different ways, as he said above, "Who delivered
us out of the power of darkness, and reconciled us who were alienated," that we
should be "holy and without blemish." [Colossians 1:13-21] No longer, he says,
is the circumcision with the knife, but in Christ Himself; for no hand imparts this
circumcision, as is the case there, but the Spirit. It circumcises not a part, but the
whole man. It is the body both in the one and the other case, but in the one it is
carnally, in the other it is spiritually circumcised; but not as the Jews, for you
have not put off flesh, but sins. When and where? In Baptism. And what he calls
circumcision, he again calls burial. Observe how he again passes on to the
subject of righteous doings; "of the sins," he says, "of the flesh," the things they
had done in the flesh. He speaks of a greater thing than circumcision, for they
did not merely cast away that of which they were circumcised, but they
destroyed it, they annihilated it.
Ver. 12. "Buried with him," he says, "in Baptism, wherein you were also
raised with Him, through faith in the working of God, who raised Him from the
dead."
But it is not burial only: for behold what he says, "Wherein you were also
raised with Him, through faith in the working of God, who raised Him from the
dead." He has well said, "of faith," for it is all of faith. You believed that God is
able to raise, and so you were raised. Then note also His worthiness of belief,
"Who raised Him," he says, "from the dead."

He now shows the Resurrection. "And you who sometime were dead
through your trespasses and the uncircumcision of your flesh, you, I say, did He
quicken together with Him." For you lay under judgment of death. But even
though ye died, it was a profitable death. Observe how again he shows what they
deserved in the words he subjoins:
Ver. 13, 14, 15. "Having forgiven us all our trespasses; having blotted out
the bond written in ordinances that was against us, which was contrary to us:
and he has taken it out of the way, nailing it to the Cross; having put off from
himself the principalities and the powers, He made a show of them openly,
triumphing over them in it."
"Having forgiven us," he says, "all our trespasses," those which produced
that deadness. What then? Did He allow them to remain? No, He even wiped
them out; He did not scratch them out merely; so that they could not be seen. "In
doctrines" [ordinances], he says. What doctrines? The Faith. It is enough to
believe. He has not set works against works, but works against faith. And what
next? Blotting out is an advance upon remission; again he says, "And has taken it
out of the way." Nor yet even so did He preserve it, but rent it even in sunder, "by
nailing it to His Cross." "Having put off from himself the principalities and the
powers, He made a show of them openly, triumphing over them in it." Nowhere
has he spoken in so lofty a strain.
Do you see how great His earnestness that the bond should be done away?
To wit, we all were under sin and punishment. He Himself, through suffering
punishment, did away with both the sin and the punishment, and He was
punished on the Cross. To the Cross then He affixed it; as having power, He tore
it asunder. What bond? He means either that which they said to Moses, namely,
"All that God has said will we do, and be obedient" [Exodus 24:3], or, if not that,
this, that we owe to God obedience; or if not this, he means that the devil held
possession of it, the bond which God made for Adam, saying, "In the day you
eat of the tree, you shall die." [Genesis 2:17] This bond then the devil held in his
possession. And Christ did not give it to us, but Himself tore it in two, the action