by nature, for neither was it a reed that you went out to see; nor by giving
himself to luxury did he lose the advantage he possessed." For that he did not
make himself a slave to luxury, his garb shows, and the wilderness, and the
prison. Since, had he been minded to wear soft raiment, he would not have lived
in the wilderness, nor in the prison, but in the king's courts: it being in his power,
merely by keeping silence, to have enjoyed honor without limit. For since Herod
so reverenced him, even when he had rebuked him, and was in chains, much
more would he have courted him, had he held his peace. You see, he had indeed
given proof of his firmness and fortitude; and how could he justly incur
suspicions of that kind?
2. When therefore as well by the place, as by his garments, and by their
concourse unto Him, He had delineated his character, He proceeds to bring in the
prophet. For having said, "Why went ye out? To see a prophet? Yea I say unto
you, and more than a prophet;" He goes on, "For this is he of whom it is written,
Behold, I send my messenger before Your face, which shall prepare Your way
before You." [Matthew 11:10] Having before set down the testimony of the Jews,
He then applies that of the prophets; or rather, He puts in the first place the
sentence of the Jews, which must have been a very strong demonstration, the
witness being borne by his enemies; secondly, the man's life; thirdly, His own
judgment; fourthly, the prophet; by all means stopping their mouths.
Then lest they should say, "But what if at that time indeed he were such an
one, but now is changed?" He added also what follows; his garments, his prison,
and together with these the prophecy.
Then having said, that he is greater than a prophet, He signifies also in what
he is greater. And in what is he greater? In being near Him that had come. For, "I
send," says He, "my messenger before Your face;" that is, near You. For as with
kings, they who ride near the chariot, these are more illustrious than the rest, just
so John also appears in his course near the advent itself. See how He signified
John's excellency by this also; and not even here does He stop, but adds
afterwards His own suffrage as well, saying, "Verily I say unto you, among them

that are born of women, there has not arisen a greater than John the Baptist."
[Matthew 11:11]
Now what He said is like this: "woman has not borne a greater than this
man." And His very sentence is indeed sufficient; but if you are minded to learn
from facts also, consider his table, his manner of life, the height of his soul. For
he so lived as though he were in heaven: and having got above the necessities of
nature, he travelled as it were a new way, spending all his time in hymns and
prayers, and holding intercourse with none among men, but with God alone
continually. For he did not so much as see any of his fellow-servants, neither was
he seen by any one of them; he fed not on milk, he enjoyed not the comfort of
bed, or roof, or market, or any other of the things of men; and yet he was at once
mild and earnest. Hear, for example, how considerately he reasons with his own
disciples, courageously with the people of the Jews, how openly with the king.
For this cause He said also, "There has not risen among them that are born of
women a greater than John the Baptist."
3. But lest the exceeding greatness of His praises should produce a sort of
extravagant feeling, the Jews honoring John above Christ; mark how He corrects
this also. For as the things which edified His own disciples did harm to the
multitudes, they supposing Him an easy kind of person; so again the remedies
employed for the multitudes might have proved more mischievous, they deriving
from Christ's words a more reverential opinion of John than of Himself.
Wherefore this also, in an unsuspected way, He corrects by saying, "He that
is less, in the kingdom of Heaven is greater than he." Less in age, and according
to the opinion of the multitude, since they even called Him "a gluttonous man
and a winebibber;" [Matthew 11:19] and, "Is not this the carpenter's son?"
[Matthew 13:55] and on every occasion they used to make light of Him.
"What then?" it may be said, "is it by comparison that He is greater than
John?" Far from it. For neither when John says, "He is mightier than I,"
[Matthew 3:11] does he say it as comparing them; nor Paul, when remembering
Moses he writes, "For this man was counted worthy of more glory than Moses,"