then the Father His in one way, and ours in another?" Assuredly then He is. For
if He is God of the righteous in a manner different from that in which He is God
of other men, much more in the case of the Son and us. For because He had said,
"Say to the brethren," in order that they might not imagine any equality from
this, He showed the difference. He was about to sit on His Father's throne, but
they to stand by. So that albeit in His Subsistence according to the Flesh He
became our Brother, yet in Honor He greatly differed from us, it cannot even be
told how much.

John 20:18
"She therefore departs, bearing these tidings to the disciples."
So great a good is perseverance and endurance. But how was it that they did
not any more grieve when He was about to depart, nor speak as they had done
before? At that time they were affected in such a way, as supposing that He was
about to die; but now that He was risen again, what reason had they to grieve?
Moreover, Mary reported His appearance and His words, which were enough to
comfort them. Since then it was likely that the disciples on hearing these things
would either not believe the woman, or, believing, would grieve that He had not
deemed them worthy of the vision, though He promised to meet them in Galilee;
in order that they might not by dwelling on this be unsettled, He let not a single
day pass, but having brought them to a state of longing, by their knowledge that
He was risen, and by what they heard from the woman, when they were thirsting
to see Him, and were greatly afraid, (which thing itself especially made their
yearning greater,) He then, when it was evening, presented Himself before them,
and that very marvelously. And why did He appear in the "evening"? Because it
was probable that they would then especially be very fearful. But the marvel
was, why they did not suppose Him to be an apparition; for He entered, "when
the doors were shut," and suddenly. The chief cause was, that the woman
beforehand had wrought great faith in them; besides, He showed His
countenance to them clear and mild. He came not by day, in order that all might
be collected together. For great was the amazement; for neither did He knock at
the door but all at once stood in the midst, and showed His side and His hands.
At the same time also by His Voice He smoothed their tossing thought, by
saying,

John 20:19
"Peace be unto you."
That is, "Be not troubled"; at the same time reminding them of the word
which He spoke to them before the Crucifixion, "My peace I leave unto you"
[John 14:27]; and again, "In me you have peace, but" "in the world you shall
have tribulation." [John 16:33]

John 20:20
"Then were the disciples glad when they saw the Lord."
Do you see the words issuing in deeds? For what He said before the
Crucifixion, that "I will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice, and your joy
no man takes from you" [John 16:22], this He now accomplished in deed; but all
these things led them to a most exact faith. For since they had a truceless war
with the Jews, He continually repeated the, "Peace be unto you," giving them, to
counterbalance the war, the consolation. And so this was the first word that He
spoke to them after the Resurrection, (wherefore also Paul continually says,
"Grace be unto you and peace,") and to women He gives good tidings of joy,
because that sex was in sorrow, and had received this as the first curse. Therefore
He gives good tidings suitable respectively, to men, peace, because of their war;
joy to women, because of their sorrow. Then having put away all painful things,
He tells of the successes of the Cross, and these were the "peace." "Since then all
hindrances have been removed," He says, "and I have made My victory glorious,
and all has been achieved," (then He says afterwards,)