against you, even had you paid out of your just earnings? But when you feed
your uncleanness by stripping orphans and wronging widows, consider how
great a fire is prepared for those who dare such things. Hear what Paul says,
"Who not only do these things, but also have pleasure in them that do them."
[Romans 1:32]
Perhaps we have touched you sharply, yet if we touch you not, there are
actual punishments awaiting those who sin without amendment. What then
avails it to gratify by words those who shall be punished by realities? Do you
take pleasure at a dancer, do you praise and admire him? Then are you worse
than he; his poverty affords him an excuse though not a reasonable one, but you
are stripped even of this defense. If I ask him, "Why have you left other arts and
come to this accursed and impure one?" he will reply, "because I can with little
labor gain great profits." But if I ask you why you admire one who spends his
time in impurity, and lives to the mischief of many, you can not run to the same
excuse, but must bow down your face and be ashamed and blush. Now if when
called by us to give account, you would have nothing to reply, when that terrible
and inexorable Judgment comes where we shall render account of thoughts and
deeds and everything, how shall we stand? With what eyes shall we behold our
Judge? What shall we say? What defense shall we make? What excuse
reasonable or unreasonable shall we put forward? Shall we allege the expense?
The gratification? The perdition of others whom by means of his art we ruin? We
can have nothing to say, but must be punished with a punishment having no end,
knowing no limit. That this come not to pass, let us henceforth guard all points,
that having departed with a good hope, we may obtain the everlasting blessings;
to which may we all attain through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom and with whom to the Father and the Holy Ghost be
glory, now and ever and world without end. Amen.

Homily 43 on the Gospel of John
John 6:16-18
"And when even was now come, His disciples went down unto the sea and
entered into a ship, and went over the sea toward Capernaum. And it was now
dark, and Jesus was not come unto them. And the sea arose by reason of a great
wind that blew."
1. Christ provides for the good of his disciples not only when He is present
in the body, but also when far away; for having abundance of means and of skill,
He effects one and the same end by contrary actions. Observe, for instance, what
He has done here. He leaves His disciples, and goes up into a mountain; and
they, when even had come, went down unto the sea. They waited for Him until
evening, expecting that He would come unto them; but when even had come,
they could no longer endure not to seek their Master; so great a love possessed
them. They said not, "It is now evening, and night has overtaken us, whither
shall we depart? The place is dangerous, the time unsafe"; but, goaded by their
longing, they entered into the ship. For it is not without a cause that the
Evangelist has declared the time also, but by it to show the warmth of their love.
Wherefore then does Christ let them go, and not show Himself? And again,
wherefore does He show Himself walking alone upon the sea? By the first He
teaches them how great (an evil) it is to be forsaken by Him, and makes their
longing greater; by the second, again, He shows forth His power. For as in His
teaching they heard not all in common with the multitude, so in the case of the
miracles they saw them not all with the mass of people, since it was needful that
they who were about to receive in charge the presidency of the world, should
have somewhat more than the rest. "And what sort of miracles," says some one,
"saw they by themselves?" The Transfiguration on the mount; this on the sea,
and those after the Resurrection, which are many and important. And from these