FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.18, C.5.

were, of its accidents. Fourthly, it has goodness from its end, to
which it is compared as to the cause of its goodness.
Reply to Objection 1: The good in view of which one acts is not
always a true good; but sometimes it is a true good, sometimes an
apparent good. And in the latter event, an evil action results from the
end in view.
Reply to Objection 2: Although the end is an extrinsic cause,
nevertheless due proportion to the end, and relation to the end, are
inherent to the action.
Reply to Objection 3: Nothing hinders an action that is good in one
of the way mentioned above, from lacking goodness in another way.
And thus it may happen that an action which is good in its species or
in its circumstances is ordained to an evil end, or vice versa.
However, an action is not good simply, unless it is good in all those
ways: since "evil results from any single defect, but good from the
complete cause," as Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iv).

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.18, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether a human action is good or evil in its

species?
Objection 1: It would seem that good and evil in moral actions do not
make a difference of species. For the existence of good and evil in
actions is in conformity with their existence in things, as stated
above (Article 1). But good and evil do not make a specific difference
in things; for a good man is specifically the same as a bad man.
Therefore neither do they make a specific difference in actions.
Objection 2: Further, since evil is a privation, it is a non-being. But
non-being cannot be a difference, according to the Philosopher
(Metaph. iii, 3). Since therefore the difference constitutes the
species, it seems that an action is not constituted in a species
through being evil. Consequently good and evil do not diversify the
species of human actions.
Objection 3: Further, acts that differ in species produce different
effects. But the same specific effect results from a good and from an
evil action: thus a man is born of adulterous or of lawful wedlock.
Therefore good and evil actions do not differ in species.
Objection 4: Further, actions are sometimes said to be good or bad
from a circumstance, as stated above (Article 3). But since a
circumstance is an accident, it does not give an action its species.
Therefore human actions do not differ in species on account of their
goodness or malice.
On the contrary, According to the Philosopher (Ethic ii. 1) "like
habits produce like actions." But a good and a bad habit differ in
species, as liberality and prodigality. Therefore also good and bad
actions differ in species.
I answer that, Every action derives its species from its object, as
stated above (Article 2). Hence it follows that a difference of object
causes a difference of species in actions. Now, it must be observed
that a difference of objects causes a difference of species in actions,
according as the latter are referred to one active principle, which
does not cause a difference in actions, according as they are
referred to another active principle. Because nothing accidental
constitutes a species, but only that which is essential; and a