made it to be day, but that man would have derived as much benefit
from the light of the moon then as now from the light of the sun.
After the resurrection, however, when the light of the moon will be
increased in very truth, there will be night nowhere on earth but only
in the center of the earth, where hell will be, because then, as stated,
the moon will shine as brightly as the sun does now; the sun seven
times as much as now, and the bodies of the blessed seven times
more than the sun, although there be no authority or reason to prove
this.
Reply to Objection 5: A thing may be useful to man in two ways.
First, by reason of necessity, and thus no creature will be useful to
man because he will have complete sufficiency from God. This is
signified (Apoc. 21:23) by the words quoted, according to which that
"city hath no need of the sun," nor "of the moon." Secondly, on
account of a greater perfection, and thus man will make use of other
creatures, yet not as needful to him in order to obtain his end, in
which way he makes use of them now.
Reply to Objection 6: This is the argument of Rabbi Moses who
endeavors to prove (Dux errantium iii) that the world was by no
means made for man's use. Wherefore he maintains that what we
read in the Old Testament about the renewal of the world, as
instanced by the quotations from Isaias, is said metaphorically: and
that even as the sun is said to be darkened in reference to a person
when he encounters a great sorrow so as not to know what to do
(which way of speaking is customary to Scripture), so on the other
hand the sun is said to shine brighter for a person, and the whole
world to be renewed, when he is brought from a state of sorrow to
one of very great joy. But this is not in harmony with the authority
and commentaries of holy men. Consequently we must answer this
argument by saying that although the heavenly bodies far surpass
the human body, yet the rational soul surpasses the heavenly bodies
far more than these surpass the human body. Hence it is not
unreasonable to say that the heavenly bodies were made for man's
sake; not, however as though this were the principal end, since the
principal end of all things is God.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the elements will be renewed by an

addition of brightness?
Objection 1: It would seem that the elements will not be renewed by
receiving some kind of brightness. For just as light is a quality
proper to a heavenly body, so are hot and cold, wet and dry. qualities
proper to the elements. Therefore as the heaven is renewed by an
increase of brightness, so ought the elements to be renewed by an
increase of active and passive qualities.
Objection 2: Further, rarity, and density are qualities of the elements,
and the elements will not be deprived of them at this renewal. Now
the rarity and density of the elements would seem to be an obstacle
to brightness, since a bright body needs to be condensed, for which
reason the rarity of the air seems incompatible with brightness, and
in like manner the density of the earth which is an obstacle to
transparency. Therefore it is impossible for the elements to be
renewed by the addition of brightness.
Objection 3: Further, it is agreed that the damned will be in the earth.
Yet they will be in darkness not only internal but also external.
Therefore the earth will not be endowed with brightness in this
renewal, nor for the same reason will the other elements.
Objection 4: Further, increase of brightness in the elements implies
an increase of heat. If therefore at this renewal the brightness of the
elements be greater than it is now, their heat will likewise be greater;
and thus it would seem that they will be changed from their natural
qualities, which are in them according to a fixed measure: and this is
absurd.
Objection 5: Further, the good of the universe which consists in the
order and harmony of the parts is more excellent than the good of
any individual creature. But if one creature be bettered, the good of
the universe is done away, since there will no longer be the same
harmony. Therefore if the elemental bodies, which according to their
natural degree in the universe should be devoid of brightness, were
to be endowed with brightness, the perfection of the universe would
be diminished thereby rather than increased.
On the contrary, It is written (Apoc. 21:1): "I saw a new heaven and a