John 8:36
"If the Son therefore shall make you free."
Do you see the consubstantiality of the Son with the Father, and how He
declares that He has the same power as the Father? "If the Son make you free, no
man afterwards gain-says, but you have firm freedom." For "it is God that
justifies, who is He that condemns?" [Romans 8:33-34] Here He shows that He
Himself is pure from sin, and alludes to that freedom which reached only to a
name; this even men give, but that God alone. And so he persuaded them not to
be ashamed at this slavery, but at that of sin. And desiring to show that they were
not slaves, except by repudiating that liberty, He the more shows them to be
slaves by saying,
"You shall be free indeed."
This is the expression of one declaring that this freedom was not real. Then,
that they might not say, "We have no sin," (for it was probable that they would
say so,) observe how He brings them beneath this imputation. For omitting to
convict all their life, He brings forward that which they had in hand, which they
yet desired to do, and says,

John 8:37
"I know that you are Abraham's seed but you seek to kill Me."
Gently and by little does He expel them from that relationship, teaching
them not to be high-minded because of it. For as freedom and bondage depend
on men's actions, so also does relationship. He said not directly, "You are not the
seed of Abraham, you the murderers of the righteous"; but for a while He even
goes along with them, and says, "I know that you are Abraham's seed." Yet this
is not the matter in question, and during the remainder of this speech He uses
greater vehemence. For we may for the most part observe, that when He is about
to work any great thing, after He has wrought it, He uses greater boldness of
speech, as though the testimony from His works shut men's mouths. "But ye seek
to kill Me." "What of that," says some one, "if they sought to do so justly." But
this was not so either; wherefore also He puts the reason;
"Because My word has no place in you."
"How then was it," says some one, "that they believed on Him?" As I before
said, they changed again. On which account He touched them sharply. "If you
boast the relationship of Abraham ye ought also to show forth his life." And He
said not, "You do not contain my words," but, "My word has no place in you,"
thus declaring the sublimity of His doctrines. Yet not for this ought they to have
slain, but rather to have honored and waited on Him so as to learn. "But what,"
says some one, "if you speak these things of yourself?" On this account He
added,

John 8:38
"I speak that which I have seen with My Father, and you do that which you have
heard from your father."
"As," He says, "I both by My words and by the truth declare the Father, so
also do ye by your actions (declare yours). For I have not only the same
Substance, but also the same Truth with the Father."