Because these more than others were in so strange and mean ways of life.
For there is nothing either worse than the publican's business, or more ordinary
than fishing. And that Philip also was among the very ignoble, is manifest from
his country. Therefore these especially they proclaim to us, with their ways of
life, to show that we ought to believe them in the glorious parts of their histories
also. For they who choose not to pass by any of the things which are accounted
reproachful, but are exact in publishing these more than the rest, whether they
relate to the Teacher or to the disciples; how can they be suspected in the parts
which claim reverence? More especially since many signs and miracles are
passed over by them, while the events of the cross, accounted to be reproaches,
they utter with exact care and loudly; and the disciples' pursuits too, and their
faults, and those of their Master's ancestry who were notorious for sins,
[Matthew 3:6] they discover with a clear voice. Whence it is manifest that they
made much account of truth, and wrote nothing for favor, nor for display.
2. Having therefore called him, He also honored him with a very great
honor by partaking straightway of his table; for in this way He would both give
him good hope for the future, and lead him on to a greater confidence. For not in
a long time, but at once, He healed his vice. And not with him only does He sit
down to meat, but with many others also; although this very thing was accounted
a charge against Him, that He chased not away the sinners. But neither do they
conceal this point, what sort of blame is endeavored to be fixed on His
proceedings.
Now the publicans come together as to one of the same trade; for he,
exulting in the entrance of Christ, had called them all together. The fact is, Christ
used to try every kind of treatment; and not when discoursing only, nor when
healing, nor when reproving His enemies, but even at His morning meal, He
would often correct such as were in a bad way; hereby teaching us, that every
season and every work may by possibility afford us profit. And yet surely what
was then set before them came of injustice and covetousness; but Christ refused
not to partake of it, because the ensuing gain was to be great: yea rather He

becomes partaker of the same roof and table with them that have committed such
offenses. For such is the quality of a physician; unless he endure the corruption
of the sick, he frees them not from their infirmity.
And yet undoubtedly He incurred hence an evil report: first by eating with
him, then in Matthew's house, and thirdly, in company with many publicans. See
at least how they reproach Him with this. "Behold a man gluttonous, and a winebibber, a friend of publicans and sinners." [Matthew 11:19]
Let them hear, as many as are striving to deck themselves with great honor
for fasting, and let them consider that our Lord was called "a man gluttonous
and a winebibber," and He was not ashamed, but overlooked all these things,
that he might accomplish what He had set before him; which indeed was
accordingly done. For the publican was actually converted, and thus became a
better man.
And to teach you that this great thing was wrought by his partaking of the
table with Him, hear what Zacchæus says, another publican. I mean, when he
heard Christ saying, "Today, I must abide in your house," the delight gave him
wings, and he says, "The half of my goods I give to the poor, and if I have taken
anything from any man by false accusation, I restore him fourfold." And to him
Jesus says, "This day is salvation come to this house." So possible is it by all
ways to give instruction.
But how is it, one may say, that Paul commands, "If any man that is called
a brother be a fornicator or covetous, with such an one no, not to eat?"
[1 Corinthians 5:11] In the first place, it is not as yet manifest, whether to
teachers also he gives this charge, and not rather to brethren only. Next, these
were not yet of the number of the perfect, nor of those who had become
brethren. And besides, Paul commands, even with respect to them that had
become brethren, then to shrink from them, when they continue as they were, but
these had now ceased, and were converted.
3. But none of these things shamed the Pharisees, but they accuse Him to
His disciples, saying,