Reply to Objection 3: There are two opinions on this point. For some
say that it was lawful for a divorced wife to be reconciled to her
husband, unless she were joined in marriage to another husband.
For then, on account of the adultery to which she had voluntarily
yielded, it was assigned to her in punishment that she should not
return to her former husband. Since, however, the law makes no
distinction in its prohibition, others say that from the moment that
she was put away she could not be taken back, even before marrying
again, because the defilement must be understood not in reference
to sin, but as explained above (Article 4, ad 3).

### ARTICLE 6. Whether the reason for divorce was hatred for the

wife?
Objection 1: It would seem that the reason for divorce was hatred for
the wife. For it is written (Malachi 2:16): "When thou shalt hate her
put her away." Therefore, etc.
Objection 2: Further, it is written (Dt. 24:1): "If . . . she find not favor
in his eyes, for some uncleanness," etc. Therefore the same
conclusion follows as before.
Objection 3: On the contrary, Barrenness and fornication are more
opposed to marriage than hatred. Therefore they ought to have been
reasons for divorce rather than hatred.
Objection 4: Further, hatred may be caused by the virtue of the
person hated. Therefore, if hatred is a sufficient reason, a woman
could be divorced on account of her virtue, which is absurd.
Objection 5: Further, "If a man marry a wife and afterwards hate her,
and seek occasions to put her away" alleging that she was not a
virgin when he married her, should he fail to prove this, he shall be
beaten, and shall be condemned in a hundred sicles of silver, and he
shall be unable to put her away all the days of his life (Dt. 22:13-19).
Therefore hatred is not a sufficient reason for divorce.
I answer that, It is the general opinion of holy men that the reason for
permission being given to divorce a wife was the avoidance of wifemurder. Now the proximate cause of murder is hatred: wherefore the
proximate cause of divorce was hatred. But hatred proceeds, like
love, from a cause. Wherefore we must assign to divorce certain
remote causes which were a cause of hatred. For Augustine says in
his gloss (De Serm. Dom. in Monte i, 14): "In the Law there were
many causes for divorcing a wife: Christ admitted none but
fornication: and He commands other grievances to be borne for
conjugal fidelity and chastity." Such causes are imperfections either
of body, as sickness or some notable deformity, or in soul as
fornication or the like which amounts to moral depravity. Some,
however, restrict these causes within narrower limits, saying with
sufficient probability that it was not lawful to divorce a wife except
for some cause subsequent to the marriage; and that not even then