enclose Him there, but expressed the being higher than all things, and having
ascended up above all things. That is, He attained even unto the very throne of
the Father: as therefore the Father is on high, so also is He. For the "sitting
together" implies nothing else than equal dignity. But if they say, that He said,
"Sit," we may ask them, What then? Did He speak to Him standing? Moreover,
he said not that He commanded, not that He enjoined, but that "He said": for no
other reason, than that you might not think Him without origin and without
cause. For that this is why he said it, is evident from the place of His sitting. For
had he intended to signify inferiority, he would not have said, "on the right
hand," but on the left hand.

Hebrews 1:4
"Being made," says he, "so much better than the angels, as He has by
inheritance obtained a more excellent name than they." The "being made," here,
is instead of "being shown forth," as one may say. Then also from what does he
reason confidently? From the Name. Do you see that the name Son is wont to
declare true relationship? And indeed if He were not a true Son (and "true" is
nothing else than "of Him"), how does he reason confidently from this? For if He
be Son only by grace, He not only is not "more excellent than the angels," but is
even less than they. How? Because righteous men too were called sons; and the
name son, if it be not a genuine son, does not avail to show the "excellency."
When too he would point out that there is a certain difference between creatures
and their maker, hear what he says:

Hebrews 1:5
"For to which of the Angels said He at any time, You are My Son, this day
have I begotten You. And again, I will be to Him a Father, and He shall be to Me
a Son"? For these things indeed are spoken with reference also to the flesh: "I
will be to Him a Father, and He shall be to Me a Son"— while this, "You are My
Son, this day have I begotten You," expresses nothing else than "from [the time]
that God is." For as He is said to be, from the time present (for this befits Him
more than any other), so also the [word] "Today" seems to me to be spoken here
with reference to the flesh. For when He has taken hold of it, thenceforth he
speaks out all boldly. For indeed the flesh partakes of the high things, just as the
Godhead of the lowly. For He who disdained not to become man, and did not
decline the reality, how should He have declined the expressions?
Seeing then that we know these things, let us be ashamed of nothing, nor
have any high thoughts. For if He Himself being God and Lord and Son of God,
did not decline to take the form of a slave, much more ought we to do all things,
though they be lowly. For tell me, O man, whence have you high thoughts?
From things of this life? But these or ever they appear, run by. Or, from things
spiritual? Nay, this is itself one spiritual excellency—to have no high thoughts.
Wherefore then do you cherish high thoughts? Because you go on aright?
Hear Christ saying, "When you have done all things, say, we are unprofitable
servants, for we have done that which was our duty to do." [Luke 17:10]
Or because of your wealth have you high thoughts? Do you not see those
before you, how they departed naked and desolate? Did we not come naked into
life, and naked also shall depart? Who has high thoughts on having what is
another's? For they who will use it to their own enjoyment alone, are deprived of
it how ever unwillingly, often before death, and at death certainly. But (says one)
while we live we use them as we will. First of all, one does not lightly see any