Christian wisdom. For on this account God permitted him there to end his life, so
that this man's death might be instructive to all who dwell in Rome. For we by
the grace of God need henceforward no evidence, being rooted in the faith. But
they who dwelt in Rome, inasmuch as there was great impiety there, required
more help. On this account both Peter and Paul, and this man after them, were all
slain there, partly, indeed, in order that they might purify with their own blood,
the city which had been defiled with blood of idols, and partly in order that they
might by their works afford a proof of the resurrection of the crucified Christ,
persuading those who dwell in Rome, that they would not with so much pleasure
disdain this present life, did they not firmly persuade themselves that they were
about to ascend to the crucified Jesus, and to see him in the heavens. For in
reality it is the greatest proof of the resurrection that the slain Christ should show
forth so great power after death, as to persuade living men to despise both
country and home and friends, and acquaintance and life itself, for the sake of
confessing him, and to choose in place of present pleasures, both stripes and
dangers and death. For these are not the achievements of any dead man, nor of
one remaining in the tomb but of one risen and living. Since how couldest thou
account, when he was alive, for all the Apostles who companied with him
becoming weaker through fear to betray their teachers and to flee and depart; but
when he died, for not only Peter and Paul, but even Ignatius, who had not even
seen him, nor enjoyed his companionship, showing such earnestness as to lay
down life itself for his sake?
5. In order then that all who dwell in Rome might learn that these things are
a reality, God allowed that there the saint should be perfected, and that this was
the reason I will guarantee from the very manner of his death. For not outside the
walls, in a dungeon, nor even in a court of justice, nor in some corner, did he
receive the sentence which condemned him, but in the midst of the theatre, while
the whole city was seated above him, he underwent this form of martyrdom,
wild beasts being let loose upon him, in order that he might plant his trophy
against the Devil, beneath the eyes of all, and make all spectators emulous of his

own conflicts. Not dying thus nobly only, but dying even with pleasure. For not
as though about to be severed from life, but as called to a better and more
spiritual life, so he beheld the wild beasts gladly. Whence is this manifest? From
the words which he uttered when about to die, for when he heard that this
manner of punishment awaited him, "may I have joy," said he, "of these wild
beasts." For such are the loving. For they receive with pleasure whatever they
may suffer for the sake of those who are beloved, and they seem to have their
desire satisfied when what happens to them is more than usually grievous.
Which happened, therefore, in this man's case. For not by his death alone, but
also by his readiness he studied to emulate the apostles, and hearing that they,
after they had been scourged retired with joy, himself too wished to imitate his
teachers, not only by his death, but by his joy. On this account he said, "may I
have joy of your wild beasts," and much milder than the tongue of the tyrant did
he consider the mouths of these; and very reasonably. For while that invited him
to Gehenna, their mouths escorted him to a kingdom. When, therefore, he made
an end of life there, yea rather, when he ascended to heaven, he departed
henceforward crowned. For this also happened through the dispensation of God,
that he restored him again to us, and distributed the martyr to the cities. For that
city received his blood as it dropped, but you were honoured with his remains,
you enjoyed his episcopate, they enjoyed his martyrdom. They saw him in
conflict, and victorious, and crowned, but you have him continually. For a little
time God removed him from you, and with greater glory granted him again to
you. And as those who borrow money, return with interest what they receive, so
also God, using this valued treasure of yours, for a little while, and having
shown it to that city, with greater brilliancy gave it back to you. You sent forth a
Bishop, and received a martyr; ye sent him forth with prayers, and you received
him with crowns; and not only ye, but all the cities which intervene. For how do
ye think that they behaved when they saw his remains being brought back? What
pleasure was produced! How they rejoiced! With what applause on all sides they
beset the crowned one! For as with a noble athlete, who has wrestled down all