She suffered all kinds of contumely from them, so that she could not return upwards to her father,
but was even shut up in a human body, and for ages passed in succession from one female body to
another, as from vessel to vessel. She was, for example, in that Helen on whose account the Trojan
war was undertaken; for whose sake also Stesichorus was struck blind, because he had cursed
her in his verses, but afterwards, repenting and writing what are called palinodes, in which he sang
her praise, he was restored to sight. Thus she, passing from body to body, and suffering insults in
every one of them, at last became a common prostitute; and she it was that was meant by the lost
sheep.
3. For this purpose, then, he had come that he might win her first, and free her from slavery,
while he conferred salvation upon men, by making himself known to them. For since the angels
ruled the world ill because each one of them coveted the principal power for himself, he had come
to amend matters, and had descended, transfigured and assimilated to powers and principalities
and angels, so that he might appear among men to be a man, while yet he was not a man; and that
thus he was thought to have suffered in Judæa, when he had not suffered. Moreover, the prophets
uttered their predictions under the inspiration of those angels who formed the world; for which
reason those who place their trust in him and Helena no longer regarded them, but, as being free,
live as they please; for men are saved through his grace, and not on account of their own righteous
actions. For such deeds are not righteous in the nature of things, but by mere accident, just as those
angels who made the world, have thought fit to constitute them, seeking, by means of such precepts,
to bring men into bondage. On this account, he pledged himself that the world should be dissolved,
and that those who are his should be freed from the rule of them who made the world.
4. Thus, then, the mystic priests belonging to this sect both lead profligate lives and practise
magical arts, each one to the extent of his ability. They use exorcisms and incantations. Love-potions,
too, and charms, as well as those beings who are called "Paredri" (familiars) and "Oniropompi"
(dream-senders), and whatever other curious arts can be had recourse to, are eagerly pressed into
their service. They also have an image of Simon fashioned after the likeness of Jupiter, and another
of Helena in the shape of Minerva; and these they worship. In fine, they have a name derived from
Simon, the author of these most impious doctrines, being called Simonians; and from them
"knowledge, falsely so called," received its beginning, as one may learn even from their own
assertions.
5. The successor of this man was Menander, also a Samaritan by birth, and he, too, was a perfect
adept in the practice of magic. He affirms that the primary Power continues unknown to all, but
that he himself is the person who has been sent forth from the presence of the invisible beings as
a saviour, for the deliverance of men. The world was made by angels, whom, like Simon, he
maintains to have been produced by EnnÏa. He gives, too, as he affirms, by means of that magic