10. For this reason I have wished to adduce some kind of proof, be it what
it might, respecting the act of conceiving, such as might serve to show in
what way, out of the things contained in the memory, the mind's eye is
informed in recollecting, and some such thing is begotten, when a man
conceives, as was already in him when, before he conceived, he
remembered; because it is easier to distinguish things that take place at
successive times, and where the parent precedes the offspring by an
interval of time. For if we refer ourselves to the inner memory of the mind
by which it remembers itself, and to the inner understanding by which it
understands itself, and to the inner will by which it loves itself, where
these three always are together, and always have been together since they
began to be at all, whether they were being thought of or not; the image of
this trinity will indeed appear to pertain even to the memory alone; but
because in this case a word cannot be without a thought (for we think all
that we say, even if it be said by that inner word which belongs to no
separate language), this image is rather to be discerned in these three
things, viz. memory, intelligence, will. And I mean now by intelligence
that by which we understand in thought, that is, when our thought is
formed by the finding of those things, which had been at hand to the
memory but were not being thought of; and I mean that will, or love, or
preference, which combines this offspring and parent, and is in some way
common to both. Hence it was that I tried also, viz. in the eleventh book,
to lead on the slowness of readers by means of outward sensible things
which are seen by the eyes of the flesh; and that I then proceeded to enter
with them upon that power of the inner man whereby he reasons of
things temporal, deferring the consideration of that which dominates as
the higher power, by which he contemplates things eternal. And I
discussed this in two books, distinguishing the two in the twelfth, the one
of them being higher and the other lower, and that the lower ought to be
subject to the higher; and in the thirteenth I discussed, with what truth
and brevity I could, the office of the lower, in which the wholesome
knowledge of things human is contained, in order that we may so act in
this temporal life as to attain that which is eternal; since, indeed, I have
cursorily included in a single book a subject so manifold and copious, and
one so well known by the many and great arguments of many and great
men, while manifesting that a trinity exists also in it, but not yet one that
can be called an image of God.

### CHAP. 8.—THE TRINITY WHICH IS THE IMAGE OF GOD IS NOW TO BE SOUGHT IN THE NOBLEST PART OF THE MIND.

11. But we have come now to that argument in which we have undertaken
to consider the noblest part of the human mind, by which it knows or can
know God, in order that we may find in it the image of God. For although
the human mind is not of the same nature with God, yet the image of that
nature than which none is better, is to be sought and found in us, in that
than which our nature also has nothing better. But the mind must first be
considered as it is in itself, before it becomes partaker of God; and His
image must be found in it. For, as we have said, although worn out and
defaced by losing the participation of God, yet the image of God still
remains. For it is His image in this very point, that it is capable of Him,
and can be partaker of Him; which so great good is only made possible by
its being His image. Well, then, the mind remembers, understands, loves
itself; if we discern this, we discern a trinity, not yet indeed God, but now
at last an image of God. The memory does not receive from without that
which it is to hold; nor does the understanding find without that which it
is to regard, as the eye of the body does; nor has will joined these two
from without, as it joins the form of the bodyily object and that which is
thence wrought in the vision of the beholder; nor has conception, in being
turned to it, found an image of a thing seen without, which has been
somehow seized and laid up in the memory, whence the intuition of him
that recollects has been formed, will as a third joining the two: as we
showed to take place in those trinities which were discovered in things
corporeal, or which were somehow drawn within from bodily objects by
the bodily sense; of all which we have discoursed in the eleventh book.
Nor, again, as it took place, or appeared to do so, when we went on
further to discuss that knowledge, which had its place now in the
workings of the inner man, and which was to be distinguished from
wisdom; of which knowledge the subject-matter was, as it were,
adventitious to the mind, and either was brought thither by historical
information,—as deeds and words, which are performed in time and pass
away, or which again are established in the nature of things in their own
times and places,—or arises in the man himself not being there before,
whether on the information of others, or by his own thinking,—as faith,
which we commended at length in the thirteenth book, or as the virtues,