also Christ said, "Behold, you are made whole; sin no more, lest a worse thing
come unto you;" [John 5:14] and this to a man who was thirty-eight years in his
infirmity. And what, one might ask, was he to suffer worse than this? Something
far worse, and more intolerable. For far be it from us, that we should endure as
much as we are capable of enduring. For God is at no loss for inflictions. For
according to the greatness of His mercy, so also is His wrath.
With this He charges Jerusalem also by Ezekiel. "I saw you," says He,
"polluted in blood; and I washed you, and anointed you; and you had renown for
your beauty; and you poured out your fornications," says He, "on those who
dwell near you," wherefore also the more grievous are His threatenings to you
when you sin.
But from hence infer not your punishment only, but also the boundless
longsuffering of God. How often at least have we put our hands to the same evil
deeds, and yet He suffers long! But let us not be sanguine, but fear; since
Pharaoh too, had he been taught by the first plague, would not have experienced
the later ones; he would not afterwards have been drowned, his host and all
together.
And this I say, because I know many, who like Pharaoh are even now
saying, "I know not God," [Exodus 5:2] and making those that are in their power
cleave to the clay and to the bricks. How many, though God bids them assauge
their "threatening," [Ephesians 6:9] cannot bear so much as to relax the toil!
"But we have no Red Sea now, to pass through afterwards." But we have a
sea of fire, a sea not like that, either in kind or in size, but far greater and fiercer,
having its waves of fire, of some strange and horrible fire. A great abyss is there,
of most intolerable flame. Since everywhere fire may be seen roving quickly
round, like some savage wild beast. And if here this sensible and material fire
leaped like a wild beast out of the furnace, and sprang upon those who were
sitting without, [Daniel 3:22] what will not that other fire do to such as have
fallen into it?
Concerning that day, hear the prophets, saying, "The day of the Lord is

incurable, full of anger and wrath." [Isaiah 13:9] For there will be none to stand
by, none to rescue, nowhere the face of Christ, so mild and calm. But as those
who work in the mines are delivered over to certain cruel men, and see none of
their friends, but those only that are set over them; so will it be then also: or
rather not so, but even far more grievous. For here it is possible to go unto the
king, and entreat, and free the condemned person: but there, no longer; for He
permits it not, but they continue in the scorching torment, and in so great
anguish, as it is not possible for words to tell. For if, when any are in flames
here, no speech can describe their sharp pangs, much less theirs, who suffer it in
that place: since here indeed all is over in a brief point of time, but in that place
there is burning indeed, but what is burnt is not consumed.
What then shall we do there? For to my self also do I say these things.
6. "But if you," says one, "who art our teacher, speak so of yourself, I care
no more; for what wonder, should I be punished?" Nay, I entreat, let no man seek
this consolation; for this is no refreshment at all. For tell me; was not the devil
an incorporeal power? Was he not superior to men? Yet he fell away. Is there any
one who will derive consolation from being punished along with him? By no
means. What of all who were in Egypt? Did they not see those also punished
who were in high places, and every house in mourning? Were they then hereby
refreshed, and comforted? No surely; and it is manifest by what they did
afterwards, as men tortured by some kind of fire, rising up together against the
king, and compelling him to cast out the people of the Hebrews.
Yea, and very unmeaning is this saying, to suppose that it gives comfort to
be punished with all men, to say, "As all, so I too." For why should I speak of
hell? Think, I pray you, of those that are seized with gout, how, when they are
racked by sharp pain, though you show them ten thousand suffering worse, they
do not so much as take it into their mind. For the intensity of their anguish
allows not their reason any leisure for thinking of others, and so finding
consolation. Let us not then feed ourselves with these cold hopes. For to receive
consolation from the ills of our neighbors, takes place in ordinary sufferings; but