195. When Saint Paul approached the apostles in Jerusalem to discern whether he was “running
or had run in vain” (Gal 2:2), the key criterion of authenticity which they presented was that he
should not forget the poor (cf. Gal 2:10). This important principle, namely that the Pauline
communities should not succumb to the self-centred lifestyle of the pagans, remains timely today,
when a new self-centred paganism is growing. We may not always be able to reflect adequately
the beauty of the Gospel, but there is one sign which we should never lack: the option for those
who are least, those whom society discards.

196. Sometimes we prove hard of heart and mind; we are forgetful, distracted and carried away by
the limitless possibilities for consumption and distraction offered by contemporary society. This
leads to a kind of alienation at every level, for “a society becomes alienated when its forms of
social organization, production and consumption make it more difficult to offer the gift of self and to
establish solidarity between people”.

The special place of the poor in God’s people

197. God’s heart has a special place for the poor, so much so that he himself “became poor” (2
Cor 8:9). The entire history of our redemption is marked by the presence of the poor. Salvation
came to us from the “yes” uttered by a lowly maiden from a small town on the fringes of a great

empire. The Saviour was born in a manger, in the midst of animals, like children of poor families;
he was presented at the Temple along with two turtledoves, the offering made by those who could
not afford a lamb (cf. Lk 2:24; Lev 5:7); he was raised in a home of ordinary workers and worked
with his own hands to earn his bread. When he began to preach the Kingdom, crowds of the
dispossessed followed him, illustrating his words: “The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he
has anointed me to preach good news to the poor” (Lk 4:18). He assured those burdened by
sorrow and crushed by poverty that God has a special place for them in his heart: “Blessed are
you poor, yours is the kingdom of God” (Lk 6:20); he made himself one of them: “I was hungry and
you gave me food to eat”, and he taught them that mercy towards all of these is the key to heaven
(cf. Mt 25:5ff.).

198. For the Church, the option for the poor is primarily a theological category rather than a
cultural, sociological, political or philosophical one. God shows the poor “his first mercy”. This
divine preference has consequences for the faith life of all Christians, since we are called to have
“this mind… which was in Jesus Christ” (Phil 2:5). Inspired by this, the Church has made an option
for the poor which is understood as a “special form of primacy in the exercise of Christian charity,
to which the whole tradition of the Church bears witness”. This option – as Benedict XVI has
taught – “is implicit in our Christian faith in a God who became poor for us, so as to enrich us with
his poverty”. This is why I want a Church which is poor and for the poor. They have much to
teach us. Not only do they share in the sensus fidei, but in their difficulties they know the suffering
Christ. We need to let ourselves be evangelized by them. The new evangelization is an invitation
to acknowledge the saving power at work in their lives and to put them at the centre of the
Church’s pilgrim way. We are called to find Christ in them, to lend our voice to their causes, but
also to be their friends, to listen to them, to speak for them and to embrace the mysterious wisdom
which God wishes to share with us through them.