SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.54, C.2.

Reply to Objection 2: The flesh is on account of the soul, as matter is
on account of the form, and the instrument on account of the
principal agent. Hence the flesh is loved lawfully, if it be directed to
the good of the soul as its end. If, however, a man place his last end
in a good of the flesh, his love will be inordinate and unlawful, and it
is thus that the prudence of the flesh is directed to the love of the
flesh.
Reply to Objection 3: The devil tempts us, not through the good of
the appetible object, but by way of suggestion. Wherefore, since
prudence implies direction to some appetible end, we do not speak
of "prudence of the devil," as of a prudence directed to some evil
end, which is the aspect under which the world and the flesh tempt
us, in so far as worldly or carnal goods are proposed to our appetite.
Hence we speak of "carnal" and again of "worldly" prudence,
according to Lk. 16:8, "The children of this world are more prudent in
their generation," etc. The Apostle includes all in the "prudence of
the flesh," because we covet the external things of the world on
account of the flesh.
We may also reply that since prudence is in a certain sense called
"wisdom," as stated above (Question 47, Article 2, ad 1), we may
distinguish a threefold prudence corresponding to the three kinds of
temptation. Hence it is written (James 3:15) that there is a wisdom
which is "earthly, sensual and devilish," as explained above
(Question 45, Article 1, ad 1), when we were treating of wisdom.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.54, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether prudence of the flesh is a mortal sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that prudence of the flesh is a mortal sin.
For it is a mortal sin to rebel against the Divine law, since this
implies contempt of God. Now "the prudence of the flesh . . . is not
subject to the law of God" (Rm. 8:7). Therefore prudence of the flesh
is a mortal sin.
Objection 2: Further, every sin against the Holy Ghost is a mortal sin.
Now prudence of the flesh seems to be a sin against the Holy Ghost,
for "it cannot be subject to the law of God" (Rm. 8:7), and so it
seems to be an unpardonable sin, which is proper to the sin against
the Holy Ghost. Therefore prudence of the flesh is a mortal sin.
Objection 3: Further, the greatest evil is opposed to the greatest
good, as stated in Ethic. viii, 10. Now prudence of the flesh is
opposed to that prudence which is the chief of the moral virtues.
Therefore prudence of the flesh is chief among mortal sins, so that it
is itself a mortal sin.
On the contrary, That which diminishes a sin has not of itself the
nature of a mortal sin. Now the thoughtful quest of things pertaining
to the care of the flesh, which seems to pertain to carnal prudence,
diminishes sin [Prov. 6:30]. Therefore prudence of the flesh has not
of itself the nature of a mortal sin.
I answer that, As stated above (Question 47, Article 2, ad 1; Article
13), a man is said to be prudent in two ways. First, simply, i.e. in
relation to the end of life as a whole. Secondly, relatively, i.e. in
relation to some particular end; thus a man is said to be prudent in
business or something else of the kind. Accordingly if prudence of
the flesh be taken as corresponding to prudence in its absolute
signification, so that a man place the last end of his whole life in the
care of the flesh, it is a mortal sin, because he turns away from God
by so doing, since he cannot have several last ends, as stated above
(FS, Question 1, Article 5).
If, on the other hand, prudence of the flesh be taken as
corresponding to particular prudence, it is a venial sin. For it
happens sometimes that a man has an inordinate affection for some
pleasure of the flesh, without turning away from God by a mortal sin;