them from the consideration of things here, saying,
Ver. 9. "But they that will be rich"; not those that are rich, but those who
wish to be. For a man may have money and make a good use of it, not
overvaluing it, but bestowing it upon the poor. Such therefore he does not blame,
but the covetous.
"They that will be rich fall into temptation and a snare, and into many
foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition."
He has justly said, "they drown men," since they cannot be raised from that
depth. "In destruction and perdition."
Ver. 10. "For the love of money is the root of all evil; which while some
coveted after, they have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through
with many sorrows."
Two things he mentions, and that which to them might seem the more
weighty he places last, their "many sorrows." And to learn how true this is, the
only way is to sojourn with the rich, to see how many are their sorrows, how
bitter their complaints.
Ver. 11. "But you, O man of God."
This is a title of great dignity. For we are all men of God, but the righteous
peculiarly so, not by right of creation only, but by that of appropriation. If then
you are a "man of God," seek not superfluous things, which lead you not to God,
but
"Flee these things, and follow after righteousness." Both expressions are
emphatic; he does not say turn from one, and approach the other, but "flee these
things, pursue righteousness," so as not to be covetous.
"Godliness," that is, soundness in doctrines.
"Faith," which is opposed to questionings.
"Love," patience, meekness.
Ver. 12. "Fight the good fight of faith, lay hold on eternal life." Lo, there is
your reward, "whereunto you are also called, and hast professed a good
profession," in hope of eternal life, "before many witnesses."

That is, do not put that confidence to shame. Why do you labor to no profit?
But what is the "temptation and snare," which he says, those that would be rich
fall into? It causes them to err from the faith, it involves them in dangers, it
renders them less intrepid. "Foolish desires," he says. And is it not a foolish
desire, when men like to keep idiots and dwarfs, not from benevolent motives,
but for their pleasure, when they have receptacles for fishes in their halls, when
they bring up wild beasts, when they give their time to dogs, and dress up horses,
and are as fond of them as of their children? All these things are foolish and
superfluous, nowise necessary, nowise useful.
"Foolish and hurtful lusts!" What are hurtful lusts? When men live
unlawfully, when they desire what is their neighbor's, when they do their utmost
in luxury, when they long for drunkenness, when they desire the murder and
destruction of others. From these desires many have aimed at tyranny, and
perished. Surely to labor with such views is both foolish and hurtful. And well
has he said, "They have erred from the faith." Covetousness attracting their eyes
to herself, and gradually stealing away their minds, suffers them not to see their
way. For as one walking on the straight road, with his mind intent on something
else, proceeds on his way indeed, but, often without knowing it, passes by the
very city to which he was hastening, his feet plying on at random and to no
purpose: such like a thing is covetousness. "They have pierced themselves
through with many sorrows." Do you see what he means by that word "pierced"?
What he means to express by the allusion is this. Desires are thorns, and as when
one touches thorns, he gores his hand, and gets him wounds, so he that falls into
these lusts will be wounded by them, and pierce his soul with griefs. And what
cares and troubles attend those who are thus pierced, it is not possible to express.
Therefore he says, "Flee these things, and follow after righteousness, godliness,
faith, love, patience, meekness." For meekness springs from love.
Ver. 12. "Fight the good fight."
Here he commends his boldness and manliness, that before all he
confidently "made profession," and he reminds him of his early instruction.