because he is less. So that his comparative deficiency, when the body is to be
built up, turns out of equal value with you unto this noble contribution : yea, he
avails as much as yourself. And it is evident from hence. Let there be no member
greater or less, nor more and less honorable: but let all be eye or all head: will
not the body perish? Every one sees it. Again, if all be inferior, the same thing
will happen. So that in this respect also the less are proved equal. Yea, and if one
must say something more, the purpose of the less being less is that the body may
remain. So that for your sake he is less, in order that you may continue to be
great. And here is the cause of his demanding the same care from all. And
having said, "that the members may have the same care one for another," he
explains "the same thing" again, by saying,

1 Corinthians 12:26
5. "And whether one member suffers all the members suffer with it; or one
member is honored, all the members rejoice with it."
"Yea, with no other view," says he, "did He make the care He requires
common, establishing unity in so great diversity, but that of all events there
might be complete communion. Because, if our care for our neighbor be the
common safety, it follows also that our glory and our sadness must be common."
Three things therefore he here demands: the not being divided but united in
perfection: the having like care for another: and the considering all that happens
common. And as above he says, "He has given more abundant honor to that part
which lacked," because it needs it; signifying that the very inferiority was
become an introduction to greater honor; so here he equalizes them in respect of
the care also which takes place mutually among them. For "therefore did he
cause them to partake of greater honor," says he, "that they might not meet with
less care." And not from hence only, but also by all that befalls them, good and
painful, are the members bound to one another. Thus often when a thorn is fixed
in the heel, the whole body feels it and cares for it: both the back is bent and the
belly and thighs are contracted, and the hands coming forth as guards and
servants draw out what was so fixed, and the head stoops over it, and the eyes
observe it with much care. So that even if the foot has inferiority from its
inability to ascend, yet by its bringing down the head it has an equality, and is
favored with the same honor; and especially whenever the feet are the cause of
the head's coming down, not by favor but by their claim on it. And thus, if by
being the more honorable it has an advantage; yet in that, being so it owes such
honor and care to the lesser and likewise equal sympathy: by this it indicates
great equality. Since what is meaner than the heel? What more honorable than
the head? Yet this member reaches to that, and moves them all together with