is poverty; upon a refusal, it compels people still to persist. Let this put us to
shame who fall back in our prayers. But observe, I pray you, Peter's gentleness:
for he said, "Look on us." So truly did their very bearing, of itself, betoken their
character. "And he gave heed unto them, expecting to receive something of them.
Then Peter said, Silver and gold have I none; but such as I have I give you." (v.
5-6.) He did not say, I give you something much better than silver or gold: but
what? "In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, rise up and walk. And he took
him by the right hand, and lifted him up." [Acts 3:7] Such was also the way of
Christ. Often He healed by word, often by an act, often also He stretched forth
the hand, where men were somewhat weak in faith, that the cure might not
appear to be spontaneous. "And he took him by the right hand, and lifted him
up." This act made manifest the Resurrection, for it was an image of the
Resurrection. "And immediately his feet and ankle bones received strength. And
he leaping up stood, and walked." [Acts 3:8] Perhaps it was by way of trying
himself that he put it thus to further proof, whether perchance the thing done
might not be to no purpose. His feet were weak; it was not that he had lost them.
Some say that he did not even know how to walk. "And entered with them into
the temple." Of a truth it was marvellous. The Apostles do not urge him; but of
his own accord he follows, by the act of following pointing out his benefactors.
"And leaping and praising God;" not admiring them, but God that wrought by
them. The man was grateful.
["Now Peter and John went up together into the temple," etc.] You observe
how they continued in prayer. "The ninth hour:" there they prayed together.
["And a certain man," etc.] The man was in the act of being carried at that
instant. ["Whom they laid daily:"] (his bearers carried him away:) ["at the gate,"
etc.] just when people went into the temple. And that you may not suppose that
they carried him for some other purpose, but that it was in order that he might
receive alms, hear what the writer says: "so that he might receive alms of those
entering into the temple." [Recapitulation of Acts 3:1-8] And this is the reason
why he also makes mention of the places, to give evidence of what he relates.

"And how was it," you may ask, "that they did not present him to Christ?"
Perhaps they were certain unbelieving men, that haunted the temple, as in fact
neither did they present him to the Apostles, when they saw them entering, after
having done such great miracles. "He asked," it is written, "to receive an alms."
[Acts 3:3] Their bearing marked them as certain devout and righteous men.
["And Peter fastening his eyes upon him, with John, said," etc.] (v. 4-5.) And
observe how John is everywhere silent, while Peter makes excuse for him also;
"Silver and gold," he says, "have I none." [Acts 3:6] He does not say, I have
none here, as we are wont to speak, but absolutely, I have none. "What then?" he
might say, "do you take no notice of me, your suppliant?" Not so, but of what I
have, receive thou. Do you remark how unassuming Peter is, how he makes no
display even to the object of his beneficence? ["In the name," etc. "And he took
him by the hand," etc.] [Acts 3:7] And the mouth and the hand did all. Such sort
of persons were the Jews; lame, and the right thing being to ask for health, these
same ask for money, grovelling on the ground: for this it was that they beset the
temple— to get money. What then does Peter? He did not despise him; he did
not look about for some rich subject; he did not say, If the miracle is not done to
some great one ([εἰς ἐκεἵνον]), nothing great is done: he did not look for some
honor from him, no, nor heal him in the presence of people; for the man was at
the entrance, not where the multitude were, that is, within. But Peter sought no
such object; nor upon entering did he proclaim the matter: no, it was by his
bearing that he attracted the lame man to ask. And the wonder is, that he
believed so readily. For those who are set free from diseases of long standing,
hardly believe their very eyesight. Once healed, he remains with the Apostles,
giving thanks to God. "And he entered," it is said, "with them into the temple,
walking, and leaping, and praising God." [Acts 3:8] Observe how restless he is,
in the eagerness of his delight, at the same time shutting the mouths of the Jews.
Also, that he leaped, was to prevent the suspicion of hypocrisy; for after all, this
was beyond the possibility of deception. For if previously he was totally unable
to walk, even when hunger pressed hard (and indeed he would not have chosen