so far were they from being earnest in this matter. Observe him also casting
(people) into prison before this. The others therefore did not prevail: but this
man did prevail, by reason of his ardent mind. "And as he journeyed, he came
near Damascus: and suddenly there shined round about him a light from heaven:
and he fell to the earth, and heard a voice saying unto him, Saul, Saul, why do
you persecute Me?" (v. 3, 4.) Why not in Jerusalem? Why not in Damascus?
That there might be no opening for different persons to relate the occurrence in
different ways, but that he alone should be the authentic narrator ([ἀ]
[ξιόπιστος]), he that went for this purpose. In fact, he says this [both in his
oration on the stairs], and when pleading before Agrippa. "Fell to the earth": [ch.
22:6: 26:12] for excess of light is wont to shock, because the eyes have their
measure: it is said also that excess of sound makes people deaf and stunned (as
in a fit) ([ἀ] [ποπλἥγας]). But him it only blinded, and extinguished his passion
by fear, so that he should hear what was spoken. "Saul, Saul," says He, "why do
you persecute me?" And He tells him nothing: does not say, Believe, nor
anything whatever of the kind: but expostulates with him, all but saying, What
wrong, great or small, have you suffered from Me, that you do these things?
"And he said, Who are You Lord?" [Acts 9:5] thus in the first place confessing
himself His servant. "And the Lord said, I am Jesus, whom you persecute." think
not your warring is with men. And they which were with him heard the voice of
Paul, but saw no person to whom he answered— for (the Lord) suffered them to
be hearers of what was less important. Had they heard the other Voice, they
would not have believed; but perceiving Paul answering (some person), they
marvelled. "But arise, and go into the city, and it shall be told you what you must
do." [Acts 9:6] Observe, how He does not immediately add all, but first softens
his mind. In the same way He called the disciples also a second time. "It shall be
told you," etc.: He gives him good hopes, and (intimates) that he shall recover
his sight also. "And the men which journeyed with him stood speechless, hearing
a voice, but seeing no man. And Saul arose from the earth; and when his eyes
were opened, he saw no man: but they led him by the hand, and brought him into

Damascus" (v. 7, 8):— the spoils of the devil ([τὰ σκεύη αὐτοὕ]), "his goods"
[Matthew 13:29], as from some city, yea, some metropolis which has been taken.
And the wonder of it is, the enemies and foes themselves brought him in, in the
sight of all! "And for three days he neither did eat nor drink, being blinded."
[Acts 9:9] What could equal this? To compensate the discouragement in the
matter of Stephen, here is encouragement, in the bringing in of Paul: though that
sadness had its consolation in the fact of Stephen's making such an end, yet it
also received this further consolation: moreover, the bringing in of the villages of
the Samaritans afforded very great comfort.— But why did this take place not at
the very first, but after these things? That it might be shown that Christ was
indeed risen. This furious assailant of Christ, the man who would not believe in
His death and resurrection, the persecutor of His disciples, how should this man
have become a believer, had not the power of His resurrection been great
indeed? Be it so, that the other Apostles favored (His pretensions ): what say you
to this man? Why then not immediately after His resurrection? That his hostility
might be more clearly shown as open war. The man who is so frantic as even to
shed blood and cast men into prisons, all at once believes! It was not enough that
he had never been in Christ's company: the believers must be warred upon by
him with vehement hostility: he left to none the possibility of going beyond him
in fury: none of them all could be so violent. But when he was blinded, then he
saw the proofs of His sovereignty and loving kindness: then he answers, "Lord,
what will You have me to do?" that none may say that he played the hypocrite, he
that was even eager for blood, and went to the priests, and flung himself upon
such dangers, in persecuting and bringing to punishment even them that were in
foreign parts— under these circumstances he now acknowledges His
sovereignty. And why was he shone upon by that light not within the city, but
before it? The many would not have believed, since even there (at Jerusalem
when the people heard the voice which came from above, they said that "it
thundered" [John 12:29, supra, note 2, p. 123]; but this man was authority
enough in reporting what was his own affair. And bound he was brought in,