Consider how great evils have oftentimes arisen from wealth. For "It is
easier" (it is said) "for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich
man to enter into the kingdom of Heaven." [Matthew 19:24] Do you see to how
many good things wealth is a hindrance, and do you seek to be rich? Do you not
rejoice that the hindrance has been overthrown? So narrow is the way which
leads into the Kingdom. So broad is wealth, and full of bulk and swelling out.
Therefore He says, "Sell that you have" [Matthew 19:21], that that way may
receive you. Why do you yearn after wealth? For this cause He took it away
from you, that He might free you from slavery. For true fathers also, when a son
is corrupted by some mistress, and having given him much exhortation they do
not persuade him to part from her, send the mistress into banishment. Such also
is abundance of wealth. Because the Lord cares for us, and delivers us from the
harm [which arises] therefrom, He takes away wealth from us.
Let us not then think poverty an evil: sin is the only evil. For neither is
wealth a good thing by itself: to be well-pleasing to God is the only good.
Poverty then let us seek, this let us pursue: so shall we lay hold on heaven, so
shall we attain to the other good things. Which may we all attain by the grace
and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom to the Father together
with the Holy Ghost be glory, power, honor, now and ever and world without
end. Amen.

## Homily 34 on Hebrews

Hebrews 13:17
" Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit yourselves. For they
watch for your souls, as they that must give account, that they may do it with joy,
and not with grief, for this is unprofitable for you."
1. Anarchy is an evil, and the occasion of many calamities, and the source
of disorder and confusion. For as, if you take away the leader from a chorus, the
chorus will not be in tune and in order; and if from a phalanx of an army thou
remove the commander, the evolutions will no longer be made in time and order,
and if from a ship thou take away the helmsman, you will sink the vessel; so too
if from a flock thou remove the shepherd, you have overthrown and destroyed
all.
Anarchy then is an evil, and a cause of ruin. But no less an evil also is the
disobedience to rulers. For it comes again to the same. For a people not obeying
a ruler, is like one which has none; and perhaps even worse. For in the former
case they have at least an excuse for disorder, but no longer in the latter, but are
punished.
But perhaps some one will say, there is also a third evil, when the ruler is
bad. I myself too know it, and no small evil it is, but even a far worse evil than
anarchy. For it is better to be led by no one, than to be led by one who is evil.
For the former indeed are oftentimes saved, and oftentimes are in peril, but the
latter will be altogether in peril, being led into the pit [of destruction].
How then does Paul say, "Obey them that have the rule over you, and
submit yourselves"? Having said above, "whose faith follow, considering the end
of their conversation" [Hebrews ver. 7], he then said, "Obey them that have the
rule over you, and submit yourselves."