SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.31, C.9.

be ruled in accordance with the power of his superior: for the natural
order demands that the inferior should be ruled according to its
superior. Therefore in those matters in which the inferior is subject
to his superior, his ministrations must be subject to the superior's
permission.
Accordingly he that is under another's power must not give alms of
anything in respect of which he is subject to that other, except in so
far as he has been commissioned by his superior. But if he has
something in respect of which he is not under the power of his
superior, he is no longer subject to another in its regard, being
independent in respect of that particular thing, and he can give alms
therefrom.
Reply to Objection 1: If a monk be dispensed through being
commissioned by his superior, he can give alms from the property of
his monaster, in accordance with the terms of his commission; but if
he has no such dispensation, since he has nothing of his own, he
cannot give alms without his abbot's permission either express or
presumed for some probable reason: except in a case of extreme
necessity, when it would be lawful for him to commit a theft in order
to give an alms. Nor does it follow that he is worse off than before,
because, as stated in De Eccles. Dogm. lxxi, "it is a good thing to
give one's property to the poor little by little, but it is better still to
give all at once in order to follow Christ, and being freed from care,
to be needy with Christ."
Reply to Objection 2: A wife, who has other property besides her
dowry which is for the support of the burdens of marriage, whether
that property be gained by her own industry or by any other lawful
means, can give alms, out of that property, without asking her
husband's permission: yet such alms should be moderate, lest
through giving too much she impoverish her husband. Otherwise
she ought not to give alms without the express or presumed consent
of her husband, except in cases of necessity as stated, in the case of
a monk, in the preceding Reply. For though the wife be her
husband's equal in the marriage act, yet in matters of housekeeping,
the head of the woman is the man, as the Apostle says (1 Cor. 11:3).
As regards Blessed Lucy, she had a betrothed, not a husband,
wherefore she could give alms with her mother's consent.
Reply to Objection 3: What belongs to the children belongs also to
the father: wherefore the child cannot give alms, except in such

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.31, C.9.

small quantity that one may presume the father to be willing: unless,
perchance, the father authorize his child to dispose of any particular
property. The same applies to servants. Hence the Reply to the
Fourth Objection is clear.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.31, C.10.