your life, and enter with great eagerness into the contests, break the phalanx of
the adversaries, bruise the face of the devil, set up your trophy. If however
godliness be in nowise harmed, and no one lay waste our doctrines (those I mean
which relate to the soul), nor compel us to do anything displeasing to God, do
not be officious.
The life of the Christian must be full of blood-sheddings; I say not in
shedding that of others, but in readiness to shed one's own. Let us then pour out
our own blood, when it is for Christ's sake, with as great readiness as one would
pour out water (for the blood which flows about the body is water), and let us
put off our flesh with as much good temper, as one even would a garment. And
this shall we do, if we be not bound to riches, if not to houses, if not to
affections, if we be detached from all things. For if they who live this life of
[earthly] soldiers bid farewell to all things, and wherever war calls them there
present themselves, and make journeys, and endure all things with ready mind;
much more ought we, the soldiers of Christ, so to have prepared ourselves, and
to set ourselves firm against the war of the passions.
8. There is no persecution now, and God grant there may never be: but there
is another war, that of the desire of money, of envy, of the passions. Paul,
describing this war, says, "We wrestle not against flesh and blood." [Ephesians
6:12] This war is ever at hand. Therefore he wishes us to stand ever armed.
Because he wishes us to stand ever armed, he says, "Stand, having girded
yourselves about." [Ephesians 6:14] Which itself also belongs to the time
present, and expresses that we ought ever to be armed. For great is the war
through the tongue, great that through the eyes; this then we must keep down—
great [too] is that of the lusts.
Therefore he begins at that point to arm the soldier of Christ: for "stand,"
says he, "having your loins girt about," and he added "with truth." [Ephesians
6:14] Why "with truth"? Because lust is a mockery and a lie: wherefore the
prophet says, "My loins are filled with mockings." [Psalm 38:7] The thing is not
pleasure, but a shadow of pleasure. "Having your loins," he says, "girt about

with truth"; that is, with true pleasure, with temperance, with orderly behavior.
For this cause he gives this advice, knowing the unreasonableness of sin, and
wishing that all our members should be hedged round; for "unjust anger" it is
said, "shall not be guiltless." [Sirach 1:22]
Moreover he wishes us to have around us a breastplate and a buckler. For
desire is a wild beast which easily springs forth, and we shall have need of walls
and fences innumerable, to overcome, and to restrain it. And for this cause God
has built this part [of our body] especially with bones, as with a kind of stones,
placing around it a support, so that [desire] might not at any time, having broken
or cut through, easily injure the whole man. For it is a fire (it is said) and a great
tempest, and no other part of the body could endure this violence. And the sons
of the physicians too say that for this cause the lungs have been spread under the
heart, so that the heart being itself [put] into something soft and tender, by
beating as it were into a sort of sponge, may continually be rested, and not [by
striking] against the resisting and hard sternum, receive hurt through the violence
of its beatings. We have need therefore of a strong breastplate, so as to keep this
wild beast always quiet.
We have need also of an helmet; for since the reasoning faculty is there, and
from this it is possible for us either to be saved, when what is right is done, or it
is possible for us to be ruined— therefore he says, "the helmet of salvation."
[Ephesians 6:17] For the brain is indeed by nature tender, and therefore is
covered above with the skull, as with a kind of shell. And it is to us the cause of
all things both good and evil, knowing what is fitting, or what is not so. Yea and
our feet too and our hands need armor, not these hands, nor these feet, but as
before those of the soul— the former by being employed about what is right, the
latter, that they may walk where they ought. Thus then let us thoroughly arm
ourselves, and we shall be able to overcome our enemies, and to wreathe
ourselves with the crown in Christ Jesus our Lord, with whom to the Father
together with the Holy Ghost be glory, might, honor, now and for ever and world
without end. Amen.