Homily 73 on the Gospel of John
John 13:36
"Simon Peter said unto Him, Lord, where are you going? Jesus answered him,
Whither I go you can not follow Me now, but you shall follow Me afterwards."
1. A great thing is love, and stronger than fire itself, and it goes up to the
very heaven; there is no hindrance which can restrain its tearing force. And so
the most fervent Peter, when he hears, "Whither I go ye cannot come," what says
he? "Lord, where are you going?" and this he said, not so much from wish to
learn, as from desire to follow. To say openly, "I go," he dared not yet, but,
"Where are you going?" Christ answered, not to his words, but to his thoughts.
For that this was his wish, is clear from what Christ said, "Whither I go you can
not follow Me now." Do you see that he longed for the following Him, and
therefore asked the question? And when he heard, "you shall follow Me
afterwards," not even so did he restrain his longing, and, though he had gained
good hopes, he is so eager as to say,

John 13:37
"Why cannot I follow You now? I will lay down my life for You."
When he had shaken off the dread of being the traitor, and was shown to be
one of His own, he afterwards asked boldly himself, while the others held their
peace. "What do you say, Peter? He said, you can not,' and you say, 'I can'?
Therefore you shall know from this temptation that your love is nothing without
the presence of the impulse from above." Whence it is clear that in care for him
He allowed even that fall. He desired indeed to teach him even by the first
words, but when he continued in his vehemence, He did not indeed throw or
force him into the denial, but left him alone, that he might learn his own
weakness. Christ had said that He must be betrayed; Peter replied, "Be it far from
You, Lord; this shall not happen unto You." [Matthew 16:22] He was rebuked,
but not instructed. On the contrary, when Christ desired to wash his feet, he said,
"You shall never wash my feet." [John 13:8] Again, when he hears, "You can not
follow Me now," he says, "Though all deny You, I will not deny You." Since then
it was likely that he would be lifted up to folly by his practice of contradiction,
Jesus next teaches him not to oppose Him. This too Luke implies, when he tells
us that Christ said, "And I have prayed for you, that your faith fail not" [Luke
22:32]; that is, "that thou be not finally lost." In every way teaching him
humility, and proving that human nature by itself is nothing. But, since great
love made him apt for contradiction, He now sobers him, that he might not in
after times be subject to this, when he should have received the stewardship of
the world, but remembering what he had suffered, might know himself. And
look at the violence of his fall; it did not happen to him once or twice, but he was
so beside himself, that in a short time thrice did he utter the words of denial, that
he might learn that he did not so love as he was loved. And yet, to one who had
so fallen He says again, "Lovest thou Me more than these?" So that the denial
was caused not by the cooling of his love, but from his having been stripped of