demon is without body: he is everywhere going about. It is he who arms the
robbers themselves. For these things do not take place without the demon. If
therefore he arms them, he knows also where it is deposited. He is not ignorant
of his own ministers. And this is not wonderful. If he sees you grieving at the
loss, he adds yet another to it. If he sees you laughing at it, and despising it, he
will desist from this course. For as we deal to our enemies those things by which
we grieve them, but if we see that they do not grieve, we henceforth desist, as
being unable to plague them; so does the devil also.
What do you say? Do you not see those who sail on the sea, how, when a
storm arises, they regard not their wealth, but even throw overboard their
substance? "O man, what do you say? Are you coöperating with the storm and
the shipwreck? Before the wave has taken away your wealth, do you do it with
your own hands? Why, before the shipwreck, do you wreck yourself?" But indeed
a rustic inexperienced in the trials of the sea might say this. But the naval man,
and one who truly knows what are the causes of calm, and what of storm, will
even laugh at him who talks thus. For I throw it overboard, he says, that there
may be no whelming sea. So he who is experienced in the events and trials of
life, when he sees the storm impending, and the spirits of evil wishing to cause
shipwreck, throws overboard even the remainder of his wealth. Have you been
plundered? Do alms, and you lighten the ship. Have robbers ravaged you? Give
what remains to Christ. So you will console your poverty from your former loss.
Lighten the ship, do not hold fast what remains, lest the vessel fill with water.
They, to preserve their bodies, throw their goods overboard, and wait not for the
assailing wave to overturn the vessel. And will you not stay the shipwreck, that
you may save souls?
Make the trial, I beseech you— if you disbelieve, make the trial, and you
will see the glory of God. When anything grievous has happened, immediately
give alms; render thanks that it has happened, and you will see how much joy
will come upon you. For spiritual gain, though it be small, is so great as to throw
into the shade all bodily loss. As long as you have to give to Christ, you are rich.

Tell me, if when you were robbed, the king coming to you held out his hand,
begging to receive something from you, would you not then think yourself richer
than all, if the king not even after so great poverty was ashamed of you? Be not
carried away with your wealth, only overcome yourself, and you will overcome
the assault of the devil. It is in your power to acquire great gain.
Let us despise wealth, that we may not despise the soul. But how can any
one despise it? Do you not see in the case of beautiful bodies, and the lovers of
them, how as long as they are in their sight the fire is kindled, the flame rises
bright; but when any one has removed them afar off, all is extinguished, all is
lulled to sleep; so also in the case of wealth, let no one provide gold, nor
precious stones, nor necklaces; when seen, they ensnare the eyes. But if you
would be rich like the ancients, be rich not in gold, but in necessary things, that
you may bestow on others from that which you have ready. Be not fond of
ornament. Such wealth is both easy to be plotted against by robbers, and a thing
that brings us cares. Not vessels of gold and silver, but let there be stores of
bread and wine and oil, not that being sold again they may procure money, but
that they may be supplied to those who need. If we withdraw ourselves from
those superfluities, we shall obtain the heavenly goods; which God grant that we
may all obtain, in Jesus Christ our Lord, with whom, etc.