I answer that, Some have maintained that the demons were wicked
straightway in the first instant of their creation; not by their nature,
but by the sin of their own will; because, as soon as he was made,
the devil refused righteousness. To this opinion, as Augustine says
(De Civ. Dei xi, 13), if anyone subscribes, he does not agree with
those Manichean heretics who say that the devil's nature is evil of
itself. Since this opinion, however, is in contradiction with the
authority of Scripture---for it is said of the devil under the figure of
the prince of Babylon (Is. 14:12): "How art thou fallen . . . O Lucifer,
who didst rise in the morning!" and it is said to the devil in the
person of the King of Tyre (Ezech. 28:13): "Thou wast in the
pleasures of the paradise of God," ---consequently, this opinion was
reasonably rejected by the masters as erroneous.
Hence others have said that the angels, in the first instant of their
creation, could have sinned, but did not. Yet this view also is
repudiated by some, because, when two operations follow one upon
the other, it seems impossible for each operation to terminate in the
one instant. Now it is clear that the angel's sin was an act
subsequent to his creation. But the term of the creative act is the
angel's very being, while the term of the sinful act is the being
wicked. It seems, then, an impossibility for the angel to have been
wicked in the first instant of his existence.
This argument, however, does not satisfy. For it holds good only in
such movements as are measured by time, and take place
successively; thus, if local movement follows a change, then the
change and the local movement cannot be terminated in the same
instant. But if the changes are instantaneous, then all at once and in
the same instant there can be a term to the first and the second
change; thus in the same instant in which the moon is lit up by the
sun, the atmosphere is lit up by the moon. Now, it is manifest that
creation is instantaneous; so also is the movement of free-will in the
angels; for, as has been already stated, they have no occasion for
comparison or discursive reasoning (Question 58, Article 3).
Consequently, there is nothing to hinder the term of creation and of
free-will from existing in the same instant.
We must therefore reply that, on the contrary, it was impossible for
the angel to sin in the first instant by an inordinate act of free-will.
For although a thing can begin to act in the first instant of its
existence, nevertheless, that operation which begins with the

existence comes of the agent from which it drew its nature; just as
upward movement in fire comes of its productive cause. Therefore, if
there be anything which derives its nature from a defective cause,
which can be the cause of a defective action, it can in the first instant
of its existence have a defective operation; just as the leg, which is
defective from birth, through a defect in the principle of generation,
begins at once to limp. But the agent which brought the angels into
existence, namely, God, cannot be the cause of sin. Consequently it
cannot be said that the devil was wicked in the first instant of his
creation.
Reply to Objection 1: As Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xi, 15), when it
is stated that "the devil sins from the beginning," "he is not to be
thought of as sinning from the beginning wherein he was created,
but from the beginning of sin": that is to say, because he never went
back from his sin.
Reply to Objection 2: That distinction of light and darkness, whereby
the sins of the demons are understood by the term darkness, must
be taken as according to God's foreknowledge. Hence Augustine
says (De Civ. Dei xi, 15), that "He alone could discern light and
darkness, Who also could foreknow, before they fell, those who
would fall."
Reply to Objection 3: All that is in merit is from God; and
consequently an angel could merit in the first instant of his creation.
The same reason does not hold good of sin; as has been said.
Reply to Objection 4: God did not distinguish between the angels
before the turning away of some of them, and the turning of others to
Himself, as Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xi, 15). Therefore, as all were
created in grace, all merited in their first instant. But some of them at
once placed an impediment to their beatitude, thereby destroying
their preceding merit; and consequently they were deprived of the
beatitude which they had merited.