THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.63, C.7.

thirdly, in regard to the recipient. In regard to the thing done, the
Eucharist belongs to the Divine worship, for the Divine worship
consists principally therein, so far as it is the sacrifice of the Church.
And by this same sacrament a character is not imprinted on man;
because it does not ordain man to any further sacramental action or
benefit received, since rather is it "the end and consummation of all
the sacraments," as Dionysius says (Eccl. Hier. iii). But it contains
within itself Christ, in Whom there is not the character, but the very
plenitude of the Priesthood.
But it is the sacrament of order that pertains to the sacramental
agents: for it is by this sacrament that men are deputed to confer
sacraments on others: while the sacrament of Baptism pertains to
the recipients, since it confers on man the power to receive the other
sacraments of the Church; whence it is called the "door of the
sacraments." In a way Confirmation also is ordained for the same
purpose, as we shall explain in its proper place (Question 65, Article
3). Consequently, these three sacraments imprint a character,
namely, Baptism, Confirmation, and order.
Reply to Objection 1: Every sacrament makes man of the a
participator in Christ's Priesthood, from the fact that it confers on
him some effect thereof. But every sacrament does not depute a man
to do or receive something pertaining to the worship of the
priesthood of Christ: while it is just this that is required for a
sacrament to imprint a character.
Reply to Objection 2: Man is sanctified by each of the sacraments,
since sanctity means immunity from sin, which is the effect of grace.
But in a special way some sacraments, which imprint a character,
bestow on man a certain consecration, thus deputing him to the
Divine worship: just as inanimate things are said to be consecrated
forasmuch as they are deputed to Divine worship.
Reply to Objection 3: Although a character is a reality and a
sacrament, it does not follow that whatever is a reality and a
sacrament, is also a character. With regard to the other sacraments
we shall explain further on what is the reality and what is the
sacrament.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.63, C.7.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.64, C.1.

## QUESTION 64 — OF THE CAUSES OF THE SACRAMENTS

Prologue
In the next place we have to consider the causes of the sacraments,
both as to authorship and as to ministration. Concerning which there
are ten points of inquiry:
(1) Whether God alone works inwardly in the sacraments?
(2) Whether the institution of the sacraments is from God alone?
(3) Of the power which Christ exercised over the sacraments;
(4) Whether He could transmit that power to others?
(5) Whether the wicked can have the power of administering the
sacraments?
(6) Whether the wicked sin in administering the sacraments?
(7) Whether the angels can be ministers of the sacraments?
(8) Whether the minister's intention is necessary in the sacraments?
(9) Whether right faith is required therein; so that it be impossible for
an unbeliever to confer a sacrament?
(10) Whether a right intention is required therein?