but slaying while they worship. Let us fear then, lest at any time, while we have
the appearance of suppliants and worshippers, we should in deed show forth the
contrary.
And let us cast everything out of our hands when we are to worship; though
it be gold that we have, let us offer it unto him and not bury it. For if those
barbarians then offered it for honor, what will become of you, not giving even to
Him that has need? If those men journeyed so far to see Him newly born, what
sort of excuse will you have, not going out of your way one alley's length, that
you may visit Him sick or in bonds? And yet when they are sick or in bonds,
even our enemies have our pity; yours is denied even to your Benefactor and
Lord. And they offered gold, you hardly give bread. They saw the star and were
glad, you, seeing Christ Himself a stranger and naked, are not moved.
For which of you, for Christ's sake, has made so long a pilgrimage, you that
have received countless benefits, as these barbarians, or rather, these wiser than
the wisest philosophers? And why say I, so long a journey? Nay, many of our
women are so delicate, that they go not over so much as one crossing of the
streets to behold Him on the spiritual manger, unless they can have mules to
draw them. And others being able to walk, yet prefer to their attendance here,
some a crowd of worldly business, some the theatres. Whereas the barbarians
accomplished so great a journey for His sake, before seeing Him; you do not
emulate them even after you have seen Him, but forsake Him after seeing Him,
and run to see the stage player. (For I touch again on the same subjects, as I did
also of late. ) And seeing Christ lying in the manger, you leave Him, that you
may see women on the stage.
7. What thunderbolts do not these things deserve? For tell me, if any one
were to lead you into a palace, and show you the king on his throne, would you
indeed choose to see the theatre instead of those things? And yet even in the
palace there is nothing to gain; but here a spiritual well of fire gushes up out of
this table. And you leave this, and runnest down to the theatre, to see women
swimming, and nature put to open dishonor, leaving Christ sitting by the well?

Yes: for now, as of old, He sits down by the well, not discoursing to a Samaritan
woman, but to a whole city. Or perchance now too with a Samaritan woman
only. For neither now is any one with Him; but some with their bodies only, and
some not even with these. But nevertheless, He retires not, but remains, and asks
of us to drink, not water, but holiness, for "His holy things He gives unto the
holy." For it is not water that He gives us from this fountain, but living blood;
and it is indeed a symbol of death, but it has become the cause of life.
But you, leaving the fountain of blood, the awful cup, go your way unto the
fountain of the devil, to see a harlot swim, and to suffer shipwreck of the soul.
For that water is a sea of lasciviousness, not drowning bodies, but working
shipwreck of souls. And whereas she swims with naked body, you beholding, are
sunk into the deep of lasciviousness. For such is the devil's net; it sinks, not them
that go down into the water itself, but them that sit above more than such as
wallow therein; and it chokes them more grievously than Pharaoh, who was of
old sunk in the sea with his horses and his chariots. And if souls could but be
seen, I could show you many floating on these waters, like the bodies of the
Egyptians at that time. But what is still more grievous is this, that they even call
such utter destruction a delight, and they term the sea of perdition a channel for a
pleasure voyage. Yet surely one might easier pass over in safety the Ægean or
the Tuscan sea, than this spectacle. For in the first place, through a whole night
the devil preoccupies their souls with the expectation of it; then having shown
them the expected object, he binds them at once, and makes them captives. For
think not, because you have not been joined unto the harlot, you are clean from
the sin; for in the purpose of your heart you have done it all. Since if you be
taken by lust, you have kindled the flame up higher; if you feel nothing at what
you see, you deserve a heavier charge, for being a scandal to others, by
encouraging them in these spectacles, and for polluting your own eye-sight, and
together with your eye-sight, your soul.
However, not merely to find fault, come let us devise a mode of correction
too. What then will the mode be? I would commit you to your own wives, that