but He gives you also recompense for His keeping of it? For indeed He does
exceedingly love us. Therefore if you should wish to lend, He stands ready; or to
sow, He receives it; or if you should wish to build, He draws you unto Himself,
saying, Build in my regions. Why do you run unto poor, unto beggarly men, who
also for little gains occasion you great trouble? Nevertheless, not even on
hearing these things, do we make up our minds to it, but where are fightings and
wars, and wild struggles, and trials and suits of law, and false accusations, there
do we hasten.
5. Does He not justly turn away from us, and punish us, when He is giving
up Himself unto us for all things, and we are resisting Him? It is surely plain to
all. For whether you are desirous to adorn yourself, "Let it, He says, be with my
ornaments;" or to arm yourself, "with my arms," or to clothe yourself, "with my
raiment;" or to feed yourself, "at my table;" or to journey, "on my way;" or to
inherit, "my inheritance;" or to enter into a country, "the city of which I am
builder and maker;" or to build a house, "among my tabernacles." "For I, so far
from asking you for a recompense of the things that I give you, to even make
myself owe you a recompense for this very thing, if you be willing to use all I
have." What can be equal to this munificence, "I am Father, I am brother, I am
bridegroom, I am dwelling place, I am food, I am raiment, I am root, I am
foundation, all whatsoever you will, I am." "Be thou in need of nothing, I will be
even a servant, for I came to minister, not to be ministered unto; I am friend, and
member, and head, and brother, and sister, and mother; I am all; only cling thou
closely to me. I was poor for you, and a wanderer for you, on the cross for you,
in the tomb for you, above I intercede for you to the Father; on earth I have
come for your sake am ambassador from my Father. You are all things to me,
brother, and joint heir, and friend, and member." What would you more? Why do
you turn away from Him, who loves you? Why do you labor for the world? Why
do you draw water into a broken cistern? For it is this to labor for the present
life. Why do you comb wool into the fire? Why do you "beat the air?"
[1 Corinthians 9:26] Why do you "run in vain?" [Galatians 2:2]

Hath not every art an end? It is surely plain to every one. Do thou also show
the end of your worldly eagerness. But you can not; for, "vanity of vanities, all is
vanity." [Ecclesiastes 1:2] Let us go to the tombs; show me your father; show me
your wife. Where is he that was clad in raiment of gold? He that rode in the
chariot? He that had armies, that had the girdle, that had the heralds? He that was
slaying these, and casting those into prison? He that put to death whom he
would, and set free whom he was minded? I see nothing but bones, and a worm,
and a spider's web; all those things are earth, all those a fable, all a dream, and a
shadow, and a bare relation, and a picture, or rather not so much as a picture. For
the picture we see at least in a likeness, but here not so much as a likeness.
And would that the evils stop with this. For now the honor, and the luxury,
and the distinction, end with a shadow, with words; but the consequences of
them, are no longer limited to a shadow and to words, but continue, and will pass
over with us elsewhere, and will be manifest to all, the rapine, the covetousness,
the fornications, the adulteries, the dreadful things beyond number; these not in
similitude, neither in ashes, but written above, both words and deeds.
With what eyes then shall we behold Christ? For if any one could not bear
to see his father, when conscious to himself that he had sinned against him, upon
Him who infinitely exceeds a father in forbearance how shall we then look?
How shall we bear it? For indeed we shall stand at Christ's judgment-seat, and
there will be a strict inquiry into all things.
But if any man disbelieve the judgments to come, let him look at the things
here, at those in the prisons, those in the mines, those on the dunghills, the
possessed, the frantic, them that are struggling with incurable diseases, those that
are fighting against continual poverty, them that live in famine, them that are
pierced with irremediable woes, those in captivity. For these persons would not
suffer these things here, unless vengeance and punishments were to await all the
others also that have committed such sins. And if the rest have undergone
nothing here, you ought to regard this very fact as a sign that there is surely
something to follow after our departure here. For the self-same God of all would