with full liberty he manifests his malignant art in the rest of the work,
constructing and weaving from a single oath a thousand perjuries.
6. And this was just what he did now in the case of Saul. Observe, however,
what a snare is immediately framed for this oath: "The army passed through a
wood, that contained a nest of bees, and the nest was in front of the people, and
the people came upon the nest, and went along talking." Do you see what a pitfall was here? A table ready spread, that the easiness of access, the sweetness of
the food, and the hope of concealment, might entice them to a transgression of
the oath. For hunger at once, and fatigue, and the hour, (for "all the land," it is
said, "was dining)," then urged them to the transgression. Moreover, the sight of
the combs invited them from without to relax the strain on their resolution. For
the sweetness, as well as the present readiness of the table, and the difficulty of
detecting the stealth, were sufficient to ensnare their utmost wisdom. If it had
been flesh, which needed boiling or roasting, their minds would not have been so
much bewitched; since while they were delaying in the cookery of these, and
engaged in preparing them for food, they might expect to be discovered. But
now there was nothing of this kind; there was honey only, for which no such
labour was required, and for which the dipping of the tip of the finger sufficed to
partake of the table, and that with secresy. Nevertheless, these persons restrained
their appetite, and did not say within themselves, "What does it concern us?
Hath any one of us sworn this? He may pay the penalty of his inconsiderate
oath, for why did he swear?" Nothing of this sort did they think; but religiously
passed on; and though there were so many enticements, they behaved themselves
wisely. "The people went on talking." What is the meaning of this word
"talking?" Why, that for the purpose of soothing their pain with words, they held
discourse with one another.
7. What then, did nothing more come of this, when all the people had acted
so wisely? Was the oath, forsooth, observed? Not even so was it observed. On
the contrary, it was violated! How, and in what way? You shall hear immediately,
in order that you may also thoroughly discern the whole art of the devil. For

Jonathan, not having heard his father take the oath, "put forth the end of the rod
that was in his hand, and dipped it in the honeycomb, and his eyes saw clearly."
[1 Samuel 14:27] Observe, who it was whom he impelled to break the oath; not
one of the soldiers, but the very son of him who had sworn it. For he did not only
desire to effect perjury, but was also plotting the slaughter of a son, and making
provision for it beforehand; and was in haste to divide nature against her own
self. and what he had done aforetime in the case of Jephthah, that he hoped now
again to accomplish. For he likewise, when he had promised that the first thing
that met him, after a victorious battle, he would sacrifice, fell into the snare of
child-murder; for his daughter first meeting him, he sacrificed her and God did
not forbid it. And I know, indeed, that many of the unbelievers impugn us of
cruelty and inhumanity on account of this sacrifice; but I should say, that the
concession in the case of this sacrifice was a striking example of providence and
clemency; and that it was in care for our race that He did not prevent that
sacrifice. For if after that vow and promise He had forbidden the sacrifice, many
also who were subsequent to Jephthah, in the expectation that God would not
receive their vows, would have increased the number of such vows, and
proceeding on their way would have fallen into child-murder. But now, by
suffering this vow to be actually fulfilled, He put a stop to all such cases in
future. And to show that this is true, after Jephthah's daughter had been slain, in
order that the calamity might be always remembered, and that her fate might not
be consigned to oblivion, it became a law among the Jews, that the virgins
assembling at the same season should bewail during forty days the sacrifice
which had taken place; in order that renewing the memory of it by lamentation,
they should make all men wiser for the future; and that they might learn that it
was not after the mind of God that this should be done, for in that case He would
not have permitted the virgins to bewail and lament her. And that what I have
said is not conjectural, the event demonstrated; for after this sacrifice, no one
vowed such a vow unto God. Therefore also He did not indeed forbid this; but
what He had expressly enjoined in the case of Isaac, that He directly prohibited;