as for instance, thought conceives but cannot utter.
And to show you that even Paul is weak and does not put out his
illustrations with exactness; and to make you tremble and refrain from searching
too far, hear what he says, having called Him Son and named Him Creator, "Who
being the brightness of His Glory, and the express image of His person."
This we must receive with reverence and clear of all incongruities. "The
brightness of His glory," says he. But observe in what reference he understands
this, and so do thou receive it:— that He is of Him: without passion: that He is
neither greater, nor less; since there are some, who derive certain strange things
from the illustration. For, say they, "the brightness" is not substantial, but has its
being in another. Now do not thou, O man, so receive it, neither be thou sick of
the disease of Marcellus and Photinus. For he has a remedy for you close at
hand, that you fall not into that imagination, nor does he leave you to be hurried
down into that fatal malady. And what says he? "And the express image of His
person" [or "subsistence" ]: that is, just as He [the Father] is personally
subsisting, being in need of nothing, so also the Son. For he says this here,
showing the undeviating similitude and the peculiar image of the Prototype, that
He [the Son] is in subsistence by Himself.
For he who said above, that "by Him He made all things" here assigns to
Him absolute authority. For what does he add? "And upholding all things by the
word of His power"; that we might hence infer not merely His being the express
image of His Person, but also His governing all things with absolute authority.
See then, how he applies to the Son that which is proper to the Father. For
on this account he did not say simply, "and upholding all things," nor did he say,
"by His power," but, "by the word of His power." For much as just now we saw
him gradually ascend and descend; so also now, as by steps, he goes up on high,
then again descends, and says, "by whom also He made the worlds."
Behold how here also he goes on two paths, by the one leading us away
from Sabellius, by the other from Arius, yea and on another, that He [Christ]
should not be accounted un originated, which he does also throughout, nor yet

alien from God. For if, even after so much, there are some who assert that He is
alien, and assign to Him another father, and say that He is at variance with Him
—had [Paul] not declared these things, what would they not have uttered?
How then does he this? When he is compelled to heal, then is he compelled
also to utter lowly things: as for instance, "He appointed Him" (says he) "heir of
all things," and "by Him He made the worlds." [Hebrews 1:2] But that He might
not be in another way dishonored, he brings Him up again to absolute authority
and declares Him to be of equal honor with the Father, yea, so equal, that many
thought Him to be the Father.
And observe thou his great wisdom. First he lays down the former point and
makes it sure accurately. And when this is shown, that He is the Son of God, and
not alien from Him, he thereafter speaks out safely all the high sayings, as many
as he will. Since any high speech concerning Him, led many into the notion just
mentioned, he first sets down what is humiliating and then safely mounts up as
high as he pleases. And having said, "whom He appointed heir of all things," and
that "by Him He made the worlds," he then adds, "and upholding all things by
the word of His power." For He that by a word only governs all things, could not
be in need of any one, for the producing all things.
2. And to prove this, mark how again going forward, and laying aside the
"by whom," he assigns to Him absolute power. For after he had effected what he
wished by the use of it, thenceforward leaving it, what says he? "Thou Lord in
the beginning hast laid the foundation of the earth, and the heavens are the
works of Your hands." [ infra, Hebrews 1:10] Nowhere is there the saying "by
whom," or that "by Him He made the worlds." What then? Were they not made
by Him? Yes, but not, as you say or imaginest, "as by an instrument": nor as
though He would not have made them unless the Father had reached out a hand
to Him. For as He "judges no man" [John 5:22], and is said to judge by the Son,
in that He begot Him a judge; so also, to create by Him, in that He begot Him a
Creator. And if the Father be the original cause of Him, in that He is Father,
much more of the things which have been made by Him. When therefore he