driven away, and their enemies had the upper hand in many places, and raised
tumults. For when they had acquired much confidence by means of the miracles
which they wrought, then the death of Stephen again caused a severe
persecution, and dispersed them all, and involved the Church in confusion; and
the disciples were again alarmed, fugitive, and distressed. And yet the Church
continually grew, when it flourished by means of the signs which were wrought
and became illustrious from the manner of its introduction. One disciple for
example was let down through a window, and so escaped the hands of the ruler;
others were brought out of prison by an angel and so released from their fetters;
others were received into the houses of common people and artisans when they
were driven out by those in authority; they were courteously treated in every
way, by female sellers of purple, by tentmakers, and tanners dwelling in the
outskirts of the cities, and by the sea shore. Frequently moreover they did not
dare to appear in the middle of the towns; and if they did venture there
themselves their entertainers did not. And thus amidst alternate trials, and
respites from trial, the fabric of the Church was wrought, and they who once
stumbled were afterwards set upright, and they who wandered away were
brought back, and the ruined places were built up more firmly than before. For
this cause when Paul prayed that the preaching of the word might proceed by a
smooth course only, God rich in wisdom and resource did not yield to His
disciple; nay even when many times invoked he would not consent but said "my
grace is sufficient for you, for my strength is made perfect in weakness."
[2 Corinthians 12:9] If then even now you will reckon up the good things with
the painful, you will see that many events have occurred which if not positive
signs and wonders do yet resemble signs, and are unspeakable proofs of the great
providence and succour of God. But that you may not hear everything from me
without any trouble, I leave this as your task, that you may reckon up everything
accurately and compare them with the misfortunes, and by occupying yourself
with this good employment may divert your mind from despondency; for you
will derive much consolation from this work.

Pray say many kind words from me to all your blessed household. May you
continue in good health and good spirits, most reverend and divinely favoured
lady.
If you wish me to write long letters inform me of this, and pray do not
deceive me by saying that you have thrown off all despondency, and are
enjoying a season of rest. For letters are a remedy of the proper kind to produce
great cheerfulness in you, and you will continually see letters from me. And
when you write to me again do not say "I have much comfort from your letters,"
for this I know of myself, but tell me that you have as much as I wish you to
have, that you are not confounded with sorrow, that you do not pass your time in
weeping, but in serenity and cheerfulness.