1 Kings xi. 1.

come short of the glory of God," and are not justified of themselves, but by the advent of the
Lord,—they who earnestly direct their eyes towards His light. And it is for our instruction that their
actions have been committed to writing, that we might know, in the first place, that our God and
theirs is one, and that sins do not please Him although committed by men of renown; and in the
second place, that we should keep from wickedness. For if these men of old time, who preceded
us in the gifts [bestowed upon them], and for whom the Son of God had not yet suffered, when
they committed any sin and served fleshly lusts, were rendered objects of such disgrace, what shall
the men of the present day suffer, who have despised the Lord's coming, and become the slaves of
their own lusts? And truly the death of the Lord became [the means of] healing and remission of
sins to the former, but Christ shall not die again in behalf of those who now commit sin, for death
shall no more have dominion over Him; but the Son shall come in the glory of the Father, requiring
from His stewards and dispensers the money which He had entrusted to them, with usury; and from
those to whom He had given most shall He demand most. We ought not, therefore, as that presbyter
remarks, to be puffed up, nor be severe upon those of old time, but ought ourselves to fear, lest
perchance, after [we have come to] the knowledge of Christ, if we do things displeasing to God,
we obtain no further forgiveness of sins, but be shut out from His kingdom. And therefore it was
that Paul said, "For if [God] spared not the natural branches, [take heed] lest He also spare not thee,
who, when thou wert a wild olive tree, wert grafted into the fatness of the olive tree, and wert made
a partaker of its fatness."
3. Thou wilt notice, too, that the transgressions of the common people have been described in
like manner, not for the sake of those who did then transgress, but as a means of instruction unto
us, and that we should understand that it is one and the same God against whom these men sinned,
and against whom certain persons do now transgress from among those who profess to have believed
in Him. But this also, [as the presbyter states,] has Paul declared most plainly in the Epistle to the
Corinthians, when he says, "Brethren, I would not that ye should be ignorant, how that all our
fathers were under the cloud, and were all baptized unto Moses in the sea, and did all eat the same
spiritual meat, and did all drink the same spiritual drink: for they drank of that spiritual rock that
followed them; and the rock was Christ. But with many of them God was not well pleased, for they
were overthrown in the wilderness. These things were for our example (in figuram nostri), to the
intent that we should not lust after evil things, as they also lusted; neither be ye idolaters, as were
reason for the secrecy with which "that presbyter's" name is guarded. Irenæus may have scrupled to draw the wrath of the
Gnostics upon any name but his own.]
reason for the secrecy with which "that presbyter's" name is guarded. Irenæus may have scrupled to draw the wrath of the
Gnostics upon any name but his own.]