of pardon, for the sake of others' salvation, first obtained that pardon. Therefore,
he says, since I am saved, let no one doubt of salvation. And observe the
humility of this blessed man; he says not, "that in me he might show forth" His
"longsuffering," but "all longsuffering"; as if he had said, greater longsuffering
He could not show in any case than in mine, nor find a sinner that so required all
His pardon, all His long-suffering; not a part only, like those who are only
partially sinners, but "all" His longsuffering.
"For a pattern to those who should hereafter believe." This is said for
comfort, for encouragement. But because he had spoken highly of the Son, and
of the great love which He has manifested, lest he should be thought to exclude
the Father from this, he ascribes the glory to Him also.
Ver. 17. "Now unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God,
be honor and glory for ever and ever. Amen."
For these things, then, we glorify not the Son only, but the Father. Here let
us argue with the heretics. Speaking of the Father, he says, "To the only God." Is
the Son then not God? "The only immortal." Is the Son then not immortal? Or
does He not possess that Himself, which hereafter He will give to us? Yes, they
say, He is God and immortal, but not such as the Father. What then? Is He of
inferior essence, and therefore of inferior immortality? What then is a greater
and a less immortality? For immortality is nothing else than the not being subject
to destruction. For there is a greater and a less glory; but immortality does not
admit of being greater or less: as neither is there a greater and a less health. For a
thing must either be destructible, or altogether indestructible. Are we men then
immortal even as He? God forbid! Surely not! Why? Because He has it by
nature, but we adventitiously. Why then do you make the difference? Because
the Father, he says, is made such as He is by no other: but the Son is what He is,
from the Father. This we also confess, not denying that the Son is generated from
the Father incorruptibly. And we glorify the Father, he means, for having
generated the Son, such as He is. Thus you see the Father is most glorified, when
the Son has done great things. For the glory of the Son is referred again to Him.

And since He generated Him omnipotent and such as He is in Himself, it is not
more the glory of the Son than of the Father, that He is self-sufficient, and selfmaintained, and free from infirmity. It has been said of the Son, "By whom He
made the worlds." [Hebrews 1:2] Now there is a distinction observed among us
between creation and workmanship. For one works and toils and executes,
another rules; and why? Because he that executes is the inferior. But it is not so
there; nor is the sovereignty with One, the workmanship with the Other. For
when we hear, "By whom He made the worlds," we do not exclude the Father
from creation. Nor when we say, "To the King immortal," do we deny dominion
to the Son. For these are common to the One and the Other, and each belongs to
Both. The Father created, in that He begot the creating Son; the Son rules, as
being Lord of all things created. For He does not work for hire, nor in obedience
to others, as workmen do among us, but from His own goodness and love for
mankind. But has the Son ever been seen? No one can affirm this. What means
then, "To the King immortal, invisible, the only wise God"? Or when it is said,
"There is no other name whereby we must be saved": and again, "There is
salvation in no other"? [Acts 4:12]
"To Him be honor and glory forever. Amen."
Now honor and glory are not mere words; and since He has honored us not
by words only, but by what He has done for us, so let us honor Him by works
and deeds. Yet this honor touches us, while that reaches not Him, for He needs
not the honor that comes from us, we do need that which is from Him.
In honoring Him, therefore, we do honor to ourselves. He who opens his
eyes to gaze on the light of the sun, receives delight himself, as he admires the
beauty of the star, but does no favor to that luminary, nor increases its splendor,
for it continues what it was; much more is this true with respect to God. He who
admires and honors God does so to his own salvation, and highest benefit; and
how? Because he follows after virtue, and is honored by Him. For "them that
honor Me," He says, "I will honor." [1 Samuel 4:30] How then is He honored, if
He enjoys no advantage from our honor? Just as He is said to hunger and thirst.