Objection 6: Further, it were not a wise craftsman who would make
very great instruments for the making of a small work. Now man is a
very small thing in comparison with the heavenly bodies, which by
their huge bulk surpass the size of man almost beyond comparison:
in fact the size of the whole earth in comparison with the heaven is
as a point compared with a sphere, as astronomers say. Since then
God is most wise it would seem that man is not the end of the
creation of the heavens, and so it is unseemly that the heaven
should deteriorate when he sinned, or that it should be bettered
when he is glorified.
On the contrary, It is written (Is. 30:26): "The light of the moon shall
be as the light of the sun, and the light of the sun shall be
sevenfold."
Further, the whole world will be renewed for the better. But the
heaven is the more noble part of the corporeal world. Therefore it will
be altered for the better. But this cannot be unless it shine out with
greater brightness. Therefore its brightness will be bettered and will
increase.
Further, "every creature that groaneth and travaileth in pain, awaiteth
the revelation of the glory of the children of God" (Rm. 8:21,22). Now
such are the heavenly bodies, as a gloss says on the same passage.
Therefore they await the glory of the saints. But they would not await
it unless they were to gain something by it. Therefore their
brightness will increase thereby, since it is their chief beauty.
I answer that, The renewal of the world is directed to the end that,
after this renewal has taken place, God may become visible to man
by signs so manifest as to be perceived as it were by his senses.
Now creatures lead to the knowledge of God chiefly by their
comeliness and beauty, which show forth the wisdom of their Maker
and Governor; wherefore it is written (Wis. 13:5): "By the greatness
of the beauty and of the creature, the Creator of them may be seen,
so as to be known thereby." And the beauty of the heavenly bodies
consists chiefly in light; wherefore it is written (Ecclus. 43:10): "The
glory of the stars is the beauty of heaven, the Lord enlighteneth the
world on high." Hence the heavenly bodies will be bettered,
especially as regards their brightness. But to what degree and in
what way this betterment will take place is known to Him alone Who
will bring it about.

Reply to Objection 1: The cleansing fire will not cause the form of the
renewal, but will only dispose thereto, by cleansing from the vileness
of sin and the impurity resulting from the mingling of bodies, and
this is not to be found in the heavenly bodies. Hence although the
heavenly bodies are not to be cleansed by fire, they are nevertheless
to be Divinely renewed.
Reply to Objection 2: Movement does not denote perfection in the
thing moved, considered in itself, since movement is the act of that
which is imperfect: although it may pertain to the perfection of a
body in so far as the latter is the cause of something. But light
belongs to the perfection of a lightsome body, even considered in its
substance: and consequently after the heavenly body has ceased to
be the cause of generation, its brightness will remain, while its
movement will cease.
Reply to Objection 3: A gloss on Is. 30:26, "The light of the moon
shall be as the light of the sun," says: "All things made for man's
sake deteriorated at his fall, and sun and moon diminished in light."
This diminishment is understood by some to mean a real lessening
of light. Nor does it matter that the heavenly bodies are by nature
unalterable, because this alteration was brought about by the Divine
power. Others, however, with greater probability, take this
diminishment to mean, not a real lessening of light, but a lessening
in reference to man's use; because after sin man did not receive as
much benefit from the light of the heavenly bodies as before. In the
same sense we read (Gn. 3:17,18): "Cursed is the earth in thy
work . . . Thorns and thistles shall it bring forth to thee"; although it
would have brought forth thorns and thistles before sin, but not as a
punishment to man. Nor does it follow that, supposing the light of
the heavenly bodies not to have been lessened essentially through
man sinning, it will not really be increased at man's glorification,
because man's sin wrought no change upon the state of the
universe, since both before and after sin man had an animal life,
which needs the movement and generation of a corporeal creature;
whereas man's glorification will bring a change upon the state of all
corporeal creatures, as stated above (Question 76, Article 7). Hence
there is no comparison.
Reply to Objection 4: This diminution, according to the more
probable opinion, refers not to the substance but to the effect. Hence
it does not follow that the moon while over the earth would have