proclaimed and came to pass, and was testified of by his appearing; the fact,
namely, of Christ's resurrection: but the other is yet in hope, i.e., our own part:—
see what he does; from the other side again he makes it out: which is a proof of
great power. Thus, "why do some say," says he, "that there is no resurrection of
the dead?" Of course then the former also in its turn is subverted by this, the
fact, namely, that Christ is raised. Wherefore also he adds, saying,

1 Corinthians 15:13
"But if there is no resurrection of the dead, neither has Christ been raised."
Do you see Paul's energy, and his spirit for the combat, so invincible? How
not only from what is evident he demonstrates what is doubted, but also from
what is doubted, endeavors to demonstrate to gainsayers the former evident
proposition? Not because what had already taken place required demonstration,
but that he might signify this to be equally worthy of belief with that.
3. "And what kind of consequence is this?" says one. "For if Christ be not
raised, that then neither should others be raised, does follow: but that if others
be not raised, neither should Christ be raised, what reason can there be in this?"
Since then this does not appear to be very reasonable, see how he works it out
wisely, scattering his seeds beforehand from the beginning, even from the very
groundwork of the Gospel: as, that "having died for our sins," He was raised;
and that He is "the first-fruits of them that slept." For the first-fruits— of what
can He be the first-fruits, except of them that are raised? And how can He be
first-fruits, if they rise not of whom He is first-fruits? How then are they not
raised?
Again, if they be not raised, wherefore was Christ raised? Wherefore came
He? Wherefore did He take upon Him flesh, if he were not about to raise flesh
again? For He stood not in need of it Himself but for our sakes. But these things
he afterwards set down as he goes on; for the present he says, "If the dead be not
raised, neither has Christ been raised," as though that were connected with this.
For had He not intended to raise Himself, He would not have wrought that other
work. Do you see by degrees the whole economy overthrown by those words of
theirs and by their unbelief in the resurrection? But as yet he says nothing of the
incarnation, but of the resurrection. For not His having become incarnate, but
His having died, took away death; since while He had flesh, the tyranny of death

still had dominion.

1 Corinthians 15:14
"And if Christ has not been raised, then is our preaching vain, your faith
also is vain."
Although what followed in due course would have been, "but if Christ be
not risen, you fight against things evident, and against so many prophets, and
the truth of facts;" nevertheless he states what is much more fearful to them:
"then is our preaching vain, your faith also is vain." For he wishes to shake
thoroughly their mind: "we have lost all," says he, "all is over, if He be not
risen." Do you see how great is the mystery of the œconomy? As thus: if after
death He could not rise again, neither is sin loosed nor death taken away nor the
curse removed. Yea, and not only have we preached in vain, but you also have
believed in vain.
4. And not hereby alone does he show the impiety of these evil doctrines,
but he further contends earnestly against them, saying,