THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.4, C.5.

flesh and bones in the definition of man. Hence human nature cannot
be without sensible matter. Nevertheless, if human nature were
subsistent in this way, it would not be fitting that it should be
assumed by the Word of God. First, because this assumption is
terminated in a Person, and it is contrary to the nature of a common
form to be thus individualized in a person. Secondly, because to a
common nature can only be attributed common and universal
operations, according to which man neither merits nor demerits,
whereas, on the contrary, the assumption took place in order that the
Son of God, having assumed our nature, might merit for us. Thirdly,
because a nature so existing would not be sensible, but intelligible.
But the Son of God assumed human nature in order to show Himself
in men's sight, according to Baruch 3:38: "Afterwards He was seen
upon earth, and conversed with men."
Likewise, neither could human nature have been assumed by the
Son of God, as it is in the Divine intellect, since it would be none
other than the Divine Nature; and, according to this, human nature
would be in the Son of God from eternity. Neither can we say that the
Son of God assumed human nature as it is in a human intellect, for
this would mean nothing else but that He is understood to assume a
human nature; and thus if He did not assume it in reality, this would
be a false understanding; nor would this assumption of the human
nature be anything but a fictitious Incarnation, as Damascene says
(De Fide Orth. iii, 11).
Reply to Objection 1: The incarnate Son of God is the common
Saviour of all, not by a generic or specific community, such as is
attributed to the nature separated from the individuals, but by a
community of cause, whereby the incarnate Son of God is the
universal cause of human salvation.
Reply to Objection 2: Self-existing [per se] man is not to be found in
nature in such a way as to be outside the singular, as the Platonists
held, although some say Plato believed that the separate man was
only in the Divine intellect. And hence it was not necessary for it to
be assumed by the Word, since it had been with Him from eternity.
Reply to Objection 3: Although human nature was not assumed in
the concrete, as if the suppositum were presupposed to the
assumption, nevertheless it is assumed in an individual, since it is
assumed so as to be in an individual.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.4, C.5.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.4, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether the Son of God ought to have assumed

human nature in all individuals?
Objection 1: It would seem that the Son of God ought to have
assumed human nature in all individuals. For what is assumed first
and by itself is human nature. But what belongs essentially to a
nature belongs to all who exist in the nature. Therefore it was fitting
that human nature should be assumed by the Word of God in all its
supposita.
Objection 2: Further, the Divine Incarnation proceeded from Divine
Love; hence it is written (Jn. 3:16): "God so loved the world as to
give His only-begotten Son." But love makes us give ourselves to
our friends as much as we can, and it was possible for the Son of
God to assume several human natures, as was said above (Question
3, Article 7), and with equal reason all. Hence it was fitting for the
Son of God to assume human nature in all its supposita.
Objection 3: Further, a skilful workman completes his work in the
shortest manner possible. But it would have been a shorter way if all
men had been assumed to the natural sonship than for one natural
Son to lead many to the adoption of sons, as is written Gal. 4:5 (cf.
Heb. 2:10). Therefore human nature ought to have been assumed by
God in all its supposita.
On the contrary, Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii, 11) that the Son
of God "did not assume human nature as a species, nor did He
assume all its hypostases."
I answer that, It was unfitting for human nature to be assumed by the
Word in all its supposita. First, because the multitude of supposita of
human nature, which are natural to it, would have been taken away.
For since we must not see any other suppositum in the assumed
nature, except the Person assuming, as was said above (Article 3), if
there was no human nature except what was assumed, it would
follow that there was but one suppositum of human nature, which is
the Person assuming. Secondly, because this would have been
derogatory to the dignity of the incarnate Son of God, as He is the
First-born of many brethren, according to the human nature, even as
He is the First-born of all creatures according to the Divine, for then
all men would be of equal dignity. Thirdly, because it is fitting that as