your death, at that very time reprove. Withhold not rebuke, for reproof is then
most seasonable, when your rebuke will be most successful, when the reality is
proved. "Exhort," he says. After the manner of physicians, having shown the
wound, he gives the incision, he applies the plaster. For if you omit either of
these, the other becomes useless. If you rebuke without convicting, you will
seem to be rash, and no one will tolerate it, but after the matter is proved, he will
submit to rebuke: before, he will be headstrong. And if you convict and rebuke,
but vehemently, and do not apply exhortation, all your labor will be lost. For
conviction is intolerable in itself if consolation be not mingled with it. As if
incision, though salutary in itself, have not plenty of lenitives to assuage the
pain, the patient cannot endure cutting and hacking, so it is in this matter.
"With all longsuffering and doctrine." For he that reproves is required to be
longsuffering, that he may not believe hastily, and rebuke needs consolation, that
it may be received as it ought. And why to "longsuffering" does he add
"doctrine"? "Not as in anger, not as in hatred, not as insulting over him, not as
having caught an enemy. Far be these things from you." But how? As loving as
sympathizing with him, as more distressed than himself at his grief, as melted at
his sufferings? "With all longsuffering and doctrine." No ordinary teaching is
implied.
Ver. 3. "For the time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine."
Before they grow stiffnecked, preoccupy them all. For this reason he says,
"in season, out of season"; do everything, so as to have willing disciples.
"But after their own lusts," he says, "shall they heap to themselves
teachers."
Nothing can be more expressive than these words. For by saying "they shall
heap to themselves," he shows the indiscriminate multitude of the teachers, as
also by their being elected by their disciples. "They shall heap to themselves
teachers," he says, "having itching ears." Seeking for such as speak to gratify
and delight their hearers.
Ver. 4. "And they shall turn away their ears from the truth, and be turned

unto fables."
This he foretells, not as willing to throw him into despair, but to prepare
him to bear it firmly, when it shall happen. As Christ also did in saying, "They
will deliver you up, and they will scourge you, and bring you before the
synagogues, for My name's sake." [Matthew 10:17] And this blessed man
elsewhere says, "For I know this, that after my departures shall grievous wolves
enter in among you, not sparing the flock." [511 xx. 29] But this he said that they
might watch, and duly use the present opportunity.
Ver. 5. "But watch thou in all things, endure affliction."
It was for this therefore, that he foretold these things; as Christ also toward
the end predicted that there should be "false Christs and false prophets"; so he
too, when he was about to depart, spoke of these things. "But watch thou in all
things, endure affliction"; that is, labor, preoccupy their minds before this
pestilence assails them; secure the safety of the sheep before the wolves enter in,
everywhere endure hardship.
"Do the work of an evangelist, make full proof of your ministry." Thus it
was the work of an evangelist that he should endure hardship, both in himself,
and from those without; "make full proof of" that is, fulfill "your ministry." And
behold another necessity for his enduring affliction,
Ver. 6. "For I am now ready to be poured out, and the time of my departure
is at hand."
He has not said of my sacrifice; but, what is much more, "of my being
poured out." For the whole of the sacrifice was not offered to God, but the whole
of the drink-offering was.
Ver. 7. "I have fought the good fight, I have finished the course, I have kept
the faith."
Often, when I have taken the Apostle into my hands, and have considered
this passage, I have been at a loss to understand why Paul here speaks so loftily:
"I have fought the good fight." But now by the grace of God I seem to have
found it out. For what purpose then does he speak thus? He is desirous to