vision of God in His essence?
Objection 1: It would seem that the human intellect cannot attain to
the vision of God in His essence. For it is written (Jn. 1:18): "No man
hath seen God at any time"; and Chrysostom in his commentary
says (Hom. xiv in Joan.) that "not even the heavenly essences,
namely the Cherubim and Seraphim, have ever been able to see Him
as He is." Now, only equality with the angels is promised to men (Mt.
22:30): "They . . . shall be as the angels of God in heaven." Therefore
neither will the saints in heaven see God in His essence.
Objection 2: Further, Dionysius argues thus (Div. Nom. i):
"Knowledge is only of existing things." Now whatever exists is finite,
since it is confined to a certain genus: and therefore God, since He is
infinite, is above all existing things. Therefore there is no knowledge
of Him, and He is above all knowledge.
Objection 3: Further, Dionysius (De Myst. Theol. i) shows that the
most perfect way in which our intellect can be united to God is when
it is united to Him as to something unknown. Now that which is seen
in its essence is not unknown. Therefore it is impossible for our
intellect to see God in His essence.
Objection 4: Further, Dionysius says (Ep. ad Caium Monach.) that
"the darkness"---for thus he calls the abundance of light---"which
screens God is impervious to all illuminations, and hidden from all
knowledge: and if anyone in seeing God understood what he saw, he
saw not God Himself, but one of those things that are His." Therefore
no created intellect will be able to see God in His essence.
Objection 5: Further, according to Dionysius (Ep. ad Hieroth.) "God
is invisible on account of His surpassing glory." Now His glory
surpasses the human intellect in heaven even as on the way.
Therefore since He is invisible on the way, so will He be in heaven.
Objection 6: Further, since the intelligible object is the perfection of
the intellect, there must needs be proportion between intelligible and
intellect, as between the visible object and the sight. But there is no
possible proportion between our intellect and the Divine essence,
since an infinite distance separates them. Therefore our intellect will

be unable to attain to the vision of the Divine essence.
Objection 7: Further, God is more distant from our intellect than the
created intelligible is from our senses. But the senses can nowise
attain to the sight of a spiritual creature. Therefore neither will our
intellect be able to attain to the vision of the Divine essence.
Objection 8: Further, whenever the intellect understands something
actually it needs to be informed with the likeness of the object
understood, which likeness is the principle of the intellectual
operation terminating in that object, even as heat is the principle of
heating. Accordingly if our intellect understands God, this must be
by means of some likeness informing the intellect itself. Now this
cannot be the very essence of God, since form and thing informed
must needs have one being, while the Divine essence differs from
our intellect in essence and being. Therefore the form whereby our
intellect is informed in understanding God must needs be a likeness
impressed by God on our intellect. But this likeness, being
something created, cannot lead to the knowledge of God except as
an effect leads to the knowledge of its cause. Therefore it is
impossible for our intellect to see God except through His effect. But
to see God through His effect is not to see Him in His essence.
Therefore our intellect will be unable to see God in His essence.
Objection 9: Further, the Divine essence is more distant from our
intellect than any angel or intelligence. Now according to Avicenna
(Metaph. iii), "the existence of an intelligence in our intellect does not
imply that its essence is in our intellect," because in that case our
knowledge of the intelligence would be a substance and not an
accident, "but that its likeness is impressed on our intellect."
Therefore neither is God in our intellect, to be understood by us,
except in so far as an impression of Him is in our intellect. But this
impression cannot lead to the knowledge of the Divine essence, for
since it is infinitely distant from the Divine essence, it degenerates to
another image much more than if the image of a white thing were to
degenerate to the image of a black thing. Therefore, just as a person
in whose sight the image of a white thing degenerates to the image
of a black thing, on account of an indisposition in the organ, is not
said to see a white thing, so neither will our intellect be able to see
God in His essence, since it understands God only by means of this
impression.
Objection 1:: Further, "In things devoid of matter that which