necessary. For what is superfluous is also useless. When you shall have practised
living on what is sufficient; then if you have a mind to emulate that widow, we
will lead you on to greater things than these. For you have not yet attained to the
philosophy of that woman, while you are anxious about what is sufficient. For
she soared higher even than this; for what was to have been her support; that she
cast in, all of it. Will you then still distress yourself about such things as be
necessary; and do you not blush to be vanquished by a woman; and not only not
to emulate her, but to be left even of her far behind? For she did not say the
things we say, 'But what, if when I have spent all I be compelled to beg of
another?' but in her munificence stripped herself of all she had. What shall we
say of the widow in the Old Testament in the time of the prophet Elias? For the
risk she ran was not of poverty, but even of death and extinction, and not her
own only, but her children's too. For neither had she any expectation of receiving
from others, but of presently dying. 'But,' says one, 'she saw the prophet, and that
made her munificent.' But do not ye see saints without number? And why do I
speak of saints? You see the Lord of the prophets asking an alms, and yet not
even so do ye become humane; but though you have coffers spewing one into
another, do not even impart of your superfluity. What do you say? Was he a
prophet that came to her, and did this persuade her to so great a magnanimity?
This of itself deserves much admiration, that she was persuaded of his being a
great and wonderful person. For how was it she did not say, as it would have
been likely that a barbarian woman and a foreigner would have reasoned, 'If he
were a prophet, he would not have begged of me. If he were a friend of God, He
would not have neglected him. Be it that because of sins the Jews suffer this
punishment: but whence, and wherefore, does this man suffer?' But she
entertained none of these thoughts; but opened to him her house, and before her
house, her heart; and set before him all she had; and putting nature on one side
and disregarding her children, preferred the stranger unto all. Consider then how
great punishment will be laid up for us, if we shall come behind and be weaker
than a woman, a widow, poor, a foreigner, a barbarian, a mother of children,

knowing nothing of these things which we know! For because we have strength
of body, we are not therefore manly persons. For he alone has this virtue, yea
though he be laid upon his bed, whose strength is from within; since without
this, though a man should tear up a mountain by his strength of body, I would
call him nothing stronger than a girl or wretched crone. For the one struggles
with incorporeal ills, but the other dares not even look them in the face. And that
you may learn that this is the measure of manliness, collect it from this very
example. For what could be more manly than that woman who both against the
tyranny of nature, and against the force of hunger, and against the threat of
death, stood nobly fast, and proved stronger than all? Hear at least how Christ
proclaims her. For, says He, "there were many widows in the days of Elias, and
to none of them was the prophet sent but to her." [Luke 4:25-26] Shall I say
something great and startling? This woman gave more to hospitality, than our
father Abraham. For she "ran" not "unto the herd," as he, [Genesis 18:7] but by
that "handful" [1 Kings 17:12] outstripped all that have been renowned for
hospitality. For in this was his excellence that he set himself to do that office; but
hers, in that for the sake of the stranger she spared not her children even, and that
too, though she looked not for the things to come. But we, though a heaven
exists, though a hell is threatened, though (which is greater than all) God has
wrought such great things for us and is made glad and rejoices over such things,
sink back supinely. Not so, I beseech you: but let us "scatter abroad," let us
"give to the poor" as we ought to give. For what is much and what little, God
defines, not by the measure of what is given, but by the extent of the substance
of him that gives. Often surely have you who cast in an hundred staters of gold
offered less than he that offered but one obol, for you cast in of your superfluity.
Howbeit do if but this, and you will come quickly even to greater munificence.
Scatter wealth that you may gather righteousness. For along with wealth this
refuses to come to us; yet through it, though not with it, it is made present to us.
For it is not possible that lust of wealth and righteousness should dwell together;
they have their tents apart. Do not then obstinately strive to bring things together