In this phase too Mary's maternal mediation does not cease to be subordinate to him who
is the one Mediator, until the final realization of "the fullness of time," that is to say until
"all things are united in Christ" (cf. Eph. 1:10).

### 2. Mary in the life of the Church and of every Christian
42. Linking itself with Tradition, the Second Vatican Council brought new light to bear
on the role of the Mother of Christ in the life of the Church. "Through the gift...of divine
motherhood, Mary is united with her Son, the Redeemer, and with his singular graces and
offices. By these, the Blessed Virgin is also intimately united with the Church: the
Mother of God is a figure of the Church in the matter of faith, charity and perfect union
with Christ." We have already noted how, from the beginning, Mary remains with the
Apostles in expectation of Pentecost and how, as "the blessed one who believed," she is
present in the midst of the pilgrim Church from generation to generation through faith
and as the model of the hope which does not disappoint (cf. Rom. 5:5).

Mary believed in the fulfillment of what had been said to her by the Lord. As Virgin, she
believed that she would conceive and bear a son: the "Holy One," who bears the name of
"Son of God," the name "Jesus" (= God who saves). As handmaid of the Lord, she
remained in perfect fidelity to the person and mission of this Son. As Mother, "believing
and obeying...she brought forth on earth the Father's Son. This she did, knowing not man
but overshadowed by the Holy Spirit."

For these reasons Mary is honored in the Church "with special reverence. Indeed, from
most ancient times the Blessed Virgin Mary has been venerated under the title of 'God-
bearer.' In all perils and needs, the faithful have fled prayerfully to her protection."
This cult is altogether special: it bears in itself and expresses the profound link which
exists between the Mother of Christ and the Church. As Virgin and Mother, Mary
remains for the Church a "permanent model." It can therefore be said that especially
under this aspect, namely as a model, or rather as a "figure," Mary, present in the mystery
of Christ, remains constantly present also in the mystery of the Church. For the Church
too is "called mother and virgin," and these names have a profound biblical and
theological justification.

. The Church "becomes herself a mother by accepting God's word with fidelity."
Like Mary, who first believed by accepting the word of God revealed to her at the
Annunciation and by remaining faithful to that word in all her trials even unto the Cross,
so too the Church becomes a mother when, accepting with fidelity the word of God, "by
her preaching and by baptism she brings forth to a new and immortal life children who
are conceived of the Holy Spirit and born of God." This "maternal" characteristic of
the Church was expressed in a particularly vivid way by the Apostle to the Gentiles when
he wrote: "My little children, with whom I am again in travail until Christ be formed in
you!" (Gal. 4:19) These words of Saint Paul contain an interesting sign of the early
Church's awareness of her own motherhood, linked to her apostolic service to mankind.
This awareness enabled and still enables the Church to see the mystery of her life and
mission modeled upon the example of the Mother of the Son, who is "the first-born
among many brethren" (Rom. 8:29).