of the blessings of the world, and a foe to the liberality of the Lord of the world,
and a friend of Mammon, or rather his slave? Nay, does not that tongue deserve
to be cut out, and the heart to be quenched, that brought forth these words?
14. Do you see how gold does not suffer men to be men, but wild beasts
and fiends? For what can be more pitiful than this rich man, whose daily prayer
is that there may be famine, in order that he may have a little gold? Yea, and his
passion by this time has come round to the contrary of itself: he not even
rejoicing in his abundant store of the fruits of the earth, but on this very account
grieving the rather, (to such a pass is he come,) that his possessions are infinite.
Although one who has much ought to be joyful: but this man on that very
account is dejected. Do you see that, as I said, the rich do not reap as much
pleasure from what is present, as they endure sorrow for what has not yet been
added? For he that had innumerable quantities of wheat did more grieve and
lament than he who suffered hunger. And while the one, on merely having his
necessary food, was crowning himself and leaping for joy and giving thanks to
God; the other, who had so much, was fretting and thought he was undone. It is
not then the superfluity which causes our pleasure, but a self-controlling mind:
since without this, though one obtain and have all, he will feel as one deprived of
all and will mourn accordingly: inasmuch as this man too of whom we are now
speaking, even if he had sold all he had for as large a sum as he wished, would
again have grieved that it was not for more; and if he could have had more, he
would again have sought another advance; and if he had disposed of the bushel
for one pound, he would even then have been distracted for sorrow, that the half
bushel could not be sold for as much. And if the price were not set so high at
first, marvel not. Since drunkards also are not at first inflamed, but when they
have loaded themselves with much wine, then they kindle the flame into greater
fierceness: so these men, by how much more they have grasped, in so much the
greater poverty do they find themselves, and they who gain more than others, are
the very persons to be the most in want.
15. But I say these things not only to this man, but also to each one of those

who are so diseased: those, I say, who raise the price of their wares and make a
traffic of the poverty of their neighbors. For of humanity none any where makes
account: but every where the covetous desire brings out many at the time of sale.
And oil and wine is sold by one quicker, by another more slowly, but neither out
of regard to others; rather the one seeks gain, the other to avoid loss by the
spoiling of his produce. Thus, because most men not making much account of
the laws of God, shut up and keep all in doors, God by other means leading them
to humanity—that were it but of necessity they may do something kind—has
infused into them the fear of greater loss, not allowing the fruits of the earth to
keep any long time, in order that out of mere dread of the damage from their
spoiling, they may expose for sale to the needy, even against their will, such
things as they wickedly bury at home and keep. However, after all this, some are
so insatiable as not even thereby to be corrected. Many, for example, have gone
so far as to empty whole casks, not giving even a cup-full to the poor man, nor a
piece of money to the needy, but after it has become vinegar, they dash it all
upon the ground, and destroy their casks together with the fruit. Others again
who would not give a part of a single cake to the hungry, have thrown whole
granaries into some river: and because they listened not to God who bade them
give to the needy, at the bidding of the moth, even unwillingly, they emptied out
all they had in their houses, in utter destruction and waste; drawing down upon
their own heads together with this loss much scorn and many a curse.
And such is the course of their affairs here; but the hereafter, what words
shall set before us? For as these men in this world cast their moth-eaten grain,
become useless, into rivers; even so the doers of such things, on this very
account become useless, God casts into the river of fire. Because as the grain by
the moth and worm, so are their souls devoured by cruelty and inhumanity. And
the reason of these things is their being nailed to things present, and gaping after
this life only. Whence also such men are full of infinite sadness; for name
whatever pleasure you will, the fear of their end is enough to annihilate all, and
such an one "is dead, while he is yet alive." [1 Timothy 5:6]