John 19:35
"And he that saw it bare record, and his record is true."
That is, "I heard it not from others, but was myself present and saw it, and
the testimony is true." As may be supposed. For he relates an insult done; he
relates not anything great and admirable, that you should suspect his narrative;
but securing the mouths of heretics, and loudly proclaiming beforehand the
Mysteries that should be, and beholding the treasure laid up in them, he is very
exact concerning what took place. And that prophecy also is fulfilled,

John 19:36
"A bone of Him shall not be broken." [ Exodus 12:46; Numbers 9:12]
For even if this was said with reference to the lamb of the Jews, still it was
for the sake of the reality that the type preceded, and in Him the prophecy was
more fully accomplished. On this account the Evangelist brought forward the
Prophet. For since by continually producing himself as witness he would have
seemed unworthy of credit, he brings Moses to help him, and says, that neither
did this come to pass without a purpose, but was written before of old. And this
is the meaning of the words, "A bone of Him shall not be broken." Again he
confirms the Prophet's words by his own witness. "These things," says he, "I
have told you, that you might learn that great is the connection of the type with
the reality." Do you see what pains he takes to make that believed which seemed
to be matter of reproach, and bringing shame? For that the soldier should insult
even the dead body, was far worse than being crucified. "But still, even these
things," he says, "I have told, and told with much earnestness, 'that you might
believe.' [John 19:35] Let none then be unbelieving, nor through shame injure
our cause. For the things which appear to be most shameful, are the very
venerable records of our good things."

John 19:38
"After this came Joseph of Arimathæa, being a disciple."
Not one of the twelve, but perhaps one of the seventy. For now deeming
that the anger of the Jews was quenched by the Cross, they approached without
fear, and took charge of His funeral. Joseph therefore came and asked the favor
from Pilate, which he granted; why should he not? Nicodemus also assists him,
and furnishes a costly burial. For they were still disposed to think of Him as a
mere man. And they brought those spices whose special nature is to preserve the
body for a long time, and not to allow it quickly to yield to corruption, which
was an act of men imagining nothing great respecting Him; but anyhow, they
exhibited very loving affection. But how did no one of the twelve come, neither
John, nor Peter, nor any other of the more distinguished disciples? Nor does the
writer conceal this point. If any one say that it was from fear of the Jews, these
men also were occupied by the same fear; for Joseph too was, it says, "A secret
(disciple) for fear of the Jews." And not one can say that Joseph acted thus
because he greatly despised them, but though himself afraid, still he came. But
John who was present, and had seen Him expire, did nothing of the kind. It
seems to me that Joseph was a man of high rank, (as is clear from the funeral,)
and known to Pilate, on which account also he obtained the favor; and then he
buried Him, not as a criminal, but magnificently, after the Jewish fashion, as
some great and admirable one.
4. And because they were straitened by the time, (since the Death took
place at the ninth hour, and it is probable, that what with going to Pilate and what
with taking down the body, evening would come upon them when it was not
lawful to work,) they laid Him in the tomb that was near. And it is providentially
ordered, that He should be placed in a new tomb, wherein no one had been
placed before, that His Resurrection might not be deemed to be that of some
other who lay there with Him; and that the disciples might be able easily to come