body. He therefore that released souls that were bound, shall not he have power
to release his own body? He that could burst asunder the bonds of evil spirits,
shall he not unloose a rivet of iron? He that by his very garments unloosed those
prisoners, and released them from the spell of devils, shall not he of himself set
himself at liberty? For this was he first bound himself, and then loosed the
prisoners, that you might understand that Christ's servants in bonds possess a
power far greater than they that are at liberty. Had one who was at liberty
wrought this, then had it not been so marvellous. So then the chain was not a
token of weakness, but rather of a greater power, and thus is the saint's might
more illustriously displayed, when, even though in bonds, he overpowers them
that are at liberty, when he that is in bonds sets not only himself at liberty, but
them that are in bonds also. Where is the use of walls? What the advantage of
thrusting him into the inner prison, whereas he opened the outer also? And why
too was it done in the night? And why with an earthquake?
Oh, bear with me a little, and give me leave while I refrain from the
Apostle's words, and revel in the Apostle's deeds, and banquet on Paul's chain;
grant me still longer to dwell upon it. I have laid hold on that chain, and no one
shall part me from it. More securely at this moment am I bound by affection,
than was he then in the stocks. This is a bond which no one can loose, for it is
formed of the love of Christ; this neither the Angels, no, nor the kingdom of
Heaven, has power to unloose. We may hear Paul's own words; [Romans 8:3839] "Neither angels, nor principalities, nor things present, nor things to come,
nor powers, nor height, nor depth, shall be able to separate us from the love of
God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord."
Now then, why did the event take place at midnight? And wherefore too
with an earthquake? Hearken, and marvel at the providential orderings of God.
Every one's bands were loosed, and the doors were opened. And yet was this
done only for the jailor's sake, not with a view to display, but with a view to his
salvation: for that the prisoners knew not that they were loosed, is evident from
Paul's exclamation; for what said he? "He cried with a loud voice, saying, Do

yourself no harm, for we are all here." [Acts 16:28] But never would they all
have been within, had they seen the doors opened, and themselves set at liberty.
They who were used to cut through walls, and to scale roofs and parapets, and to
venture on all sorts of attempts in chains, never would have endured to remain
within, with their bands loosed, and the doors opened, with the jailer himself
asleep; no, but the bond of sleep was to them instead of the bonds of iron. So
that the thing took place and yet no damage ensued from the miracle to the jailer
who was to be saved. And besides this too, they that are bound are bound most
securely in the night, not in the day; and so accordingly might we behold them
bound again with all care and sleeping: but had these things been done in the day
time, there would have been great stir and tumult.
Then again, wherefore was the building shaken? It was to arouse the jailer,
to behold what was done, for he alone was worthy of being saved. And do thou
too, behold, I pray, the exceeding greatness of the grace of Christ, for well were
it in the midst of Paul's bonds to make mention also of the grace of God, nay
indeed the very bonds themselves are of the gift and grace of God. Some indeed
there are who complain "Why was the jailer saved?" and from those very
circumstances, for which they ought to admire the loving-kindness of God they
find fault with it. Nor is it anything to be wondered at. Such are those sickly
persons, that find fault even with the food that nourishes them, which they ought
to prize, and who affirm that honey is bitter: and those dimsighted persons who
are darkened by the very thing which ought to enlighten them. Not that these
effects arise from the nature of the objects themselves, but from the weakness of
the persons who are unable to use them properly. What, however, was I saying?
When they ought to be admiring God's loving-kindness, in that He took a man
who had fallen into the most desperate wickedness, and was making him better,
they find fault: "Why, how was it that he did not take the thing to be the work of
witchcraft and of sorcery, and confine them the more closely, and cry out?"
Many things conspired to prevent this; first, that he heard them singing praises to
God. And sorcerers never would have been singing such hymns as those, for he