needs be derived by the sacraments from Christ's Godhead through
His humanity.
Now sacramental grace seems to be ordained principally to two
things: namely, to take away the defects consequent on past sins, in
so far as they are transitory in act, but endure in guilt; and, further,
to perfect the soul in things pertaining to Divine Worship in regard to
the Christian Religion. But it is manifest from what has been stated
above (Question 48, Articles 1,2,6; Question 49, Articles 1,3) that
Christ delivered us from our sins principally through His Passion,
not only by way of efficiency and merit, but also by way of
satisfaction. Likewise by His Passion He inaugurated the Rites of the
Christian Religion by offering "Himself---an oblation and a sacrifice
to God" (Eph. 5:2). Wherefore it is manifest that the sacraments of
the Church derive their power specially from Christ's Passion, the
virtue of which is in a manner united to us by our receiving the
sacraments. It was in sign of this that from the side of Christ hanging
on the Cross there flowed water and blood, the former of which
belongs to Baptism, the latter to the Eucharist, which are the
principal sacraments.
Reply to Objection 1: The Word, forasmuch as He was in the
beginning with God, quickens souls as principal agent; but His flesh,
and the mysteries accomplished therein, are as instrumental causes
in the process of giving life to the soul: while in giving life to the
body they act not only as instrumental causes, but also to a certain
extent as exemplars, as we stated above (Question 56, Article 1, ad
3).
Reply to Objection 2: Christ dwells in us "by faith" (Eph. 3:17).
Consequently, by faith Christ's power is united to us. Now the power
of blotting out sin belongs in a special way to His Passion. And
therefore men are delivered from sin especially by faith in His
Passion, according to Rm. 3:25: "Whom God hath proposed to be a
propitiation through faith in His Blood." Therefore the power of the
sacraments which is ordained unto the remission of sins is derived
principally from faith in Christ's Passion.
Reply to Objection 3: Justification is ascribed to the Resurrection by
reason of the term "whither," which is newness of life through grace.
But it is ascribed to the Passion by reason of the term "whence," i.e.
in regard to the forgiveness of sin.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.62, C.6.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.62, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether the sacraments of the Old Law caused

grace?
Objection 1: It seems that the sacraments of the Old Law caused
grace. For, as stated above (Article 5, ad 2) the sacraments of the
New Law derive their efficacy from faith in Christ's Passion. But
there was faith in Christ's Passion under the Old Law, as well as
under the New, since we have "the same spirit of faith" (2 Cor. 4:13).
Therefore just as the sacraments of the New Law confer grace, so
did the sacraments of the Old Law.
Objection 2: Further, there is no sanctification save by grace. But
men were sanctified by the sacraments of the Old Law: for it is
written (Lev. 8:31): "And when he," i.e. Moses, "had sanctified them,"
i.e. Aaron and his sons, "in their vestments," etc. Therefore it seems
that the sacraments of the Old Law conferred grace.
Objection 3: Further, Bede says in a homily on the Circumcision:
"Under the Law circumcision provided the same health-giving balm
against the wound of original sin, as baptism in the time of revealed
grace." But Baptism confers grace now. Therefore circumcision
conferred grace; and in like manner, the other sacraments of the
Law; for just as Baptism is the door of the sacraments of the New
Law, so was circumcision the door of the sacraments of the Old Law:
hence the Apostle says (Gal. 5:3): "I testify to every man
circumcising himself, that he is a debtor to the whole law."
On the contrary, It is written (Gal. 4:9): "Turn you again to the weak
and needy elements?" i.e. "to the Law," says the gloss, "which is
called weak, because it does not justify perfectly." But grace justifies
perfectly. Therefore the sacraments of the old Law did not confer
grace.
I answer that, It cannot be said that the sacraments of the Old Law
conferred sanctifying grace of themselves, i.e. by their own power:
since thus Christ's Passion would not have been necessary,
according to Gal. 2:21: "If justice be by the Law, then Christ died in
vain."
But neither can it be said that they derived the power of conferring
sanctifying grace from Christ's Passion. For as it was stated above