case of the kingdom conversely, the labor is little while the pleasure is great and
boundless. For consider: the husbandman wearies himself the whole year
through, and at the very end of his hope of times misses of the fruit of those
many toils. The shipmaster again and the soldier, until extreme old age, are
occupied with wars and labors; and oftentimes has each of them departed, the
one with the loss of his wealthy cargoes, the other, along with victory, of life
itself. What excuse then shall we have, tell me, if in worldly matters indeed we
prefer what is laborious in order that we may rest for a little, or not a little even;
(for the hope of this is uncertain;) but in spiritual things do the converse of this
and draw upon ourselves unutterable punishment for a little sloth? Wherefore I
beseech you all, though late, yet still at length to recover from this frenzy. For
none shall deliver us in that day; neither brother, nor father, nor child, nor friend,
nor neighbor, nor any other: but if our works play us false, all will be over and
we must needs perish. How many lamentations did that rich man make, and
besought the Patriarch and begged that Lazarus might be sent! But hear what
Abraham said unto him: "There is a gulf between us and you, so that they who
wish to go forth cannot pass there." [Luke 16:26] How many petitions did those
virgins make to their fellows for a little oil! But hear what they also say;
"Peradventure there will not be enough for you and for us;" [Matthew 25:9] and
none was able to bring them in to the bridal chamber.
Thinking then on these things let us also be careful of that which is our life.
For mention what toils soever and bring forward besides what punishment
soever; all these combined will be nothing in comparison of the good things to
come. Instance therefore, if you will, fire and steel and wild beasts, and if there
be anything sorer than these; but yet these are not even a shadow compared with
those torments. For these things when applied in excess become then especially
light, making the release speedy ; since the body suffices not unto intensity at
once and long continuance of suffering; but both meet together, both
prolongation and excess, alike in the good and the grievous. Whilst we have time
then, "let us come before His presence with confession," [Psalm 95:2,

Septuagint] that in that day we may behold Him gentle and serene, that we may
escape altogether those threat-bearing Powers. Do you see not how this world's
soldiers who perform the bidding of those in authority drag men about; how they
chain, how they scourge them, how they pierce their sides, how they apply
torches to their torments, how they dismember them? Yet all these things are but
plays and joke unto those punishments. For these punishments are temporal; but
there neither the worm dies nor is the fire quenched: for that body of all is
incorruptible, which is then to be raised up. But God grant that we may never
learn these things by experience; but that these fearful things may never be
nearer unto us than in the mention of them ; and that we be not delivered over to
those tormentors, but may be hence made wise. How many things shall we then
say in accusation of ourselves! How many lamentations shall we utter! How
many groans! But it will thenceforth be of no avail. For neither can sailors, when
the ship has gone to pieces and has sunk, thereafter be of any service; nor
physicians when the patient is departed; but they will often say indeed that so
and so ought to have been done; but all is fruitless and in vain. For as long
indeed as hopes remain from amendment, one ought both to say and do every
thing: but when we have no longer any thing in our power, all being quite ruined,
it is to no purpose that all is said and done. For even then Jews will then say,
"Blessed is He that comes in the Name of the Lord:" [Matthew 23:39] but they
will be able to reap none advantage of this cry towards escaping their
punishment; for when they ought to have said it, they said it not. That then this
be not the case with us in respect to our life, let us now and from this time
reform that we may stand at the tribunal of Christ with all boldness; whereunto
may all of us attain through the grace and love toward men of our Lord Jesus
Christ, with Whom to the Father, with the Holy Spirit, be glory and might for
ever and ever. Amen.