effects of the tender care of God; "Whom the Lord loves He chastens, and
scourges," it says, "every son whom He receives." [Hebrews 12:6] When
therefore a man serves Him only in the season of ease, he gives proofs of no
great love, and loves not Christ purely. And why speak I of health, or abundant
riches, or poverty, or disease? Should thou hear of the fiery pit or of any other
dreadful thing, not even so must thou cease from speaking good of your Master,
but suffer and do all things because of your love for Him. For this is the part of
right-minded servants and of an unswerving soul; and he who is disposed after
this sort will easily endure the present, and obtain good things to come, and
enjoy much confidence in the presence of God; which may it be that we all
obtain through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom
with the Father and the Holy Ghost be glory, now and ever, and world without
end. Amen.

Homily 36 on the Gospel of John
John 4:54-5:1
"This is again the second miracle that Jesus did, when He had come out of
Judæa into Galilee. After this there was a feast of the Jews; and Jesus went up to
Jerusalem."
1. As in gold mines one skillful in what relates to them would not endure to
overlook even the smallest vein as producing much wealth, so in the holy
Scriptures it is impossible without loss to pass by one jot or one tittle, we must
search into all. For they all are uttered by the Holy Spirit, and nothing useless is
written in them.
Consider, for instance, what the Evangelist in this place says, "This is again
the second miracle that Jesus did, when He had come out of Judæa into
Galilee." Even the word "second" he has added not without cause, but to exalt
yet more the praise of the Samaritans, by showing that even when a second
miracle had been wrought, they who beheld it had not yet reached as high as
those who had not seen one.
"After this there was a feast of the Jews." What "feast"? Methinks that of
Pentecost. "And Jesus went up to Jerusalem." Continually at the feasts He
frequents the City, partly that He might appear to feast with them, partly that He
might attract the multitude that was free from guile; for during these days
especially, the more simply disposed ran together more than at other times.

John 5:2-3
"Now there is at Jerusalem a sheep pool, called in the Hebrew tongue Bethesda,
having five porches. In these lay a great multitude of impotent folk, of halt, blind,
withered, waiting for the moving of the water."
What manner of cure is this? What mystery does it signify to us? For these
things are not written carelessly, or without a purpose, but as by a figure and type
they show in outline things to come, in order that what was exceedingly strange
might not by coming unexpectedly harm among the many the power of faith.
What then is it that they show in outline? A Baptism was about to be given,
possessing much power, and the greatest of gifts, a Baptism purging all sins, and
making men alive instead of dead. These things then are foreshown as in a
picture by the pool, and by many other circumstances. And first is given a water
which purges the stains of our bodies, and those defilements which are not, but
seem to be, as those from touching the dead, those from leprosy, and other
similar causes; under the old covenant one may see many things done by water
on this account. However, let us now proceed to the matter in hand.
First then, as I before said, He causes defilements of our bodies, and
afterwards infirmities of different kinds, to be done away by water. Because
God, desiring to bring us nearer to faith in baptism, no longer heals defilements
only, but diseases also. For those figures which came nearer [in time] to the
reality, both as regarded Baptism, and the Passion, and the rest, were plainer than
the more ancient; and as the guards near the person of the prince are more
splendid than those before, so was it with the types. And "an Angel came down
and troubled the water," and endued it with a healing power, that the Jews might
learn that much more could the Lord of Angels heal the diseases of the soul. Yet
as here it was not simply the nature of the water that healed, (for then this would
have always taken place,) but water joined to the operation of the Angel; so in
our case, it is not merely the water that works, but when it has received the grace