it not also implanted in him power.
Moral. For a work indeed it was of power, of mighty power, and such as no
human diligence was equal to. For he brought three qualifications to the
preaching of the word, a zeal fervent and venturous, a soul ready to undergo any
possible hardship, and knowledge and wisdom combined. For his love of
enterprise, his blamelessness of life, had availed nothing, had he not also
received the power of the Spirit. And look at it as seen first in himself, or rather
hear his own words. "That our ministration be not blamed." [2 Corinthians 6:3]
And again, "For our exhortation, is not of error, nor of uncleanness, nor in guile,
nor a cloke of covetousness." [1 Thessalonians 2:3-5] Thus you have seen his
blamelessness. And again, "For we take thought for things honorable, not only
in the sight of the Lord, but also in the sight of men." [2 Corinthians 8:21] Then
again, besides these; "I protest by that glorying in you which I have in Christ
Jesus our Lord, I die daily." [1 Corinthians 15:31] And again; "Who shall
separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or anguish, or
persecution?" [Romans 8:35] And again; "In much patience, in afflictions, in
necessities, in distresses, in stripes, in imprisonments, in watchings." [2
Corinthians 6:4-5] Then again, his prudence and management; "To the Jews I
became as a Jew, to them that are without law as without law, to them that are
under the law as under the law." [1 Corinthians 9:20] He shaves his head also,
[Acts 21:24-26] and does numberless things of the sort. But the crown of all is in
the power of the Holy Ghost. "For I will not dare to speak," says he, "of any
things save those which Christ wrought through me." [Romans 15:18] And
again, "For what is there wherein you were made inferior to the rest of the
Churches?" [2 Corinthians 12:13] And again, "For in nothing was I behind the
very chiefest Apostles though I am nothing." [2 Corinthians 12:11] Without these
things, the work had been impossible.
It was not then by his miracles that men were made believers; no, it was not
the miracles that did this, nor was it upon the ground of these that he claimed his
high pretension, but upon those other grounds. For a man must be alike

irreproachable in conduct, prudent and discreet in his dealings with others,
regardless of danger, and apt to teach. It was by these qualifications that the
greater part of his success was achieved. Where there were these, there was no
need of miracles. At least we see he was successful in numberless such cases,
quite antecedently to the use of miracles. But, now-a-days, we without any of
these would fain command all things. Yet if one of them be separated from the
other, it henceforth becomes useless. What is the advantage of a man's being
ever so regardless of danger, if his life be open to censure. "For if the light that is
in you be darkness," says Christ, "how great is that darkness?" [Matthew 6:23]
Again, what the advantage of a man's being of an irreproachable life, if he is
sluggish and indolent? "For, he that does not take his cross, and follow after
Me," says He, "is not worthy of Me;" [Matthew 10:38] and so, "The good
shepherd lays down his life for the sheep." [John 10:11] Again, what is the
advantage of being both these, unless a man is at the same time prudent and
discreet in "knowing how he ought to answer each one?" [Colossians 4:6] Even
if miracles be not in our power, yet both these qualities are in our power. Still
however, notwithstanding Paul contributed so much from himself, yet did he
attribute all to grace. This is the act of a grateful servant. And we should never
so much as have heard of his good deeds, had he not been brought to a necessity
of declaring them.
And are we worthy then so much as even to mention the name of Paul? He,
who had moreover grace to aid him, yet was not satisfied, but contributed to the
work ten thousand perils; while we, who are destitute of that source of
confidence, whence, tell me, do we expect either to preserve those who are
committed to our charge, or to gain those who are not come to the fold—men, as
we are, who have been making a study of self-indulgence, who are searching the
world over for ease, and who are unable, or rather who are unwilling, to endure
even the very shadow of danger, and are as far distant from his wisdom as
heaven is from earth? Hence it is too that they who are under us are at so great a
distance behind the men of those days; because the disciples of those days were