John 20:28
"My Lord, and my God," He says,

John 20:29
"Because you have seen Me, you have believed; blessed are they who have not
seen, and yet have believed."
For this is of faith, to receive things not seen; since," Faith is the substance
of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen." [Hebrews 11:1] And here
He pronounces blessed not the disciples only, but those also who after them
should believe. "Yet," says some one, "the disciples saw and believed." Yes, but
they sought nothing of the kind, but from the proof of the napkins, they
straightway received the word concerning the Resurrection, and before they saw
the body, exhibited all faith. When therefore any one in the present day say, "I
would that I had lived in those times, and had seen Christ working miracles," let
them reflect, that, "Blessed are they who have not seen, and yet have believed."
It is worth enquiring, how an incorruptible body showed the prints of the
nails, and was tangible by a mortal hand. But be not thou disturbed; what took
place was a matter of condescension. For that which was so subtle and light as to
enter in when the doors were shut, was free from all density ; but this marvel
was shown, that the Resurrection might be believed, and that men might know
that it was the Crucified One Himself, and that another rose not in His stead. On
this account He arose bearing the signs of the Cross, and on this account He eats.
At least the Apostles everywhere made this a sign of the Resurrection, saying,
"We, who ate and drank with Him." [Acts 10:41] As therefore when we see Him
walking on the waves before the Crucifixion, we do not say, that that body is of a
different nature, but of our own; so after the Resurrection, when we see Him
with the prints of the nails, we will no more say, that he is therefore corruptible.
For He exhibited these appearances on account of the disciple.

John 20:30
"And many other signs truly did Jesus."
2. Since this Evangelist has mentioned fewer than the others, he tells us that
neither have all the others mentioned them all, but as many as were sufficient to
draw the hearers to belief. For, "If," it says, "they should be written every one, I
suppose that even the world itself could not contain the books." [John 21:25]
Whence it is clear, that What they have mentioned they wrote not for display, but
only for the sake of what was useful. For how could they who omitted the
greater part, write these others for display? But why went they not through them
all? Chiefly on account of their number; besides, they also considered, that he
who believed not those they had mentioned, would not give heed to a greater
number; while he who received these, would have no need of another in order to
believe. And here too he seems to me to be for the time speaking of the miracles
after the Resurrection. Wherefore He says,
"In the presence of His disciples."
For as before the Resurrection it was necessary that many should be done,
in order that they might believe that He was the Son of God, so was it also after
the Resurrection, in order that they might admit that He had arisen. For another
reason also he has added, "In the presence of His disciples," because He
conversed with them alone after the Resurrection; wherefore also He said, "The
world sees Me no more." [John 14:19] Then, in order that you may understand
that what was done was done only for the sake of the disciples, he added,