Here is the reason why, when it was needful that the earth should be
destroyed, not even then did He make us of other matter, nor did He translate the
righteous man, but leaving him in the midst of the deluge, like a kind of spark of
the world, He rekindled our race from thence, even by the blessed Noah. And
from the beginning He made one sovereignty only, setting the man over the
woman. But after that our race ran headlong into extreme disorder, He appointed
other sovereignties also, those of Masters, and those of Governors, and this too
for love's sake. That is, since vice was a thing apt to dissolve and subvert our
race, He set those who administer justice in the midst of our cities as a kind of
physicians, that driving away vice, as it were a plague to love, they might gather
together all in one.
And that not only in cities, but also in each family there might be great
unanimity, He honored the man with rule and superiority; the woman on the
other hand He armed with desire: and the gift also of procreation of children, He
committed in common to both, and withal He furnished also other things apt to
conciliate love: neither entrusting all to the man, nor all to the woman; but
"dividing these things also severally to each;" to her entrusting the house, and to
him the market; to him the work of feeding, for he tills the ground; to her that of
clothing, for loom and distaff are the woman's. For it is God Himself who gave
to woman-kind skill in woven work. Woe be to covetousness, which suffers not
this difference to appear! For the general effeminacy has gone so far as to
introduce our men to the looms, and put shuttles into their hands, and the woof,
and threads. Nevertheless, even thus the forethought of the divine economy
shines out. For we still greatly need the woman in other more necessary things,
and we require the help of our inferiors in those things which keep our life
together.
8. And so strong is the compulsion of this need that though one be richer
than all men, not even thus is he rid of this close conjunction, and of his want of
that which is inferior to himself. For it is not, we see, the poor only who need the
rich, but the rich also the poor; and these require those more than the others

them. And that you may see it more clearly, let us suppose, if it seem good, two
cities, the one of rich only, but the other of poor; and neither in that of the rich let
there be any poor man, nor in that of the poor any rich; but let us purge out both
thoroughly, and see which will be the more able to support itself. For if we find
that of the poor able, it is evident that the rich will more stand in need of them.
Now then, in that city of the affluent there will be no manufacturer, no
builder, no carpenter, no shoe-maker, no baker, no husbandman, no brazier, no
rope-maker, nor any other such trade. For who among the rich would ever
choose to follow these crafts, seeing that the very men who take them in hand,
when they become rich, endure no longer the discomfort caused by these works?
How then shall this our city stand? "The rich," it is replied, "giving money, will
buy these things of the poor." Well then, they will not be sufficient for
themselves, their needing the others proves that. But how will they build houses?
Will they purchase this too? But the nature of things cannot admit this. Therefore
they must needs invite the artificers there, and destroy the law, which we made at
first when we were founding the city. For you remember, that we said, "let there
be no poor man within it." But, lo, necessity, even against our will, has invited
and brought them in. Whence it is evident that it is impossible without poor for a
city to subsist: since if the city were to continue refusing to admit any of these, it
will be no longer a city but will perish. Plainly then it will not support itself,
unless it shall collect the poor as a kind of preservers, to be within itself.
But let us look also upon the city of the poor, whether this too will be in a
like needy condition, on being deprived of the rich. And first let us in our
discourse thoroughly clear the nature of riches, and point them out plainly. What
then may riches be? Gold, and silver, and precious stones, and garments silken,
purple, and embroidered with gold. Now then that we have seen what riches are,
let us drive them away from our city of the poor: and if we are to make it purely
a city of poor persons, let not any gold appear there, no not in a dream, nor
garments of such quality; and if you will, neither silver, nor vessels of silver.
What then? Because of this will that city and its concerns live in want, tell me?