FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.12, C.4.

another, because of the greater number of purposes for which it is
available: so that evidently a man can intend several things at the
same time.
Reply to Objection 1: Augustine means to say that man cannot at the
same time direct his attention to God and to bodily benefits, as to
two last ends: since, as stated above (Question 1, Article 5), one man
cannot have several last ends.
Reply to Objection 2: There can be several termini ordained to one
another, of the same movement and in the same direction; but not
unless they be ordained to one another. At the same time it must be
observed that what is not one in reality may be taken as one by the
reason. Now intention is a movement of the will to something already
ordained by the reason, as stated above (Article 1, ad 3). Wherefore
where we have many things in reality, we may take them as one term
of intention, in so far as the reason takes them as one: either
because two things concur in the integrity of one whole, as a proper
measure of heat and cold conduce to health; or because two things
are included in one which may be intended. For instance, the
acquiring of wine and clothing is included in wealth, as in something
common to both; wherefore nothing hinders the man who intends to
acquire wealth, from intending both the others.
Reply to Objection 3: As stated in the FP, Question 12, Article 10; FP,
Question 58, Article 2; FP, Question 85, Article 4. it is possible to
understand several things at the same time, in so far as, in some
way, they are one.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.12, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether intention of the end is the same act as

the volition of the means?
Objection 1: It would seem that the intention of the end and the
volition of the means are not one and the same movement. For
Augustine says (De Trin. xi, 6) that "the will to see the window, has
for its end the seeing of the window; and is another act from the will
to see, through the window, the passersby." But that I should will to
see the passersby, through the window, belongs to intention;
whereas that I will to see the window, belongs to the volition of the
means. Therefore intention of the end and the willing of the means
are distinct movements of the will.
Objection 2: Further, acts are distinct according to their objects. But
the end and the means are distinct objects. Therefore the intention of
the end and the willing of the means are distinct movements of the
will.
Objection 3: Further, the willing of the means is called choice. But
choice and intention are not the same. Therefore intention of the end
and the willing of the means are not the same movement of the will.
On the contrary, The means in relation to the end, are as the midspace to the terminus. Now it is all the same movement that passes
through the mid-space to the terminus, in natural things. Therefore in
things pertaining to the will, the intention of the end is the same
movement as the willing of the means.
I answer that, The movement of the will to the end and to the means
can be considered in two ways. First, according as the will is moved
to each of the aforesaid absolutely and in itself. And thus there are
really two movements of the will to them. Secondly, it may be
considered accordingly as the will is moved to the means for the
sake of the end: and thus the movement of the will to the end and its
movement to the means are one and the same thing. For when I say:
"I wish to take medicine for the sake of health," I signify no more
than one movement of my will. And this is because the end is the
reason for willing the means. Now the object, and that by reason of
which it is an object, come under the same act; thus it is the same
act of sight that perceives color and light, as stated above (Question
8, Article 3, ad 2). And the same applies to the intellect; for if it