## CHAPTER XCIV--Of the Certainty of Divine Providence

tends to the good of the part absolutely, and makes the best of it that it can; but the
universal agent tends to the good of the whole: hence a defect may be beside the
intention of the particular agent, but according to the intention of the universal agent. It
is the intention of the particular agent that its effect should be perfect to the utmost
possible in its kind: but it is the intention of the universal agent that this effect be carried
to a certain degree of perfection and no further. Now between the parts of the universe
the first apparent difference is that of contingent and necessary. Beings of a higher
order are necessary and indestructible and unchangeable: from which condition beings
fall away, the lower the rank in which they are placed; so that the lowest beings suffer
destruction in their being and change in their constitution, and produce their effects, not
necessarily, but contingently. Every agent therefore that is part of the universe
endeavours, so far as it can, to abide in its being and natural constitution, and to
establish its effect: but God, the governor of the universe, intends that of the effects
which take place in it one be established as of necessity, another as of contingency;
and with this view He applies different causes to them, necessary causes to these
effects, contingent causes to those. It falls under divine providence therefore, not only
that this effect be, but also that this effect be necessarily, that other contingently. Thus,
of things subject to divine providence, some are necessary, and others contingent, not
all necessary.
Hence it is clear that this conditional proposition is true: `If God has foreseen this thing
in the future, it will be.' But it will be as God has provided that it shall be; and supposing
that He has provided that it shall be contingently, it follows infallibly that it will be
contingently, and not necessarily.
Cicero (De divinatione ii, 8) has this argument: `If all things are foreseen by God, the
order of causes is certain; but if so, all things happen by fate, nothing is left in our
power, and there is no such thing as free will.' A frivolous argument, for since not only
effects are subject to divine providence, but also causes, and modes of being, it follows
that though all things happen by divine providence, some things are so foreseen by God
as that they are done freely by us.
Nor can the defectibility of secondary causes, by means of which the effects of
providence are produced, take away the certainty of divine providence: for since God
works in all things, it belongs to His providence sometimes to allow defectible causes to
fail, and sometimes to keep them from failing.
The Philosopher shows that if every effect has a proper cause (causam per se),
every future event may be reduced to some present or past cause. Thus if the question
is put concerning any one, whether he is to be slain by robbers, that effect proceeds
from a cause, his meeting with robbers; and that effect again is preceded by another
cause, his going out of his house; and that again by another, his wanting to find water;
the preceding cause to which is thirst, and this is caused by eating salt meat, which he
either is doing or has done. If then, positing the cause, the effect must be posited of
necessity, he must necessarily be thirsty, if he eats salt meat; and he must necessarily
will to seek water, if he is thirsty; and be must necessarily go out of the house, if he wills