and his body small; thereby declaring to us nothing else than this, that we are
hastening onward to another life. "Be not drunk," says he, "with wine, wherein is
riot"; for it does not save but it destroys; and that, not the body only, but the soul
also.
Ver. 18, 19, 20, 21. "But be filled with the Spirit; speaking one to another in
psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing and making melody with your
heart to the Lord; giving thanks always for all things in the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ to God even the Father; subjecting yourselves one to another in the
fear of Christ."
Do you wish, he says, to be cheerful, do you wish to employ the day? I give
you spiritual drink; for drunkenness even cuts off the articulate sound of our
tongue; it makes us lisp and stammer, and distorts the eyes, and the whole frame
together. Learn to sing psalms, and you shall see the delightfulness of the
employment. For they who sing psalms are filled with the Holy Spirit, as they
who sing satanic songs are filled with an unclean spirit.
What is meant by "with your hearts to the Lord"? It means, with close
attention and understanding. For they who do not attend closely, merely sing,
uttering the words, while their heart is roaming elsewhere.
"Always," he says, "giving thanks for all things in the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ unto God even the Father, subjecting yourselves one to another in
the fear of Christ."
That is, "let your requests be made known unto God, with thanksgiving"
[Philippians 4:6]; for there is nothing so pleasing to God, as for a man to be
thankful. But we shall be best able to give thanks unto God, by withdrawing our
souls from the things before mentioned, and by thoroughly cleansing them by
the means he has told us.
"But be filled," says he, "with the Spirit."
And is then this Spirit within us? Yes, indeed, within us. For when we have
driven away lying, and bitterness, and fornication, and uncleanness, and
covetousness, from our souls, when we have become kind, tender-hearted,

forgiving one another, when there is no jesting, when we have rendered
ourselves worthy of it, what is there to hinder the Holy Spirit from coming and
lighting upon us? And not only will He come unto us, but He will fill our hearts;
and when we have so great a light kindled within us, then will the way of virtue
be no longer difficult to attain, but will be easy and simple.
"Giving thanks always," he says, "for all things."
What then? Are we to give thanks for everything that befalls us? Yes; be it
even disease, be it even penury. For if a certain wise man gave this advice in the
Old Testament, and said, "Whatsoever is brought upon you take cheerfully, and
be patient when you are changed to a low estate" [Sirach 2:4]; much more ought
this to be the case in the New. Yes, even though thou know not the word, give
thanks. For this is thanksgiving. But if you give thanks when you are in comfort
and in affluence, in success and in prosperity, there is nothing great, nothing
wonderful in that. What is required is, for a man to give thanks when he is in
afflictions, in anguish, in discouragements. Utter no word in preference to this,
"Lord, I thank you." And why do I speak of the afflictions of this world? It is our
duty to give God thanks, even for hell itself, for the torments and punishments of
the next world. For surely it is a thing beneficial to those who attend to it, when
the dread of hell is laid like a bridle on our hearts. Let us therefore give thanks
not only for blessings which we see, but also for those which we see not, and for
those which we receive against our will. For many are the blessings He bestows
upon us, without our desire, without our knowledge. And if you believe me not, I
will at once proceed to make the case clear to you. For consider, I pray, do not
the impious and unbelieving Gentiles ascribe everything to the sun and to their
idols? But what then? Does He not bestow blessings even upon them? Is it not
the work of His providence, that they both have life, and health, and children,
and the like? And again they that are called Marcionites, and the Manichees, do
they not even blaspheme Him? But what then? Does He not bestow blessings on
them every day? Now if He bestows blessings on them that know them not,
much more does he bestow them upon us. For what else is the peculiar work of