THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.84, C.2.

as practiced in the Church, is a sacrament.
Reply to Objection 1: By corporeal things taken in a wide sense we
may understand also external sensible actions, which are to this
sacrament what water is to Baptism, or chrism to Confirmation. But
it is to be observed that in those sacraments, whereby an
exceptional grace surpassing altogether the proportion of a human
act, is conferred, some corporeal matter is employed externally, e.g.
in Baptism, which confers full remission of all sins, both as to guilt
and as to punishment, and in Confirmation, wherein the fulness of
the Holy Ghost is bestowed, and in Extreme Unction, which confers
perfect spiritual health derived from the virtue of Christ as from an
extrinsic principle. Wherefore, such human acts as are in these
sacraments, are not the essential matter of the sacrament, but are
dispositions thereto. On the other hand, in those sacraments whose
effect corresponds to that of some human act, the sensible human
act itself takes the place of matter, as in the case of Penance and
Matrimony, even as in bodily medicines, some are applied externally,
such as plasters and drugs, while others are acts of the person who
seeks to be cured, such as certain exercises.
Reply to Objection 2: In those sacraments which have a corporeal
matter, this matter needs to be applied by a minister of the Church,
who stands in the place of Christ, which denotes that the excellence
of the power which operates in the sacraments is from Christ. But in
the sacrament of Penance, as stated above (ad 1), human actions
take the place of matter, and these actions proceed from internal
inspiration, wherefore the matter is not applied by the minister, but
by God working inwardly; while the minister furnishes the
complement of the sacrament, when he absolves the penitent.
Reply to Objection 3: In Penance also, there is something which is
sacrament only, viz. the acts performed outwardly both by the
repentant sinner, and by the priest in giving absolution; that which is
reality and sacrament is the sinner's inward repentance; while that
which is reality, and not sacrament, is the forgiveness of sin. The
first of these taken altogether is the cause of the second; and the
first and second together are the cause of the third.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.84, C.2.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.84, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether sins are the proper matter of this

sacrament?
Objection 1: It would seem that sins are not the proper matter of this
sacrament. Because, in the other sacraments, the matter is hallowed
by the utterance of certain words, and being thus hallowed produces
the sacramental effect. Now sins cannot be hallowed, for they are
opposed to the effect of the sacrament, viz. grace which blots out
sin. Therefore sins are not the proper matter of this sacrament.
Objection 2: Further, Augustine says in his book De Poenitentia
[Serm. cccli]: "No one can begin a new life, unless he repent of the
old." Now not only sins but also the penalties of the present life
belong to the old life. Therefore sins are not the proper matter of
Penance.
Objection 3: Further, sin is either original, mortal or venial. Now the
sacrament of Penance is not ordained against original sin, for this is
taken away by Baptism, nor against mortal sin, for this is taken away
by the sinner's confession, nor against venial sin, which is taken
away by the beating of the breast and the sprinkling of holy water
and the like. Therefore sins are not the proper matter of Penance.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (2 Cor. 12:21): "(Who) have not
done penance for the uncleanness and fornication and
lasciviousness, that they have committed."
I answer that, Matter is twofold, viz. proximate and remote: thus the
proximate matter of a statue is a metal, while the remote matter is
water. Now it has been stated (Article 1, ad 1, ad 2), that the
proximate matter of this sacrament consists in the acts of the
penitent, the matter of which acts are the sins over which he grieves,
which he confesses, and for which he satisfies. Hence it follows that
sins are the remote matter of Penance, as a matter, not for approval,
but for detestation, and destruction.
Reply to Objection 1: This argument considers the proximate matter
of a sacrament.
Reply to Objection 2: The old life that was subject to death is the
object of Penance, not as regards the punishment, but as regards