of the sacrament, both these things should concur when possible.
But when there is reason for urgency, the penitent should fulfill his
own part, by being contrite and confessing to whom he can; and
although this person cannot perfect the sacrament, so as to fulfill the
part of the priest by giving absolution, yet this defect is supplied by
the High Priest. Nevertheless confession made to a layman, through
lack of a priest, is quasi-sacramental, although it is not a perfect
sacrament, on account of the absence of the part which belongs to
the priest.
Reply to Objection 2: Although a layman is not the judge of the
person who confesses to him, yet, on account of the urgency, he
does take the place of a judge over him, absolutely speaking, in so
far as the penitent submits to him, through lack of a priest.
Reply to Objection 3: By means of the sacraments man must needs
be reconciled not only to God, but also to the Church. Now he cannot
be reconciled to the Church, unless the hallowing of the Church
reach him. In Baptism the hallowing of the Church reaches a man
through the element itself applied externally, which is sanctified by
"the word of life" (Eph. 5:26), by whomsoever it is conferred: and so
when once a man has been baptized, no matter by whom, he must
not be baptized again. On the other hand, in Penance the hallowing
of the Church reaches man by the minister alone, because in that
sacrament there is no bodily element applied externally, through the
hallowing of which grace may be conferred. Consequently although
the man who, in a case of necessity, has confessed to a layman, has
received forgiveness from God, for the reason that he fulfilled, so far
as he could, the purpose which he conceived in accordance with
God's command, he is not yet reconciled to the Church, so as to be
admitted to the sacraments, unless he first be absolved by a priest,
even as he who has received the Baptism of desire, is not admitted
to the Eucharist. Wherefore he must confess again to a priest, as
soon as there is one at hand, and the more so since, as stated above
(ad 1), the sacrament of Penance was not perfected, and so it needs
yet to be perfected, in order that by receiving the sacrament, the
penitent may receive a more plentiful effect, and that he may fulfill
the commandment about receiving the sacrament of Penance.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether, outside a case of necessity, anyone who

is not a priest may hear the confession of venial sins?
Objection 1: It would seem that, outside a case of necessity, no one
but a priest may hear the confession of venial sins. For the
dispensation of a sacrament is committed to a layman by reason of
necessity. But the confession of venial sins is not necessary.
Therefore it is not committed to a layman.
Objection 2: Further, Extreme Unction is ordained against venial sin,
just as Penance is. But the former may not be given by a layman, as
appears from James 5:14. Therefore neither can the confession of
venial sins be made to a layman.
On the contrary, is the authority of Bede (on James 5:16,
"Confess . . . one to another") quoted in the text (Sent. iv, D, 17).
I answer that, By venial sin man is separated neither from God nor
from the sacraments of the Church: wherefore he does not need to
receive any further grace for the forgiveness of such a sin, nor does
he need to be reconciled to the Church. Consequently a man does
not need to confess his venial sins to a priest. And since confession
made to a layman is a sacramental, although it is not a perfect
sacrament, and since it proceeds from charity, it has a natural
aptitude to remit sins, just as the beating of one's breast, or the
sprinkling of holy water (cf. TP, Question 87, Article 3).
This suffices for the Reply to the First Objection, because there is no
need to receive a sacrament for the forgiveness of venial sins. and a
sacramental, such as holy water or the like, suffices for the purpose.
Reply to Objection 2: Extreme Unction is not given directly as a
remedy for venial sin, nor is any other sacrament.