THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.55, C.3.

Resurrection even by sight, because from the testimony of their own
eyes they saw Christ alive, whom they had known to be dead. But
just as man comes from the hearing of faith to the beatific vision, so
did men come to the sight of the risen Christ through the message
already received from angels.
Reply to Objection 2: Christ's Ascension as to its term wherefrom,
was not above men's common knowledge, but only as to its term
whereunto. Consequently, the disciples were able to behold Christ's
Ascension as to the term wherefrom, that is, according as He was
uplifted from the earth; but they did not behold Him as to the term
whereunto, because they did not see how He was received into
heaven. But Christ's Resurrection transcended common knowledge
as to the term wherefrom, according as His soul returned from hell
and His body from the closed sepulchre; and likewise as to the term
whereunto, according as He attained to the life of glory.
Consequently, the Resurrection ought not to be accomplished so as
to be seen by man.
Reply to Objection 3: Lazarus was raised so that he returned to the
same life as before, which life is not beyond man's common ken.
Consequently, there is no parity.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.55, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether Christ ought to have lived constantly

with His disciples after the Resurrection?
Objection 1: It would seem that Christ ought to have lived constantly
with His Disciples, because He appeared to them after His
Resurrection in order to confirm their faith in the Resurrection, and
to bring them comfort in their disturbed state, according to Jn. 20:20:
"The disciples were glad when they saw the Lord." But they would
have been more assured and consoled had He constantly shown
them His presence. Therefore it seems that He ought to have lived
constantly with them.
Objection 2: Further, Christ rising from the dead did not at once
ascend to heaven, but after forty days, as is narrated in Acts 1:3. But
meanwhile He could have been in no more suitable place than where
the disciples were met together. Therefore it seems that He ought to
have lived with them continually.
Objection 3: Further, as Augustine says (De Consens. Evang. iii), we
read how Christ appeared five times on the very day of His
Resurrection: first "to the women at the sepulchre; secondly to the
same on the way from the sepulchre; thirdly to Peter; fourthly to the
two disciples going to the town; fifthly to several of them in
Jerusalem when Thomas was not present." Therefore it also seems
that He ought to have appeared several times on the other days
before the Ascension.
Objection 4: Further, our Lord had said to them before the Passion
(Mt. 26:32): "But after I shall be risen again, I will go before you into
Galilee"; moreover an angel and our Lord Himself repeated the same
to the women after the Resurrection: nevertheless He was seen by
them in Jerusalem on the very day of the Resurrection, as stated
above (Objection 3); also on the eighth day, as we read in Jn. 20:26.
It seems, therefore, that He did not live with the disciples in a fitting
way after the Resurrection.
On the contrary, It is written (Jn. 20:26) that "after eight days" Christ
appeared to the disciples. Therefore He did not live constantly with
them.
I answer that, Concerning the Resurrection two things had to be