abundance; but whosoever has not, from him shall be taken away, even that
which he seems to have."
And although the saying be full of much obscurity, yet it indicates
unspeakable justice. For what He says is like this: When any one has
forwardness and zeal, there shall be given unto him all things on God's part also:
but if he be void of these, and contribute not his own share, neither are God's
gifts bestowed. For even "what he seems to have," so He says, "shall be taken
away from him;" God not so much taking it away, as counting him unworthy of
His gifts. This we also do; when we see any one listening carelessly, and when
with much entreaty we cannot persuade him to attend, it remains for us to be
silent. For if we are still to go on, his carelessness is aggravated. But him that is
striving to learn, we lead on, and pour in much.
And well said He, "Even that which he seems to have." For he has not really
even this.
Then He also made what He had said more distinct, pointing out the
meaning of, "To him that has, shall be given, but from him that has not, even that
which he seems to have, shall be taken away."
"Therefore," says He, "speak I to them in parables; because they seeing see
not." [Matthew 13:13]
"It were meet then," one may say, "to have opened their eyes, if they see
not." Nay, if the blindness were natural, it were meet to open them; but because
it was a voluntary and self-chosen blindness, therefore He said not simply, "They
see not," but, "seeing, they see not;" so that the blindness is of their own
wickedness. For they saw even devils cast out, and said, "By Beelzebub, prince
of the devils, He casts out the devils." [Matthew 12:14] They heard Him guiding
them unto God, and evincing His great unanimity with Him, and they say, "This
man is not of God." [John 9:16] Since then the judgment they pronounced was
contrary both to their sight and hearing, therefore, says He, the very hearing do I
take away from them. For they derive thence no advantage, but rather greater
condemnation. For they not only disbelieved, but found fault also, and accused,

and laid snares. However, He says not this, for it is not His will to give disgust in
accusing them. Therefore neither at the beginning did He so discourse to them,
but with much plainness; but because they perverted themselves, thenceforth He
speaks in parables.
2. After this, lest any one should suppose His words to be a mere
accusation, and lest men should say, Being our enemy He is bringing these
charges and calumnies against us; He introduces the prophet also, pronouncing
the same judgment as Himself.
"For in them is fulfilled," says He, "the prophecy of Esaias, which says, By
hearing you shall hear, and shall not understand, and seeing you shall see, and
shall not perceive."
Do you see the prophet likewise, accusing them with this same accuracy?
For neither did He say, You see not, but "You shall see and not perceive;" nor
again, You shall not hear, but "You shall hear and not understand." So that they
first inflicted the loss on themselves, by stopping their ears, by closing their
eyes, by making their heart fat. For they not only failed to hear, but also "heard
heavily," and they did this, He says,
"Lest at any time they should be converted, and I should heal them;"
describing their aggravated wickedness, and their determined defection from
Him. And this He says to draw them unto Him, and to provoke them, and to
signify that if they would convert He would heal them: much as if one should
say, "He would not look at me, and I thank him; for if he had vouchsafed me this,
I should straightway have given in:" and this he says, to signify how he would
have been reconciled. Even so then here too it is said, "Lest at any time they
should convert, and I should heal them;" implying that both their conversion was
possible, and that upon their repentance they might be saved, and that not for His
own glory, but for their salvation, He was doing all things.
For if it had not been His will that they should hear and be saved, He ought
to have been silent, not to have spoken in parables; but now by this very thing
He stirs them up, even by speaking under a veil. "For God wills not the death of