which may we all attain by the grace and love toward man, etc.

## Homily 20 on Romans

Rom. XII. 1
"I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that you present
your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your
reasonable service."
After discoursing at large upon the love of God toward man, and pointing
out His unspeakable concern for us, and unutterable goodness, which cannot
even be searched into, he next puts it forward with a view of persuading those
who have received the benefit to exhibit a conversation worthy of the gift. And
though he is so great and good a person, yet he does not decline beseeching
them, and that not for any enjoyment he was likely to get himself, but for that
they would have to gain. And why wonder that he does not decline beseeching,
where he is even putting God's mercies before them? For since, he means, it is
from this you have those numberless blessings, from the mercies of God,
reverence them, be moved to compassion by them. For they themselves take the
attitude of suppliants, that you would show no conduct unworthy of them. I
entreat you then, he means, by the very things through which you were saved.
As if any one who wished to make a person, who had had great kindnesses done
him, show regard, was to bring him the benefactor himself as a suppliant. And
what do you beseech? Let me hear. "That ye would present your bodies a living
sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service." For
when he had said sacrifice, to prevent any from thinking he bade them kill
themselves, he immediately added (Greek order) "living." Then to distinguish it
from the Jewish, he calls it "holy, acceptable to God, your reasonable service."
For theirs was a material one, and not very acceptable either. Since He says,
"Who has required this at your hands?" [Isaiah 1:12] And in sundry other
passages He clearly throws them aside. For it was not this, but this with the

other, that He looked to have presented. Wherefore he says, "The sacrifice of
praise shall glorify Me." And again, "I will praise the name of my God with a
song, and this shall please him better than a bullock that puts forth horns and
hoofs." [Psalm 50:23; 69:30, 31] And so in another place He rejects it, and says,
"Shall I eat the flesh of bulls, or drink goat's blood?" [Psalm 50:13] and
proceeds with, "Offer unto God a sacrifice of praise, and pay your vows unto the
Most High." [Psalm 49:14] So Paul also here bids us "present our bodies a living
sacrifice." And how is the body, it may be said, to become a sacrifice? Let the
eye look upon no evil thing, and it has become a sacrifice; let your tongue speak
nothing filthy, and it has become an offering; let your hand do no lawless deed,
and it has become a whole burnt offering. Or rather this is not enough, but we
must have good works also: let the hand do alms, the mouth bless them that
cross one, and the hearing find leisure evermore for lections of Scripture. For
sacrifice allows of no unclean thing: sacrifice is a first-fruit of the other actions.
Let us then from our hands, and feet, and mouth, and all other members, yield a
first-fruit unto God. Such a sacrifice is well pleasing, as that of the Jews was
even unclean, for, "their sacrifices," it says, "are unto them as the bread of
mourning." [Hosea 9:4] Not so ours. That presented the thing sacrificed dead:
this makes the thing sacrificed to be living. For when we have mortified our
members, then we shall be able to live. For the law of this sacrifice is new, and
so the sort of fire is a marvellous one. For it needs no wood or matter under it;
but our fire lives of itself, and does not burn up the victim, but rather quickens it.
This was the sacrifice that God sought of old. Wherefore the Prophet says, "The
sacrifice of God is a broken spirit." [Psalm 51:17] And the three Children offer
this when they say, "At this time there is neither prince, or prophet, or leader, or
burnt offering, or place to sacrifice before You, and to find mercy. Nevertheless,
in a contrite heart and an humble spirit let us be accepted." [Daniel 3:15-16]
And observe how great the exactness wherewith he uses each word. For he does
not say, offer [ποιήσατε] [Exodus 29:39, Septuagint] your bodies as a sacrifice,
but "present" ([παραστήσατε] see below) them, as if he had said, never more