SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.68, C.4.

emperor another," according to a gloss on Rm. 13:2. Now when a
judge oppresses anyone unjustly, in this respect he departs from the
order of the higher authority, whereby he is obliged to judge justly.
Hence it is lawful for a man who is oppressed unjustly, to have
recourse to the authority of the higher power, by appealing either
before or after sentence has been pronounced. And since it is to be
presumed that there is no rectitude where true faith is lacking, it is
unlawful for a Catholic to appeal to an unbelieving judge, according
to Decretals II, qu. vi, can. Catholicus: "The Catholic who appeals to
the decision of a judge of another faith shall be excommunicated,
whether his case be just or unjust." Hence the Apostle also rebuked
those who went to law before unbelievers (1 Cor. 6:6).
Reply to Objection 2: It is due to a man's own fault or neglect that, of
his own accord, he submits to the judgment of one in whose justice
he has no confidence. Moreover it would seem to point to levity of
mind for a man not to abide by what he has once approved of. Hence
it is with reason that the law refuses us the faculty of appealing from
the decision of judges of our own choice, who have no power save
by virtue of the consent of the litigants. On the other hand the
authority of an ordinary judge depends, not on the consent of those
who are subject to his judgment, but on the authority of the king or
prince who appointed him. Hence, as a remedy against his unjust
oppression, the law allows one to have recourse to appeal, so that
even if the judge be at the same time ordinary and chosen by the
litigants, it is lawful to appeal from his decision, since seemingly his
ordinary authority occasioned his being chosen as arbitrator. Nor is
it to be imputed as a fault to the man who consented to his being
arbitrator, without adverting to the fact that he was appointed
ordinary judge by the prince.
Reply to Objection 3: The equity of the law so guards the interests of
the one party that the other is not oppressed. Thus it allows ten days
for appeal to be made, this being considered sufficient time for
deliberating on the expediency of an appeal. If on the other hand
there were no fixed time limit for appealing, the certainty of judgment
would ever be in suspense, so that the other party would suffer an
injury. The reason why it is not allowed to appeal a third time on the
same point, is that it is not probable that the judges would fail to
judge justly so many times.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.68, C.4.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.68, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether a man who is condemned to death may

lawfully defend himself if he can?
Objection 1: It would seem that a man who is condemned to death
may lawfully defend himself if he can. For it is always lawful to do
that to which nature inclines us, as being of natural right, so to
speak. Now, to resist corruption is an inclination of nature not only
in men and animals but also in things devoid of sense. Therefore if
he can do so, the accused, after condemnation, may lawfully resist
being put to death.
Objection 2: Further, just as a man, by resistance, escapes the death
to which he has been condemned, so does he by flight. Now it is
lawful seemingly to escape death by flight, according to Ecclus. 9:18,
"Keep thee far from the man that hath power to kill and not to
quicken". Therefore it is also lawful for the accused to resist.
Objection 3: Further, it is written (Prov. 24:11): "Deliver them that are
led to death: and those that are drawn to death forbear not to
deliver." Now a man is under greater obligation to himself than to
another. Therefore it is lawful for a condemned man to defend
himself from being put to death.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (Rm. 13:2): "He that resisteth the
power, resisteth the ordinance of God: and they that resist, purchase
to themselves damnation." Now a condemned man, by defending
himself, resists the power in the point of its being ordained by God
"for the punishment of evil-doers, and for the praise of the good" [1
Pt. 2:14]. Therefore he sins in defending himself.
I answer that, A man may be condemned to death in two ways. First
justly, and then it is not lawful for the condemned to defend himself,
because it is lawful for the judge to combat his resistance by force,
so that on his part the fight is unjust, and consequently without any
doubt he sins.
Secondly a man is condemned unjustly: and such a sentence is like
the violence of robbers, according to Ezech. 22:21, "Her princes in
the midst of her are like wolves ravening the prey to shed blood."
Wherefore even as it is lawful to resist robbers, so is it lawful, in a
like case, to resist wicked princes; except perhaps in order to avoid