SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.106, C.4.

simply, or in some case of necessity.
Secondly, a man may be ungrateful, because he not only omits to
pay the debt of gratitude, but does the contrary. This again is
sometimes mortal and sometimes a venial sin, according to the kind
of thing that is done.
It must be observed, however, that when ingratitude arises from a
mortal sin, it has the perfect character of ingratitude, and when it
arises from venial sin, it has the imperfect character.
Reply to Objection 1: By committing a venial sin one is not
ungrateful to God to the extent of incurring the guilt of perfect
ingratitude: but there is something of ingratitude in a venial sin, in so
far as it removes a virtuous act of obedience to God.
Reply to Objection 2: When ingratitude is a venial sin it is not
contrary to, but beside charity: since it does not destroy the habit of
charity, but excludes some act thereof.
Reply to Objection 3: Seneca also says (De Benef. vii): "When we say
that a man after conferring a favor should forget about it, it is a
mistake to suppose that we mean him to shake off the recollection of
a thing so very praiseworthy. When we say: He must not remember
it, we mean that he must not publish it abroad and boast about it."
Reply to Objection 4: He that is unaware of a favor conferred on him
is not ungrateful, if he fails to repay it, provided he be prepared to do
so if he knew. It is nevertheless commendable at times that the
object of a favor should remain in ignorance of it, both in order to
avoid vainglory, as when Blessed Nicolas threw gold into a house
secretly, wishing to avoid popularity: and because the kindness is all
the greater through the benefactor wishing not to shame the person
on whom he is conferring the favor.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.106, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether favors should be withheld from the

ungrateful?
Objection 1: It seems that favors should withheld from the
ungrateful. For it is written (Wis. 16:29): "The hope of the unthankful
shall melt away as the winter's ice." But this hope would not melt
away unless favors were withheld from him. Therefore favors should
be withheld from the ungrateful.
Objection 2: Further, no one should afford another an occasion of
committing sin. But the ungrateful in receiving a favor is given an
occasion of ingratitude. Therefore favors should not be bestowed on
the ungrateful.
Objection 3: Further, "By what things a man sinneth, by the same
also he is tormented" (Wis. 11:17). Now he that is ungrateful when he
receives a favor sins against the favor. Therefore he should be
deprived of the favor.
On the contrary, It is written (Lk. 6:35) that "the Highest . . . is kind to
the unthankful, and to the evil." Now we should prove ourselves His
children by imitating Him (Lk. 6:36). Therefore we should not
withhold favors from the ungrateful.
I answer that, There are two points to be considered with regard to
an ungrateful person. The first is what he deserves to suffer and thus
it is certain that he deserves to be deprived of our favor. The second
is, what ought his benefactor to do? For in the first place he should
not easily judge him to be ungrateful, since, as Seneca remarks (De
Benef. iii), "a man is often grateful although he repays not," because
perhaps he has not the means or the opportunity of repaying.
Secondly, he should be inclined to turn his ungratefulness into
gratitude, and if he does not achieve this by being kind to him once,
he may by being so a second time. If, however, the more he repeats
his favors, the more ungrateful and evil the other becomes, he
should cease from bestowing his favors upon him.
Reply to Objection 1: The passage quoted speaks of what the
ungrateful man deserves to suffer.
Reply to Objection 2: He that bestows a favor on an ungrateful