described?
Objection 1: It would seem that the daughters of lust are unfittingly
reckoned to be "blindness of mind, thoughtlessness, inconstancy,
rashness, self-love, hatred of God, love of this world and abhorrence
or despair of a future world." For mental blindness, thoughtlessness
and rashness pertain to imprudence, which is to be found in every
sin, even as prudence is in every virtue. Therefore they should not
be reckoned especially as daughters of lust.
Objection 2: Further, constancy is reckoned a part of fortitude, as
stated above (Question 128, ad 6; Question 137, Article 3). But lust is
contrary, not to fortitude but to temperance. Therefore inconstancy
is not a daughter of lust.
Objection 3: Further, "Self-love extending to the contempt of God" is
the origin of every sin, as Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xiv, 28).
Therefore it should not be accounted a daughter of lust.
Objection 4: Further, Isidore [Questions. in Deut., qu. xvi] mentions
four, namely, "obscene," "scurrilous," "wanton" and "foolish
talking." There the aforesaid enumeration would seem to be
superfluous.
On the contrary, stands the authority of Gregory (Moral. xxxi, 45).
I answer that, When the lower powers are strongly moved towards
their objects, the result is that the higher powers are hindered and
disordered in their acts. Now the effect of the vice of lust is that the
lower appetite, namely the concupiscible, is most vehemently intent
on its object, to wit, the object of pleasure, on account of the
vehemence of the pleasure. Consequently the higher powers, namely
the reason and the will, are most grievously disordered by lust.
Now the reason has four acts in matters of action. First there is
simple understanding, which apprehends some end as good, and
this act is hindered by lust, according to Dan. 13:56, "Beauty hath
deceived thee, and lust hath perverted thy heart." In this respect we
have "blindness of mind." The second act is counsel about what is
to be done for the sake of the end: and this is also hindered by the

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.152, C.6.

concupiscence of lust. Hence Terence says (Eunuch., act 1, sc. 1),
speaking of lecherous love: "This thing admits of neither counsel
nor moderation, thou canst not control it by counseling." In this
respect there is "rashness," which denotes absence of counsel, as
stated above (Question 53, Article 3). The third act is judgment about
the things to be done, and this again is hindered by lust. For it is
said of the lustful old men (Dan. 13:9): "They perverted their own
mind . . . that they might not . . . remember just judgments." In this
respect there is "thoughtlessness." The fourth act is the reason's
command about the thing to be done, and this also is impeded by
lust, in so far as through being carried away by concupiscence, a
man is hindered from doing what his reason ordered to be done. To
this "inconstancy" must be referred. Hence Terence says (Eunuch.,
act 1, sc. 1) of a man who declared that he would leave his mistress:
"One little false tear will undo those words."
On the part of the will there results a twofold inordinate act. One is
the desire for the end, to which we refer "self-love," which regards
the pleasure which a man desires inordinately, while on the other
hand there is "hatred of God," by reason of His forbidding the
desired pleasure. The other act is the desire for the things directed
to the end. With regard to this there is "love of this world," whose
pleasures a man desires to enjoy, while on the other hand there is
"despair of a future world," because through being held back by
carnal pleasures he cares not to obtain spiritual pleasures, since
they are distasteful to him.
Reply to Objection 1: According to the Philosopher (Ethic. vi, 5),
intemperance is the chief corruptive of prudence: wherefore the
vices opposed to prudence arise chiefly from lust, which is the
principal species of intemperance.
Reply to Objection 2: The constancy which is a part of fortitude
regards hardships and objects of fear; but constancy in refraining
from pleasures pertains to continence which is a part of temperance,
as stated above (Question 143). Hence the inconstancy which is
opposed thereto is to be reckoned a daughter of lust. Nevertheless
even the first named inconstancy arises from lust, inasmuch as the
latter enfeebles a man's heart and renders it effeminate, according to
Osee 4:11, "Fornication and wine and drunkenness take away the
heart." Vegetius, too, says (De Re Milit. iii) that "the less a man
knows of the pleasures of life, the less he fears death." Nor is there
any need, as we have repeatedly stated, for the daughters of a