impurities of these places! And still they did not abstain; but always on this day
they flocked together to the unlawful spectacles of the dancers; and they held
their diabolical assembly in opposition to the full congregation of God's Church;
so that their vehement shouts, borne in the air from that place, resounded against
the psalms which we were singing here. But behold, now while we were keeping
silence, and saying nothing on the subject, they of themselves have shut up their
orchestra; and the Hippodrome has been left deserted! Before this, many of our
own people used to hasten to them; but now they are all fled hither from thence
to the church, and all alike join in praising our God!
2. Do you see what advantage has come of fear? If fear were not a good
thing, fathers would not have set tutors over their children; nor lawgivers
magistrates for cities. What can be more grievous than hell? Yet nothing is more
profitable than the fear of it; for the fear of hell will bring us the crown of the
kingdom. Where fear is, there is no envy; where fear is, the love of money does
not disturb; where fear is, wrath is quenched, evil concupiscence is repressed,
and every unreasonable passion is exterminated. And even as in a house, where
there is always a soldier under arms, no robber, nor house-breaker, nor any such
evil doer will dare to make his appearance; so also while fear holds possession of
our minds, none of the base passions will readily attack us, but all fly off and are
banished, being driven away in every direction by the despotic power of fear.
And not only this advantage do we gain from fear, but also another which is far
greater. For not only, indeed, does it expel our evil passions, but it also
introduces every kind of virtue with great facility. Where fear exists, there is zeal
in almsgiving, and intensity of prayer, and tears warm and frequent, and groans
fraught with compunction. For nothing so swallows up sin, and makes virtue to
increase and flourish, as a perpetual state of dread. Therefore it is impossible for
him who does not live in fear to act aright; as, on the other hand, it is impossible
that the man who lives in fear can go wrong.
3. Let us not then grieve, beloved, let us not despond on account of the
present tribulation, but let us admire the well-devised plan of God's wisdom. For

by these very means through which the devil hoped to overturn our city, has God
restored and corrected it. The devil animated certain lawless men to treat the
very statues of the Emperor contemptuously, in order that the very foundations
of the city might be razed. But God employed this same circumstance for our
greater correction; driving out all sloth by the dread of the expected wrath: and
the thing has turned out directly opposite to what the devil wished, by the means
which he had himself prepared. For our city is being purified every day; and the
lanes and crossings, and places of public concourse, are freed from lascivious
and voluptuous songs; and turn where we will there are supplications, and
thanksgivings, and tears, instead of rude laughter; there are words of sound
wisdom instead of obscene language, and our whole city has become a Church,
the workshops being closed, and all being engaged throughout the day in these
general prayers; and calling upon God in one united voice with much
earnestness. What preaching, what admonition, what counsel, what length of
time had ever availed to accomplish these things?
4. For this then let us be thankful, and let us not be petulant or discontented;
for that fear is a good thing, what we have said has made manifest. But hear
Solomon thus uttering a lesson of wisdom concerning it; Solomon, who was
nourished in every luxury, and enjoyed much security. What then does he say?
"It is better to go to the house of mourning than to the house of laughter." What
do you say, I ask? Is it better to go where there is weeping, lamentation, and
groans, and anguish, and so much sadness, than where there is the dance, the
cymbals, and laughter, and luxury, and full eating and drinking? Yes, verily, he
replies. And tell me why is it so, and for what reason? Because, at the former
place, insolence is bred, at the latter, sobriety. And when a person goes to the
banquet of one more opulent, he will no longer behold his own house with the
same pleasure, but he comes back to his wife in a discontented mood; and in
discontent he partakes of his own table; and is peevish towards his own servants,
and his own children, and every body in his house; perceiving his own poverty
the more forcibly by the wealth of others. And this is not the only evil; but that