Cf M. Ruiz Jurado, 'En torno a la gracia de acatamiento amoroso', in Manresa (1963), PP I45-I54. devotion but with a reiteration of that inter-penetration of truths which was hinted at in the final point of the 'Contemplation to obtain love'. In the eucharistic liturgy, the saint finds the great prayer, the period when earth and heaven are most obviously at one, the point at which the soul's access to the divine acquires its greatest facility. There is in the Diary a very personal approach to the mass: the saint cannot tolerate distraction at that time. There is no trace of the social theology which is required if the full wealth of the mass is to be estimated. But it is essential to remember the purpose of the Diary. It is not a mere collection of thoughts; it is kept with a definite end in view: 2s the recording of the consolations and desolations experienced in the course of reaching a decision about poverty. For a full exposition of Ignatius' theological convictions, it is necessary to study his other writings. 29 Where the Diary is of particular importance is in the revelation it offers of the force that certain of the saint's ideals and modes of thought had acquired. Other aspects of his inner motivation are revealed elsewhere.

21 Second week: Rules for the discernment of spirits (Exx 330).

82 basra apretarme en los pechos: the interpretations vary. Iparraguirre, following Knauer, favours, 'that I was hugging my breast'. mysteriously in the Biblioteca Nacional in Madrid. 33 Here are written out the passages underlined in the Diary; those that refer to the most extraordinary of the visions and graces. The saint would not have gone to such trouble if he were constantly receiving graces of this kind. Secondly, there is a passage in the Autobiography, dictated eleven years later, which gives the Diary a special importance: He (Ignatius) then showed me (Fr Gonalves da Camara) quite a large bundle of written notes and read me a good part of them. For the most part they were visions he had seen in confirmation of some parts of the Constitutions: he had sometimes seen God the Father, at other times the three Persons of the Trinity, at others our Lady interceding or approving. He spoke to me in particular of the deliberation in which he had been stuck for 4 ° days, saying mass each day, and with many tears each day: the point at issue was if the Church should have an income, and if the Society could avail itself of such. The method he used while composing the Constitutions was to celebrate mass each day, to present to God the point he was treating, and to make his prayer about it; during both his prayers and his mass he would shed tears. I wanted to see all those notes referring to the Constitutions, and I asked him to let me have them for a short while; but he did not want to. s4 Ignatius probably continued to preserve the Diary precisely because of the exceptional nature of its entries; they recorded an apex of his spiritual life. However, if in the first part of the Diary the number of visions, particularly of the Trinity, the references to physical heat and other strange sensations are remarkable, it is in the second part that the more unusual of the special mystical phenomena make their appearance: the loquela and its music: The internal loquela of the mass seemed even more a special gift from God; I had prayed for it this very day because during the week I had sometimes experienced the external loquela and sometimes not, but the internal more rarely, although last Saturday I heard it a little more clearly... During the internal and external loquela I felt wholly moved to the divine love and tothis gift of loquela granted by God; within me a great harmony accompanying the internal loquela, but I cannot express it. May i i. I took great pleasure in the internal loquela; at the same time I found myself enjoying or remembering the loquela or music of heaven (music of heaven). May 12. A little later I thought I was taking excessive pleasure in the tone