FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.5.

various gods: and so, to strengthen in the minds of men their belief
in the unity of the Godhead, God wished sacrifices to be offered to
Him in one place only. Another reason was in order to show that
bodily worship is not acceptable of itself: and so they restrained
from offering sacrifices anywhere and everywhere. But the worship
of the New Law, in the sacrifice whereof spiritual grace is contained,
is of itself acceptable to God; and consequently the multiplication of
altars and temples is permitted in the New Law.
As to those matters that regarded the spiritual worship of God,
consisting in the teaching of the Law and the Prophets, there were,
even under the Old Law, various places, called synagogues,
appointed for the people to gather together for the praise of God;
just as now there are places called churches in which the Christian
people gather together for the divine worship. Thus our church takes
the place of both temple and synagogue: since the very sacrifice of
the Church is spiritual; wherefore with us the place of sacrifice is not
distinct from the place of teaching. The figurative reason may be that
hereby is signified the unity of the Church, whether militant or
triumphant.
Reply to Objection 4: Just as the unity of the temple or tabernacle
betokened the unity of God, or the unity of the Church, so also the
division of the tabernacle or temple signified the distinction of those
things that are subject to God, and from which we arise to the
worship of God. Now the tabernacle was divided into two parts: one
was called the "Holy of Holies," and was placed to the west; the
other was called the "Holy Place", which was situated to the east.
Moreover there was a court facing the tabernacle. Accordingly there
are two reasons for this distinction. One is in respect of the
tabernacle being ordained to the worship of God. Because the
different parts of the world are thus betokened by the division of the
tabernacle. For that part which was called the Holy of Holies
signified the higher world, which is that of spiritual substances:
while that part which is called the Holy Place signified the corporeal
world. Hence the Holy Place was separated from the Holy of Holies
by a veil, which was of four different colors (denoting the four
elements), viz. of linen, signifying earth, because linen, i.e. flax,
grows out of the earth; purple, signifying water, because the purple
tint was made from certain shells found in the sea; violet, signifying
air, because it has the color of the air; and scarlet twice dyed,
signifying fire: and this because matter composed of the four
elements is a veil between us and incorporeal substances. Hence the

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.5.

high-priest alone, and that once a year, entered into the inner
tabernacle, i.e. the Holy of Holies: whereby we are taught that man's
final perfection consists in his entering into that (higher) world:
whereas into the outward tabernacle, i.e. the Holy Place, the priests
entered every day: whereas the people were only admitted to the
court; because the people were able to perceived material things, the
inner nature of which only wise men by dint of study are able to
discover.
But regard to the figurative reason, the outward tabernacle, which
was called the Holy Place, betokened the state of the Old Law, as the
Apostle says (Heb. 9:6, seqq.): because into that tabernacle "the
priests always entered accomplishing the offices of sacrifices." But
the inner tabernacle, which was called the Holy of Holies, signified
either the glory of heaven or the spiritual state of the New Law to
come. To the latter state Christ brought us; and this was signified by
the high-priest entering alone, once a year, into the Holy of Holies.
The veil betokened the concealing of the spiritual sacrifices under
the sacrifices of old. This veil was adorned with four colors: viz. that
of linen, to designate purity of the flesh; purple, to denote the
sufferings which the saints underwent for God; scarlet twice dyed,
signifying the twofold love of God and our neighbor; and violet, in
token of heavenly contemplation. With regard to the state of the Old
Law the people and the priests were situated differently from one
another. For the people saw the mere corporeal sacrifices which
were offered in the court: whereas the priests were intent on the
inner meaning of the sacrifices, because their faith in the mysteries
of Christ was more explicit. Hence they entered into the outer
tabernacle. This outer tabernacle was divided from the court by a
veil; because some matters relating to the mystery of Christ were
hidden from the people, while they were known to the priests:
though they were not fully revealed to them, as they were
subsequently in the New Testament (cf. Eph. 3:5).
Reply to Objection 5: Worship towards the west was introduced in
the Law to the exclusion of idolatry: because all the Gentiles, in
reverence to the sun, worshipped towards the east; hence it is
written (Ezech. 8:16) that certain men "had their backs towards the
temple of the Lord, and their faces to the east, and they adored
towards the rising of the sun." Accordingly, in order to prevent this,
the tabernacle had the Holy of Holies to westward, that they might
adore toward the west. A figurative reason may also be found in the
fact that the whole state of the first tabernacle was ordained to