SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.186, C.6.

discreet in becoming a mendicant for the purpose of humiliation, lest
a man thereby incur the mark of covetousness or of anything else
unbecoming. Secondly, mendicancy may be considered on the part
of that which one gets by begging: and thus a man may be led to beg
by a twofold motive. First, by the desire to have wealth or meat
without working for it, and such like mendicancy is unlawful;
secondly, by a motive of necessity or usefulness. The motive is one
of necessity if a man has no other means of livelihood save begging;
and it is a motive of usefulness if he wishes to accomplish
something useful, and is unable to do so without the alms of the
faithful. Thus alms are besought for the building of a bridge, or
church, or for any other work whatever that is conducive to the
common good: thus scholars may seek alms that they may devote
themselves to the study of wisdom. In this way mendicancy is lawful
to religious no less than to seculars.
Reply to Objection 1: Augustine is speaking there explicitly of those
who beg from motives of covetousness.
Reply to Objection 2: The first gloss speaks of begging from motives
of covetousness, as appears from the words of the Apostle; while
the second gloss speaks of those who without effecting any useful
purpose, beg their livelihood in order to live in idleness. on the other
hand, he lives not idly who in any way lives usefully.
Reply to Objection 3: This precept of the divine law does not forbid
anyone to beg, but it forbids the rich to be so stingy that some are
compelled by necessity to beg. The civil law imposes a penalty on
able-bodied mendicants who beg from motives neither of utility nor
of necessity.
Reply to Objection 4: Disgrace is twofold; one arises from lack of
honesty [Question 145, Article 1], the other from an external defect,
thus it is disgraceful for a man to be sick or poor. Such like
uncomeliness of mendicancy does not pertain to sin, but it may
pertain to humility, as stated above.
Reply to Objection 5: Preachers have the right to be fed by those to
whom they preach: yet if they wish to seek this by begging so as to
receive it as a free gift and not as a right this will be a mark of greater
humility.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.186, C.6.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.186, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether it is lawful for religious to wear coarser

clothes than others?
Objection 1: It would seem unlawful for religious to wear coarser
clothes than others. For according to the Apostle (1 Thess. 5:22) we
ought to "refrain from all appearance of evil." Now coarseness of
clothes has an appearance of evil; for our Lord said (Mt. 7:15):
"Beware of false prophets who come to you in the clothing of
sheep": and a gloss on Apoc. 6:8, "Behold a pale horse," says: "The
devil finding that he cannot succeed, neither by outward afflictions
nor by manifest heresies, sends in advance false brethren, who
under the guise of religion assume the characteristics of the black
and red horses by corrupting the faith." Therefore it would seem that
religious should not wear coarse clothes.
Objection 2: Further, Jerome says (Ep. lii ad Nepotian.): "Avoid
somber," i.e. black, "equally with glittering apparel. Fine and coarse
clothes are equally to be shunned, for the one exhales pleasure, the
other vainglory." Therefore, since vainglory is a graver sin than the
use of pleasure, it would seem that religious who should aim at what
is more perfect ought to avoid coarse rather than fine clothes.
Objection 3: Further, religious should aim especially at doing works
of penance. Now in works of penance we should use, not outward
signs of sorrow, but rather signs of joy; for our Lord said (Mt. 6:16):
"When you fast, be not, as the hypocrites, sad," and afterwards He
added: "But thou, when thou fastest, anoint thy head and wash thy
face." Augustine commenting on these words (De Serm. Dom. in
Monte ii, 12): "In this chapter we must observe that not only the glare
and pomp of outward things, but even the weeds of mourning may
be a subject of ostentation, all the more dangerous as being a decoy
under the guise of God's service." Therefore seemingly religious
ought not to wear coarse clothes.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (Heb. 11:37): "They wandered
about in sheep-skins in goat-skins," and a gloss adds---"as Elias and
others." Moreover it is said in the Decretal XXI, qu. iv, can. Omnis
jactantia: "If any persons be found to deride those who wear coarse
and religious apparel they must be reproved. For in the early times
all those who were consecrated to God went about in common and
coarse apparel."