a fashion.
Reply to Objection 2: As the soul separated from the body does not
perfectly understand separate substances, so neither does it know
all natural things perfectly; but it knows them confusedly, as above
explained in this article.
Reply to Objection 3: Isidore speaks of the knowledge of the future
which neither angels, nor demons, nor separated souls, know except
so far as future things pre-exist in their causes or are known by
Divine revelation. But we are here treating of the knowledge of
natural things.
Reply to Objection 4: Knowledge acquired here by study is proper
and perfect; the knowledge of which we speak is confused. Hence it
does not follow that to study in order to learn is useless.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the separated soul knows singulars?

Objection 1: It would seem that the separated soul does not know
singulars. For no cognitive power besides the intellect remains in the
separated soul, as is clear from what has been said above (Question
77, Article 8). But the intellect cannot know singulars, as we have
shown (Question 86, Article 1). Therefore the separated soul cannot
know singulars.
Objection 2: Further, the knowledge of the singular is more
determinate than knowledge of the universal. But the separated soul
has no determinate knowledge of the species of natural things,
therefore much less can it know singulars.
Objection 3: Further, if it knew the singulars, yet not by sense, for
the same reason it would know all singulars. But it does not know all
singulars. Therefore it knows none.
On the contrary, The rich man in hell said: "I have five brethren" (Lk.
16:28).
I answer that, Separated souls know some singulars, but not all, not
even all present singulars. To understand this, we must consider
that there is a twofold way of knowing things, one by means of
abstraction from phantasms, and in this way singulars cannot be
directly known by the intellect, but only indirectly, as stated above
(Question 86, Article 1). The other way of understanding is by the
infusion of species by God, and in that way it is possible for the
intellect to know singulars. For as God knows all things, universal
and singular, by His Essence, as the cause of universal and
individual principles (Question 14, Article 2), so likewise separate
substances can know singulars by species which are a kind of
participated similitude of the Divine Essence. There is a difference,
however, between angels and separated souls in the fact that
through these species the angels have a perfect and proper
knowledge of things; whereas separated have only a confused
knowledge. Hence the angels, by reason of their perfect intellect,
through these species, know not only the specific natures of things,
but also the singulars contained in those species; whereas
separated souls by these species know only those singulars to
which they are determined by former knowledge in this life, or by