1 Corinthians 4:7
3. "For who makes you to differ? For what have you which thou did not
receive?"
From this point, dismissing the governed, he turns to the governors. What
he says comes to this: From whence is evident that you are worthy of being
praised? Why, has any judgment taken place? Any inquiry proceeded? Any
essay? Any severe testing? Nay, you can not say it: and if men give their votes,
their judgment is not upright. But let us suppose that thou really art worthy of
praise and hast indeed the gracious gift, and that the judgment of men is not
corrupt: yet not even in this case were it right to be high-minded; for you have
nothing of yourself but from God received it. Why then do you pretend to have
that which you have not? You will say, "you have it:" and others have it with
you: well then, you have it upon receiving it: not merely this thing or that, but all
things whatsoever you have.
For not to you belong these excellencies, but to the grace of God. Whether
you name faith, it came of His calling; or whether it be the forgiveness of sins
which you speak of, or spiritual gifts, or the word of teaching, or the miracles;
you received all from thence. Now what have you, tell me, which you have not
received, but hast rather achieved of your own self? You have nothing to say.
Well: you have received; and does that make you high-minded? Nay, it ought to
make you shrink back into yourself. For it is not yours, what has been given, but
the giver's. What if you received it? You received it of him. And if you received
of him, it was not yours which you received, and if you but received what was
not your own, why are you exalted as if you had something of your own?
Wherefore he added also, Now if you received it, why do you glory, as if you
had not received it?
4. Thus having, you see, made good his argument by concession, ([κατὰ

συνδρομὴν].) he indicates that they have their deficiencies; and those not a few:
and says, "In the first place, though you had received all things, it were not meet
to glory, for nothing is your own; but as the case really stands there are many
things of which you are destitute." And in the beginning he did but hint at this,
saying, "I could not speak unto you as unto spiritual:" and, "I determined to
know nothing among you, save Jesus Christ and Him crucified." But here he
does it in a way to abash them, saying,

1 Corinthians 4:8
"Already you are filled, already you are rich:" that is, you want nothing
henceforth; you have become perfect; you have attained the very summit; you
stand, as you think, in need of no one, either among Apostles or teachers.
"Already you are filled." And well says he "already;" pointing out, from the
time, the incredibility of their statements and their unreasonable notion of
themselves. It was therefore in mockery that he said to them, "So quickly have
you come to the end;" which thing was impossible in the time: for all the more
perfect things wait long in futurity: but to be "full" with a little betokens a feeble
soul; and from a little to imagine one's self "rich," a sick and miserable one. For
piety is an insatiable thing; and it argues a childish mind to imagine from just the
beginnings that you have obtained the whole: and for men who are not yet even
in the prelude of a matter, to be high-minded as if they had laid hold of the end.
Then also by means of what follows he puts them yet more out of
countenance; for having said, "Already you are full," he added, "you have
become rich, you have reigned without us: yea and I would to God you reigned,
that we also might reign with you." Full of great austerity is the speech: which is
why it comes last, being introduced by him after that abundance of reproof. For
then is our admonition respected and easily received, when after our accusations
we introduce our humiliating expressions, ([τὰ ἐυτρεπτικὰ ῤήματα].) For this
were enough to repress even the shameless soul and strike it more sharply than
direct accusation, and correct the bitterness and hardened feeling likely to arise
from the charge brought. It being certain that this more than anything else is the
admirable quality of those arguments which appeal to our sense of shame, that
they possess two contrary advantages. On the one hand, one cuts deeper than by
open invective: on the other hand, it causes the person reprimanded to bear that
severer stab with more entire patience.