FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.74, C.8.

we must observe that in every case brought up for judgment, the
final sentence belongs to the supreme court, even as we see that in
speculative matters the final sentence touching any proposition is
delivered by referring it to the first principles; since, so long as there
remains a yet higher principle, the question can yet be submitted to
it: wherefore the judgment is still in suspense, the final sentence not
being as yet pronounced. But it is evident that human acts can be
regulated by the rule of human reason, which rule is derived from the
created things that man knows naturally; and further still, from the
rule of the Divine law, as stated above (Question 19, Article 4).
Consequently, since the rule of the Divine law is the higher rule, it
follows that the ultimate sentence, whereby the judgment is finally
pronounced, belongs to the higher reason which is intent on the
eternal types. Now when judgment has to be pronounced on several
points, the final judgment deals with that which comes last; and, in
human acts, the action itself comes last, and the delectation which is
the inducement to the action is a preamble thereto. Therefore the
consent to an action belongs properly to the higher reason, while the
preliminary judgment which is about the delectation belongs to the
lower reason, which delivers judgment in a lower court: although the
higher reason can also judge of the delectation, since whatever is
subject to the judgment of the lower court, is subject also to the
judgment of the higher court, but not conversely.
Reply to Objection 1: Consent is an act of the appetitive power, not
absolutely, but in consequence of an act of reason deliberating and
judging, as stated above (Question 15, Article 3). Because the fact
that the consent is finally given to a thing is due to the fact that the
will tends to that upon which the reason has already passed its
judgment. Hence consent may be ascribed both to the will and to the
reason.
Reply to Objection 2: The higher reason is said to consent, from the
very fact that it fails to direct the human act according to the Divine
law, whether or not it advert to the eternal law. For if it thinks of
God's law, it holds it in actual contempt: and if not, it neglects it by a
kind of omission. Therefore the consent to a sinful act always
proceeds from the higher reason: because, as Augustine says (De
Trin. xii, 12), "the mind cannot effectively decide on the commission
of a sin, unless by its consent, whereby it wields its sovereign power
of moving the members to action, or of restraining them from action,
it become the servant or slave of the evil deed."

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.74, C.8.

Reply to Objection 3: The higher reason, by considering the eternal
law, can direct or restrain the internal delectation, even as it can
direct or restrain the external action: nevertheless, before the
judgment of the higher reason is pronounced the lower reason, while
deliberating the matter in reference to temporal principles,
sometimes approves of this delectation: and then the consent to the
delectation belongs to the lower reason. If, however, after
considering the eternal law, man persists in giving the same
consent, such consent will then belong to the higher reason.
Reply to Objection 4: The apprehension of the power of imagination
is sudden and indeliberate: wherefore it can cause an act before the
higher or lower reason has time to deliberate. But the judgment of
the lower reason is deliberate, and so requires time, during which
the higher reason can also deliberate; consequently, if by its
deliberation it does not check the sinful act, this will deservedly by
imputed to it.