intelligible in potentiality, but they are actually such; for they first
and principally understand immaterial things, as will appear later
(Question 84, Article 7; Question 85, Article 1). Therefore there
cannot be an active and a passive intellect in them, except
equivocally.
Reply to Objection 1: As the words themselves show, the
Philosopher understands those two things to be in every nature in
which there chances to be generation or making. Knowledge,
however, is not generated in the angels, but is present naturally.
Hence there is not need for admitting an active and a passive
intellect in them.
Reply to Objection 2: It is the function of the active intellect to
enlighten, not another intellect, but things which are intelligible in
potentiality, in so far as by abstraction it makes them to be actually
intelligible. It belongs to the passive intellect to be in potentiality
with regard to things which are naturally capable of being known,
and sometimes to apprehend them actually. Hence for one angel to
enlighten another does not belong to the notion of an active intellect:
neither does it belong to the passive intellect for the angel to be
enlightened with regard to supernatural mysteries, to the knowledge
of which he is sometimes in potentiality. But if anyone wishes to call
these by the names of active and passive intellect, he will then be
speaking equivocally; and it is not about names that we need
trouble.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether there is only intellectual knowledge in

the angels?
Objection 1: It would seem that the knowledge of the angels is not
exclusively intellectual. For Augustine says (De Civ. Dei viii) that in
the angels there is "life which understands and feels." Therefore
there is a sensitive faculty in them as well.
Objection 2: Further, Isidore says (De Summo Bono) that the angels
have learnt many things by experience. But experience comes of
many remembrances, as stated in Metaph. i, 1. Consequently they
have likewise a power of memory.
Objection 3: Further, Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iv) that there is a
sort of "perverted phantasy" in the demons. But phantasy belongs to
the imaginative faculty. Therefore the power of the imagination is in
the demons; and for the same reason it is in the angels, since they
are of the same nature.
On the contrary, Gregory says (Hom. 29 in Ev.), that "man senses in
common with the brutes, and understands with the angels."
I answer that, In our soul there are certain powers whose operations
are exercised by corporeal organs; such powers are acts of sundry
parts of the body, as sight of the eye, and hearing of the ear. There
are some other powers of the soul whose operations are not
performed through bodily organs, as intellect and will: these are not
acts of any parts of the body. Now the angels have no bodies
naturally joined to them, as is manifest from what has been said
already (Question 51, Article 1). Hence of the soul's powers only
intellect and will can belong to them.
The Commentator (Metaph. xii) says the same thing, namely, that the
separated substances are divided into intellect and will. And it is in
keeping with the order of the universe for the highest intellectual
creature to be entirely intelligent; and not in part, as is our soul. For
this reason the angels are called "intellects" and "minds," as was
said above (Article 3, ad 1).
A twofold answer can be returned to the contrary objections. First, it
may be replied that those authorities are speaking according to the