the power of repentance; "And now, brethren, I know that through ignorance you
did it, as did also your rulers." [Acts 3:17] This is one ground of excuse. The
second is of a different kind. As Joseph speaks to his brethren, God did send me
before you [Genesis 45:5]; what in the former speech he had briefly said, in the
words, "Him, being delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of
God, you have taken,"— this he here enlarges upon: "But what God before had
showed by the mouth of all His Prophets, that His Christ should suffer, He has so
fulfilled." [Acts 3:18] At the same time showing, that it was not of their doing, if
this be proved, that it took place after God's counsel. He alludes to those words
with which they had reviled Him on the Cross, namely "Let Him deliver Him, if
He will have Him; for He said, I am the Son of God. If He trust in God, let Him
now come down from the cross." [Matthew 27:42-43] O foolish men, were these
idle words? It must needs so come to pass, and the prophets bear witness
thereunto. Therefore if He descended not, it was for no weakness of His own that
He did not come down, but for very power. And Peter puts this by way of
apology for the Jews, hoping that they may also close with what he says. "He
has so fulfilled," he says. Do you see now how he refers everything to that
source? "Repent ye therefore," he says, "and be converted." He does not add,
"from your sins;" but, "that your sins, may be blotted out," means the same
thing. And then he adds the gain: "So shall the times of refreshing come from the
presence of the Lord." [Acts 3:19] This betokens them in a sad state, brought low
by many wars. For it is to the case of one on fire, and craving comfort, that the
expression applies. And see now how he advances. In his first sermon, he but
slightly hinted at the resurrection, and Christ's sitting in heaven; but here he also
speaks of His visible advent. And He shall send Jesus the Christ ordained (for
you), "Whom the heaven must (i.e. must of necessity) receive, until the times of
the restitution of all things." The reason why He does not now come is clear.
"Which God has spoken," he continues, "by the mouth of His holy prophets since
the world began. For Moses truly said unto the fathers, A Prophet shall the Lord
your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like me; him shall you hear in all

things whatsoever he shall say unto you." Before, he had spoken of David, here
he speaks of Moses. "Of all things," he says, "which He has spoken." But he
does not say, "which Christ," but, "which God has spoken by the mouth of all His
holy prophets since the world began." (v. 20-21.) Then he betakes him to the
ground of credibility, saying, "A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto
you of your brethren, like me; Him shall you hear in all things." And then the
greatness of the punishment: "And it shall come to pass, that every soul which
will not hear that Prophet, shall be destroyed from among the people. Yea, and
all the prophets, from Samuel and those that follow, after, as many as have
spoken have likewise foretold of these days." (v. 23-24.) He has done well to set
the distinction here. For whenever he says anything great, he appeals to them of
old. And he found a text which contained both truths; just as in the other
discourse he said, "Until He put His foes under His feet." [Acts 2:35] The
remarkable circumstance is, that the two things stand together; that is, subjection
and disobedience, and the punishment. "Like unto me," he says. Then why are
you alarmed? "You are the children of the prophets" [Acts 3:25]: so that to you
they spoke, and for your sakes have all these things come to pass. For as they
deemed that through their outrage they had become alienated (and indeed there
is no parity of reason, that He Who now is crucified, should now cherish them as
His own), he proves to them that both the one and the other are in accordance
with prophecy. "You are the children," he says, "of the Prophets, and of the
covenant which God made with our fathers, saying unto Abraham, 'And in your
seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed.' Unto you first," he continues,
"God having raised up His Son ([τόν Παἵδα]) sent Him." "To others indeed also,
but to you first who crucified Him." "To bless you," he adds, "in turning away
every one of you from his iniquities." [Acts 3:26]
Now let us consider again more minutely what has been read out.
(Recapitulation.) In the first place, he establishes the point that the miracle was
performed by them ; saying, "Why marvel ye?" And he will not let the assertion
be disbelieved: and to give it more weight, he anticipates their judgment. "Why