Objection 1: It would seem that hope is not a help but a hindrance to
action. Because hope implies security. But security begets
negligence which hinders action. Therefore hope is a hindrance to
action.
Objection 2: Further, sorrow hinders action, as stated above
(Question 37, Article 3). But hope sometimes causes sorrow: for it is
written (Prov. 13:12): "Hope that is deferred afflicteth the soul."
Therefore hope hinders action.
Objection 3: Further, despair is contrary to hope, as stated above
(Article 4). But despair, especially in matters of war, conduces to
action; for it is written (2 Kgs. 2:26), that "it is dangerous to drive
people to despair." Therefore hope has a contrary effect, namely, by
hindering action.
On the contrary, It is written (1 Cor. 9:10) that "he that plougheth
should plough in hope . . . to receive fruit": and the same applies to
all other actions.
I answer that, Hope of its very nature is a help to action by making it
more intense: and this for two reasons. First, by reason of its object,
which is a good, difficult but possible. For the thought of its being
difficult arouses our attention; while the thought that it is possible is
no drag on our effort. Hence it follows that by reason of hope man is
intent on his action. Secondly, on account of its effect. Because
hope, as stated above (Question 32, Article 3), causes pleasure;
which is a help to action, as stated above (Question 33, Article 4).
Therefore hope is conducive to action.
Reply to Objection 1: Hope regards a good to be obtained; security
regards an evil to be avoided. Wherefore security seems to be
contrary to fear rather than to belong to hope. Yet security does not
beget negligence, save in so far as it lessens the idea of difficulty:
whereby it also lessens the character of hope: for the things in which
a man fears no hindrance, are no longer looked upon as difficult.
Reply to Objection 2: Hope of itself causes pleasure; it is by accident
that it causes sorrow, as stated above (Question 32, Article 3, ad 2).

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.40, C.9.

Reply to Objection 3: Despair threatens danger in war, on account of
a certain hope that attaches to it. For they who despair of flight,
strive less to fly, but hope to avenge their death: and therefore in this
hope they fight the more bravely, and consequently prove dangerous
to the foe.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.41, C.1.

## QUESTION 41 — OF FEAR, IN ITSELF

Prologue
We must now consider, in the first place, fear; and, secondly, daring.
With regard to fear, four things must be considered: (1) Fear, in
itself; (2) Its object; (3) Its cause; (4) Its effect. Under the first head
there are four points of inquiry:
(1) Whether fear is a passion of the soul?
(2) Whether fear is a special passion?
(3) Whether there is a natural fear?
(4) Of the species of fear.