In proof whereof it must be borne in mind that the higher the cause,
the more numerous the objects to which its causation extends. Now
the underlying principle in things is always more universal than that
which informs and restricts it; thus, being is more universal than
living, living than understanding, matter than form. The more widely,
then, one thing underlies others, the more directly does that thing
proceed from a higher cause. Thus the thing that underlies primarily
all things, belongs properly to the causality of the supreme cause.
Therefore no secondary cause can produce anything, unless there is
presupposed in the thing produced something that is caused by a
higher cause. But creation is the production of a thing in its entire
substance, nothing being presupposed either uncreated or created.
Hence it remains that nothing can create except God alone, Who is
the first cause. Therefore, in order to show that all bodies were
created immediately by God, Moses said: "In the beginning God
created heaven and earth."
Reply to Objection 1: In the production of things an order exists, but
not such that one creature is created by another, for that is
impossible; but rather such that by the Divine wisdom diverse
grades are constituted in creatures.
Reply to Objection 2: God Himself, though one, has knowledge of
many and different things without detriment to the simplicity of His
nature, as has been shown above (Question 15, Article 2); so that by
His wisdom He is the cause of diverse things as known by Him, even
as an artificer, by apprehending diverse forms, produces diverse
works of art.
Reply to Objection 3: The amount of the power of an agent is
measured not only by the thing made, but also by the manner of
making it; for one and the same thing is made in one way by a higher
power, in another by a lower. But the production of finite things,
where nothing is presupposed as existing, is the work of infinite
power, and, as such, can belong to no creature.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the forms of bodies are from the angels?

Objection 1: It would seem that the forms of bodies come from the
angels. For Boethius says (De Trin. i): "From forms that are without
matter come the forms that are in matter." But forms that are without
matter are spiritual substances, and forms that are in matter are the
forms of bodies. Therefore, the forms of bodies are from spiritual
substances.
Objection 2: Further, all that is such by participation is reduced to
that which is such by its essence. But spiritual substances are forms
essentially, whereas corporeal creatures have forms by participation.
Therefore the forms of corporeal things are derived from spiritual
substances.
Objection 3: Further, spiritual substances have more power of
causation than the heavenly bodies. But the heavenly bodies give
form to things here below, for which reason they are said to cause
generation and corruption. Much more, therefore, are material forms
derived from spiritual substances.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Trin. iii, 8): "We must not
suppose that this corporeal matter serves the angels at their nod,
but rather that it obeys God thus." But corporeal matter may be said
thus to serve that from which it receives its form. Corporeal forms,
then, are not from the angels, but from God.
I answer that, It was the opinion of some that all corporeal forms are
derived from spiritual substances, which we call the angels. And
there are two ways in which this has been stated. For Plato held that
the forms of corporeal matter are derived from, and formed by, forms
immaterially subsisting, by a kind of participation. Thus he held that
there exists an immaterial man, and an immaterial horse, and so
forth, and that from such the individual sensible things that we see
are constituted, in so far as in corporeal matter there abides the
impression received from these separate forms, by a kind of
assimilation, or as he calls it, "participation" (Phaedo xlix). And,
according to the Platonists, the order of forms corresponds to the
order of those separate substances; for example, that there is a
single separate substance, which is horse and the cause of all
horses, whilst above this is separate life, or "per se" life, as they