that John's sufferings at their hands, whatever they are, are undeserved; and by
His throwing into the shade what would annoy them, by means of two signs, the
one on the mountain, the other just about to take place.
But when they heard these things, they do not ask Him when Elias comes;
being straitened either by grief at His passion, or by fear. For on many occasions,
upon seeing Him unwilling to speak a thing clearly, they are silent, and so an
end. For instance, when during their abode in Galilee He said, "The Son of Man
shall be betrayed, and they shall kill Him;" [Matthew 17:22-23] it is added by
Mark, "That they understood not the saying, and were afraid to ask Him;"
[Mark 9:32] by Luke, "That it was hid from them, that they might not perceive it,
and they feared to ask Him of that saying." [Luke 9:45]
3. "And when they had come to the multitude, there came to Him a man,
kneeling down to Him, and saying, Lord, have mercy on my son, for he is lunatic,
and sore vexed; for ofttimes he falls into the fire, and oft into the water. And I
brought him unto Your disciples, and they could not cure him." [Matthew 17:1416]
This man the Scripture signifies to be exceedingly weak in faith; and this is
many ways evident; from Christ's saying, "All things are possible to him that
believes;" [Mark 9:23] from the saying of the man himself that approached,
"Help my unbelief:" [Mark 9:24] from Christ's commanding the devil to "enter
no more into him;" [Mark 9:25] and from the man's saying again to Christ, "If
You can." [Mark 9:22] "Yet if his unbelief was the cause," it may be said, "that
the devil went not out, why does He blame the disciples?" Signifying, that even
without persons to bring the sick in faith, they might in many instances work a
cure. For as the faith of the person presenting oftentimes availed for receiving
the cure, even from inferior ministers; so the power of the doers oftentimes
sufficed, even without belief in those who came to work the miracle.
And both these things are signified in the Scripture. For both they of the
company of Cornelius by their faith drew unto themselves the grace of the Spirit;
and in the case of Eliseus [2 Kings 13:21] again, when none had believed, a dead

man rose again. For as to those that cast him down, not for faith but for
cowardice did they cast him, unintentionally and by chance, for fear of the band
of robbers, and so they fled: while the person himself that was cast in was dead,
yet by the mere virtue of the holy body the dead man arose.
Whence it is clear in this case, that even the disciples were weak; but not
all; for the pillars [Galatians 2:9] were not present there. And see this man's want
of consideration, from another circumstance again, how before the multitude he
pleads to Jesus against His disciples, saying, "I brought him to Your disciples,
and they could not cure him."
But He, acquitting them of the charges before the people, imputes the
greater part to him. For, "O faithless and perverse generation," these are His
words, "how long shall I be with you?" [Matthew 17:17] not aiming at his person
only, lest He should confound the man, but also at all the Jews. For indeed many
of those present might probably be offended, and have undue thoughts of them.
But when He said, "How long shall I be with you," He indicates again death
to be welcome to Him, and the thing an object of desire, and His departure
longed for, and that not crucifixion, but being with them, is grievous.
He stopped not however at the accusations; but what says He? "Bring him
hither to me." [Mark 9:21] And Himself moreover asks him, "how long time he
is thus;" both making a plea for His disciples, and leading the other to a good
hope, and that he might believe in his attaining deliverance from the evil.
And He suffers him to be torn, not for display (accordingly, when a crowd
began to gather, He proceeded to rebuke him), but for the father's own sake, that
when he should see the evil spirit disturbed at Christ's mere call, so at least, if in
no other way, he might be led to believe the coming miracle.
And because he had said, "Of a child," and, "If you can help me," Christ
says, "To him that believes, all things are possible," [Mark 9:23] again giving the
complaint a turn against him. And whereas when the leper said, "If You will, You
can make me clean," [Matthew 8:2] bearing witness to His authority Christ
commending him, and confirming His words, said, "I will, be thou clean;" in this