SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.23, C.5.

thing is loved more, or less; it is in this way that the virtual quantity
of charity increases.
Reply to Objection 2: Charity consists in an extreme with regard to
its object, in so far as its object is the Supreme Good, and from this
it follows that charity is the most excellent of the virtues. Yet not
every charity consists in an extreme, as regards the intensity of the
act.
Reply to Objection 3: Some have said that charity does not increase
in its essence, but only as to its radication in its subject, or
according to its fervor.
But these people did not know what they were talking about. For
since charity is an accident, its being is to be in something. So that
an essential increase of charity means nothing else but that it is yet
more in its subject, which implies a greater radication in its subject.
Furthermore, charity is essentially a virtue ordained to act, so that an
essential increase of charity implies ability to produce an act of more
fervent love. Hence charity increases essentially, not by beginning
anew, or ceasing to be in its subject, as the objection imagines, but
by beginning to be more and more in its subject.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.23, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether charity increases by addition?

Objection 1: It would seem that charity increases by addition. For
just as increase may be in respect of bodily quantity, so may it be
according to virtual quantity. Now increase in bodily quantity results
from addition; for the Philosopher says (De Gener. i, 5) that "increase
is addition to pre-existing magnitude." Therefore the increase of
charity which is according to virtual quantity is by addition.
Objection 2: Further, charity is a kind of spiritual light in the soul,
according to 1 Jn. 2:10: "He that loveth his brother abideth in the
light." Now light increases in the air by addition; thus the light in a
house increases when another candle is lit. Therefore charity also
increases in the soul by addition.
Objection 3: Further, the increase of charity is God's work, even as
the causing of it, according to 2 Cor. 9:10: "He will increase the
growth of the fruits of your justice." Now when God first infuses
charity, He puts something in the soul that was not there before.
Therefore also, when He increases charity, He puts something there
which was not there before. Therefore charity increases by addition.
On the contrary, Charity is a simple form. Now nothing greater
results from the addition of one simple thing to another, as proved in
Phys. iii, text. 59, and Metaph. ii, 4. Therefore charity does not
increase by addition.
I answer that, Every addition is of something to something else: so
that in every addition we must at least presuppose that the things
added together are distinct before the addition. Consequently if
charity be added to charity, the added charity must be presupposed
as distinct from charity to which it is added, not necessarily by a
distinction of reality, but at least by a distinction of thought. For God
is able to increase a bodily quantity by adding a magnitude which
did not exist before, but was created at that very moment; which
magnitude, though not pre-existent in reality, is nevertheless
capable of being distinguished from the quantity to which it is
added. Wherefore if charity be added to charity we must presuppose
the distinction, at least logical, of the one charity from the other.
Now distinction among forms is twofold: specific and numeric.