moreover is difficult to be guarded against, let us discuss this point a little, to
show you how vast an evil it is. For indeed this is a work of the devil, to make us
disregard things indifferent. First of all then, even if it were indifferent, not even
in that case were it right to disregard it, when one knows that the greatest evils
are both produced and increased by it, and that it oftentimes terminates in
fornication. However, that it is not even indifferent is evident from hence. Let us
see then whence it is produced. Or rather, let us see what sort of a person a saint
ought to be:— gentle, meek, sorrowful, mournful, contrite. The man then who
deals in jests is no saint. Nay, were he even a Greek, such an one would be
scorned. These are things allowed to those only who are on the stage. Where
filthiness is, there also is jesting; where unseasonable laughter is, there also is
jesting. Hearken to what the Prophet says, "Serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice
with trembling." [Psalm 2:11] Jesting renders the soul soft and indolent. It
excites the soul unduly, and often it teems with acts of violence, and creates
wars. But what more? In fine, have you not come to be among men? Then "put
away childish things." [1 Corinthians 13:11] Why, you will not allow your own
servant in the market place to speak an impertinent word: and do you then, who
sayest you are a servant of God, go uttering your witticisms in the public square?
It is well if the soul that is "sober" be not stolen away; but one that is relaxed and
dissolute, who cannot carry off? It will be its own murderer, and will stand in no
need of the crafts or assaults of the devil.
But, moreover, in order to understand this, look too at the very name. It
means the versatile man, the man of all complexions, the unstable, the pliable,
the man that can be anything and everything. But far is this from those who are
servants to the Rock. Such a character quickly turns and changes; for he must
needs mimic both gesture and speech, and laugh and gait, and everything, aye,
and such an one is obliged to invent jokes: for he needs this also. But far be this
from a Christian, to play the buffoon. Farther, the man who plays the jester must
of necessity incur the signal hatred of the objects of his random ridicule, whether
they be present, or being absent hear of it.

If the thing is creditable, why is it left to mountebanks? What, do you make
yourself a mountebank, and yet art not ashamed? Why is it ye permit not your
gentlewomen to do so? Is it not that you set it down as a mark of an immodest,
and not of a discreet character? Great are the evils that dwell in a soul given to
jesting; great is the ruin and desolation. Its consistency is broken, the building is
decayed, fear is banished, reverence is gone. A tongue you have, not that you
may ridicule another man, but that you may give thanks unto God. Look at your
merriment-makers, as they are called, those buffoons. These are your jesters.
Banish from your souls, I entreat you, this graceless accomplishment. It is the
business of parasites, of mountebanks, of dancers, of harlots; far be it from a
generous, far be it from a highborn soul, aye, far too even from slaves. If there
be any one who has lost respect, if there be any vile person, that man is also a
jester. To many indeed the thing appears to be even a virtue, and this truly calls
for our sorrow. Just as lust little by little drives headlong into fornication, so also
does a turn for jesting. It seems to have a grace about it, yet there is nothing
more graceless than this. For hear the Scripture which says, "Before the thunder
goes lightning, and before a shamefaced man shall go favor." Now there is
nothing more shameless than the jester; so that his mouth is not full of favor, but
of pain. Let us banish this custom from our tables. Yet are there some who teach
it even to the poor! O monstrous! They make men in affliction play the jester.
Why, where shall not this pest be found next? Already has it been brought into
the Church itself. Already has it laid hold of the very Scriptures. Need I say
anything to prove the enormity of the evil? I am ashamed indeed, but still
nevertheless I will speak; for I am desirous to show to what a length the mischief
has advanced, that I may not appear to be trifling, or to be discoursing to you on
some trifling subject; that even thus I may be enabled to withdraw you from this
delusion. And let no one think that I am fabricating, but I will tell you what I
have really heard. A certain person happened to be in company with one of those
who pride themselves highly on their knowledge (now I know I shall excite a
smile, but still I will say it notwithstanding); and when the platter was set before