to come unto me shortly." [2 Timothy 1:4, and 4:9] Immediately therefore he
raises him up, and proceeds to praise him.
Ver. 3, 4. "I thank God, whom I serve from my forefathers with pure
conscience, that without ceasing I have remembrance of you in my prayers night
and day; greatly desiring to see you, being mindful of your tears, that I might be
filled with joy."
"'I thank God,' he says, 'that I remember you,' so much do I love you." This
is a mark of excessive love, when a man glories in his affection from loving so
much. "I thank God," he says, "Whom I serve": and how? "With a pure
conscience," for he had not violated his conscience. And here he speaks of his
blameless life, for he everywhere calls his life his conscience. Or because I never
gave up any good that I purposed, for any human cause, not even when I was a
persecutor. Wherefore he says, "I obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly in
unbelief" [1 Timothy 1:13]; all but saying, "Do not suspect that it was done of
wickedness." He properly commends his own disposition, that his love may
appear sincere. For what he says is in fact, "I am not false, I do not think one
thing and profess another." So in the book of Acts we read he was compelled to
praise himself. For when they slandered him as a seditious man and an
innovator, he said in his own defense, "Ananias said to me, The God of our
fathers has chosen you that you should know His will, and see that Just One, and
should hear the voice of His mouth. For you shall be His witness unto all men of
what you have seen and heard." [Acts 22:14-15] In the same manner here, that
he may not, as if he had been forgetful, have the character of one void of
friendship and conscience, he justly praises himself, saying, that "without
ceasing I have remembrance of you," and not simply that, but "in my prayers."
That is, it is the business of my prayers, that which I constantly continue to
perform. For this he shows by saying, "For this I besought God day and night,
desiring to see you." Mark his fervent desire, the intensity of his love. And
again, his humility, how he apologizes to his disciples, and then he shows that it
was not on light or vain grounds; and this he had shown us before, but again

gives proof of it. "Being mindful of your tears." It was natural for Timothy, when
parting from him, to mourn and weep, more than a child torn away from the milk
and from the breast of its mother. "That I may be filled with joy; greatly desiring
to see you." I would not willingly have deprived myself of so great a pleasure,
though I had been of an unfeeling and brutal nature, for those tears coming to my
remembrance would have been enough to soften me. But such is not my
character. I am one of those who serve God purely; so that many strong motives
urged me to come to you. So then he wept. And he mentions another cause, and
that of a consolatory kind.
Ver. 5. "When I call to remembrance the unfeigned faith that is in you."
This is another commendation, that Timothy came not of Gentiles, nor of
unbelievers, but of a family that served Christ from the first. [Acts 16:1-3]
"Which dwelt first in your grandmother Lois, and your mother Eunice."
For Timothy, it says, "was the son of a certain woman which was a Jewess,
and believed." How a Jewess? How believing? Because she was not of the
Gentiles, "but on account of his father, who was a Greek, and of the Jews that
were in those quarters, he took and circumcised him." Thus, as these mixtures of
Jews and Gentiles took place, the Law began gradually to be dissolved. And
mark in how many ways he shows that he did not despise him. "I serve God," he
says, "I have a true conscience" for my part, and you have your "tears," and not
your tears only, but for "your faith," because you are a laborer for the Truth,
because there is no deceit in you. As therefore you show yourself worthy of love,
being so affectionate, so genuine a disciple of Christ; and as I am not one of
those who are devoid of affection, but of those who earnestly pursue the Truth;
what hindered me from coming to you?
"And I am persuaded that in you also."
From the beginning, he means, you have had this excellency. You received
from your forefathers the faith unfeigned. For the praises of our ancestors, when
we share in them, redound also to us. Otherwise they avail nothing, but rather
condemn us; wherefore he has said, "I am persuaded that in you also." It is not a