to obey what is here said. "To every man that is among you." Not to this person
and to that merely, but to the governor and to the governed, to the slave and to
the free, to the unlearned and to the wise, to the woman and to the man, to the
young and to the old. For the Law is common to all as being the Lord's. And by
this he likewise makes his language inoffensive, setting the lessons he gives to
all, even to such as do not come under them, that those who do come under them
may with more willingness accept such a reproof and correction. And what do
you say? Let me hear. "Not to think more highly than he ought to think." Here he
is bringing before us the mother of good deeds, which is lowliness of mind, in
imitation of his own Master. For as He, when He went up into the mountain, and
was going to give a tissue of moral precepts, took this for his first beginning, and
made this the foundation, in the words, "Blessed are the poor in spirit" [Matthew
5:3]; so Paul too, as he has now passed from the doctrinal parts to those of a
more practical kind, has taught us virtue in general terms, by requiring of us the
admirable sacrifice; and being on the point of giving a more particular portrait of
it, he begins from lowliness of mind as from the head, and tells us, "not to think
more highly of one's self than one ought to think," (for this is His will), (many
manuscripts om. for etc.), "but to think soberly." But what he means is about
this. We have received wisdom not that we should use it to make us haughty, but
to make us sober-minded. And he does not say in order to be lowly in mind, but
in order to sobriety, meaning by sobriety ([σωφροσύνη]) here not that virtue
which contrasts with lewdness, nor the being free from intemperance, but being
sober and healthful in mind. And the Greek name of it means keeping the mind
safe. To show then that he who is not thus modest ([μετριάζοντα]), cannot be
sober either, that is, cannot be staid and healthful minded (because such an one is
bewildered, and out, of his wits, and is more crazed than any madman), he calls
lowliness of mind, soberness of mind.
"According as God has dealt to every man the measure of faith." For since
having gifts given them had made many unreasonably elated, both with these
and with the Corinthians, see how he lays open the cause of the disease, and

gradually removes it. For after saying that we should think soberly, he proceeds,
"according as God has dealt to every man the measure of faith," meaning here
the gift by faith: and by using the word "dealt," he solaces him who had the less,
and humbles him who had the greater share. For if God dealt it, and it is no
achievement of yours, why think highly of yourself? But if any one says that
faith here does not mean the gift, this would only the more show that he was
humbling the vain boasters. For if that which is the cause of the gift (so Field
with most manuscripts: Vulg. "If the faith by which miracles are wrought is the
cause of the gift"), that faith by which miracles are wrought, be itself from God,
on what ground do you think highly of yourself? If He had not come, or been
incarnate, then the things of faith would not have fared well either. And it is
from hence that all the good things take their rise. But if it is He that gives it, He
knows how He deals it. For He made all, and takes like care of all. And as His
giving came of His love towards man, so does the quantity which He gives. For
was He Who had shown His goodness in regard to the main point, which is the
giving of the gift, likely to neglect you in regard to the measure? For had He
wished to do you dishonor, then He had not given them at all. But if to save you
and to honor you was what He had in view (and for this He came and distributed
such great blessings), why are you confounded and disturbed, and abusest your
wisdom to foolishness, making yourself more disgraceful than one who is by
nature so? For being foolish by nature is no ground of complaint. But being
foolish through wisdom, is at once bereaving one's self of excuse, and running
into greater punishment.
Such then are those, who pride themselves upon their wisdom, and fall into
the excess of recklessness. For recklessness of all things makes a person a fool.
Wherefore the Prophet calls the barbarian by this name. But "the fool," he says,
"shall speak folly." [Isaiah 32:6] But that you may see the folly of him from his
own words, hear what he says. "Above the stars of heaven will I place my throne,
and I will be like the Most High." [Isaiah 14:14] "I will take hold of the world as
a nest, and as eggs that are left will I take them away." [Isaiah 10:14] Now what