third part, at least by the fourth part, at least by the tenth. For owing to God's
favor, it were possible for our city to nourish the poor of ten cities.
And if you will, let us make some calculation in proof of this; or rather
there is no need so much as of reckoning; for of itself the easiness of the thing is
discernible. See at least, upon public occasions, how much one house has often
not been backward to spend, and has not had so much as a little feeling of the
expense, which service if each of the rich were willing to perform for the poor,
in a brief moment of time he would have seized on Heaven.
What plea then will there be? What shadow of defense, when not even of
the things from which we must assuredly be separated, when taken away from
hence, not even of these do we impart to the needy with as much liberality as
others to those on the stage, and this when we are to reap so many benefits
therefrom? For we ought indeed, even though we were always to be here, not
even so to be sparing of this good expenditure; but when after a little time, we
are to be removed from hence, and dragged away naked from all, what kind of
defense shall we have for not even out of our income giving to the hungry and
distressed?
For neither do I constrain you to lessen your possessions, not because I do
not wish it, but because I see you very backward. It is not then this I say, but
spend of your fruits, and treasure up nothing from these. It is enough for you to
have the money of your income pouring in on you as from a fountain; make the
poor sharers with you, and become a good steward of the things given you of
God.
But I pay tribute, one may say. For this cause then do you despise, because
in this case no one demands it of you? And the other, who, should the earth bear,
or should it not bear, takes by force, and extorts, you dare not gainsay; but Him
that is so mild, and then only demands, when the earth bears, you answer not
even to a word? And who will deliver you from those intolerable punishments?
There is no one. For if, because in the other case a very sore punishment will
ensue to you for not giving, therefore you become diligent about the payment,

consider here too is one more sore; not to be bound, neither to be cast into
prison, but to depart into the eternal fire.
For all reasons then let us pay these tributes first: for great is the facility,
and greater the reward; and more abundant the gain, and worse the punishments
to us if we are obstinate. For a punishment comes upon us, which has no end.
But if you tell me of the soldier's fighting for you with the barbarians, there
is here too a camp, that of the poor, and a war, which the poor are waging for
you. For when they receive, by praying they make God propitious; and making
Him propitious, they repulse, instead of barbarians, the assaults of the devils;
they suffer not the evil one to be violent, neither to attack us continually, but they
relax his might.
5. Seeing therefore these soldiers every day fighting in your behalf with the
devil by their supplications and prayers, demand of yourself this good
contribution, their nourishment. For this King being mild has not assigned you
any to demand it of you, but desires you should give it willingly; though thou
pay little by little, He receives it; though being in difficulty, you should pay after
a long time, He does not press him that has not.
Let us not then despise His long-suffering; let us treasure up for ourselves,
not wrath, but salvation; not death, but life; not punishment and vengeance, but
honors and crowns. There is no need in this case to pay a hire for the conveyance
of the things contributed; there is no need in this case to labor in turning them
into money. If you give them up, the Lord Himself removes them into Heaven;
He Himself makes the traffic the more gainful for you.
There is no need here to find one to carry in what you have contributed;
contribute only, and straightway it goes up, not that others may be maintained as
soldiers, but that it may remain for you with great profit. For here whatsoever
you may have given, it is not possible to recover; but there you will receive them
again with much honor, and shall gain greater, and more spiritual gains. Here the
gifts are a demand; there a loan, and money at interest, and a debt.
Yea farther, God has given you bonds. For "he that shows mercy to a poor