Again, it has been demonstrated in geometry that two circles are tangent only at one point: but if
we posit two bodies being simultaneously in the same place, it would follow that two circles
could be totally tangent. Therefore it is impossible that two bodies should be in the same place at
the same time.

Again, whatever things are equal to one and the same thing are equal to each other; but since
local dimension must be one with a localized body (since no dimension can be supposed without
a subject), if two bodies could be simultaneously in the same place, it would follow that the
dimensions of each body would be equal to the dimensions of the place; therefore it would
follow that the bodies would be the same, but this is impossible.

Response. I answer that it must be said that in those things belonging to our world, all of which
are judged to be corporeal, we see from sense experience that when one body arrives at any
given place, any other body is expelled from that place; therefore it is experimentally evident that
two such bodies cannot be in the same place.

There are, however, certain philosophers who declare that two bodies are not thus prohibited
from simultaneous occupation of the same place on account of their corporeity, or on account of
anything else which belongs to the nature of a body, as a body, for thus it would follow that it
would be altogether impossible for two bodies to exist simultaneously [in the same place]. But
they say that this prohibition is due only to their corpulentia. But whatever this corpulentia may
meanÑwhether density or impurity or corruptibility which attends certain bodies, or even some
special nature superadded to the general nature of corporeityÑthe prohibition can be on account
of none of these things.

Now, there is to be found a double relation of a body to place. One is according as it has location
in this or that determined place; and this relationship follows upon the specific nature of this or
that body, just as heavy things, by the very nature of their gravity, hold a lower place, but light
bodies, a higher place.

But another relationship prevails according as a body is said, absolutely, to be in place: and this
relationship characterizes a bodily thing by the very nature of its corporeity, not because of
anything additional. For according as a particular body is in place, it is commensurate with that
place; but this is because it has dimensions that are equal and similar to the dimensions of the
place; moreover, dimensions belong to every body by reason of its very corporeity. For, that
many bodies should or should not be in the same place, has no relation to a determined place, but
regards place absolutely; therefore it must be that the cause of this impediment should be referred
to the nature of corporeity, by reason of which every body, inasmuch as it is a body, is destined