honor of the many? It is nothing, for if they themselves which render the honor
perish, much more does the honor. He that renders honor to another, ought first
to render it to himself; for if he gain not honor for himself, how can he ever
render it to another? Whereas now we seek even honors from vile and despicable
characters, themselves dishonorable, and objects of reproach. What kind of
honor then is this? Perceive ye, how that all things are "vanity of vanities"?
Therefore, says he, "in the vanity of their mind."
But further, is not their religion of this sort, wood and stone? He has made
the sun to shine for a lamp to light us. Who will worship his own lamp? The sun
supplies us with light, but where he cannot, a lamp can do it. Then why not
worship your lamp? "Nay," one will say, "I worship the fire." Oh, how
ridiculous! So great is the absurdity, and yet look again at another absurdity.
Why extinguish the object of your worship? Why destroy, why annihilate your
god? Wherefore do you not suffer your house to be filled with him? For if the
fire be god, let him feed upon your body. Put not your god under the bottom of
your kettle, or your cauldron. Bring him into your inner chambers, bring him
within your silken draperies. Whereas not only do you not bring him in, but if by
any accident he has found entrance, you drive him out from every place, you call
everybody together, and, as though some wild beast had entered, you weep and
wailest, and callest the presence of your god an overwhelming calamity. I have a
God, and I do all I can to enshrine Him in my bosom, and I deem it my true
bliss, not when He visits my dwelling, but when I can draw Him even to my
heart. Do thou too draw the fire to your heart. This is folly and vanity. Fire is
good for use, not for adoration; good for ministration and for service, to be my
slave, not to be my master. It was made for me, not I for it. If you are a
worshiper of fire, why recline upon your couch yourself, and order your cook to
stand before your god? Take up the art of cookery yourself, become a baker if
you will, or a coppersmith, for nothing can be more honorable than these arts,
since these are they that your god visits. Why deem that art a disgrace, where
your god is all in all? Why commit it to your slaves, and not be ambitious of it

yourself? Fire is good, inasmuch as it is the work of a good Creator, but it is not
God. It is the work of God, it was not called God. Do you see not how
ungovernable is its nature;— how when it lays hold on a building it stops
nowhere? But if it seizes anything continuous, it destroys all; and, except the
hands of workmen or others quench its fury, it knows not friends nor foes, but
deals with all alike. Is this then your god, and are you not ashamed? Well indeed
does he say, "in the vanity of their mind."
But the sun, they say, is God. Tell me, how and wherefore. Is it that he
sheds abundance of light? Yet do you not see him overcome by clouds, and in
bondage to the necessity of nature, and eclipsed, and hidden by the moon? And
yet the cloud is weaker than the sun; but still it often gains the mastery of him.
And this indeed is the work of God's wisdom. God must needs be all sufficient:
but the sun needs many things; and this is not like a god. For he requires air to
shine in, and that, too, thin air; since the air, when it is greatly condensed, suffers
not the rays to pass through it. He requires also water, and other restraining
power, to prevent him from consuming. For were it not that fountains, and lakes,
and rivers, and seas, formed some moisture by the emission of their vapors, there
would be nothing to prevent an universal conflagration. Do you see then, say ye,
that he is a god? What folly, what madness! A god, say ye, because he has power
to do harm. Nay, rather, for this very reason is he no god, because where he does
harm he needs nothing; whereas, where he does good, he requires many things
besides. Now to do harm, is foreign to God's nature; to do good, is His property.
Where then the reverse is the case, how can he be God? Do you see not that
poisonous drugs injure, and need nothing; but when they are to do good, need
many things? For your sake then is he such as he is, both good, and powerless;
good, that you may acknowledge his Lord; and powerless, that you may not say
that he is lord. "But," say they, "he nourishes the plants and the seeds." What
then, at that rate is not the very dung a god? For even that also nourishes. And
why not at that rate the scythe as well, and the hands of the husbandman? Prove
to me that the sun alone does the work of nourishing without needing the help of