we shall desire of You, You should do it for us." [Mark 10:35]
And Christ says to them, "What would ye?" [Mark 10:36] not being
ignorant, but that He may compel them to answer, and lay open the wound, and
so apply the medicine. But they out of shame and confusion of face, because
under the influence of a human passion they had come to do this, took Him
privately apart from the disciples, and asked Him. For they went before, it is
said, so that it might not be observable to them, and so said what they wished.
For it was their desire, as I suppose, because they heard, "You shall sit on twelve
thrones," to have the first place of these seats. And that they had an advantage
over the others, they knew, but they were afraid of Peter, and say, "Command,
that one sit on Your right hand, one on Your left;" and they urge Him, saying,
"Command."
What then says He? Showing, that they asked nothing spiritual, neither, if
they had known again what they were asking, would they have ventured to ask
for so much, He says, "You know not what ye ask," how great, how marvellous,
how surpassing even the powers above. After that He adds, "Are ye able to drink
of the cup that I shall drink of, and to be baptized with the baptism that I am
baptized with?" Do you see, how He straightway drew them off from their
suspicion, by framing His discourse from the contrary topics? For you, He says,
talk to me of honor and crowns, but I to you of conflicts and labors. For this is
not the season for rewards, neither shall that glory of mine appear now, but the
present time is one of slaughter, and wars, and dangers.
And see how by the form of His question, He both urges and attracts them.
For He said not, "Are ye able to be slain?" "Are ye able to pour forth your
blood?" but how? "Are ye able to drink of the cup?" Then to attract them to it,
He says, "Which I shall drink of," that by their fellowship with Him in it they
might be made more ready.
And a baptism again calls He it; showing that great was the cleansing the
world was to have from the things that were being done.
"They say unto Him, We are able." [Matthew 20:22] Out of their

forwardness they straightway undertook it, not knowing even this which they
were saying, but looking to hear what they had asked.
What then says He? "You shall drink indeed of my cup, and be baptized
with the baptism that I am baptized with." Great blessings did He foretell to
them. His meaning is, you shall be counted worthy of martyrdom, and shall
suffer these things which I suffer; you shall close your life by a violent death,
and in these things you shall be partakers with me; "But to sit on my right hand
and on my left is not mine to give, but it shall be given to them for whom it is
prepared of my Father."
3. Having first elevated their souls, and made them of a higher character,
and having rendered them such as sorrow could not subdue, then He reproves
their request.
But what can be this present saying? For indeed there are two points that
are subjects of inquiry to many: one, if it be prepared for any to sit on His right
hand; and then, if the Lord of all has not power to bestow it on them for whom it
is prepared.
What then is the saying? If we solve the former point, then the second also
will be clear to the inquirers. What then is this? No one shall sit on His right
hand nor on His left. For that throne is inaccessible to all, I do not say to men
only, and saints, and apostles, but even to angels, and archangels, and to all the
powers that are on high.
At least Paul puts it as a peculiar privilege of the Only-Begotten, saying,
"To which of the angels said He at any time, Sit on my right hand?
[Hebrews 1:13] And of the angels He says, who makes His angels spirits; but
unto the Son, 'Your throne, O God.'" [Hebrews 1:7-8]
How then says He, "To sit on my right hand and on my left is not mine to
give," as though there are some that should sit there? Not as though there are; far
from it; but He makes answer to the thoughts of them who ask the favor,
condescending to their understanding. For neither did they know that lofty
throne, and His sitting at the right hand of the Father; how should they, when