angels of heaven corrupt the Gospel, let him be anathema." The phrase "of
heaven" is purposely added, because priests are also called angels. "For the
priest's lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the law at his mouth:
for he is the messenger [angel] of the Lord of hosts." [Malachi 2:7] Lest
therefore it should be thought that priests are here meant, by the term "angels,"
he points out the celestial intelligences by the addition, "from heaven." And he
says not, if they preach a contrary Gospel, or subvert the whole of the true one,
let them be anathema; but, if they even slightly vary, or incidentally disturb, my
doctrine. "As we have said before, so say I now again." That his words might not
seem to be spoken in anger, or with exaggeration, or with recklessness he now
repeats them. Sentiments may perhaps change, when an expression has been
called forth by anger, but to repeat it a second time proves that it is spoken
advisedly, and was previously approved by the judgment. When Abraham was
requested to send Lazarus, he replied, "They have Moses and the Prophets; let
them hear them: if they hear them not, neither will they be persuaded, if one rise
from the dead." [Luke 16:31] And Christ introduces Abraham thus speaking, to
show that He would have the Scriptures accounted more worthy of credence,
even than one raised from the dead: Paul too, (and when I say Paul, I mean
Christ, who directed his mind,) prefers them before an angel come down from
heaven. And justly, for the angels, though mighty, are but servants and ministers,
but the Scriptures were all written and sent, not by servants, but by God the Lord
of all. He says, if "any man" preach another Gospel to you than that which we
have preached—not "if this or that man:" and herein appears his prudence, and
care of giving offense, for what needed there still any mention of names, when
he had used such extensive terms as to embrace all, both in heaven and earth? In
that he anathemized evangelists and angels, he included every dignity, and his
mention of himself included every intimacy and affinity. "Tell me not," he
exclaims, "that my fellow apostles and colleagues have so spoken; I spare not
myself if I preach such doctrine." And he says this not as condemning the
Apostles for swerving from the message they were commissioned to deliver; far

from it, (for he says, whether we or they thus preach;) but to show, that in the
discussion of truth the dignity of persons is not to be considered.
Ver. 10. "For am I now persuading men: or God?" or am I seeking to please
men? If I were still pleasing men, I should not be a servant of Christ.
Granting, says he, that I might deceive you by these doctrines, could I
deceive God, who knows my yet unuttered thoughts, and to please whom is my
unceasing endeavor? See here the Apostolical spirit, the Evangelical loftiness!
So too he writes to the Corinthians, "For we are not again commending
ourselves unto you, but speak as giving you occasion of glorying;" [2
Corinthians 5:12] and again, "But with me it is a very small thing that I should be
judged of you, or of man's judgment." [1 Corinthians 4:3] For since he is
compelled to justify himself to his disciples, being their teacher, he submits to it;
but he is grieved at it, not on account of chagrin, far from it, but on account of
the instability of the minds of those led away and on account of not being fully
trusted by them. Wherefore Paul now speaks, as it were, thus:— Is my account
to be rendered to you? Shall I be judged by men? My account is to God, and all
my acts are with a view to that inquisition, nor am I so miserably abandoned as
to pervert my doctrine, seeing that I am to justify what I preach before the Lord
of all.
He thus expressed himself, as much with a view of withstanding their
opinions, as in self-defence; for it becomes disciples to obey, not to judge, their
master. But now, says he, that the order is reversed, and you sit as judges, know
that I am but little concerned to defend myself before you; all, I do for God's
sake, and in order that I may answer to Him concerning my doctrine. He who
wishes to persuade men, is led to act tortuously and insincerely, and to employ
deceit and falsehood, in order to engage the assent of his hearers. But he who
addresses himself to God, and desires to please Him, needs simplicity and purity
of mind, for God cannot be deceived. Whence it is plain that I have thus written
to you not from the love of rule, or to gain disciples, or to receive honor at your
hands. My endeavor has been to please God, not man. Were it otherwise, I