"Artificialia."

were] produced, like Him, for the performance of works tending to the benefit and establishment
of mankind, they are found doing nothing of the same or a like kind [with His actions], nor what
can in any respect be brought into comparison with them. And if they have in truth accomplished
anything [remarkable] by means of magic, they strive [in this way] deceitfully to lead foolish people
astray, since they confer no real benefit or blessing on those over whom they declare that they exert
[supernatural] power; but, bringing forward mere boys [as the subjects on whom they practise],
and deceiving their sight, while they exhibit phantasms that instantly cease, and do not endure even
a moment of time, they are proved to be like, not Jesus our Lord, but Simon the magician. It is
certain, too, from the fact that the Lord rose from the dead on the third day, and manifested
Himself to His disciples, and was in their sight received up into heaven, that, inasmuch as these
men die, and do not rise again, nor manifest themselves to any, they are proved as possessing souls
in no respect similar to that of Jesus.
4. If, however, they maintain that the Lord, too, performed such works simply in appearance,
we shall refer them to the prophetical writings, and prove from these both that all things were thus
predicted regarding Him, and did take place undoubtedly, and that He is the only Son of God.
Wherefore, also, those who are in truth His disciples, receiving grace from Him, do in His name
perform [miracles], so as to promote the welfare of other men, according to the gift which each
one has received from Him. For some do certainly and truly drive out devils, so that those who
have thus been cleansed from evil spirits frequently both believe [in Christ], and join themselves
to the Church. Others have foreknowledge of things to come: they see visions, and utter prophetic
expressions. Others still, heal the sick by laying their hands upon them, and they are made whole.
Yea, moreover, as I have said, the dead even have been raised up, and remained among us for
many years. And what shall I more say? It is not possible to name the number of the gifts which
the Church, [scattered] throughout the whole world, has received from God, in the name of Jesus
Christ, who was crucified under Pontius Pilate, and which she exerts day by day for the benefit of
the Gentiles, neither practising deception upon any, nor taking any reward from them [on account

That is, as being done in reality, and not in appearance.
upon the infant Church were not wholly extinct in the days of Irenæus. Possibly the venerable Father is speaking from his own
personal recollection of some who had been raised from the dead, and had continued for a time living witnesses of the efficacy
of Christian faith." [See cap. xxxi., supra.]