Reply to Objection 4: The divine essence is predicated of the Father
by mode of identity by reason of the divine simplicity; yet it does not
follow that it can stand for the Father, its mode of signification being
different. This objection would hold good as regards things which
are predicated of another as the universal of a particular.
Reply to Objection 5: The difference between substantive and
adjectival names consist in this, that the former carry their subject
with them, whereas the latter do not, but add the thing signified to
the substantive. Whence logicians are wont to say that the
substantive is considered in the light of "suppositum," whereas the
adjective indicates something added to the "suppositum." Therefore
substantive personal terms can be predicated of the essence,
because they are really the same; nor does it follow that a personal
property makes a distinct essence; but it belongs to the
"suppositum" implied in the substantive. But notional and personal
adjectives cannot be predicated of the essence unless we add some
substantive. We cannot say that the "essence is begetting"; yet we
can say that the "essence is a thing begetting," or that it is "God
begetting," if "thing" and God stand for person, but not if they stand
for essence. Consequently there exists no contradiction in saying
that "essence is a thing begetting," and "a thing not begetting";
because in the first case "thing" stands for person, and in the
second it stands for the essence.
Reply to Objection 6: So far as Godhead is one in several
"supposita," it agrees in a certain degree with the form of a collective
term. So when we say, "the Father is the principle of the whole
Godhead," the term Godhead can be taken for all the persons
together, inasmuch as it is the principle in all the divine persons. Nor
does it follow that He is His own principle; as one of the people may
be called the ruler of the people without being ruler of himself. We
may also say that He is the principle of the whole Godhead; not as
generating or spirating it, but as communicating it by generation and
spiration.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether the persons can be predicated of the

essential terms?
Objection 1: It would seem that the persons cannot be predicated of
the concrete essential names; so that we can say for instance, "God
is three persons"; or "God is the Trinity." For it is false to say, "man
is every man," because it cannot be verified as regards any
particular subject. For neither Socrates, nor Plato, nor anyone else is
every man. In the same way this proposition, "God is the Trinity,"
cannot be verified of any one of the "supposita" of the divine nature.
For the Father is not the Trinity; nor is the Son; nor is the Holy
Ghost. So to say, "God is the Trinity," is false.
Objection 2: Further, the lower is not predicated of the higher except
by accidental predication; as when I say, "animal is man"; for it is
accidental to animal to be man. But this name "God" as regards the
three persons is as a general term to inferior terms, as Damascene
says (De Fide Orth. iii, 4). Therefore it seems that the names of the
persons cannot be predicated of this name "God," except in an
accidental sense.
On the contrary, Augustine says, in his sermon on Faith [Serm. ii, in
coena Domini], "We believe that one God is one divinely named
Trinity."
I answer that, As above explained (Article 5), although adjectival
terms, whether personal or notional, cannot be predicated of the
essence, nevertheless substantive terms can be so predicated,
owing to the real identity of essence and person. The divine essence
is not only really the same as one person, but it is really the same as
the three persons. Whence, one person, and two, and three, can be
predicated of the essence as if we were to say, "The essence is the
Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost." And because this word
"God" can of itself stand for the essence, as above explained (Article
4, ad 3), hence, as it is true to say, "The essence is the three
persons"; so likewise it is true to say, "God is the three persons."
Reply to Objection 1: As above explained this term "man" can of
itself stand for person, whereas an adjunct is required for it to stand
for the universal human nature. So it is false to say, "Man is every
man"; because it cannot be verified of any particular human subject.