possible, but eternally non existent, any divine decree is requisite to keep them out of
existence. Is it not enough that there is no decree to call them into existence? Or is such
a decree of exclusion rendered requisite by the conjuntion of a perfect will with a perfect
actual knowledge? Anyhow God is under no antecedent necessity of decreeing the
existence of any creature, because He is well enough without creatures, supremely selfsufficient and independent of all creation: which independence and self-sufficiency is
the root of the divine free-will ad extra: which free-will again alone bars pantheism,
disconcerts idealism (by taking away the determinism to which it leads), saves the
notion of a Personal God, and with it prayer, miracles, Christianity.

## CHAPTER LXXXII--Arguments against the aforesaid Doctrine and Solutions of the
same
THESE awkward consequences seem to follow, if any things that God wills He does not
will of necessity.
1. If the will of God in respect of certain objects of will is not determined by any of them,
it seems to be indifferent. But every faculty that indifferent is in a manner in potentiality.
2. Since potential being, as such, is naturally changeable, -- for what can be can also
not be, -- it follows that the divine will is variable.
4. Since what hangs loose, indifferent between two alternatives, does not tend to one
rather than to the other, unless it be determined by one or other, either God wills none
of the things to which He is indifferent, or He is determined by one or other of them, in
which case there must be something antecedent to God to determine Him.
But none of the above objections can stand.
1. The indifference, or indeterminateness, of a faculty may be attributable either to the
faculty itself or to its object. To the faculty itself, when its indeterminateness comes from
its not having yet attained to its perfection. This argues imperfection in the faculty, and
an unfulfilled potentiality, as we see in the mind of a doubter, who has not yet attained
to premises sufficient to determine him to take either of two sides. To the object of the
faculty, when the perfect working of the faculty does not depend on its adoption of either
alternative, and yet either alternative may be adopted, as when art may employ different
instruments to do the same work equally well. This argues no imperfection in the faculty,
but rather its pre-eminent excellence, inasmuch as it rises superior to both opposing
alternatives, and therefore is indifferent to both and determined by neither. Such is the
position of the divine will with respect to things other than itself. Its perfection depends
on none of them; being as it is intimately conjoined with its own last end and final
perfection.
2. In the divine will there is no potentiality. Unnecessitated, it prefers one alternative to
another respecting the creatures which it causes to be. It is not to be looked upon as
being in a potential attitude to both alternatives, so as first to be potentially willing both,
and then to be actually willing one. It is for ever actually willing whatever it wills, as well
its own self as the creatures which are the objects of its causation. But whatever
creature God wills to exist, that creature stands in no necessary relation to the divine
goodness, which is the proper object of the divine will.
4. We cannot admit that either the divine will wills none of the effects of its causation, or
that its volition is determined by some exterior object. The proper object of the will is
good apprehended as such by the understanding. Now the divine understanding
apprehends, not only the divine being, or divine goodness, but other good things
likewise (Chap.XLIX); and it apprehends them as likenesses of the divine