melted by fire but itself does not melt the fire: so also does corruption melt and
vanish away under incorruption, but is never able itself to get the better of
incorruption.
6. Let us then hear the voice of Paul, saying, that "we must stand at the
judgment-seat of Christ;" and let us picture to ourselves that court of justice, and
imagine it to be present now and the reckoning to be required. For I will speak of
it more at large. For Paul, seeing that he was discoursing on affliction, and he
had no mind to afflict them again, did not dwell on the subject; but having in
brief expressed its austerity , "Each one shall receive according to what he has
done," he quickly passed on. Let us then imagine it to be present now, and
reckon each one of us with his own conscience, and account the Judge to be
already present, and everything to be revealed and brought forth. For we must
not merely stand, but also be manifested. Do ye not blush? Are ye not astonied?
But if now, when the reality is not yet present, but is granted in supposition
merely and imaged in thought; if now [I say] we perish conscience-struck; what
shall we do when [it] shall arrive, when the whole world shall be present, when
angels and archangels, when ranks upon ranks, and all hurrying at once, and
some caught up on the clouds, and an array full of trembling; when there shall be
the trumpets, one upon another, [when] those unceasing voices?
For suppose there were no hell, yet in the midst of so great brightness to be
rejected and to go away dishonored—how great the punishment! For if even
now, when the Emperor rides in and his train with him, we contemplating each
one of us our own poverty, derive not so much pleasure from the spectacle, as we
endure dejection at having no share in what is going on about the Emperor, nor
being near the Sovereign; what will it be then? Or do you think it is a light
punishment, not to be ranked in that company, not to be counted worthy of that
unutterable glory, from that assemblage and those untold good things, to be cast
forth some-wither far and distant? But when there is also darkness, and gnashing
of teeth, and chains indissoluble, and an undying worm, and fire unquenchable,
and affliction, and straitness, and tongues scorching like the rich man's; and we

wail, and none hears; and we groan and gnash our teeth for anguish, and none
regards; and we look all round, and no where is there any to comfort us; where
shall we rank those that are in this condition? What is there more miserable than
are those souls? What more pitiable? For if, when we enter a prison and see its
inmates, some squalid, some chained and famishing, some again shut up in
darkness, we are moved with compassion, we shudder, we use all diligence that
we may never be cast into that place; how will it be with us, when we are led and
dragged away into the torture-dungeons themselves of hell? For not of iron are
those chains, but of fire that is never quenched; nor are they that are set over us
our fellows whom it is often possible even to mollify; but angels whom one may
not so much as look in the face, exceedingly enraged at our insults to their
Master. Nor is it given, as here, to see some bringing in money, some food, some
words of comfort, and to meet with consolation; but all is irremissible there: and
though it should be Noah, or Job, or Daniel, and he should see his own kindred
punished, he dares not succor. For even natural sympathy too comes then to be
done away. For since it happens that there are righteous fathers of wicked
children, and [righteous] children of [wicked] fathers; that so their pleasure may
be unalloyed, and those who enjoy the good things may not be moved with
sorrow through the constraining force of sympathy, even this sympathy, I affirm,
is extinguished, and themselves are indignant together with the Master against
their own bowels. For if the common run of men, when they see their own
children vicious, disown and cut them off from that relationship; much rather
will the righteous then. Therefore let no one hope for good things, if he have not
wrought any good thing, even though he have ten thousand righteous ancestors.
"For each one shall receive the things done in the body according to what he has
done." Here he seems to me to be alluding also to them that commit fornication:
and to raise up as a wall unto them the fear of that world, not however to them
alone; but also to all that in any wise transgress.
7. Let us hear then, us also. And if you have the fire of lust, set against it
that other fire, and this will presently be quenched and gone. And if you purpose