from those without over, than this from the demons begins. Mark the infatuated
Jewish hardness. Having seen his garments working miracles, they paid no heed
to it. What could be greater than this? But, on the contrary, it resulted in just the
opposite effect. If any of the heathens believe not, having seen the (very) dust
working these effects, let him believe. (f) Wonderful, how great the power of
them that have believed! Both Simon for the sake of merchandise sought the
grace of the Spirit, and these for this object did this. What hardness (of heart)!
Why does not Paul rebuke them? It would have looked like envy, therefore it is
so ordered. This same took place in the case of Christ [Mark 9:36]: but then the
person is not hindered, for it was the beginning of the new state of things: since
Judas also is not hindered, whereas Ananias and Sapphira were struck dead: and
many Jews even for opposing (Christ) suffered nothing, while Elymas was
blinded. "For I am not come," says Christ, "to judge the world, but that the
world might be saved." [John 3:17] "And seven sons," etc. [Acts 19:14] See the
villany of the men! They still continued to be Jews, while wishing to make a
gain of that Name. All that they did was for glory and profit. (g) Look, in every
case, how men are converted not so much in consequence of good things as of
things fearful. In the case of Sapphira, fear fell upon the Church, and men dared
not join themselves to them: here they received handkerchiefs and aprons, and
were healed: and after this, then they came confessing their sins. (Hereby) the
power of the demons is shown to be a great one, when it is against unbelievers.
For why did he not say, "Who is Jesus?" He was afraid, lest he also should suffer
punishment; but, that it might be permitted him to take revenge upon those who
mocked him, he did this; "Jesus," says he, "I know," etc. He was in dread of
Paul. For why did not those wretched men say to him, We believe? How much
more splendid an appearance they would have made had they said this, that is, if
they had claimed Him as their Master? But instead of that, they spoke even those
senseless words, "By Jesus, whom Paul preaches." Do you mark the forbearance
(of the writer), how he writes history and does not call names? This makes the
Apostles admirable. "And the evil spirit," etc. [Acts 19:15], for what had

happened at Philippi [Acts 16:16] had given a lesson to these also. He mentions
the name, and the number, thereby giving to the persons then living a credible
proof of what he wrote. And why were they itinerant? For the sake of
merchandise: not assuredly to bear tidings of the word; how should that be their
object? And how ran they anon, preaching by the things they suffered?
"Insomuch," it says, "that all that dwelt in Asia heard the word of the Lord."
Ought not this to have converted all? And marvel not, for nothing convinces
malice. But come now, let us look at the affair of the exorcists, with what an evil
disposition (they acted). Why the same was not done in the case of Christ, is an
inquiry for another time, and not for the present, save that this also was well and
usefully ordered. It seems to me that they did this also in mockery, and that in
consequence of this (punishment), none dared even at random to name that
Name. Why did this put them upon confession? Because this was a most mighty
argument of God's omniscience (therefore), before they should be exposed by
the demons, they accused themselves, fearing lest they should suffer the same
things. For when the demons their helpers are their accusers, what hope is there
thenceforth, save the confession by deeds?
But see, I pray you, after such signs had been wrought, what evils within a
short space ensue. Such is human nature: it soon forgets. Or, do ye not remember
what has been the case among ourselves? Did not God last year shake our whole
city? Did not all run to baptism? Did not whoremongers and effeminate and
corrupt persons leave their dwellings, and the places where they spent their time,
and change and become religious? But three days passed, and they returned
again to their own proper wickedness. And whence is this? From the excessive
laziness. And what marvel if, when the things have passed away (this be the
case), seeing that, the images lasting perpetually, the result is such? The fate of
Sodom— say, does it not still last (in its effects)? Well, did the dwellers beside it
become any the better? And what say you to the son of Noah? Was he not such
(as he is represented), did he not see with his eyes so vast a desolation, and yet
was wicked? Then let us not marvel how, when such things had been done, these