condemnation? This I do not fix upon, but will suffer you yourselves to
determine the sentence. So we arrange matters in our own case, not only in
respect of oaths but in respect of other defects, and fixing a time for ourselves,
with most grievous punishments, if at any time we have fallen into them, shall
come clean to our Master, and shall escape the fire of hell, and shall stand before
the judgment seat of Christ with boldness, to which may we all attain, by the
grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom be glory to the
Father together with the Holy Spirit for ever and ever: Amen.

Second Instruction
To those about to be illuminated; and concerning women who adorn
themselves with plaiting of hair, and gold, and concerning those who have used
omens, and amulets, and incantations, all which are foreign to Christianity.
1. I have come to ask first of all for some fruit in return for the words lately
said out of brotherly love to you. For we do not speak in order that you should
hear simply, but in order that you should remember what has been said, and may
afford us evidence of this, by your works. Yea, rather, not us, but, God, who
knows the secrets of the heart. On this account indeed instruction is so called, in
order that even when we are absent, our discourse may instruct your hearts. And
be not surprised if, after an interval of ten days only, we have come asking for
fruit from the seed sown. For in one day it is possible at once to let the seed fall,
and to accomplish the harvest. For strengthened not by our own power alone, but
by the influence which comes from God, we are summoned to the conflict. Let
as many therefore as have received what has been spoken, and have fulfilled it
by their works, remain reaching forth to the things which are before. But let as
many as have not yet arrived at this good achievement, arrive at it straightway,
that they may dispel the condemnation which arises out of their sloth by their
diligence for the future. For it is possible, it is indeed possible for him who has
been very slothful, by using diligence for the future to recover the whole loss of
the time that is past. Wherefore, He says, "Today if you will hear his voice,
harden not your hearts, as in the day of provocation." And this, He says,
exhorting and counselling us; that we should never despair, but so long as we are
here, should have good hopes, and should lay hold on what is before us, and
hasten towards the prize of our high calling of God. This then let us do, and let
us inquire into the names of this great gift. For as ignorance of the greatness of
this dignity makes those who are honored with it more slothful, so when it is

known it renders them thankful, and makes them more earnest; and anyhow it
would be disgraceful and ridiculous that they who enjoy such glory and honors
from God, should not even know what the names of it are intended to show
forth. And why do I speak about this gift, for if you will consider the common
name of our race, you will receive the greatest instruction and incentive to
virtue. For this name "Man," we do not define according as they who are without
define it, but as the Divine Scripture has bidden us. For a man is not merely
whosoever has hands and feet of a man, nor whosoever is rational only, but
whosoever practices piety and virtue with boldness. Hear, at least, what he says
concerning Job. For in saying that "there was a man in the land of Ausis," he
does not describe him in those terms in which they who are without describe
him, nor does he say this because he had two feet and broad nails, but he added
the evidences of his piety and said, "just, true, fearing God, eschewing every evil
deed," [Job 1:1] showing that this is a man; even as therefore another says, "Fear
God, and keep his commandments, because this is the whole man."
[Ecclesiastes 12:13] But if the name man affords such a great incentive to virtue,
much rather the term faithful. For you are called faithful on this account, because
you have faith in God, and yourself art entrusted from Him with righteousness,
sanctification, cleansing of soul, adoption, the kingdom of heaven. He entrusted
you with these, and handed them over to you. Thou in turn hast entrusted, and
handed over other things to him, almsgiving, prayers, self-control and every
other virtue. And why do I say almsgiving? If you give him even a cup of cold
water, you shall not indeed lose this, but even this he keeps with care against that
day, and will restore it with overflowing abundance. For this truly is wonderful,
that he does not keep only that which has been entrusted to him, but in
recompensing it increases it.
This too he has bidden you do according to your power, with what has been
entrusted to you, to extend the holiness which you have received, and to make
the righteousness which comes from the laver brighter, and the gift of grace
more radiant; even as therefore Paul did, increasing all the good things which he