SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.3, C.7.

something eternal, viz. the First Truth, as stated above (Question 1,
Article 1). Hence there is one faith of things both temporal and
eternal. It is different with wisdom and knowledge, which consider
temporal and eternal matters under their respective aspects.
Reply to Objection 2: This difference of past and future arises, not
from any difference in the thing believed, but from the different
relationships of believers to the one thing believed, as also we have
mentioned above (FS, Question 103, Article 4; FS, Question 107,
Article 1, ad 1).
Reply to Objection 3: This objection considers numerical diversity of
faith.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.3, C.8.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether faith is the first of the virtues?

Objection 1: It would seem that faith is not the first of the virtues. For
a gloss on Lk. 12:4, "I say to you My friends," says that fortitude is
the foundation of faith. Now the foundation precedes that which is
founded thereon. Therefore faith is not the first of the virtues.
Objection 2: Further, a gloss on Ps. 36, "Be not emulous," says that
hope "leads on to faith." Now hope is a virtue, as we shall state
further on (Question 17, Article 1). Therefore faith is not the first of
the virtues.
Objection 3: Further, it was stated above (Article 2) that the intellect
of the believer is moved, out of obedience to God, to assent to
matters of faith. Now obedience also is a virtue. Therefore faith is not
the first virtue.
Objection 4: Further, not lifeless but living faith is the foundation, as
a gloss remarks on 1 Cor. 3:11 [Augustine, De Fide et Oper. xvi.].
Now faith is formed by charity, as stated above (Article 3). Therefore
it is owing to charity that faith is the foundation: so that charity is the
foundation yet more than faith is (for the foundation is the first part
of a building) and consequently it seems to precede faith.
Objection 5: Further, the order of habits is taken from the order of
acts. Now, in the act of faith, the act of the will which is perfected by
charity, precedes the act of the intellect, which is perfected by faith,
as the cause which precedes its effect. Therefore charity precedes
faith. Therefore faith is not the first of the virtues.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (Heb. 11:1) that "faith is the
substance of things to be hoped for." Now the substance of a thing
is that which comes first. Therefore faith is first among the virtues.
I answer that, One thing can precede another in two ways: first, by
its very nature; secondly, by accident. Faith, by its very nature,
precedes all other virtues. For since the end is the principle in
matters of action, as stated above (FS, Question 13, Article 3; FS,
Question 34, Article 4, ad 1), the theological virtues, the object of
which is the last end, must needs precede all the others. Again, the
last end must of necessity be present to the intellect before it is