THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.15, C.3.

the weaker the "fomes" of sin becomes in him. Hence, since in Christ
the virtues were in their highest degree, the "fomes" of sin was
nowise in Him; inasmuch, also, as this defect cannot be ordained to
satisfaction, but rather inclined to what is contrary to satisfaction.
Reply to Objection 1: The inferior powers pertaining to the sensitive
appetite have a natural capacity to be obedient to reason; but not the
bodily powers, nor those of the bodily humors, nor those of the
vegetative soul, as is made plain Ethic. i, 13. And hence perfection of
virtue, which is in accordance with right reason, does not exclude
passibility of body; yet it excludes the "fomes" of sin, the nature of
which consists in the resistance of the sensitive appetite to reason.
Reply to Objection 2: The flesh naturally seeks what is pleasing to it
by the concupiscence of the sensitive appetite; but the flesh of man,
who is a rational animal, seeks this after the manner and order of
reason. And thus with the concupiscence of the sensitive appetite
Christ's flesh naturally sought food, drink, and sleep, and all else
that is sought in right reason, as is plain from Damascene (De Fide
Orth. iii, 14). Yet it does not therefore follow that in Christ there was
the "fomes" of sin, for this implies the lust after pleasurable things
against the order of reason.
Reply to Objection 3: The spirit gives evidence of fortitude to some
extent by resisting that concupiscence of the flesh which is opposed
to it; yet a greater fortitude of spirit is shown, if by its strength the
flesh is thoroughly overcome, so as to be incapable of lusting
against the spirit. And hence this belonged to Christ, whose spirit
reached the highest degree of fortitude. And although He suffered no
internal assault on the part of the "fomes" of sin, He sustained an
external assault on the part of the world and the devil, and won the
crown of victory by overcoming them.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.15, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether in Christ there was ignorance?

Objection 1: It would seem that there was ignorance in Christ. For
that is truly in Christ which belongs to Him in His human nature,
although it does not belong to Him in His Divine Nature, as suffering
and death. But ignorance belongs to Christ in His human nature; for
Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii, 21) that "He assumed an ignorant
and enslaved nature." Therefore ignorance was truly in Christ.
Objection 2: Further, one is said to be ignorant through defect of
knowledge. Now some kind of knowledge was wanting to Christ, for
the Apostle says (2 Cor. 5:21) "Him that knew no sin, for us He hath
made sin." Therefore there was ignorance in Christ.
Objection 3: Further, it is written (Is. 8:4): "For before the child know
to call his Father and his mother, the strength of Damascus . . . shall
be taken away." Therefore in Christ there was ignorance of certain
things.
On the contrary, Ignorance is not taken away by ignorance. But
Christ came to take away our ignorance; for "He came to enlighten
them that sit in darkness and in the shadow of death" (Lk. 1:79).
Therefore there was no ignorance in Christ.
I answer that, As there was the fulness of grace and virtue in Christ,
so too there was the fulness of all knowledge, as is plain from what
has been said above (Question 7, Article 9; Question 9). Now as the
fulness of grace and virtue in Christ excluded the "fomes" of sin, so
the fulness of knowledge excluded ignorance, which is opposed to
knowledge. Hence, even as the "fomes" of sin was not in Christ,
neither was there ignorance in Him.
Reply to Objection 1: The nature assumed by Christ may be viewed
in two ways. First, in its specific nature, and thus Damascene calls it
"ignorant and enslaved"; hence he adds: "For man's nature is a
slave of Him" (i.e. God) "Who made it; and it has no knowledge of
future things." Secondly, it may be considered with regard to what it
has from its union with the Divine hypostasis, from which it has the
fulness of knowledge and grace, according to Jn. 1:14: "We saw Him
as it were the Only-begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth";
and in this way the human nature in Christ was not affected with