THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.69, C.3.

for all his sins.
Reply to Objection 1: Since the pains of Christ's Passion are
communicated to the person baptized, inasmuch as he is made a
member of Christ, just as if he himself had borne those pains, his
sins are set in order by the pains of Christ's Passion.
Reply to Objection 2: Water not only cleanses but also refreshes.
And thus by refreshing it signifies the remission of the debt of
punishment, just as by cleansing it signifies the washing away of
guilt.
Reply to Objection 3: In punishments inflicted by a human tribunal,
we have to consider not only what punishment a man deserves in
respect of God, but also to what extent he is indebted to men who
are hurt and scandalized by another's sin. Consequently, although a
murderer is freed by Baptism from his debt of punishment in respect
of God, he remains, nevertheless, in debt to men; and it is right that
they should be edified at his punishment, since they were
scandalized at his sin. But the sovereign may remit the penalty to
such like out of kindness.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.69, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether Baptism should take away the penalties

of sin that belong to this life?
Objection 1: It seems that Baptism should take away the penalties of
sin that belong to this life. For as the Apostle says (Rm. 5:15), the gift
of Christ is farther-reaching than the sin of Adam. But through
Adam's sin, as the Apostle says (Rm. 5:12), "death entered into this
world," and, consequently, all the other penalties of the present life.
Much more, therefore, should man be freed from the penalties of the
present life, by the gift of Christ which is received in Baptism.
Objection 2: Further, Baptism takes away the guilt of both original
and actual sin. Now it takes away the guilt of actual sin in such a way
as to free man from all debt of punishment resulting therefrom.
Therefore it also frees man from the penalties of the present life,
which are a punishment of original sin.
Objection 3: Further, if the cause be removed, the effect is removed.
But the cause of these penalties is original sin, which is taken away
by Baptism. Therefore such like penalties should not remain.
On the contrary, on Rm. 6:6, "that the body of sin may be destroyed,"
a gloss says: "The effect of Baptism is that the old man is crucified,
and the body of sin destroyed, not as though the living flesh of man
were delivered by the destruction of that concupiscence with which
it has been bespattered from its birth; but that it may not hurt him,
when dead, though it was in him when he was born." Therefore for
the same reason neither are the other penalties taken away by
Baptism.
I answer that, Baptism has the power to take away the penalties of
the present life yet it does not take them away during the present life,
but by its power they will be taken away from the just in the
resurrection when "this mortal hath put on immortality" (1 Cor.
15:54). And this is reasonable. First, because, by Baptism, man is
incorporated in Christ, and is made His member, as stated above
(Article 3; Question 68, Article 5). Consequently it is fitting that what
takes place in the Head should take place also in the member
incorporated. Now, from the very beginning of His conception Christ
was "full of grace and truth," yet He had a passible body, which
through His Passion and death was raised up to a life of glory.