FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.72, C.7.

come under the one species of murder, although the actions
themselves differ specifically according to the natural species.
Accordingly, if we refer to the material species in sins of omission
and commission, they differ specifically, using species in a broad
sense, in so far as negation and privation may have a species. But if
we refer to the formal species of sins of omission and commission,
they do not differ specifically, because they are directed to the same
end, and proceed from the same motive. For the covetous man, in
order to hoard money, both robs, and omits to give what he ought,
and in like manner, the glutton, to satiate his appetite, both eats too
much and omits the prescribed fasts. The same applies to other
sins: for in things, negation is always founded on affirmation, which,
in a manner, is its cause. Hence in the physical order it comes under
the same head, that fire gives forth heat, and that it does not give
forth cold.
Reply to Objection 1: This division in respect of commission and
omission, is not according to different formal species, but only
according to material species, as stated.
Reply to Objection 2: In God's law, the necessity for various
affirmative and negative precepts, was that men might be gradually
led to virtue, first by abstaining from evil, being induced to this by
the negative precepts, and afterwards by doing good, to which we
are induced by the affirmative precepts. Wherefore the affirmative
and negative precepts do not belong to different virtues, but to
different degrees of virtue; and consequently they are not of
necessity, opposed to sins of different species. Moreover sin is not
specified by that from which it turns away, because in this respect it
is a negation or privation, but by that to which it turns, in so far as
sin is an act. Consequently sins do not differ specifically according
to the various precepts of the Law.
Reply to Objection 3: This objection considers the material diversity
of sins. It must be observed, however, that although, properly
speaking, negation is not in a species, yet it is allotted to a species
by reduction to the affirmation on which it is based.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.72, C.7.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.72, C.8.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether sins are fittingly divided into sins of

thought, word, and deed?
Objection 1: It would seem that sins are unfittingly divided into sins
of thought, word, and deed. For Augustine (De Trin. xii, 12) describes
three stages of sin, of which the first is "when the carnal sense
offers a bait," which is the sin of thought; the second stage is
reached "when one is satisfied with the mere pleasure of thought";
and the third stage, "when consent is given to the deed." Now these
three belong to the sin of thought. Therefore it is unfitting to reckon
sin of thought as one kind of sin.
Objection 2: Further, Gregory (Moral. iv, 25) reckons four degrees of
sin; the first of which is "a fault hidden in the heart"; the second,
"when it is done openly"; the third, "when it is formed into a habit";
and the fourth, "when man goes so far as to presume on God's
mercy or to give himself up to despair": where no distinction is made
between sins of deed and sins of word, and two other degrees of sin
are added. Therefore the first division was unfitting.
Objection 3: Further, there can be no sin of word or deed unless
there precede sin of thought. Therefore these sins do not differ
specifically. Therefore they should not be condivided with one
another.
On the contrary, Jerome in commenting on Ezech. 43:23: "The
human race is subject to three kinds of sin, for when we sin, it is
either by thought, or word, or deed."
I answer that, Things differ specifically in two ways: first, when each
has the complete species; thus a horse and an ox differ specifically:
secondly, when the diversity of species is derived from diversity of
degree in generation or movement: thus the building is the complete
generation of a house, while the laying of the foundations, and the
setting up of the walls are incomplete species, as the Philosopher
declares (Ethic. x, 4); and the same can apply to the generation of
animals. Accordingly sins are divided into these three, viz. sins of
thought, word, and deed, not as into various complete species: for
the consummation of sin is in the deed, wherefore sins of deed have
the complete species; but the first beginning of sin is its foundation,
as it were, in the sin of thought; the second degree is the sin of