SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.26, C.2.

Reply to Objection 1: A better man, through being better, is more
lovable; but through having more perfect charity, loves more. He
loves more, however, in proportion to the person he loves. For a
better man does not love that which is beneath him less than it ought
to be loved: whereas he who is less good fails to love one who is
better, as much as he ought to be loved.
Reply to Objection 2: As the Philosopher says (Ethic. viii, 8), "men
wish to be loved in as much as they wish to be honored." For just as
honor is bestowed on a man in order to bear witness to the good
which is in him, so by being loved a man is shown to have some
good, since good alone is lovable. Accordingly men seek to be loved
and to be honored, for the sake of something else, viz. to make
known the good which is in the person loved. On the other hand,
those who have charity seek to love for the sake of loving, as though
this were itself the good of charity, even as the act of any virtue is
that virtue's good. Hence it is more proper to charity to wish to love
than to wish to be loved.
Reply to Objection 3: Some love on account of being loved, not so
that to be loved is the end of their loving, but because it is a kind of
way leading a man to love.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.26, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether to love considered as an act of charity is

the same as goodwill?
Objection 1: It would seem that to love, considered as an act of
charity, is nothing else than goodwill. For the Philosopher says
(Rhet. ii, 4) that "to love is to wish a person well"; and this is
goodwill. Therefore the act of charity is nothing but goodwill.
Objection 2: Further, the act belongs to the same subject as the
habit. Now the habit of charity is in the power of the will, as stated
above (Question 24, Article 1). Therefore the act of charity is also an
act of the will. But it tends to good only, and this is goodwill.
Therefore the act of charity is nothing else than goodwill.
Objection 3: Further, the Philosopher reckons five things pertaining
to friendship (Ethic. ix, 4), the first of which is that a man should
wish his friend well; the second, that he should wish him to be and
to live; the third, that he should take pleasure in his company; the
fourth, that he should make choice of the same things; the fifth, that
he should grieve and rejoice with him. Now the first two pertain to
goodwill. Therefore goodwill is the first act of charity.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. ix, 5) that "goodwill is
neither friendship nor love, but the beginning of friendship." Now
charity is friendship, as stated above (Question 23, Article 1).
Therefore goodwill is not the same as to love considered as an act of
charity.
I answer that, Goodwill properly speaking is that act of the will
whereby we wish well to another. Now this act of the will differs from
actual love, considered not only as being in the sensitive appetite
but also as being in the intellective appetite or will. For the love
which is in the sensitive appetite is a passion. Now every passion
seeks its object with a certain eagerness. And the passion of love is
not aroused suddenly, but is born of an earnest consideration of the
object loved; wherefore the Philosopher, showing the difference
between goodwill and the love which is a passion, says (Ethic. ix, 5)
that goodwill does not imply impetuosity or desire, that is to say, has
not an eager inclination, because it is by the sole judgment of his
reason that one man wishes another well. Again such like love arises
from previous acquaintance, whereas goodwill sometimes arises