FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.57, C.3.

understood by the intellect, not at once, but by means of the
reason's inquiry, and is as a "term." This may happen in two ways:
first, so that it is the last in some particular genus; secondly, so that
it is the ultimate term of all human knowledge. And, since "things
that are knowable last from our standpoint, are knowable first and
chiefly in their nature" (Phys. i, text. 2, 3); hence that which is last
with respect to all human knowledge, is that which is knowable first
and chiefly in its nature. And about these is "wisdom," which
considers the highest causes, as stated in Metaph. i, 1,2. Wherefore
it rightly judges all things and sets them in order, because there can
be no perfect and universal judgment that is not based on the first
causes. But in regard to that which is last in this or that genus of
knowable matter, it is "science" which perfects the intellect.
Wherefore according to the different kinds of knowable matter, there
are different habits of scientific knowledge; whereas there is but one
wisdom.
Reply to Objection 1: Wisdom is a kind of science, in so far as it has
that which is common to all the sciences; viz. to demonstrate
conclusions from principles. But since it has something proper to
itself above the other sciences, inasmuch as it judges of them all,
not only as to their conclusions, but also as to their first principles,
therefore it is a more perfect virtue than science.
Reply to Objection 2: When the formal aspect of the object is
referred to a power or habit by one same act, there is no distinction
of habit or power in respect of the formal aspect and of the material
object: thus it belongs to the same power of sight to see both color,
and light, which is the formal aspect under which color is seen, and
is seen at the same time as the color. On the other hand, the
principles of a demonstration can be considered apart, without the
conclusion being considered at all. Again they can be considered
together with the conclusions, since the conclusions can be
deduced from them. Accordingly, to consider the principles in this
second way, belongs to science, which considers the conclusions
also: while to consider the principles in themselves belongs to
understanding.
Consequently, if we consider the point aright, these three virtues are
distinct, not as being on a par with one another, but in a certain
order. The same is to be observed in potential wholes, wherein one
part is more perfect than another; for instance, the rational soul is
more perfect than the sensitive soul; and the sensitive, than the

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.57, C.3.

vegetal. For it is thus that science depends on understanding as on a
virtue of higher degree: and both of these depend on wisdom, as
obtaining the highest place, and containing beneath itself both
understanding and science, by judging both of the conclusions of
science, and of the principles on which they are based.
Reply to Objection 3: As stated above (Question 55, Articles 3,4), a
virtuous habit has a fixed relation to good, and is nowise referable to
evil. Now the good of the intellect is truth, and falsehood is its evil.
Wherefore those habits alone are called intellectual virtues, whereby
we tell the truth and never tell a falsehood. But opinion and
suspicion can be about both truth and falsehood: and so, as stated
in Ethic. vi, 3, they are not intellectual virtues.