which denotes one who was pleased. For you know, indeed ye know, how our
soul is affected by sweet savors, how it is pleased, how it is delighted. The
Scriptures therefore shrunk not from applying to God a word so human, and so
lowly, that it might show to men that their gifts have become acceptable. For not
the fat, not the smoke, made them acceptable, but the purpose of mind which
offered them. Had it been otherwise, Cain's offering too had been received. It
says then, that He is even pleased, and how He is pleased. For men could not
without this have learned. He then, who has no need, says that He is thus
pleased, that they may not become remiss by the absence of need. And
afterward, when they had no care for other virtues, and trusted to their offerings
alone, behold, how again he sets them right by saying, "Will I eat the flesh of
bulls, or drink the blood of goats?" [Psalm 50:13] This Paul also says. "Not that
I seek," says he, "for the gift."
Ver. 19. "And may my God fulfill every need of yours, according to His
riches in glory, in Christ Jesus."
Behold how he invokes blessings upon them, as poor men do. But if even
Paul blesses those who give, much more let us not be ashamed to do this when
we receive. Let us not receive as though we ourselves had need, let us not rejoice
on our own account, but on that of the givers. Thus we too who receive shall
have a reward, if we rejoice for their sake. Thus we shall not take it hardly, when
men do not give, but rather shall grieve for their sake. So shall we render them
more zealous, if we teach them, that not for our own sake do we so act; "but may
my God" fulfill every need of yours, or every grace, or every joy. If the second
be true, "every grace," he means not only the alms, which are of earth, but every
excellency. If the first, "your every need," which I think too should rather be
read, this is what he means to show. As he had said, "ye lacked opportunity," he
here makes an addition, as he does in the Epistle to the Corinthians, saying, "And
He that supplies seed to the sower, may He supply bread for food, and multiply
your seed for sowing, and increase the fruits of your righteousness." [2
Corinthians 9:10] He invokes blessings upon them, that they may abound, and

have wherewith to sow. He blesses them too, not simply that they might abound,
but "according to His riches," so that this too is done in measured terms. For had
they been as he was, so truly wise, so crucified, he would not have done this; but
since they were men that were handicraftsmen, poor, having wives, bringing up
children, ruling their families, and who had given these very gifts out of small
possessions, and had certain desires of the things of this world, he blesses them
appropriately. For it is not unseemly to invoke sufficiency and plenty upon those
who thus use them. See too what he said. He said not, May He make you rich,
and to abound greatly; but what said he? "May He fulfill every need of yours," so
that you may not be in want, but have things for your necessities. Since Christ
too, when He gave us a form of prayer, inserted also this in the prayer, when He
taught us to say,
"Give us this day our daily bread." [Matthew 6:11]
"According to His riches." That is, according to His free gift, i.e. it is easy
to Him, and possible, and quickly. And since I have spoken of need, do not think
that he will drive you into straits. Wherefore he added, "according to his riches
in glory in Christ Jesus." So shall all things abound to you, that you may have
them to His glory. Or, you are wanting in nothing; (for it is written, "great grace
was upon them all, neither was there any that lacked.") [Acts 4:33] Or, so as to
do all things for His glory, as if he had said, that you may use your abundance to
His glory.
Ver. 20. "Now unto our God and Father be the glory for ever and ever.
Amen." For the glory of which he speaks belongs not only to the Son, but to the
Father too, for when the Son is glorified, then is the Father also. For when he
said, This is done to the glory of Christ, lest any one should suppose that it is to
His glory alone, he continued, "Unto our God and Father be the glory," that
glory which is paid to the Son.
Ver. 21. "Salute every saint in Christ Jesus." This also is no small thing. For
it is a proof of great good will, to salute them through letters. "The brethren
which are with me salute you." And yet you said that you have "no one like-