FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.78, C.5.

something extrinsic, as it were. Wherefore a sin is aggravated by the
very fact that it is committed through certain malice, and so much
the more, as the malice is greater; whereas it is diminished by being
committed through passion, and so much the more, as the passion
is stronger. Secondly, because the passion which incites the will to
sin, soon passes away, so that man repents of his sin, and soon
returns to his good intentions; whereas the habit, through which a
man sins, is a permanent quality, so that he who sins through
malice, abides longer in his sin. For this reason the Philosopher
(Ethic. vii, 8) compares the intemperate man, who sins through
malice, to a sick man who suffers from a chronic disease, while he
compares the incontinent man, who sins through passion, to one
who suffers intermittently. Thirdly, because he who sins through
certain malice is ill-disposed in respect of the end itself, which is the
principle in matters of action; and so the defect is more dangerous
than in the case of the man who sins through passion, whose
purpose tends to a good end, although this purpose is interrupted on
account of the passion, for the time being. Now the worst of all
defects is defect of principle. Therefore it is evident that a sin
committed through malice is more grievous than one committed
through passion.
Reply to Objection 1: Ignorance of choice, to which the objection
refers, neither excuses nor diminishes a sin, as stated above
(Question 76, Article 4). Therefore neither does a greater ignorance
of the kind make a sin to be less grave.
Reply to Objection 2: The impulse due to passion, is, as it were, due
to a defect which is outside the will: whereas, by a habit, the will is
inclined from within. Hence the comparison fails.
Reply to Objection 3: It is one thing to sin while choosing, and
another to sin through choosing. For he that sins through passion,
sins while choosing, but not through choosing, because his
choosing is not for him the first principle of his sin; for he is induced
through the passion, to choose what he would not choose, were it
not for the passion. On the other hand, he that sins through certain
malice, chooses evil of his own accord, in the way already explained
(Articles 2,3), so that his choosing, of which he has full control, is
the principle of his sin: and for this reason he is said to sin
"through" choosing.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.78, C.5.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.79, C.1.

## QUESTION 79 — OF THE EXTERNAL CAUSES OF SIN

Prologue
We must now consider the external causes of sin, and (1) on the part
of God; (2) on the part of the devil; (3) on the part of man.
Under the first head there are four points of inquiry:
(1) Whether God is a cause of sin?
(2) Whether the act of sin is from God?
(3) Whether God is the cause of spiritual blindness and hardness of
heart?
(4) Whether these things are directed to the salvation of those who
are blinded or hardened?