describing the treasures of kindness to the poor laid up by the Corinthians, he
writes, "For the administration of this service not only supplies the want of the
saints, but is abundant also by many thanksgivings unto God." [2 Corinthians
9:12] And again; "Whiles they glorify God for your professed subjection unto the
Gospel of Christ, and for your liberal distribution unto them, and unto all men;
and by their prayer for you, which long after you." Do you behold it resolving
itself into thanksgiving and praise of God, and continual prayers of those who
have been benefited, and more fervent charity? Let us then sacrifice, beloved, let
us sacrifice every day upon these altars. For this sacrifice is greater than prayer
and fasting, and many things beside, if only it come from honest gain, and
honest toils, and be pure from all covetousness, and rapine, and violence. For
God accepts such offerings as these, but the others He turns away from and
hates; He will not be honored out of other men's calamities, such sacrifice is
unclean and profane, and would rather anger God than appease Him. So that we
must use all carefulness, that we do not, in the place of service, insult Him whom
we would honor. For if Cain for making a second-rate offering, having done no
other wrong, suffered extreme punishment, how shall not we when we offer
anything gained by rapine and covetousness, suffer yet more severely. It is for
this that God has shown to us the pattern of this commandment, that we might
have mercy, not be severe to our fellow-servants; but he who takes what belongs
to one and gives it to another, has not shown mercy, but inflicted hurt, and done
an extreme injustice. As then a stone cannot yield oil, so neither can cruelty
produce humanity; for alms when it has such a root as this is alms no longer.
Therefore I exhort that we look not to this only, that we give to those that need,
but also that we give not from other men's plunder. "When one prays, and
another curses, whose voice will the Lord hear?" [Sirach 34:24] If we guide
ourselves thus strictly, we shall be able by the grace of God to obtain much
lovingkindness and mercy and pardon for what we have done amiss during all
this long time, and to escape the river of fire; from which may it come to pass
that we be all delivered, and ascend to the Kingdom of Heaven, through the

grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom, with the Father and
the Holy Ghost, be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Homily 14 on the Gospel of John
John 1:16
"And of His fullness have all we received, and grace for grace."
1. I said the other day, that John, to resolve the doubts of those who should
question with themselves how the Lord, though He came after to the preaching,
became before and more glorious than he, added, "for He was before me." And
this is indeed one reason. But not content with this, he adds again a second,
which now he declares. What is it? "And of his fullness," says he, "have all we
received, and grace for grace." With these again he mentions another. What is
this? That