and gained the crown. And what says He? "Do you believe in the Son of God?"
What is this, after so much arguing against the Jews, after so many words, He
asks him, "Do you believe?" He spoke it not from ignorance, but desiring to
make Himself known, and showing that He gently valued the man's faith. "This
great multitude," He says, "has insulted Me, but of them I make no account; for
one thing I care, that you should believe. For better is one who does the will of
God, than ten thousand transgressors." "Do you believe in the Son of God?" As
having both been present, and as approving what had been said by him, He asks
this question; and first, He brought him to a state of longing for Himself. For He
said not directly, "Believe," but in the way of an enquiry. What then said the
man? "Lord, who is He, that I might believe in Him?" The expression is that of a
longing and enquiring soul. He knows not Him in whose defense he had spoken
so much, that you may learn his love of truth. For he had not yet seen Him.

John 9:37
"Jesus says unto him, You have both seen Him, and it is He that talks with you."
He said not "I am He," but as yet in an intermediate and reserved manner,
"You have both seen Him." This was still uncertain; therefore He adds more
clearly, "It is He that talks with you."

John 9:38
"He says, Lord, I believe; and he worshipped Him" (straightway ).
He said not, "I am He that healed you, that bade you, Go, wash in Siloam";
but keeping silence on all these points, He says, "Do you believe in the Son of
God?" and then the man, showing his great earnestness, straightway worshipped;
which few of those who were healed had done; as, for instance, the lepers, and
some others; by this act declaring His divine power. For that no one might think
that what had been said by him was a mere expression, he added also the deed.
When he had worshipped, Christ said,

John 9:39
"For judgment I have come into the world, that they which see not might see,
and that they which see might be made blind."
So also says Paul; "What shall we say then? That the Gentiles which
followed not after righteousness have attained to righteousness, even the
righteousness which is of the faith of Jesus; but Israel, which followed after the
law of righteousness, has not attained to the law of righteousness." [Romans
9:30-31] By saying, "For judgment I have come into this world," He both made
the man stronger respecting the faith, and aroused those who followed Him; for
the Pharisees were following Him. And the, "For judgment," He spoke with
reference to a greater punishment; showing that they who had given sentence
against Him, had received sentence against themselves; that they who had
condemned Him as a sinner, were themselves the persons condemned. In this
passage He speaks of two recoveries of sight, and two blindnesses; one sensible,
the other spiritual.