here the narration of this history, I beseech you, together with the beheading of
John, to tell one another also of the murder of Jonathan, and the general
destruction of a whole people (which did not indeed take place, but which was
involved in the obligation of the oaths); and both at home, and in public, and
with your wives, and friends, and with neighbours, and with all men in general,
to make an earnest business of this matter, and not to think it a sufficient apology
that we can plead custom.
15. For that this excuse is a mere pretext, and that the fault arises not from
custom but from listlessness, I will endeavour to convince you from what has
already occurred. The Emperor has shut up the baths of the city, and has given
orders that no one shall bathe; and no one has dared to transgress the law, nor to
find fault with what has taken place, nor to allege custom. But even though in
weak health perchance, men and women, and children and old men; and many
women but recently eased from the pangs of childbirth; though all requiring this
as a necessary medicine; bear with the injunction, willingly or unwillingly; and
neither plead infirmity of body, nor the tyranny of custom, nor that they are
punished, whereas others were the offenders, nor any other thing of this kind, but
contentedly put up with this punishment, because they were in expectation of
greater evils; and pray daily that the wrath of the Emperor may go no further. Do
you see that where there is fear, the bond of custom is easily relaxed, although it
be of exceedingly long standing, and great necessity? To be denied the use of the
bath is certainly a grievous matter. For although we be never so philosophic, the
nature of the body proves incapable of deriving any benefit for its own health,
from the philosophy of the soul. But as to abstinence from swearing, this is
exceedingly easy, and brings no injury at all; none to the body, none to the mind;
but, on the contrary, great gain, much safety, and abundant wealth. How then is it
any thing but absurd, to submit to the greatest hardships, when an Emperor
enjoins it; but when God commands nothing grievous nor difficult, but what is
very tolerable and easy, to despise or to deride it, and to advance custom as an
excuse? Let us not, I entreat, so far despise our own safety, but let us fear God as

we fear man. I know that you shudder at hearing this, but what deserves to be
shuddered at is that you do not pay even so much respect to God; and that while
ye diligently observe the Emperor's decrees, you trample under foot those which
are divine, and which have come down from heaven; and consider diligence
concerning these a secondary object. For what apology will there be left for us,
and what pardon, if after so much admonition we persist in the same practices.
For I began this admonition at the very commencement of the calamity which
has taken hold of the city, and that is now on the point of coming to an end; but
we have not as yet thoroughly put in practice even one precept. How then can we
ask a removal of the evils which still beset us, when we have not been able to
perform a single precept? How can we expect a change for the better? How shall
we pray? With what tongue shall we call upon God? For if we perform the law,
we shall enjoy much pleasure, when the Emperor is reconciled to the city. But if
we remain in the transgression, shame and reproach will be ours on every hand,
inasmuch as when God has freed us from the danger we have continued in the
same listlessness.
16. Oh! That it were possible for me to undress the souls of those who
swear frequently, and to expose to view the wounds and the bruises which they
receive daily from oaths! We should then need neither admonition nor counsel;
for the sight of these wounds would avail more powerfully than all that could be
said, to withdraw from their wickedness even those who are most addicted to
this wicked practice. Nevertheless, if it be not possible to spread before the eyes
the shameful state of their soul, it may be possible to expose it to the thoughts,
and to display it in its rottenness and corruption. For as it says, "As a servant that
is continually beaten will not be clear of a bruise, so he that swears and names
God continually will not be purified of his sin." [Sirach 23:10] It is impossible,
utterly impossible, that the mouth which is practised in swearing, should not
frequently commit perjury. Therefore, I beseech you all, by laying aside this
dreadful and wicked habit, to win another crown. And since it is every where
sung of our city, that first of all the cities of the world, she bound on her brow