SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.183, C.2.

Reply to Objection 2: A man may be said to be perfect in two ways.
First, simply: and this perfection regards that which belongs to a
thing's nature, for instance an animal may be said to be perfect when
it lacks nothing in the disposition of its members and in such things
as are necessary for an animal's life. Secondly, a thing is said to be
perfect relatively: and this perfection regards something connected
with the thing externally, such as whiteness or blackness or
something of the kind. Now the Christian life consists chiefly in
charity whereby the soul is united to God; wherefore it is written (1
Jn. 3:14): "He that loveth not abideth in death." Hence the perfection
of the Christian life consists simply in charity, but in the other
virtues relatively. And since that which is simply, is paramount and
greatest in comparison with other things, it follows that the
perfection of charity is paramount in relation to the perfection that
regards the other virtues.
Reply to Objection 3: Patience is stated to have a perfect work in
relation to charity, in so far as it is an effect of the abundance of
charity that a man bears hardships patiently, according to Rm. 8:35,
"Who . . . shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation?
Or distress?" etc.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.183, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether any one can be perfect in this life?

Objection 1: It would seem that none can be perfect in this life. For
the Apostle says (1 Cor. 13:10): "When that which is perfect is come,
that which is in part shall be done away." Now in this life that which
is in part is not done away; for in this life faith and hope, which are in
part, remain. Therefore none can be perfect in this life.
Objection 2: Further, "The perfect is that which lacks nothing" (Phys.
iii, 6). Now there is no one in this life who lacks nothing; for it is
written (James 3:2): "In many things we all offend"; and (Ps. 138:16):
"Thy eyes did see my imperfect being." Therefore none is perfect in
this life.
Objection 3: Further, the perfection of the Christian life, as stated
(Article 1), relates to charity, which comprises the love of God and of
our neighbor. Now, neither as to the love of God can one have
perfect charity in this life, since according to Gregory (Hom. xiv in
Ezech.) "the furnace of love which begins to burn here, will burn
more fiercely when we see Him Whom we love"; nor as to the love of
our neighbor, since in this life we cannot love all our neighbors
actually, even though we love them habitually; and habitual love is
imperfect. Therefore it seems that no one can be perfect in this life.
On the contrary, The Divine law does not prescribe the impossible.
Yet it prescribes perfection according to Mt. 5:48, "Be you . . .
perfect, as also your heavenly Father is perfect." Therefore
seemingly one can be perfect in this life.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), the perfection of the
Christian life consists in charity. Now perfection implies a certain
universality because according to Phys. iii, 6, "the perfect is that
which lacks nothing." Hence we may consider a threefold perfection.
One is absolute, and answers to a totality not only on the part of the
lover, but also on the part of the object loved, so that God be loved
as much as He is lovable. Such perfection as this is not possible to
any creature, but is competent to God alone, in Whom good is wholly
and essentially.
Another perfection answers to an absolute totality on the part of the
lover, so that the affective faculty always actually tends to God as