of the God of peace have to do with strife?
"But be gentle unto all men."
How is it then he says, "Rebuke with all authority" [Titus 2:15]; and again,
"Let no man despise your youth" [1 Timothy 4:12]: and again, "Rebuke them
sharply"? [Titus 1:13] Because this is consistent with meekness. For a strong
rebuke, if it be given with gentleness, is most likely to wound deeply: for it is
possible, indeed it is, to touch more effectually by gentleness, than one overawes
by boldness.
"Apt to teach"; that is, those who are willing to be taught. For "a man that is
an heretic," he says, "after the first and second admonition reject." [Titus 3:10]
"Patient." He has well added this, for it is a quality which a teacher above all
things ought to possess. All things are vain without it. And if fishermen do not
despair, though often they cast their nets for a whole day without catching
anything, much more should not we. For see what is the result. From constant
teaching, it often happens that the plow of the word, descending to the depth of
the soul, roots out the evil passion that troubled it. For he that hears often will at
length be affected. A man cannot go on hearing continually without some effect
being produced. Sometimes therefore, when he was on the point of being
persuaded, he is lost by our becoming weary. For the same thing occurs, as if an
unskillful husbandman should in the first year dig about the vine he had planted,
and seeking to reap some fruit in the second year, and again in the third, and
gathering nothing, should after three years despair, and in the fourth year, when
he was about to receive the recompense of his labors, abandon his vine. And
having said, "Patient," he is not satisfied, but goes on to say,
Ver. 25. "In meekness instructing those that oppose themselves."
For he that teaches must be especially careful to do it with meekness. For a
soul that wishes to learn cannot gain any useful instruction from harshness and
contention. For when it would apply, being thus thrown into perplexity, it will
learn nothing. He who would gain any useful knowledge ought above all things
to be well disposed towards his teacher, and if this be not previously attained,

nothing that is requisite or useful can be accomplished. And no one can be well
disposed towards him who is violent and overbearing. How is it then that he
says, "A man that is an heretic, after the first and second admonition, reject"? He
speaks there of one incorrigible, of one whom he knows to be diseased beyond
the possibility of cure.
"If God perhaps will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the
truth."
Ver. 26. "And that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the
devil."
What he says amounts to this. Perhaps there will be a reformation. Perhaps!
For it is uncertain. So that we ought to withdraw only from those, of whom we
can show plainly, and concerning whom we are fully persuaded, that whatever
be done, they will not be reformed. "In meekness," he says. In this temper, you
see, we ought to address ourselves to those who are willing to learn, and never
cease from conversing with them till we have come to the demonstration.
"Who are taken captive by him at his will." It is truly said, "Who are taken
captive," for meanwhile they float in error. Observe here how he teaches to be
humble-minded. He has not said, if perhaps you should be able, but, "if perhaps
God should grant them a recovery"; if anything be done, therefore, all is of the
Lord. Thou plantest, you water but He sows and makes it produce fruit. Let us
not therefore be so affected, as if we ourselves wrought the persuasion, even if
we should persuade any one. "Taken captive by him," he says, "to His will." This
no one will say relates to doctrine, but to life. For "His will" is that we live
rightly. But some are in the snare of the devil by reason of their life, we ought
not therefore to be weary even with respect to these.
"If perhaps," he says, "they may recover, that are taken captive, unto His
will." Now "If perhaps," implies much longsuffering. For not to do the will of
God is a snare of the devil.
For as a sparrow, though it be not wholly enclosed, but only caught by the
foot, is still under the power of him who set the snare; so though we be not