SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.183, C.4.

wherein perfection consists, when He said, "And follow Me." Hence
Jerome in his commentary on Mt. 19:27, says that "since it is not
enough merely to leave, Peter added that which is perfect: 'And have
followed Thee'"; and Ambrose, commenting on Lk. 5:27, "Follow
Me," says: "He commands him to follow, not with steps of the body,
but with devotion of the soul, which is the effect of charity."
Wherefore it is evident from the very way of speaking that the
counsels are means of attaining to perfection, since it is thus
expressed: "If thou wilt be perfect, go, sell," etc., as though He said:
"By so doing thou shalt accomplish this end."
Reply to Objection 2: As Augustine says (De Perf. Justit. viii) "the
perfection of charity is prescribed to man in this life, because one
runs not right unless one knows whither to run. And how shall we
know this if no commandment declares it to us?" And since that
which is a matter of precept can be fulfilled variously, one does not
break a commandment through not fulfilling it in the best way, but it
is enough to fulfil it in any way whatever. Now the perfection of
Divine love is a matter of precept for all without exception, so that
even the perfection of heaven is not excepted from this precept, as
Augustine says (De Perf. Justit. viii [De Spir. et Lit. XXXVI]), and one
escapes transgressing the precept, in whatever measure one attains
to the perfection of Divine love. The lowest degree of Divine love is
to love nothing more than God, or contrary to God, or equally with
God, and whoever fails from this degree of perfection nowise fulfils
the precept. There is another degree of the Divine love, which cannot
be fulfilled so long as we are on the way, as stated above (Article 2),
and it is evident that to fail from this is not to be a transgressor of
the precept; and in like manner one does not transgress the precept,
if one does not attain to the intermediate degrees of perfection,
provided one attain to the lowest.
Reply to Objection 3: Just as man has a certain perfection of his
nature as soon as he is born, which perfection belongs to the very
essence of his species, while there is another perfection which he
acquires by growth, so again there is a perfection of charity which
belongs to the very essence of charity, namely that man love God
above all things, and love nothing contrary to God, while there is
another perfection of charity even in this life, whereto a man attains
by a kind of spiritual growth, for instance when a man refrains even
from lawful things, in order more freely to give himself to the service
of God.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.183, C.4.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.183, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether whoever is perfect is in the state of