Homily 36 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts XVI. 25, 26
"And at midnight Paul and Silas prayed, and sang praises unto God: and
the prisoners heard them. And suddenly there was a great earthquake, so that the
foundations of the prison were shaken, and immediately all the doors were
opened, and every one's bands were loosed."
What could equal these souls? These men had been scourged, had received
many stripes, they had been misused, were in peril of their lives, were thrust into
the inner prison, and set fast in the stocks: and for all this they did not suffer
themselves to sleep, but kept vigil all the night. Do you mark what a blessing
tribulation is? But we, in our soft beds, with none to be afraid of, pass the whole
night in sleep. But belike this is why they kept vigil, because they were in this
condition. Not the tyranny of sleep could overpower them, not the smart of pain
could bow them, not the fear of evil east them into helpless dejection: no, these
were the very things that made them wakeful: and they were even filled with
exceeding delight. "At midnight," it says, "and the prisoners listened to them:" it
was so strange and surprising! "And suddenly there was a great earthquake, so
that the foundations of the prison were shaken, and immediately, all the doors
were opened, and every one's bands were loosed. And the keeper of the prison
awaking out of his sleep, and seeing the prison doors open, drew out his sword,
and would have killed himself, supposing that the prisoners had been fled."
[Acts 16:27] There was an earthquake, that the keeper should be roused from
sleep, and the doors flew open, that he should wonder at what had happened: but
these things the prisoners saw not: otherwise they would all have fled: but the
keeper of the prison was about to slay himself, thinking the prisoners were
escaped. "But Paul cried with a loud voice, saying, Do yourself no harm: for we
are all here" [Acts 16:28] (b) "Then he called for lights, and sprang in, and

came trembling, and fell down before Paul and Silas; and brought them out, and
said, Sirs, what must I do to be saved?" (v. 29, 30.) Do you mark how the
wonder overpowered him? (a) He wondered more at Paul's kindness; he was
amazed at his manly boldness, that he had not escaped when he had it in his
power, that he hindered him from killing himself. (c) "And they said, believe in
the Lord Jesus Christ, and you shall be saved, and your house. And they spoke
unto him the word of the Lord, and to all that were in his house." (v. 31, 35) and
(so) immediately gave proof of their kindness towards him. "And he took them
the same hour of the night and washed their stripes; and was baptized, he and
all his, straightway." [Acts 16:33] He washed them, and was himself baptized,
he and his house. "And when he had brought them into his house, he set meat
before them, and rejoiced, believing in God with all his house. And when it was
day, the magistrates sent the sergeants, saying, Let those men go." (v. 34, 35.) It
is likely the magistrates had learned what had happened, and did not dare of
themselves to dismiss them. "And the keeper of the prison told these words to
Paul, saying, the magistrates have sent to let you go: now therefore depart, and
go in peace. But Paul said unto them, they have beaten us openly uncondemned,
being Romans, and have cast us into prison; and now do they thrust as out
privily? Nay verily; but let them come themselves and fetch us out. And the
sergeants told these words unto the magistrates: and they feared, when they
heard that they were Romans. And they came and besought them, and brought
them out, and desired them to depart out of the city. And they went out of the
prison, and entered into the house of Lydia: and when they had seen the
brethren, they comforted them, and departed." [Acts 16:36-40] Even upon the
declaration of the magistrates Paul does not go out, but for the sake both of
Lydia and the rest he puts them in fear: that they may not be supposed to have
come out upon their own request, that they may set the rest in a posture of
boldness. The impeachment was twofold: that "being Romans," and
"uncondemned," they had openly cast them into prison. You see that in many
things they took their measures as men.