shall be committed to good hands. Escaping from all these, the soul looks but to
one thing at its last breath, that it may depart in favor with God. And if disease
occurs, the causes of it are matter of glory rather than of reproach, as in other
cases. For it proceeds not from gluttony nor fullness of the head, but from
intense watchfulness and fasting, or the like causes; and hence it is easily
removed, for it is sufficient for its removal to abate the severity of these
exercises.
Tell me then, you will say, whether any one could wash the Saints' feet in
the Church? Whether such are to be found among us? Yes: undoubtedly they are
such. Let us not, however, when the life of these saints is described despise those
that are in the Churches. There are many such often among us, though they are
in secret. Nor let us despise them, because they go from house to house, or go
into the forum, or stand forth in public. God has even commanded such services,
saying, "Judge the fatherless, plead for the widow." [Isaiah 1:17] Many are the
ways of being virtuous, as there are many varieties of jewels, though all are
called jewels; one is bright and round on all sides, another has some different
beauty. And how is this? As coral has, by a kind of art, its line extended, and its
angles shaped off, and another color more delicious than white, and the prasius
above every green, another has the rich color of blood, another an azure
surpassing the sea, another is more brilliant than the purple, and thus rivaling in
their varieties all the colors of flowers or of the sun. Yet all are called jewels. So
it is with the Saints. Some discipline themselves, some the Churches. Paul
therefore has well said, "If she have washed the Saints' feet, if she have relieved
the afflicted." For he speaks thus, that he may excite us all to imitation. Let us
hasten then to perform such actions, that we may be able hereafter to boast that
we have washed the Saints' feet. For if we ought to wash their feet, much more
ought we to give them our money with our own hands, and at the same time
study to be concealed. "Let not your left hand know," He says, "what your right
hand does." [Matthew 6:3]
Why do you take so many witnesses? Let not your servant know it, nor, if

possible, your wife. Many are the impediments of the deceitful one. Often she
who never before interfered, will impede such works, either from vainglory, or
some other motive. Even Abraham, who had an admirable wife, when he was
about to offer up his son, concealed it from her, though he knew not what was to
happen, but was fully persuaded that he must slaughter his son. What then,
would any one that was but an ordinary man have said? Would it not be, "Who is
this that perpetrates such acts?" Would he not have accused him of cruelty and
brutality? His wife was not even allowed to see her son, to receive his last
words, to witness his dying struggles. But he led him away like a captive. That
just man though not of any such thing, inebriated as he was with zeal, so that he
looked only how to fulfill that which was commanded. No servant, no wife was
present, nay, he himself knew not what would be the issue. But intent upon
offering up a pure victim, he would not defile it with tears, or with any
opposition. Mark too with what gentleness Isaac asks, "Behold the fire and the
wood, but where is the lamb for a burnt offering?": and what was the father's
answer? "My son, God will provide Himself a lamb for a burnt offering."
[Genesis 22:7-8] In this he uttered a prophecy that God would provide Himself a
burnt offering in His Son, and it also came true at the time. But why did he
conceal it from him who was to be sacrificed? Because he feared lest he should
be astounded, lest he should prove unworthy. With such care and prudence did
he act throughout this affair! Well then has the Scripture said, "Let not your left
hand know what your right hand does." If we have one dear to us as one of our
own members, let us not be anxious to show to him our charitable works, unless
it be necessary. For many evils may arise from it. A man is excited to vainglory,
and impediments are often raised. For this reason let us conceal it, if possible,
from our own selves, that we may attain the blessings promised, through the
grace and lovingkindness of Jesus Christ our Lord, with whom, etc.