THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.77, C.7.

senses (as a man is heartened by the odor of meat, and intoxicated
by the fumes of wine). Because such refreshment does not suffice
long for a man, whose body needs repair owing to constant waste:
and yet a man could be supported for long if he were to take hosts
and consecrated wine in great quantity.
In like manner the statement advanced by others cannot stand, who
hold that the sacramental species nourish owing to the remaining
substantial form of the bread and wine: both because the form does
not remain, as stated above (Question 75, Article 6): and because to
nourish is the act not of a form but rather of matter, which takes the
form of the one nourished, while the form of the nourishment passes
away: hence it is said in De Anima ii that nourishment is at first
unlike, but at the end is like.
Reply to Objection 1: After the consecration bread can be said to be
in this sacrament in two ways. First, as to the species, which retain
the name of the previous substance, as Gregory says in an Easter
Homily (Lanfranc, De Corp. et Sang. Dom. xx). Secondly, Christ's
very body can be called bread, since it is the mystical bread "coming
down from heaven." Consequently, Ambrose uses the word "bread"
in this second meaning, when he says that "this bread does not pass
into the body," because, to wit, Christ's body is not changed into
man's body, but nourishes his soul. But he is not speaking of bread
taken in the first acceptation.
Reply to Objection 2: Although the sacramental species are not
those things out of which the human body is made, yet they are
changed into those things stated above.
Reply to Objection 3: Although the sacramental species are not a
substance, still they have the virtue of a substance, as stated above.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.77, C.8.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether the sacramental species are broken in

this sacrament?
Objection 1: It seems that the sacramental species are not broken in
this sacrament, because the Philosopher says in Meteor. iv that
bodies are breakable owing to a certain disposition of the pores; a
thing which cannot be attributed to the sacramental species.
Therefore the sacramental species cannot be broken.
Objection 2: Further, breaking is followed by sound. But the
sacramental species emit no sound: because the Philosopher says
(De Anima ii), that what emits sound is a hard body, having a smooth
surface. Therefore the sacramental species are not broken.
Objection 3: Further, breaking and mastication are seemingly of the
same object. But it is Christ's true body that is eaten, according to
Jn. 6:57: "He that eateth My flesh, and drinketh My blood." Therefore
it is Christ's body that is broken and masticated: and hence it is said
in the confession of Berengarius: "I agree with the Holy Catholic
Church, and with heart and lips I profess, that the bread and wine
which are placed on the altar, are the true body and blood of Christ
after consecration, and are truly handled and broken by the priest's
hands, broken and crushed by the teeth of believers." Consequently,
the breaking ought not to be ascribed to the sacramental species.
On the contrary, Breaking arises from the division of that which has
quantity. But nothing having quantity except the sacramental
species is broken here, because neither Christ's body is broken, as
being incorruptible, nor is the substance of the bread, because it no
longer remains. Therefore the sacramental species are broken.
I answer that, Many opinions prevailed of old on this matter. Some
held that in this sacrament there was no breaking at all in reality, but
merely in the eyes of the beholders. But this contention cannot
stand, because in this sacrament of truth the sense is not deceived
with regard to its proper object of judgment, and one of these
objects is breaking, whereby from one thing arise many: and these
are common sensibles, as is stated in De Anima ii.
Others accordingly have said that there was indeed a genuine
breaking, but without any subject. But this again contradicts our