Homily 2 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts I. 6
"When they therefore had come together, they asked of Him, saying, Lord,
will You at this time restore again the kingdom to Israel?"
When the disciples intend to ask anything, they approach Him together, that
by dint of numbers they may abash Him into compliance. They well knew that in
what He had said previously, "Of that day knows no man" [Matthew 24:36], He
had merely declined telling them: therefore they again drew near, and put the
question. They would not have put it had they been truly satisfied with that
answer. For having heard that they were about to receive the Holy Ghost, they, as
being now worthy of instruction, desired to learn. Also they were quite ready for
freedom: for they had no mind to address themselves to danger; what they
wished was to breathe freely again; for they were no light matters that had
happened to them, but the utmost peril had impended over them. And without
saying any thing to Him of the Holy Ghost, they put this question: "Lord, will
You at this time restore the kingdom to Israel?" They did not ask, when? But
whether "at this time." So eager were they for that day. Indeed, to me it appears
that they had not any clear notion of the nature of that kingdom; for the Spirit
had not yet instructed them. And they do not say, When shall these things be?
But they approach Him with greater honour, saying, "Will You at this time
restore again the kingdom," as being now already fallen. For there they were still
affected towards sensible objects, seeing they were not yet become better than
those who were before them; here they have henceforth high conceptions
concerning Christ. Since then their minds are elevated, He also speaks to them in
a higher strain. For He no longer tells them, "Of that day not even the Son of
Man knows" [Mark 13:32]; but He says, It is not for you to know the times or the
seasons which the Father has put in His own power [Acts 1:7] You ask things

greater than your capacity, He would say. And yet even now they learned things
that were much greater than this. And that you may see that this is strictly the
case, look how many things I shall enumerate. What, I pray you, was greater
than their having learned what they did learn? Thus, they learned that there is a
Son of God, and that God has a Son equal with Himself in dignity [John 5:1720]; they learned that there will be a resurrection [Matthew 17:9]; that when He
ascended He sat on the right hand of God [Luke 22:69]; and what is still more
stupendous, that Flesh is seated in heaven, and adored by Angels, and that He
will come again [Mark 16:19]; they learned what is to take place in the judgment
[Matthew 16:27]; learned that they shall then sit and judge the twelve tribes of
Israel [Luke 21:27]; learned that the Jews would be cast out, and in their stead
the Gentiles should come in [Matthew 19:28]. For, tell me, which is greater? To
learn that a person will reign, or to learn the time when? [Luke 21:24]. Paul
learned "things which it is not lawful for a man to utter" [2 Corinthians 12:4];
things that were before the world was made, he learned them all. Which is the
more difficult, the beginning or the end? Clearly to learn the beginning. This,
Moses learned, and the time when, and how long ago: and he enumerates the
years. And the wise Solomon says, "I will make mention of things from the
beginning of the world." And that the time is at hand, they do know: as Paul
says, "The Lord is at hand, be careful for nothing." [Philippians 4:5]. These
things they knew not [then], and yet He mentions many signs [Matthew 24]. But,
as He has just said, "Not many days hence," wishing them to be vigilant, and did
not openly declare the precise moment, so is it here also. However, it is not about
the general Consummation that they now ask Him, but, "Will You at this time,"
say they, "restore the kingdom to Israel?" And not even this did He reveal to
them. They also asked this [about the end of the world] before: and as on that
occasion He answered by leading them away from thinking that their deliverance
was near and, on the contrary, cast them into the midst of perils, so likewise on
this occasion but more mildly. For, that they may not imagine themselves to be
wronged, and these things to be mere pretences, hear what He says: He