150. Jesus was angered by those supposed teachers who demanded much of others, teaching
God’s word but without being enlightened by it: “They bind heavy burdens, hard to bear, and lay
them on the shoulders of others; but they themselves will not lift a finger to move them” (Mt 23:4).
The apostle James exhorted: “Not many of you should become teachers, my brethren, for you
know that we who teach shall be judged with greater strictness” (Jas 3:1). Whoever wants to
preach must be the first to let the word of God move him deeply and become incarnate in his daily
life. In this way preaching will consist in that activity, so intense and fruitful, which is

“communicating to others what one has contemplated”. For all these reasons, before
preparing what we will actually say when preaching, we need to let ourselves be penetrated by
that word which will also penetrate others, for it is a living and active word, like a sword “which
pierces to the division of soul and spirit, of joints and marrow, and discerns the thoughts and
intentions of the heart” (Heb 4:12). This has great pastoral importance. Today too, people prefer to
listen to witnesses: they “thirst for authenticity” and “call for evangelizers to speak of a God whom
they themselves know and are familiar with, as if they were seeing him”.

151. We are not asked to be flawless, but to keep growing and wanting to grow as we advance
along the path of the Gospel; our arms must never grow slack. What is essential is that the
preacher be certain that God loves him, that Jesus Christ has saved him and that his love always
has the last word. Encountering such beauty, he will often feel that his life does not glorify God as
it should, and he will sincerely desire to respond more fully to so great a love. Yet if he does not
take time to hear God’s word with an open heart, if he does not allow it to touch his life, to
challenge him, to impel him, and if he does not devote time to pray with that word, then he will
indeed be a false prophet, a fraud, a shallow impostor. But by acknowledging his poverty and
desiring to grow in his commitment, he will always be able to abandon himself to Christ, saying in
the words of Peter: “I have no silver and gold, but what I have I give you” (Acts 3:6). The Lord
wants to make use of us as living, free and creative beings who let his word enter their own hearts
before then passing it on to others. Christ’s message must truly penetrate and possess the
preacher, not just intellectually but in his entire being. The Holy Spirit, who inspired the word,
“today, just as at the beginning of the Church, acts in every evangelizer who allows himself to be
possessed and led by him. The Holy Spirit places on his lips the words which he could not find by
himself”.

Spiritual reading

152. There is one particular way of listening to what the Lord wishes to tell us in his word and of
letting ourselves be transformed by the Spirit. It is what we call lectio divina. It consists of reading
God’s word in a moment of prayer and allowing it to enlighten and renew us. This prayerful
reading of the Bible is not something separate from the study undertaken by the preacher to
ascertain the central message of the text; on the contrary, it should begin with that study and then
go on to discern how that same message speaks to his own life. The spiritual reading of a text
must start with its literal sense. Otherwise we can easily make the text say what we think is
convenient, useful for confirming us in our previous decisions, suited to our own patterns of
thought. Ultimately this would be tantamount to using something sacred for our own benefit and
then passing on this confusion to God’s people. We must never forget that sometimes “even Satan
disguises himself as an angel of light” (2 Cor 11:14).