THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.78, C.3.

bread. For it was said (Article 1) that this consecration consists in
changing the substance of bread into the body of Christ. Now the
form of a sacrament ought to denote what is done in the sacrament.
Consequently the form for the consecration of the bread ought to
signify the actual conversion of the bread into the body of Christ.
And herein are three things to be considered: namely, the actual
conversion, the term "whence," and the term "whereunto."
Now the conversion can be considered in two ways: first, in
"becoming," secondly, in "being." But the conversion ought not to
be signified in this form as in "becoming," but as in "being." First,
because such conversion is not successive, as was said above
(Question 75, Article 7), but instantaneous; and in such changes the
"becoming" is nothing else than the "being." Secondly, because the
sacramental forms bear the same relation to the signification of the
sacramental effect as artificial forms to the representation of the
effect of art. Now an artificial form is the likeness of the ultimate
effect, on which the artist's intention is fixed ;. just as the art-form in
the builder's mind is principally the form of the house constructed,
and secondarily of the constructing. Accordingly, in this form also
the conversion ought to be expressed as in "being," to which the
intention is referred.
And since the conversion is expressed in this form as in "being," it
is necessary for the extremes of the conversion to be signified as
they exist in the fact of conversion. But then the term "whereunto"
has the proper nature of its own substance; whereas the term
"whence" does not remain in its own substance, but only as to the
accidents whereby it comes under the senses, and can be
determined in relation to the senses. Hence the term "whence" of the
conversion is conveniently expressed by the demonstrative
pronoun, relative to the sensible accidents which continue; but the
term "whereunto" is expressed by the noun signifying the nature of
the thing which terminates the conversion, and this is Christ's entire
body, and not merely His flesh; as was said above (Question 76,
Article 1, ad 2). Hence this form is most appropriate: "This is My
body."
Reply to Objection 1: The ultimate effect of this conversion is not a
"becoming" but a "being," as stated above, and consequently
prominence should be given to this in the form.
Reply to Objection 2: God's word operated in the creation of things,

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.78, C.3.

and it is the same which operates in this consecration, yet each in
different fashion: because here it operates effectively and
sacramentally, that is, in virtue of its signification. And consequently
the last effect of the consecration must needs be signified in this
sentence by a substantive verb of the indicative mood and present
time. But in the creation of things it worked merely effectively, and
such efficiency is due to the command of His wisdom; and therefore
in the creation of things the Lord's word is expressed by a verb in
the imperative mood, as in Gn. 1:3: "Let there be light, and light was
made."
Reply to Objection 3: The term "whence" does not retain the nature
of its substance in the "being" of the conversion, as the term
"whereunto" does. Therefore there is no parallel.
Reply to Objection 4: The pronoun "My," which implicitly points to
the chief person, i.e. the person of the speaker, sufficiently indicates
Christ's person, in Whose person these words are uttered, as stated
above (Article 1).
Reply to Objection 5: The conjunction "for" is set in this form
according to the custom of the Roman Church, who derived it from
Peter the Apostle; and this on account of the sequence with the
words preceding: and therefore it is not part of the form, just as the
words preceding the form are not.