brings upon one great evils; as, for instance, almsgiving overlooked casts into
hell them that have come short in it; and yet this is not the whole of virtue, but a
part thereof. But nevertheless both the virgins were punished for not having this,
and the rich man was for this cause tormented, and they that have not fed the
hungry, are for this condemned with the devil. Again, not to revile is a very
small part of it, nevertheless this too casts out them that have not attained to it.
"For he that says to his brother, You fool, shall be in danger of hell fire."
[Matthew 5:22] Again, even continence itself is a part, but nevertheless, without
this no one shall see the Lord. For, "Follow peace," it is said, "and holiness,
without which no man shall see the Lord." [Hebrews 12:14] And humility too in
like manner is a part of virtue; but nevertheless though any one should fulfill
other good works, but have not attained to this, he is unclean with God. And this
is manifest from the Pharisee, who though abounding with numberless good
works, by this lost all.
But I have also something more than these things to say again. I mean, that
not only one of them overlooked shuts Heaven against us, but though it be done,
yet not in due perfection and abundance, it produces the selfsame effect again.
"For unless your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, you shall not enter into the kingdom of Heaven." [Matthew 8:20] So
that though thou give alms, but not more than they, you shall not enter in.
And how much did they bestow in alms? One may ask. For this very thing,
I am minded to say now, that they who do not give may be roused to give, and
they that give may not pride themselves, but may make increase of their gifts.
What then did they give? A tenth of all their possessions, and again another
tenth, and after this a third, so that they almost gave away the third part, for
three-tenths put together make up this. And together with these, first fruits, and
first born, and other things besides, as, for instance, the offerings for sins, those
for purification, those at feasts, those in the jubilee, those by the cancelling of
debts, and the dismissals of servants, and the lendings that were clear of usury.
But if he who gave the third part of his goods, or rather the half (for those being

put together with these are the half), if then he who is giving the half, achieves
no great thing, he who does not bestow so much as the tenth, of what shall he be
worthy? With reason He said, "There are few that be saved."
5. Let us not, then, despise the care of our life. For if one portion of it
despised brings so great a destruction, when on every hand we are subject to the
sentence of condemnation, how shall we escape the punishment? And what
manner of penalty shall we not suffer? And what manner of hope of salvation
have we, one may ask, if each of the things we have numbered threatens us with
hell? I too say this; nevertheless, if we give heed we may be saved, preparing the
medicines of almsgiving, and attending to our wounds.
For oil does not so strengthen a body, as benevolence at once strengthens a
soul, and makes it invincible to all and impregnable to the devil. For
wheresoever he may seize us, his hold then slips, this oil not suffering his grasp
to fix on our back.
With this oil therefore let us anoint ourselves continually. For it is the cause
of health, and a supply of light, and a source of cheerfulness. "But such a one,"
you will say, "has talents of gold so many and so many, and gives away
nothing." And what is that to you? For thus shall you appear more worthy of
admiration, when in poverty you are more munificent than he. It was on this
ground Paul marvelled at the Macedonians, not because they gave, but because
even though they were in poverty they gave.
Look not then at these, but at the common Teacher of all, who "had not
where to lay His head." [Matthew 8:20] And why, you say, does not this and that
person do so? Do not judge another, but deliver yourself from the charge against
you. Since the punishment is greater when thou at the same time blamest others,
and yourself doest not, when judging other men, you are again yourself also
subject to the same judgment. For if even them who do right He permits not to
judge others, much more will He not permit offenders. Let us not therefore judge
others, neither let us look to others who are taking their ease, but unto Jesus, and
from thence let us draw our examples.