THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.84, C.4.

lame man: "What I have, I give thee: In the name of Jesus Christ of
Nazareth, arise and walk."
Reply to Objection 5: It is true in a sense that the words, "I absolve
thee" mean "I declare thee absolved," but this explanation is
incomplete. Because the sacraments of the New Law not only
signify, but effect what they signify. Wherefore, just as the priest in
baptizing anyone, declares by deed and word that the person is
washed inwardly, and this not only significatively but also
effectively, so also when he says: "I absolve thee," he declares the
man to be absolved not only significatively but also effectively. And
yet he does not speak as of something uncertain, because just as
the other sacraments of the New Law have, of themselves, a sure
effect through the power of Christ's Passion, which effect,
nevertheless, may be impeded on the part of the recipient, so is it
with this sacrament. Hence Augustine says (De Adult. Conjug. ii):
"There is nothing disgraceful or onerous in the reconciliation of
husband and wife, when adultery committed has been washed away,
since there is no doubt that remission of sins is granted through the
keys of the kingdom of heaven." Consequently there is no need for a
special revelation to be made to the priest, but the general revelation
of faith suffices, through which sins are forgiven. Hence the
revelation of faith is said to have been made to Peter.
It would be a more complete explanation to say that the words, "I
absolve thee" mean: "I grant thee the sacrament of absolution."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.84, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the imposition of the priest's hands is

necessary for this sacrament?
Objection 1: It would seem that the imposition of the priest's hands
is necessary for this sacrament. For it is written (Mk. 16:18): "They
shall lay hands upon the sick, and they shall recover." Now sinners
are sick spiritually, and obtain recovery through this sacrament.
Therefore an imposition of hands should be made in this sacrament.
Objection 2: Further, in this sacrament man regains the Holy Ghost
Whom he had lost, wherefore it is said in the person of the penitent
(Ps. 1:14): "Restore unto me the joy of Thy salvation, and strengthen
me with a perfect spirit." Now the Holy Ghost is given by the
imposition of hands; for we read (Acts 8:17) that the apostles "laid
their hands upon them, and they received the Holy Ghost"; and (Mt.
19:13) that "little children were presented" to our Lord, "that He
should impose hands upon them." Therefore an imposition of hands
should be made in this sacrament.
Objection 3: Further, the priest's words are not more efficacious in
this than in the other sacraments. But in the other sacraments the
words of the minister do not suffice, unless he perform some action:
thus, in Baptism, the priest while saying: "I baptize thee," has to
perform a bodily washing. Therefore, also while saying: "I absolve
thee," the priest should perform some action in regard to the
penitent, by laying hands on him.
On the contrary, When our Lord said to Peter (Mt. 16:19):
"Whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth," etc., He made no mention of
an imposition of hands; nor did He when He said to all the apostles
(Jn. 20:13): "Whose sins you shall forgive, they are forgiven them."
Therefore no imposition of hands is required for this sacrament.
I answer that, In the sacraments of the Church the imposition of
hands is made, to signify some abundant effect of grace, through
those on whom the hands are laid being, as it were, united to the
ministers in whom grace should be plentiful. Wherefore an
imposition of hands is made in the sacrament of Confirmation,
wherein the fulness of the Holy Ghost is conferred; and in the
sacrament of order, wherein is bestowed a certain excellence of
power over the Divine mysteries; hence it is written (2 Tim. 1:6): "Stir