SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.184, C.8.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether bishops sin mortally if they distribute not

to the poor the ecclesiastical goods which accrue to them?
Objection 1: It would seem that bishops sin mortally if they distribute
not to the poor the ecclesiastical goods which they acquire. For
Ambrose [Basil, Serm. lxiv, de Temp.] expounding Lk. 12:16, "The
land of a certain . . . man brought forth plenty of fruits," says: "Let no
man claim as his own that which he has taken and obtained by
violence from the common property in excess of his requirements";
and afterwards he adds: "It is not less criminal to take from him who
has, than, when you are able and have plenty to refuse him who has
not." Now it is a mortal sin to take another's property by violence.
Therefore bishops sin mortally if they give not to the poor that which
they have in excess.
Objection 2: Further, a gloss of Jerome on Is. 3:14, "The spoil of the
poor is in your house," says that "ecclesiastical goods belong to the
poor." Now whoever keeps for himself or gives to others that which
belongs to another, sins mortally and is bound to restitution.
Therefore if bishops keep for themselves, or give to their relations or
friends, their surplus of ecclesiastical goods, it would seem that they
are bound to restitution.
Objection 3: Further, much more may one take what is necessary for
oneself from the goods of the Church, than accumulate a surplus
therefrom. Yet Jerome says in a letter to Pope Damasus [Can.
Clericos, cause. i, qu. 2; Can. Quoniam; cause. xvi, qu. 1; Regul.
Monach. iv, among the supposititious works of St. Jerome]: "It is
right that those clerics who receive no goods from their parents and
relations should be supported from the funds of the Church. But
those who have sufficient income from their parents and their own
possessions, if they take what belongs to the poor, they commit and
incur the guilt of sacrilege." Wherefore the Apostle says (1 Tim.
5:16): "If any of the faithful have widows, let him minister to them,
and let not the Church be charged, that there may be sufficient for
them that are widows indeed." Much more therefore do bishops sin
mortally if they give not to the poor the surplus of their ecclesiastical
goods.
On the contrary, Many bishops do not give their surplus to the poor,
but would seem commendably to lay it out so as to increase the

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.184, C.8.

revenue of the Church.
I answer that, The same is not to be said of their own goods which
bishops may possess, and of ecclesiastical goods. For they have
real dominion over their own goods; wherefore from the very nature
of the case they are not bound to give these things to others, and
may either keep them for themselves or bestow them on others at
will. Nevertheless they may sin in this disposal by inordinate
affection, which leads them either to accumulate more than they
should, or not to assist others, in accordance with the demands of
charity; yet they are not bound to restitution, because such things
are entrusted to their ownership.
On the other hand, they hold ecclesiastical goods as dispensers or
trustees. For Augustine says (Ep. clxxxv ad Bonif.): "If we possess
privately what is enough for us, other things belong not to us but to
the poor, and we have the dispensing of them; but we can claim
ownership of them only by wicked theft." Now dispensing requires
good faith, according to 1 Cor. 4:2, "Here now it is required among
the dispensers that a man be found faithful." Moreover ecclesiastical
goods are to be applied not only to the good of the poor, but also to
the divine worship and the needs of its ministers. Hence it is said
(XII, qu. ii, can. de reditibus): "Of the Church's revenues or the
offerings of the faithful only one part is to be assigned to the bishop,
two parts are to be used by the priest, under pain of suspension, for
the ecclesiastical fabric, and for the benefit of the poor; the
remaining part is to be divided among the clergy according to their
respective merits." Accordingly if the goods which are assigned to
the use of the bishop are distinct from those which are appointed for
the use of the poor, or the ministers, or for the ecclesiastical
worship, and if the bishop keeps back for himself part of that which
should be given to the poor, or to the ministers for their use, or
expended on the divine worship, without doubt he is an unfaithful
dispenser, sins mortally, and is bound to restitution.
But as regards those goods which are deputed to his private use, the
same apparently applies as to his own property, namely that he sins
through immoderate attachment thereto or use thereof, if he exceeds
moderation in what he keeps for himself, and fails to assist others
according to the demands of charity.
On the other hand, if no distinction is made in the aforesaid goods,
their distribution is entrusted to his good faith; and if he fail or