THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.80, C.9.

obstacle, which arises from a sense of decency, can be set aside
owing to any necessity, as Gregory says (Regist. xi): "As when
perchance either a festival day calls for it, or necessity compels one
to exercise the ministry because there is no other priest at hand."
Reply to Objection 1: A person is hindered necessarily, only by
mortal sin, from receiving this sacrament: but from a sense of
decency one may be hindered through other causes, as stated
above.
Reply to Objection 2: Conjugal intercourse, if it be without sin, (for
instance, if it be done for the sake of begetting offspring, or of
paying the marriage debt), does not prevent the receiving of this
sacrament for any other reason than do those movements in
question which happen without sin, as stated above; namely, on
account of the defilement to the body and distraction to the mind. On
this account Jerome expresses himself in the following terms in his
commentary on Matthew (Epist. xxviii, among St. Jerome's works):
"If the loaves of Proposition might not be eaten by them who had
known their wives carnally, how much less may this bread which has
come down from heaven be defiled and touched by them who shortly
before have been in conjugal embraces? It is not that we condemn
marriages, but that at the time when we are going to eat the flesh of
the Lamb, we ought not to indulge in carnal acts." But since this is to
be understood in the sense of decency, and not of necessity,
Gregory says that such a person "is to be left to his own judgment."
"But if," as Gregory says (Regist. xi), "it be not desire of begetting
offspring, but lust that prevails," then such a one should be
forbidden to approach this sacrament.
Reply to Objection 3: As Gregory says in his Letter quoted above to
Augustine, Bishop of the English, in the Old Testament some
persons were termed polluted figuratively, which the people of the
New Law understand spiritually. Hence such bodily uncleannesses,
if perpetual or of long standing, do not hinder the receiving of this
saving sacrament, as they prevented approaching those figurative
sacraments; but if they pass speedily, like the uncleanness of the
aforesaid movements, then from a sense of fittingness they hinder
the receiving of this sacrament during the day on which it happens.
Hence it is written (Dt. 23:10): "If there be among you any man, that
is defiled in a dream by night, he shall go forth out of the camp; and
he shall not return before he be washed with water in the evening."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.80, C.9.

Reply to Objection 4: Although the stain of guilt be taken away by
contrition and confession nevertheless the bodily defilement is not
taken away, nor the mental distraction which follows therefrom.
Reply to Objection 5: To dream of homicide brings no bodily
uncleanness, nor such distraction of mind as fornication, on account
of its intense delectation; still if the dream of homicide comes of a
cause sinful in itself, especially if it be mortal sin, then owing to its
cause it hinders the receiving of this sacrament.