Arg. 6. Thing and being are convertible terms. But evil is in the world. Therefore it is
some thing and nature.
Reply. Evil is said `to be' in the world, not as having any essence, or existing as a thing,
but in the way in which a thing `is' evil precisely by evil, as blindness, an in the way in
which any privation is said `to be,' inasmuch as an animal `is' blind by blindness. For
there are two senses of `being': in one sense it means the essence of a thing, and is
divided into the ten predicaments; and in this sense no privation can be called a
being: in another sense, it signifies the truth of an affirmative proposition (veritatem
compositionis); and thus evil and privation is said to be a being, inasmuch as a thing is
said to `be' thereby under a privation.

## CHAPTER X--That the Cause of Evil is good
WHAT is not, is cause of nothing: every cause must be some being. But evil is not any
being (Chapp.VII,IX): therefore evil cannot be the cause of anything. If then
evil is caused by anything, what causes it must be good.
4. Every cause is either material, formal, efficient, or final. But evil can be neither matter
nor form: for it has been shown (Chapp.VII,IX) that both actual being and
potential being is good. In like manner evil cannot be an efficient cause, since
everything acts according as it is actually and has a form. Nor can it be a final cause,
since it is beside the intention (Chap.IV). Evil therefore cannot be the cause of
anything; and therefore, if there be any cause of evil, it must be caused by good.
But since good and evil are opposites, and one opposite cannot be cause of another
except accidentally, it follows that good cannot be the active cause of evil except
accidentally. In physics, this accident may happen either on the part of the agent or on
the part of the effect. On the part of the agent, when the agent suffers from a lack of
power, whence it follows that the action is defective and the effect deficient. But to an
agent, as such, it is quite an accident to suffer from a lack of power: for an agent does
not act inasmuch as power is lacking to him, but according as he has anything of power.
Thus then evil is caused accidentally on the part of the agent, inasmuch as the agent
runs short of power: therefore it is said that evil has not got an efficient cause, but a
deficient cause, because evil does not follow from an efficient cause except in so far as
it is deficient in power, and in this respect is is not efficient. It comes to the same thing if
the defect of the action and effect arises from some defect of the instrument, or of any
other thing requisite for the agent's action, as when motive power produces halting
through crookedness of the shin-bone: for the agent acts by both the power and the
instrument. On the part of the effect evil is caused accidentally as well in respect of the
matter of the effect as also in respect of its form. For if the matter is indisposed to
receive the impression of the agent, some defect must follow in the effect. Nor is it
imputable to any defect of the agent, that it does not transmute an indisposed matter to
a perfect act: for the power of every natural agent is determined according to the limit of
its nature; and its failure to transcend that cannot be brought in against it as a defect in
power: such defect can then only be argued when it falls short of the measure of power
due to it by nature. On the part of the form of the effect evil is accidentally incident,
inasmuch as one form necessarily involves the privation of another form, and with the
production of one thing there must needs ensue the destruction of another. But this evil
does not belong to the effect intended by the agent, but attaches to something else. In
the processes of nature therefore evil is caused by good only accidentally. The same is
the case also in the processes of art: for art in its operation imitates nature, and is at
fault in the same way as nature.
But in moral matters the case seems to be different. For a flaw in morals does not follow
from any lack of power, seeing that weakness either entirely removes, or at least
diminishes, moral reprehensibleness: for weakness does not deserve the punishment
which is due to fault, but rather compassion and indulgence: to be blameworthy, a point