minded soul: but like as a little spark, if you cast it into a mighty deep, thou
presently puttest it out, so does even a total and excessive sorrow if it light on a
good conscience easily die away and disappear.
Such then was the spring of Paul's continual joy: because in whatever was
of God he was full of hope; and did not so much as take count of ills so great,
but though he grieved as a man yet sank not. So too was that Patriarch
encompassed with joy in the midst of much painful suffering; for consider, he
forsook his country, underwent journeyings long and hard; when he came into a
strange land, had "not so much as to set his foot on." [Acts 7:5] Then again a
famine awaited him which made him once more a wanderer; after the famine
again came the seizure of his wife, then the fear of death, and childlessness, and
battle, and peril, and conspiracies, and at the last that crowning trial, the slaying
of his only-begotten and true son, that grievous irreparable [sacrifice.] For think
not, I pray you, that because he readily obeyed, he felt not all the things he
underwent. For though his righteousness had been, as indeed it was, inestimable
, yet was he a man and felt as nature bade. But yet did none of these things cast
him down, but he stood like a noble athlete, and for each one was proclaimed
and crowned a victor. So also the blessed Paul, though seeing trials in very
snow-showers assailing him daily, rejoiced and exulted as though in the middelights of Paradise. As then he who is gladdened with this joy cannot be a prey
to despair; so he who makes not this his own is easily overcome of all; and is as
one that has unsound armor, and is wounded by even a common stroke: but not
so he who is well encased at all points, and proof against every shaft that comes
upon him. And truly stouter than any armor is joy in God; and whoso has it,
nothing can ever make his head droop or his countenance sad, but he bears all
things nobly. For what is worse to bear than fire? What more painful than
continual torture? truly it is more overpowering in pain than the loss of untold
wealth, of children, of any thing; for, says he, "Skin for skin, yea, all that a man
has will he give for his life." [Job 2:4] So nothing can be harder to bear than
bodily pain; nevertheless, because of this joy in God, what even to hear of is

intolerable, becomes both tolerable and longed for: and if you take from the
cross or from the gridiron the martyr yet just breathing, you will find such a
treasure of joy within him as admits not of being told.
6. And does any one say, What am I to do ; for now is no time of
martyrdom? What do you say? Is now no time of martyrdom? Never is it not a
time; but ever is it before our eyes; if we will keep them open. For it is not the
hanging on a cross only that makes a Martyr, for were this so, then was Job
excluded from this crown; for he neither stood at bar, nor heard Judge's voice,
nor looked on executioner; no, nor while hanging on tree aloft had his sides
mangled; yet he suffered worse than many martyrs; more sharply than any stroke
did the tale of those successive messengers strike, and goad him on every side:
and keener the gnawings of the worms which devoured him in every part than
thousand executioners.
Against what martyr then may he not worthily be set? Surely against ten
thousand. For in every kind [of suffering] he both wrestled and was crowned; in
goods, and children, and person, and wife, and friends, and enemies, and
servants, (for these too even did spit in his face,) in hunger and visions and pains
and noisomeness; it was for this I said he might worthily be set, not against one
nor two nor three, but against ten thousand Martyrs. For besides what I have
mentioned, the time also makes a great addition to his crown; in that it was
before the Law, before Grace, he thus suffered, and that, many months, and each
in its worst form; and all these evils assailed him at once. And yet each
individual evil by itself intolerable, even that which seems most tolerable, the
loss of his goods. For many have patiently borne stripes, but could not bear the
loss of their goods; but rather than relinquish any part of them were content even
to be scourged for their sake and suffer countless ills; and this blow, the loss of
goods, appeared to them heavier than all. So then here is another method of
martyrdom for one who bears this loss nobly. And does any ask, How shall we
bear it nobly? When you have learned that by one word of thanksgiving you
shall gain more than all you have lost. For if at the tidings of our loss we be not