"It was night," says the Evangelist, when he went out. "Why tellest thou me
the time?" That you may learn his forwardness, that not even the time restrained
him from his purpose. Yet not even did this make him quite manifest, for the
others were at this time in confusion, occupied by fear and great distress, and
they knew not the true reason of what had been said but supposed that He spoke
thus, in order that Judas might give somewhat to the poor. For He cared greatly
for the poor, teaching us also to bestow much diligence on this thing. But they
thought this, not without a cause, but "because he had the bag." Yet no one
appears to have brought money to Him; that the female disciples nourished Him
of their substance, it has said, but this it has nowhere intimated. [Luke 8:3] But
how did He who bade His disciples bear neither scrip, nor money, nor staff,
Himself bear a bag to minister to the poor? That you may learn, that it behooves
even him who is exceedingly needy and crucified, to be very careful on this
point. For many things He did in the way of dispensation for our instruction. The
disciples then thought that He said this, that Judas should give something to the
poor; and not even this shamed him, His not being willing even to the last day to
make him a public example. We too ought to do the like, and not parade the sins
of our companions, though they be incurable. For even after this He gave a kiss
to the man who came to betray Him, and endured, such an action as that was,
and then proceeded to a thing of far greater daring, the Cross itself, to the death
of shame, and there again He manifested His lovingkindness. And here He calls
it "glory," showing us that there is nothing so shameful and reproachful which
makes not brighter him who goes to it, if it be done according to the will of God.
At least after the going forth of Judas to the betraying, He says,

John 13:31
"Now is the Son of Man glorified."
In this way rousing the dejected thoughts of the disciples, and persuading
them not only not to despond, but even to rejoice. On this account He rebuked
Peter at the first, because for one who has been in death to overcome death, is
great glory. And this is what He said of Himself, "When I am lifted up, then you
shall know that I Am" [John 8:28]; and again, "Destroy this Temple" [John 2:19];
and again, "No sign shall be given unto you but the sign of Jonas." [Matthew
12:39] For how can it be otherwise than great glory, the being able even after
death to do greater things than before death? For in order that the Resurrection
might be believed, the disciples did work greater things. But unless He had lived,
and had been God, how could these men have wrought such things in His Name?
Ver. 32 . "And God shall glorify Him."
What is, "And God shall glorify Him in Himself"? It is "by means of
Himself, not by means of another."
"And shall straightway glorify Him."
4. That is, "simultaneously with the Cross." "For it will not be after much
time," He says, "nor will He wait for the distant season of the Resurrection, nor
will He then show Him glorious, but straightway on the Cross itself His glories
shall appear." And so the sun was darkened, the rocks rent; the veil of the temple
was parted asunder, many bodies of saints that slept arose, the tomb had its seals,
the guards sat by, and while a stone lay over the Body the Body rose; forty days
passed by, and the Gift of the Spirit came, and they all straightway preached
Him. This is, "shall glorify Him in Himself, and shall straightway glorify Him";
not by Angels or Archangels, not by any other power, but by Himself. But how
did He also glorify Him by Himself? By doing all for the glory of the Son. Yet
the Son did all. Do you see that He referrs to the Father the things done by
Himself?