wisdom of God was made known to the principalities and powers in
the heavenly places---that is, through the Church." As though he
were to say: This mystery was hidden from men, but not from the
Church in heaven, which is contained in the principalities and
powers who knew it "from all ages, but not before all ages: because
the Church was at first there, where after the resurrection this
Church composed of men will be gathered together."
It can also be explained otherwise that "what is hidden, is known by
the angels, not only in God, but also here where when it takes place
and is made public," as Augustine says further on (Gen. ad lit. v, 19).
Thus when the mysteries of Christ and the Church were fulfilled by
the apostles, some things concerning these mysteries became
apparent to the angels, which were hidden from them before. In this
way we can understand what Jerome says (Comment. in Ep. ad
Eph.)---that from the preaching of the apostles the angels learned
certain mysteries; that is to say, through the preaching of the
apostles, the mysteries were realized in the things themselves: thus
by the preaching of Paul the Gentiles were converted, of which
mystery the Apostle is speaking in the passage quoted.
Reply to Objection 2: The apostles were instructed immediately by
the Word of God, not according to His Divinity, but according as He
spoke in His human nature. Hence the argument does not prove.
Reply to Objection 3: Certain men in this state of life are greater than
certain angels, not actually, but virtually; forasmuch as they have
such great charity that they can merit a higher degree of beatitude
than that possessed by certain angels. In the same way we might say
that the seed of a great tree is virtually greater than a small tree,
though actually it is much smaller.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether man by the power of his soul can change

corporeal matter?
Objection 1: It would seem that man by the power of his soul can
change corporeal matter. For Gregory says (Dialog. ii, 30): "Saints
work miracles sometimes by prayer, sometimes by their power: thus
Peter, by prayer, raised the dead Tabitha to life, and by his reproof
delivered to death the lying Ananias and Saphira." But in the working
of miracles a change is wrought in corporeal matter. Therefore men,
by the power of the soul, can change corporeal matter.
Objection 2: Further, on these words (Gal. 3:1): "Who hath bewitched
you, that you should not obey the truth?" the gloss says that "some
have blazing eyes, who by a single look bewitch others, especially
children." But this would not be unless the power of the soul could
change corporeal matter. Therefore man can change corporeal
matter by the power of his soul.
Objection 3: Further, the human body is nobler than other inferior
bodies. But by the apprehension of the human soul the human body
is changed to heat and cold, as appears when a man is angry or
afraid: indeed this change sometimes goes so far as to bring on
sickness and death. Much more, then, can the human soul by its
power change corporeal matter.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Trin. iii, 8): "Corporeal matter
obeys God alone at will."
I answer that, As stated above (Question 110, Article 2), corporeal
matter is not changed to (the reception of) a form save either by
some agent composed of matter and form, or by God Himself, in
whom both matter and form pre-exist virtually, as in the primordial
cause of both. Wherefore of the angels also we have stated
(Question 110, Article 2) that they cannot change corporeal matter by
their natural power, except by employing corporeal agents for the
production of certain effects. Much less therefore can the soul, by its
natural power, change corporeal matter, except by means of bodies.
Reply to Objection 1: The saints are said to work miracles by the
power of grace, not of nature. This is clear from what Gregory says
in the same place: "Those who are sons of God, in power, as John