justly finds fault, saying, "Why, of what ingratitude have you convicted me?
What poverty do you know to be in me, that you hasten by me, and resortest unto
others? Have you lent to One, and do you demand the debt of another?"
For although man received it, it was God that commanded you to bestow;
and His will is to be Himself, and in the original sense, debtor, and surety,
affording you ten thousand occasion to demand the debt of Him from every
quarter. Do not then let go so great facility and abundance, and seek to receive of
me who have nothing. Why, to what end do you display to me your mercy
shown to the poor. What! Was it I that said to you, Give? Was it from me that
you heard this; that you should demand it back of me? He Himself has said, "He
that has pity upon the poor lends to God." [Proverbs 19:17] You have lent to
God: put it to His account.
"But He does not repay the whole now." Well, this too He does for your
good. For such a debtor is He: not as many, who are anxious simply to repay that
which is lent; whereas He manages and does all things, with a view of investing
likewise in security that which has been given unto Him. Therefore some, you
see, He repays here: some He assigns in the other place.
14. Knowing therefore as we do these things, let us make our mercifulness
abundant, let us give proof of much love to man, both by the use of our money,
and by our actions. And if we see any one ill-treated and beaten in the marketplace, whether we can pay down money, let us do it: or whether by words we
may separate them, let us not be backward. For even a word has its re ward, and
still more have sighs. And this the blessed Job said; "But I wept for every
helpless one, and I sighed when I saw a man in distress." [Job 30:25] But if there
be a reward for tears and sighs; when words also, and an anxious endeavor, and
many things besides are added, consider how great the recompence becomes.
Yea, for we too were enemies to God, and the Only-begotten reconciled us,
casting himself between, and for us receiving stripes, and for us enduring death.
Let us then likewise do our diligence to deliver from countless evils such as
are incurring them; and not as we now do, when we see any beating and tearing

one another: we are apt to stand by, finding pleasure in the disgrace of others,
and forming a devilish amphitheatre around: than which what can be more cruel?
You see men reviled, tearing each other to pieces, rending their clothes, smiting
each other's faces, and do you endure to stand by quietly?
What! Is it a bear that is fighting? A wild beast? A serpent? It is a man, one
who has in every respect fellowship with you: a brother, a member.
[Ephesians 4:25] Look not on, but separate them. Take no pleasure, but amend
the evil. Stir not up others to the shameful sight, but rather drive off and separate
those who are assembled. It is for shameless persons, and born slaves, to take
pleasure in such calamities; for those that are mere refuse, for asses without
reason.
You see a man behaving himself unseemly, and do you not account the
unseemliness your own? Do you not interpose, and scatter the devil's troop, and
put an end to men's miseries?
"That I may receive blows myself," says one; "is this also your bidding?"
You will not have to suffer even this; but if you should, the thing would be to
you a sort of martyrdom; for you suffered on God's behalf. And if you are slow
to receive blows, consider that your Lord was not slow to endure the cross for
you.
Since they for their part are drunken in darkness; wrath being their tyrant
and commander; and they need some one who is sound to help them, both the
wrong-doer, and he who is injured; the one that he may be delivered from
suffering evil, the other that he may cease to do it. Draw near, therefore, and
stretch forth the hand, you that are sober to him that is drunken. For there is a
drunkenness of wrath too, and that more grievous than the drunkenness of wine.
Do you see not the seamen, how, when they see any meeting with
shipwreck, they spread their sails, and set out with all haste, to rescue those of
the same craft out of the waves? Now, if partakers in an art show so much care
one for another, how much more ought they who are partakers of the same
nature to do all these things! Because in truth here too is a shipwreck, a more