the limit and measure of all the forms at which he gazes in his thought.
For no one can conceive at all, either a color or a form of body, which he
never saw, or a sound which he never heard, or a flavor which he never
tasted, or a scent which he never smelt, or any touch of a corporeal thing
which he never felt. But if no one conceives anything corporeal except
what he has  perceived, because no one remembers anything
corporeal except what he has thus perceived, then, as is the limit of
perceiving in bodies, so is the limit of thinking in the memory. For the
sense receives the species from that body which we perceive, and the
memory from the sense; but the mental eye of the concipient, from the
memory.
15. Further, as the will applies the sense to the bodily object, so it applies
the memory to the sense, and the eye of the mind of the concipient to the
memory. But that which harmonizes those things and unites them, itself
also disjoins and separates them, that is, the will. But it separates the
bodily senses from the bodies that are to be perceived, by movement of
the body, either to hinder our perceiving the thing, or that we may cease
to perceive it: as when we avert our eyes from that which we are unwilling
to see, or shut them; so, again, the ears from sounds, or the nostrils from
smells. So also we turn away from tastes, either by shutting the mouth, or
by casting the thing out of the mouth. In touch, also, we either remove the
bodily thing, that we may not touch what we do not wish, or if we were
already touching it, we fling or push it away. Thus the will acts by
movement of the body, so that the bodily sense shall not be joined to the
sensible things. And it does this according to its power; for when it
endures hardship in so doing, on account of the condition of slavish
mortality, then torment is the result, in such wise that nothing remains to
the will save endurance. But the will averts the memory from the sense;
when, through its being intent on something else, it does not suffer things
present to cleave to it. As any one may see, when often we do not seem to
ourselves to have heard some one who was speaking to us, because we
were thinking of something else. But this is a mistake; for we did hear,
but we do not remember, because the words of the speaker presently
slipped out of the perception of our ears, through the bidding of the will
being diverted elsewhere, by which they are usually fixed in the memory.
Therefore, we should say more accurately in such a case, we do not

remember, than, we did not hear; for it happens even in reading, and to
myself very frequently, that when I have read through a page or an
epistle, I do not know what I have read, and I begin it again. For the
purpose of the will being fixed on something else, the memory was not so
applied to the bodily sense, as the sense itself was applied to the letters.
So, too, any one who walks with the will intent on something else, does
not know where he has got to; for if he had not seen, he would not have
walked thither, or would have felt his way in walking with greater
attention, especially if he was passing through a place he did not know;
yet, because he walked easily, certainly he saw; but because the memory
was not applied to the sense itself in the same way as the sense of the eyes
was applied to the places through which he was passing, he could not
remember at all even the last thing he saw. Now, to will to turn away the
eye of the mind from that which is in the memory, is nothing else but not
to think thereupon.