less grating, he says,
Ver. 19. "For your obedience has come abroad unto all men."
This he does, not to leave them free to be shameless, but to win them
beforehand with encomiums, and the number of his witnesses, to arrest their
attention. For neither is it I alone that am the witness, but the whole world. And
he does not say for your understanding, but, "your obedience:" that is, their
compliance, which was evidence of much meekness in them. "I am glad
therefore on your behalf." And this is no small encomium too. Then, after the
praise, admonition. For lest, after liberating them from any charges against them,
he should make them the more listless, as not being observed; he gives them
another hint in the words,
"I would have you wise unto that which is good, and simple concerning
evil."
You see then how he attacks them again, and that without their suspecting
it. For this looks like intimating that some of them were apt to be led astray.
Ver. 20. "And the God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly."
For since he had spoken of those who "caused divisions and offenses
among them," he has mentioned "the God of peace" also, that they might feel
hopeful about the riddance of these evils. For he that rejoices in this (i.e., peace)
will put an end to that which makes havoc of it. And he does not say, will
subject, but "will bruise" [Genesis 3:19], which is a stronger expression. And not
those people only, but also him who was the general over them herein, Satan.
And not "will bruise" merely, but "under your feet," so that they may obtain the
victory themselves, and become noble by the trophy. And the time again is made
a ground of comfort. For he adds, "shortly." And this was prayer and prophecy
as well at once. "The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you."
That greatest weapon; that impregnable wall; that tower unshaken! For he
reminds them of the grace, that he may give them the more alacrity. Because if
you have been freed from the ills more grievous by far, and freed by grace only,
much more will you be freed from the lesser, now you have become friends too,

and contribute your own share likewise. You see how he neither puts prayer
without works, nor works without prayer. For after giving them credit for their
obedience, than he prays; to show that we need both, our own part as well as
God's part, if we are to be duly saved. For it was not before only, but now too,
even though we be great and in high esteem, we need grace from Him.
Ver. 21. "Timotheus my work-fellow salutes you."
Observe the customary encomiums again. "And Lucius, and Jason, and
Sosipater my kinsmen."
This Jason Luke also mentions, and sets before us his manliness also, when
he says, that "they drew" him "to the rulers of the city, crying," etc. [Acts 17:5]
And it is likely that the others too were men of note. For he does not mention
relations barely, unless they were also like him in religiousness.
Ver. 22. "I Tertius, who wrote this Epistle, salute you."
This too is no small encomium, to be Paul's amanuensis. Still it is not to
pass encomiums on himself that he says this, but that he might attach a warm
love to him on their part, for this ministration.
Ver. 23. "Gaius mine host ([ξένος]), and of the whole Church, salutes you."
See what a crown he has framed for him by bearing witness to such great
hospitality in him, and brought in the entire Church into this man's house! For by
the word [ξένον], used here, he means a host, not a guest. But when you hear
that he was Paul's host, do not admire him for his munificence only, but also for
his strictness of life. For except he were worthy of Paul's excellency, he would
never have lodged there, since he, who took pains to go beyond many of Christ's
commands, would never have trespassed against that law, which bids us be very
particular about who receive us, and about lodging with "worthy" persons.
[Matthew 10:11] "Erastus, the chamberlain of the city, salutes you, and Quartus
a brother." There is a purpose in his adding "the chamberlain of the city," for as
he wrote to the Philippians, "They of Cæsar's household salute you" [Philippians
4:22], that he might show that the Gospel had taken a hold upon great folk, so
here too he mentions the title with a view to the same object, and to show that, to