THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.72, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether chrism is a fitting matter for this

sacrament?
Objection 1: It seems that chrism is not a fitting matter for this
sacrament. For this sacrament, as stated above (Article 1, ad 1), was
instituted by Christ when He promised His disciples the Holy Ghost.
But He sent them the Holy Ghost without their being anointed with
chrism. Moreover, the apostles themselves bestowed this sacrament
without chrism, by the mere imposition of hands: for it is written
(Acts 8:17) that the apostles "laid their hands upon" those who were
baptized, "and they received the Holy Ghost." Therefore chrism is
not the matter of this sacrament: since the matter is essential to the
sacrament.
Objection 2: Further, Confirmation perfects, in a way, the sacrament
of Baptism, as stated above (Question 65, Articles 3,4): and so it
ought to be conformed to it as perfection to the thing perfected. But
the matter, in Baptism, is a simple element, viz. water. Therefore
chrism, which is made of oil and balm, is not a fitting matter for this
sacrament.
Objection 3: Further, oil is used as the matter of this sacrament for
the purpose of anointing. But any oil will do for anointing: for
instance, oil made from nuts, and from anything else. Therefore not
only olive oil should be used for this sacrament.
Objection 4: Further, it has been stated above (Question 66, Article 3)
that water is used as the matter of Baptism, because it is easily
procured everywhere. But olive oil is not to be procured everywhere;
and much less is balm. Therefore chrism, which is made of these, is
not a fitting matter for this sacrament.
On the contrary, Gregory says (Registr. iv): "Let no priest dare to
sign the baptized infants on the brow with the sacred chrism."
Therefore chrism is the matter of this sacrament.
I answer that, Chrism is the fitting matter of this sacrament. For, as
stated above (Article 1), in this sacrament the fulness of the Holy
Ghost is given for the spiritual strength which belongs to the perfect
age. Now when man comes to perfect age he begins at once to have
intercourse with others; whereas until then he lives an individual life,

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.72, C.3.

as it were, confined to himself. Now the grace of the Holy Ghost is
signified by oil; hence Christ is said to be "anointed with the oil of
gladness" (Ps. 44:8), by reason of His being gifted with the fulness of
the Holy Ghost. Consequently oil is a suitable matter of this
sacrament. And balm is mixed with the oil, by reason of its fragrant
odor, which spreads about: hence the Apostle says (2 Cor. 2:15):
"We are the good odor of Christ," etc. And though many other things
be fragrant, yet preference is given to balm, because it has a special
odor of its own, and because it confers incorruptibility: hence it is
written (Ecclus. 24:21): "My odor is as the purest balm."
Reply to Objection 1: Christ, by the power which He exercises in the
sacraments, bestowed on the apostles the reality of this sacrament, i.
e. the fulness of the Holy Ghost, without the sacrament itself,
because they had received "the first fruits of the Spirit" (Rm. 8:23).
Nevertheless, something of keeping with the matter of this
sacrament was displayed to the apostles in a sensible manner when
they received the Holy Ghost. For that the Holy Ghost came down
upon them in a sensible manner under the form of fire, refers to the
same signification as oil: except in so far as fire has an active power,
while oil has a passive power, as being the matter and incentive of
fire. And this was quite fitting: for it was through the apostles that
the grace of the Holy Ghost was to flow forth to others. Again, the
Holy Ghost came down on the apostles in the shape of a tongue.
Which refers to the same signification as balm: except in so far as
the tongue communicates with others by speech, but balm, by its
odor. because, to wit, the apostles were filled with the Holy Ghost, as
teachers of the Faith; but the rest of the believers, as doing that
which gives edification to the faithful.
In like manner, too, when the apostles imposed their hands, and
when they preached, the fulness of the Holy Ghost came down under
visible signs on the faithful, just as, at the beginning, He came down
on the apostles: hence Peter said (Acts 11:15): "When I had begun to
speak, the Holy Ghost fell upon them, as upon us also in the
beginning." Consequently there was no need for sacramental
sensible matter, where God sent sensible signs miraculously.
However, the apostles commonly made use of chrism in bestowing
the sacrament, when such like visible signs were lacking. For
Dionysius says (Eccl. Hier. iv): "There is a certain perfecting
operation which our guides," i.e. the apostles, "call the sacrifice of
Chrism."