When He was silent, Pilate says,

John 19:10
"Do you not know that I have power to crucify you?"
Do you see how he condemned himself beforehand; for, "if the whole rests
with you, why dost not thou let Him go, when you have found no fault in Him?"
When then Pilate had uttered the sentence against himself, then He says,

John 19:11
"He that delivered Me unto you has the greater sin."
Showing that he also was guilty of sin. Then, to pull down his pride and
arrogance, He says,
"You would have no power except it were given you."
Showing that this did not come to pass merely in the common order of
events, but that it was accomplished mystically. Then lest, when you hear,
"Except it were given you," you should deem that Pilate was exempt from all
blame, on this account therefore He said, "Therefore he that delivered Me unto
you has the greater sin." "And yet if it was given, neither he nor they were liable
to any charge." "Thou objectest idly; for the 'given' in this place means what is
'allowed'; as though He had said, 'He has permitted these things to be, yet not
for that are you clear of the wickedness.'" He awed Pilate by the words, and
proffered a clear defense. On which account that person sought to release Him;
but they again cried out, saying,

John 19:12
"If thou let this man go, you are not Cæsar's friend."
For when they profited nothing by bringing charges drawn from their own
law, they wickedly betook themselves to external laws, saying,
"Every one that makes himself a king speaks against Cæsar."
And where has this Man appeared as a tyrant? Whence can you prove it?
By the purple robe? By the diadem? By the dress? By the soldiers? Did not He
ever walk unattended, save by His twelve disciples, following in every point a
humble mode of living, both as to food, and clothing, and habitation? But O
what shamelessness and ill-time cowardice! For Pilate, deeming that he should
now incur some danger were he to overlook these words, comes forth as though
to enquire into the matter, (for the "sitting down" showed this,) but without
making any enquiry, he gave Him up to them, thinking to shame them. For to
prove that he did it for this purpose, hear what he says.

John 19:14-15
"Behold your king!" But when they said, "Crucify him," he added again, "Shall I
crucify your king?" But they cried out, "We have no king but Cæsar."
Of their own will they subjected themselves to punishment; therefore also
God gave them up, because they were the first to cast themselves out from His
providence and superintendence; and since with one voice they rejected His
sovereignty, He allowed them to fall by their own suffrages. Still what had been
said should have been sufficient to calm their passion, but they feared, lest, being
let go, He should again draw the multitudes, and they did all they could to
prevent this. For a dreadful thing is love of rule, dreadful and able to destroy the
soul; it was on account of this that they had never heard Him. And yet Pilate, in
consequence of a few words, desired to let Him go, but they pressed on, saying,
"Crucify him." And why did they strive to kill Him in this manner? It was a
shameful death. Fearing therefore lest there should afterwards be any
remembrance of Him, they desired to bring Him to the accursed punishment, not
knowing that truth is exalted by hindrances. To prove that they had this
suspicion, listen to what they say; "We have heard that that deceiver said, After
three days I will rise again" [Matthew 27:63]; on this account they made all this
stir, turning things upside down, that they might ruin matters in after time. And
the ill-ordered people, corrupted by their rulers, cried out continually, "Crucify
him!"
3. But let us not merely read of these things, but bear them in our mind; the
crown of thorns, the robe, the reed, the blows, the smiting on the cheek, the
spittings, the irony. These things, if continually meditated on, are sufficient to
take down all anger; and if we be mocked at, if we suffer injustice, let us still
say, "The servant is not greater than his Lord" [John 13:16]; and let us bring
forward the words of the Jews, which they uttered in their madness, saying, "You
are a Samaritan, and hast a devil" [John 8:48]; and, "He casts out devils by