136. Let us renew our confidence in preaching, based on the conviction that it is God who seeks to
reach out to others through the preacher, and that he displays his power through human words.
Saint Paul speaks forcefully about the need to preach, since the Lord desires to reach other
people by means of our word (cf. Rom 10:14-17). By his words our Lord won over the hearts of the
people; they came to hear him from all parts (cf. Mk 1:45); they were amazed at his teachings (cf.
Mk 6:2), and they sensed that he spoke to them as one with authority (cf. Mk 1:27). By their words
the apostles, whom Christ established “to be with him and to be sent out to preach” (Mk 3:14),
brought all nations to the bosom of the Church (cf. Mt 16:15.20).

The liturgical context

137. It is worthy remembering that “the liturgical proclamation of the word of God, especially in the
eucharistic assembly, is not so much a time for meditation and catechesis as a dialogue between
God and his people, a dialogue in which the great deeds of salvation are proclaimed and the
demands of the covenant are continually restated”. The homily has special importance due to
its eucharistic context: it surpasses all forms of catechesis as the supreme moment in the dialogue
between God and his people which lead up to sacramental communion. The homily takes up once
more the dialogue which the Lord has already established with his people. The preacher must
know the heart of his community, in order to realize where its desire for God is alive and ardent, as
well as where that dialogue, once loving, has been thwarted and is now barren.

138. The homily cannot be a form of entertainment like those presented by the media, yet it does
need to give life and meaning to the celebration. It is a distinctive genre, since it is preaching
situated within the framework of a liturgical celebration; hence it should be brief and avoid taking

on the semblance of a speech or a lecture. A preacher may be able to hold the attention of his
listeners for a whole hour, but in this case his words become more important than the celebration
of faith. If the homily goes on too long, it will affect two characteristic elements of the liturgical
celebration: its balance and its rhythm. When preaching takes place within the context of the
liturgy, it is part of the offering made to the Father and a mediation of the grace which Christ pours
out during the celebration. This context demands that preaching should guide the assembly, and
the preacher, to a life-changing communion with Christ in the Eucharist. This means that the
words of the preacher must be measured, so that the Lord, more than his minister, will be the
centre of attention.

A mother’s conversation

139. We said that the people of God, by the constant inner working of the Holy Spirit, is constantly
evangelizing itself. What are the implications of this principle for preachers? It reminds us that the
Church is a mother, and that she preaches in the same way that a mother speaks to her child,
knowing that the child trusts that what she is teaching is for his or her benefit, for children know
that they are loved. Moreover, a good mother can recognize everything that God is bringing about
in her children, she listens to their concerns and learns from them. The spirit of love which reigns
in a family guides both mother and child in their conversations; therein they teach and learn,
experience correction and grow in appreciation of what is good. Something similar happens in a
homily. The same Spirit who inspired the Gospels and who acts in the Church also inspires the
preacher to hear the faith of the God’s people and to find the right way to preach at each
Eucharist. Christian preaching thus finds in the heart of people and their culture a source of living
water, which helps the preacher to know what must be said and how to say it. Just as all of us like
to be spoken to in our mother tongue, so too in the faith we like to be spoken to in our “mother
culture,” our native language , and our heart is better disposed to listen. This
language is a kind of music which inspires encouragement, strength and enthusiasm.