doctrine and of exhortation, all these he explained by his letter: but what were
matters of bare recital, these he entrusted to the bearer of the letter. "That ye may
know my affairs," that is, may be informed of them. This manifests both the love
which he entertained towards them, and their love towards him.
Ver. 22. "Whom I have sent unto you," says he, "for this very purpose, that
you may know our state, and that he may comfort your hearts."
This language he employs, not without a purpose, but in consequence of
what he had been saying previously; "having girded your loins, having on the
breastplate," etc., which are a token of a constant and unceasing advance; for
hear what the Prophet says, "Let it be unto him as the raiment wherewith he
covers himself, and for the girdle wherewith he is girded continually" [Psalm
109:19]; and the Prophet Isaiah again says, that God has "put on righteousness
as a breastplate" [Isaiah 59:17]; by these expressions instructing us that these
are things which we must have, not for a short time only, but continually,
inasmuch as there is continual need of warfare. "For it is said the righteous are
bold as a lion." [Proverbs 28:1] For he that is armed with such a breastplate, it
cannot be that he should fear the array that is against him, but he will leap into
the midst of the enemy. And again Isaiah says, "How beautiful are the feet of him
that brings good tidings." [Isaiah 52:7] Who would not run, who would not serve
in such a cause; to publish the good tidings of peace, peace between God and
man, peace, where men have toiled not, but where God has wrought all?
But what is the "preparation of the Gospel"? Let us hearken to what John
says, "Make ready the way of the Lord, make His paths straight." [Matthew 3:3]
But again there is need also of another "preparation" after baptism, so that we
may do nothing unworthy of "peace." And then, since the feet are usually a
token of the way of life, hence he is constantly exhorting in this language, "Look,
therefore, carefully how ye walk." [Ephesians 5:15] On this account, he would
say, let us exhibit a practice and example worthy of the Gospel; that is, make our
life and conduct pure. The good tidings of peace have been proclaimed to you,
give to these good tidings a ready way; since if you again become enemies, there

is no more "preparation of peace." Be ready, be not backward to embrace this
peace. As you were ready and disposed for peace and faith, so also continue. The
shield is that which first receives the assaults of the adversary, and preserves the
armor uninjured. So long then as faith be right and the life be right, the armor
remains uninjured.
He discourses, however, much concerning faith, but most especially in
writing to the Hebrews, as he does also concerning hope. Believe, says he, in the
good things to come, and none of this armor shall be injured. In dangers, in toils,
by holding out your hope and your faith to protect you, you will preserve your
armor uninjured. "He that comes to God must believe that He is, and that He is a
rewarder of them that seek after Him." [Hebrews 11:6] Faith is a shield; but
wherever there are quibbles, and reasonings, and scrutinizings, then is it no
longer a shield, but it impedes us. Let this our faith be such as shall cover and
screen the whole frame. Let it not then be scanty, so as to leave the feet or any
other part exposed, but let the shield be commensurate with the whole body.
"Fiery darts." For many doubtful reasonings there are, which set the soul,
as it were, on fire, many difficulties, many perplexities, but all of them faith sets
entirely at rest; many things does the devil dart in, to inflame our soul and bring
us into uncertainty; as, for example, when some persons say, "Is there then a
resurrection?" "Is there a judgment?" "Is there a retribution?" "But is there
faith?" the apostle would say, "you shall with it quench the darts of the devil.
Has any base lust assaulted you? Hold before you your faith in the good things
to come, and it will not even show itself, yea, it will perish." "All the darts"; not
some quenched, and others not. Hearken to what Paul says, "For I reckon that
the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory
that shall be revealed to us-ward." [Romans 8:18] Do you see how many darts
the righteous quenched in those days? Seems it not to you to be "fiery darts,"
when the patriarch burned with inward fire, as he was offering up his son? Yea,
and other righteous men also have quenched "all his darts." Whether then they
be reasonings that assault us, let us hold out this; or whether they be base