were in reserve for us, but that he was far away from us, whist we were enduring
them. But this was, however, for our safety. For as soon as he had learned these
things from them; more warmly did the fountain of his tears then gush forth, and
he betook himself to God with more fervent supplication; and spent his nights
without sleep, beseeching Him that He would succour the city, while enduring
these things, and make the mind of the Emperor more placable. And as soon as
he came to that great city, and had entered the royal palace, he stood before the
Emperor at a distance—speechless—weeping—with downcast eyes—covering
his face as if he himself had been the doer of all the mischief; and this he did,
wishing first to incline him to mercy by his posture, and aspect, and tears; and
then to begin an apology on our behalf; since there is but one hope of pardon for
those who have offended, which is to be silent, and to utter nothing in defence of
what has been done. For he was desirous that one feeling should be got rid of,
and that another should take its place; that anger should be expelled, and sadness
introduced, in order that he might thus prepare the way for the words of his
apology; which indeed actually took place. And just as Moses going up to the
mount, when the people had offended, stood speechless himself, until God called
him, saying, "Let me alone, and I will blot out this people;" [Exodus 32:10] so
also did he now act: The Emperor therefore, when he saw him shedding tears,
and bending toward the ground, himself drew near; and what he really felt on
seeing the tears of the priest, he made evident by the words he addressed to him;
for they were not those of a person provoked or inflamed, but of one in sorrow;
not of one enraged, but rather dejected, and under constraint of extreme pain.
7. And that this is true, you will understand when you hear what were his
words. For he did not say, "What does this mean? Have you come heading an
embassy on behalf of impious and abominable men, such as ought not even to
live; on behalf of rebels, of revolutionists, who deserve the utmost punishment?"
But dismissing all words of that sort, he composed a defence of himself full of
respectfulness and dignity; and he enumerated the benefits, which during the
whole time of his reign he had conferred upon the city; and at each of these he

said, "Was it thus I should have been treated in return for these things? What
injuries had I done, that they should take such revenge? What complaint had
they, great or small, that they must not insult me only, but the deceased also?
Was it not sufficient to wreak their resentment against the living? Yet they
thought they were doing nothing grand, unless they insulted those now in their
graves. Granting that I had injured them, as they suppose; surely it would have
been becoming to spare the dead, who had done them no wrong; for they could
not have the same complaint against them. Did I not ever esteem this city above
every thing, and account it as dearer than my native place? And was it not a
matter of my continual prayers to visit this city; and did I not make this my oath
to all men?"
8. Upon this, the priest sobbing bitterly, and shedding warmer tears, no
longer kept silence: for he saw that the defence of the Emperor was raising our
crime to a still higher amount; but heaving from the bottom of his heart a deep
and bitter sigh, he said, We must confess, O Emperor, this love which you have
shown towards our country! We cannot deny it! On this account, especially, we
mourn, that a city thus beloved has been bewitched by demons; and that we
should have appeared ungrateful towards her benefactor, and have provoked her
ardent lover. And although you were to overthrow; although you were to burn;
although you were to put to death; or whatever else you might do, you would
never yet have taken on us the revenge we deserve. We ourselves have, by
anticipation, inflicted on ourselves what is worse than a thousand deaths! For
what can be more bitter, than when we are found to have unjustly provoked our
benefactor, and one who loved us so much, and the whole world knows it, and
condemns us for the most monstrous ingratitude! If Barbarians had made an
incursion on our city, and razed its walls, and burnt its houses, and had taken and
carried us away captive, the evil had been less. And why so? But because, while
you live, and continue such a generous kindness towards us, there might be a
hope that we might again be brought back to our former condition, and regain a
more illustrious liberty. But now, having been deprived of your favour, and