SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.185, C.8.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether it is right to say that religious perfection

consists in these three vows?
Objection 1: It would seem that it is not right to say that religious
perfection consists in these three vows. For the perfection of life
consists of inward rather than of outward acts, according to Rm.
14:17, "The Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but justice and
peace and joy in the Holy Ghost." Now the religious vow binds a man
to things belonging to perfection. Therefore vows of inward actions,
such as contemplation, love of God and our neighbor, and so forth,
should pertain to the religious state, rather than the vows of poverty,
continence, and obedience which refer to outward actions.
Objection 2: Further, the three aforesaid come under the religious
vow, in so far as they belong to the practice of tending to perfection.
But there are many other things that religious practice, such as
abstinence, watchings, and the like. Therefore it would seem that
these three vows are incorrectly described as pertaining to the state
of perfection.
Objection 3: Further, by the vow of obedience a man is bound to do
according to his superior's command whatever pertains to the
practice of perfection. Therefore the vow of obedience suffices
without the two other vows.
Objection 4: Further, external goods comprise not only riches but
also honors. Therefore, if religious, by the vow of poverty, renounce
earthly riches, there should be another vow whereby they may
despise worldly honors.
On the contrary, It is stated (Extra, de Statu Monach., cap. Cum ad
monasterium) that "the keeping of chastity and the renouncing of
property are affixed to the monastic rule."
I answer that, The religious state may be considered in three ways.
First, as being a practice of tending to the perfection of charity:
secondly, as quieting the human mind from outward solicitude,
according to 1 Cor. 7:32: "I would have you to be without solicitude":
thirdly, as a holocaust whereby a man offers himself and his
possessions wholly to God; and in corresponding manner the
religious state is constituted by these three vows.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.185, C.8.

First, as regards the practice of perfection a man is required to
remove from himself whatever may hinder his affections from
tending wholly to God, for it is in this that the perfection of charity
consists. Such hindrances are of three kinds. First, the attachment to
external goods, which is removed by the vow of poverty; secondly,
the concupiscence of sensible pleasures, chief among which are
venereal pleasures, and these are removed by the vow of
continence; thirdly, the inordinateness of the human will, and this is
removed by the vow of obedience. In like manner the disquiet of
worldly solicitude is aroused in man in reference especially to three
things. First, as regards the dispensing of external things, and this
solicitude is removed from man by the vow of poverty; secondly, as
regards the control of wife and children, which is cut away by the
vow of continence; thirdly, as regards the disposal of one's own
actions, which is eliminated by the vow of obedience, whereby a man
commits himself to the disposal of another.
Again, "a holocaust is the offering to God of all that one has,"
according to Gregory (Hom. xx in Ezech.). Now man has a threefold
good, according to the Philosopher (Ethic. i, 8). First, the good of
external things, which he wholly offers to God by the vow of
voluntary poverty: secondly, the good of his own body, and this
good he offers to God especially by the vow of continence, whereby
he renounces the greatest bodily pleasures. the third is the good of
the soul, which man wholly offers to God by the vow of obedience,
whereby he offers God his own will by which he makes use of all the
powers and habits of the soul. Therefore the religious state is
fittingly constituted by the three vows.
Reply to Objection 1: As stated above (Article 1), the end whereunto
the religious vow is directed is the perfection of charity, since all the
interior acts of virtue belong to charity as to their mother, according
to 1 Cor. 13:4, "Charity is patient, is kind," etc. Hence the interior
acts of virtue, for instance humility, patience, and so forth, do not
come under the religious vow, but this is directed to them as its end.
Reply to Objection 2: All other religious observances are directed to
the three aforesaid principal vows; for if any of them are ordained for
the purpose of procuring a livelihood, such as labor, questing, and
so on, they are to be referred to poverty; for the safeguarding of
which religious seek a livelihood by these means. Other
observances whereby the body is chastised, such as watching,