SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.121, C.3.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.121, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the second precept of the decalogue is

fittingly expressed?
Objection 1: It seems that the second precept of the decalogue is
unfittingly expressed. For this precept, "Thou shalt not take the
name of thy God in vain" is thus explained by a gloss on Ex. 20:7:
"Thou shalt not deem the Son of God to be a creature," so that it
forbids an error against faith. Again, a gloss on the words of Dt. 5:11,
"Thou shalt not take the name of . . . thy God in vain, " adds, i.e. "by
giving the name of God to wood or stone," as though they forbade a
false confession of faith, which, like error, is an act of unbelief. Now
unbelief precedes superstition, as faith precedes religion. Therefore
this precept should have preceded the first, whereby superstition is
forbidden.
Objection 2: Further, the name of God is taken for many purposes --for instance, those of praise, of working miracles, and generally
speaking in conjunction with all we say or do, according to Col. 3:17,
"All whatsoever you do in word or in work . . . do ye in the name of
the Lord." Therefore the precept forbidding the taking of God's name
in vain seems to be more universal than the precept forbidding
superstition, and thus should have preceded it.
Objection 3: Further, a gloss on Ex. 20:7 expounds the precept,
"Thou shalt not take the name of . . . thy God in vain," namely, by
swearing to nothing. Hence this precept would seem to forbid
useless swearing, that is to say, swearing without judgment. But
false swearing, which is without truth, and unjust swearing, which is
without justice, are much more grievous. Therefore this precept
should rather have forbidden them.
Objection 4: Further, blasphemy or any word or deed that is an insult
to God is much more grievous than perjury. Therefore blasphemy
and other like sins should rather have been forbidden by this
precept.
Objection 5: Further, God's names are many. Therefore it should not
have been said indefinitely: "Thou shalt not take the name of . . . thy
God in vain."
On the contrary, stands the authority of Scripture.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.121, C.4.

I answer that, In one who is being instructed in virtue it is necessary
to remove obstacles to true religion before establishing him in true
religion. Now a thing is opposed to true religion in two ways. First,
by excess, when, to wit, that which belongs to religion is given to
others than to whom it is due, and this pertains to superstition.
Secondly, by lack, as it were, of reverence, when, to wit, God is
contemned, and this pertains to the vice of irreligion, as stated
above (Question 97, in the preamble, and in the Article that follows).
Now superstition hinders religion by preventing man from
acknowledging God so as to worship Him: and when a man's mind is
engrossed in some undue worship, he cannot at the same time give
due worship to God, according to Is. 28:20, "The bed is straitened, so
that one must fall out," i.e. either the true God or a false god must fall
out from man's heart, "and a short covering cannot cover both." On
the other hand, irreligion hinders religion by preventing man from
honoring God after he has acknowledged Him. Now one must first of
all acknowledge God with a view to worship, before honoring Him we
have acknowledged.
For this reason the precept forbidding superstition is placed before
the second precept, which forbids perjury that pertains to irreligion.
Reply to Objection 1: These expositions are mystical. The literal
explanation is that which is given Dt. 5:11: "Thou shalt not take the
name of . . . thy God in vain," namely, "by swearing on that which is
not."
Reply to Objection 2: This precept does not forbid all taking of the
name of God, but properly the taking of God's name in confirmation
of a man's word by way of an oath, because men are wont to take
God's name more frequently in this way. Nevertheless we may
understand that in consequence all inordinate taking of the Divine
name is forbidden by this precept: and it is in this sense that we are
to take the explanation quoted in the First Objection.
Reply to Objection 3: To swear to nothing means to swear to that
which is not. This pertains to false swearing, which is chiefly called
perjury, as stated above (Question 98, Article 1, ad 3). For when a
man swears to that which is false, his swearing is vain in itself, since
it is not supported by the truth. on the other hand, when a man
swears without judgment, through levity, if he swear to the truth,
there is no vanity on the part of the oath itself, but only on the part of