ancestors.
And these things he said, not as forbidding them to say that they were
sprung from those holy men, but as forbidding them to put confidence in this,
while they were neglecting the virtue of the soul; at once bringing forward
publicly what was in their minds, and foretelling things to come. Because after
this they are found to say, "We have Abraham to our father, and were never in
bondage to any man." [John 8:33] Since then it was this, which most of all lifted
them up with pride and ruined them, he first puts it down.
And see how with his honor paid to the patriarch he combines his
correction touching these things. Namely, having said, "Think not to say, We
have Abraham to our father," he said not, "for the patriarch shall not be able to
profit you anything," but somehow in a more gentle and acceptable manner he
intimated the self-same thing, by saying,
"For God is able of these stones to raise up children to Abraham."
[Matthew 3:9]
Now some say, that concerning the Gentiles he says these things, calling
them stones, metaphorically; but I say, that the expression has also another
meaning. But of what kind is this? Think not, says he, that if you should perish,
you would make the patriarch childless. This is not, this is not so. For with God
it is possible, both out of stones to give him men, and to bring them to that
relationship; since at the beginning also it was so done. For it was like the birth
of men out of stones, when a child came forth from that hardened womb.
This accordingly the prophet also was intimating, when he said, "Look unto
the hard rock, whence you are hewn, and to the hole of the pit, whence you are
dug: look unto Abraham your father, and unto Sarah that bare you."
[Isaiah 51:1-2] Now of this prophecy, you see, he reminds them, showing that if
at the beginning he made him a father, as marvellously as if he had made him so
out of stones, it was possible for this now also to come to pass. And see how he
both alarms them, and cuts them off: in that he said not, "He had already raised
up," lest they should despair of themselves, but that He "is able to raise up:" and

he said not, "He is able out of stones to make men," but what was a much greater
thing, "kinsmen and children of Abraham."
Do you see how for the time he drew them off from their vain imagination
about things of the body, and from their refuge in their forefathers; in order that
they might rest the hope of their salvation in their own repentance and
continence? Do you see how by casting out their carnal relationship, he is
bringing in that which is of faith?
4. Mark then how by what follows also he increases their alarm, and adds
intensity to their agonizing fear.
For having said that "God is able of these stones to raise up children unto
Abraham," he added, "And now also the axe is laid unto the root of the trees," by
all means making his speech alarming. For as he from his way of life had much
freedom of speech, so they needed his severe rebuke, having been left barren
now for a long time. For "why do I say" (such are his words) that you are on the
point of falling away from your relationship to the patriarch and of seeing others,
even those that are of stones, brought in to your pre-eminence? Nay, not to this
point only will your penalty reach, but your punishment will proceed further.
"For now," says he, "the axe is laid unto the root of the trees." There is nothing
more terrible than this turn of his discourse. For it is no longer "a flying sickle,"
nor "the taking down of a hedge," nor "the treading under foot of the vineyard;"
[Isaiah 5:5] but an axe exceeding sharp, and what is worse, it is even at the
doors. For inasmuch as they continually disbelieved the prophets, and used to
say, "Where is the day of the Lord:" and "let the counsel of the Holy One of
Israel come, that we may know it," [Isaiah 5:19] by reason that it was many years
before what they said came to pass; to lead them off from this encouragement
also, he sets the terrors close to them. And this he declared by saying "now," and
by his putting it to "the root." "For the space between is nothing now," says he,
"but it is laid to the very root." And he said not, "to the branches," nor "to the
fruits," but "to the root." Signifying, that if they were negligent, they would have
incurable horrors to endure, and not have so much as a hope of remedy. It being