not the power of the first ruler. These perishable bodies, created as they are by God,
are perfectly subject to His power.
The Psalmist, filled with God's spirit, considering this truth , and wishing to point out to
us the divine government of things, first describes to us the perfection of the first ruler, -of His nature, when he says God; of His power, when he says, is a great Lord,
needing no co-operation to work the effect of His power; of His authority, when he says
a great king above all gods, because, though there be many rulers, all are subject to His
rule. Secondly he describes to us the manner of government, -- as well in respect of
intelligent beings, which follow His rule and gain from Him their last end, which is
Himself, and therefore he says, for the Lord will not reject his people, -- as also in
respect of perishable beings, which, however they sometimes depart from their proper
modes of action, still are never let go beyond the control of the prime ruler: hence it is
said, in his hands are all the ends of the earth, -- likewise in respect of the heavenly
bodies, which exceed all the height of the earth and of perishable bodies, and always
observe the right order of divine rule: hence he says, and the heights of the mountains
he beholdeth. Thirdly he assigns the reason of this universal control, which is, because
things created by God needs must be ruled by Him: hence he says, For the sea is his,
etc.
Since then in the first Book we have treated of the perfection of the divine nature, and
in the second of the perfection of God's power, it remains for us in this third Book to
treat of His perfect authority, or dignity, in as much as He is the last end and ruler of all
things. This therefore will be our order of procedure, to treat first of God, as the final end
of all things; secondly of His universal control, whereby He governs every creature;
thirdly of the special control which He exercises in the government of creatures
endowed with understanding.

he could have altered the point of view of his eye by some millions of miles, he would
have beheld our planet Earth, the native region of generation and corruption, turned into
a corpus coeleste, serenely resplendent as Venus and Mars, sweeping out in its orbit
with the same accuracy, neither morning star nor evening star more wonderful. Yet the
reader of St Thomas will find him not altogether credulous of the popular astronomy of
his time. He attributes less to the corpus coeleste than many of his contemporaries.

CHAPTER II.--That every Agent acts to some End
IN the case of agents that manifestly act to some end, we call that the end to which the
effort of the agent tends. Gaining that, he is said to gain his end; and missing that, he is
said to miss his intended end. Nor on this point does it make any difference whether the
end be tended to with knowledge or not: for as the target is the end of the archer, so is it
also the end of the path of the arrow. The effort of every agent tends to some
certain end. Not any and every action can proceed from any and every power. Action is
sometimes terminated to some product, sometimes not. When action is terminated to
some product, the effort of the agent tends to the same. When action is not terminated
to any product, the effort of the agent tends to the action itself. Every agent therefore
must intend some end in his action, sometimes the action itself, sometimes something
produced by the action.
3. It is impossible for the chain of actions to extend to infinity: there must then be
something, in the getting of which the effort of the agent comes to rest. Therefore every
agent acts to some end.
6. Actions are open to criticism only so far as they are taken to be done as means to
some end. It is not imputed as a fault to any one, if he fails in effecting that for which his
work is not intended. A physician is found fault with if he fails in healing, but not a
builder or a grammarian. We find fault in points of art, as when a grammarian does not
speak correctly; and also in points of nature, as in monstrous births. Therefore both the
natural agent, and the agent who acts according to art and with a conscious purpose,
acts for an end.
7. To an agent that did not tend to any definite effect, all effects would be indifferent. But
what is indifferent to many things, does not do one of them rather than another: hence
from an agent open to both sides of an alternative (a contingente ad utrumque) there
does not follow any effect, unless by some means it comes to be determined to one
above the rest: otherwise it could not act at all. Every agent therefore tends to some
definite effect, and that is called its end.
Still there are actions that do not seem to be for any end, as things done for sport, and
acts of contemplation, and things done without advertence, as the stroking of the beard
and the like: from which instances one may suppose that there is such a thing as an
agent acting not for any end. But we must observe that though acts of contempation are
not for any other end, they are an end in themselves: as for things done in sport,
sometimes they are their own end, as when one plays solely for the amusement that he
finds in play; sometimes they are for an end, as when we play that afterwards we may
resume work more vigorously: while things done without advertence may proceed not
from the understanding, but from some phantasy or physical principle; yet even these
acts tend to certain ends, though beyond the scope of the intellect of the agent.