FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.35, C.4.

as, from a strong desire for a certain pleasure, one does not shrink
from undergoing pain, so as to obtain that pleasure. In each of these
ways, the sorrows of the present life lead us to the comfort of the
future life. Because by the mere fact that man mourns for his sins, or
for the delay of glory, he merits the consolation of eternity. In like
manner a man merits it when he shrinks not from hardships and
straits in order to obtain it.
Reply to Objection 2: Pain itself can be pleasurable accidentally in so
far as it is accompanied by wonder, as in stage-plays; or in so far as
it recalls a beloved object to one's memory, and makes one feel
one's love for the thing, whose absence gives us pain.
Consequently, since love is pleasant, both pain and whatever else
results from love, forasmuch as they remind us of our love, are
pleasant. And, for this reason, we derive pleasure even from pains
depicted on the stage: in so far as, in witnessing them, we perceive
ourselves to conceive a certain love for those who are there
represented.
Reply to Objection 3: The will and the reason reflect on their own
acts, inasmuch as the acts themselves of the will and reason are
considered under the aspect of good or evil. In this way sorrow can
be the matter of pleasure, or vice versa, not essentially but
accidentally: that is, in so far as either of them is considered under
the aspect of good or evil.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.35, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether all sorrow is contrary to all pleasure?

Objection 1: It would seem that all sorrow is contrary to all pleasure.
Because, just as whiteness and blackness are contrary species of
color, so pleasure and sorrow are contrary species of the soul's
passions. But whiteness and blackness are universally contrary to
one another. Therefore pleasure and sorrow are so too.
Objection 2: Further, remedies are made of things contrary (to the
evil). But every pleasure is a remedy for all manner of sorrow, as the
Philosopher declares (Ethic. vii, 14). Therefore every pleasure is
contrary to every sorrow.
Objection 3: Further, contraries are hindrances to one another. But
every sorrow hinders any kind of pleasure: as is evident from Ethic.
x, 5. Therefore every sorrow is contrary to every pleasure.
On the contrary, The same thing is not the cause of contraries. But
joy for one thing, and sorrow for the opposite thing, proceed from
the same habit: thus from charity it happens that we "rejoice with
them that rejoice," and "weep with them that weep" (Rm. 12:15).
Therefore not every sorrow is contrary to every pleasure.
I answer that, As stated in Metaph. x, 4 contrariety is a difference in
respect of a form. Now a form may be generic or specific.
Consequently things may be contraries in respect of a generic form,
as virtue and vice; or in respect of a specific form, as justice and
injustice.
Now we must observe that some things are specified by absolute
forms, e.g. substances and qualities; whereas other things are
specified in relation to something extrinsic, e.g. passions and
movements, which derive their species from their terms or objects.
Accordingly in those things that are specified by absolute forms, it
happens that species contained under contrary genera are not
contrary as to their specific nature: but it does not happen for them
to have any affinity or fittingness to one another. For intemperance
and justice, which are in the contrary genera of virtue and vice, are
not contrary to one another in respect of their specific nature; and
yet they have no affinity or fittingness to one another. On the other
hand, in those things that are specified in relation to something