So that there is need not of pomp of words, but of strong minds, of skill in
the Scriptures and of powerful thoughts. Do you not see that Paul put to flight
the whole world, that he was more powerful than Plato and all the rest? But it
was by miracles, you say. Not by miracles only, for if you peruse the Acts of the
Apostles, you will find him often prevailing by his teaching previously to his
miracles.
"That he may be able by sound doctrine to exhort," that is, to retain his own
people, and to overthrow the adversaries. "And to convince the gainsayers." For
if this is not done, all is lost. He who knows not how to combat the adversaries,
and to "bring every thought into captivity to the obedience of Christ," and to beat
down reasonings, he who knows not what he ought to teach with regard to right
doctrine, far from him be the Teacher's throne. For the other qualities may be
found in those under his rule, such as to be "blameless, to have his children in
subjection, to be hospitable, just, holy." But that which characterizes the Teacher
is this, to be able to instruct in the word, to which no regard is now paid.
Ver. 10. "For there are many unruly and vain talkers and deceivers,
especially they of the circumcision;"
Ver. 11. "Whose mouths must be stopped."
Do you see how he shows that they are such? From their not wishing to be
ruled, but to rule. For he has glanced at this. When therefore you can not
persuade them, do not give them charges, but stop their mouths, for the benefit
of others. But of what advantage will this be, if they will not obey, or are unruly?
Why then should he stop their mouths? In order that others may be benefited by
it.
"Who subvert whole houses, teaching things which they ought not for filthy
lucre's sake."
For if he has undertaken the office of a Teacher, and is not able to combat
these enemies, and to stop their mouths who are so shameless, he will become in
each case the cause of their destination who perish. And if some one has thus
advised, "Seek not to be a judge, unless you can take away iniquity" [Sirach 7:6];

much more may we say here, "Seek not to be a Teacher, if you are unequal to the
dignity of the office; but though dragged to it, decline it." Do you see that the
love of power, the love of filthy lucre, is the cause of these evils? "Teaching
things which they ought not," he says, "for filthy lucre's sake."
Moral . For there is nothing which is not spoiled by these passions. But as
when violent winds, falling on a calm sea, turn it up from its foundation, and
mingle the sand with the waves, so these passions assailing the soul turn all
upside down, and dim the clearness of the mental sight, but especially does the
mad desire of glory. For a contempt for money any one may easily attain, but to
despise the honor that proceeds from the multitude, requires a great effort, a
philosophic temper, a certain angelic soul that reaches to the very summit of
heaven. For there is no passion so tyrannical, so universally prevalent, in a
greater or less degree indeed, but still everywhere. How then shall we subdue it,
if not wholly, yet in some little part? By looking up to heaven, by setting God
before our eyes, by entertaining thoughts superior to earthly things. Imagine,
when you desire glory, that you have already attained it, and mark the end, and
you will find it to be nothing. Consider with what loss it is attended, of how
many and how great blessings it will deprive you. For you will undergo the toils
and danger, yet be deprived of the fruits and rewards of them. Consider that the
majority are bad, and despise their opinion. In the case of each individual,
consider what the man is, and you will see how ridiculous a thing is glory, that it
is rather to be called shame.
And after this, lift up your thoughts to the theater above. When in doing any
good you consider that it ought to be displayed to men, and you seek for some
spectators of the action, and art in travail to be seen, reflect that God beholds
you, and all that desire will be extinguished. Retire from the earth, and look to
that theater that is in Heaven. If men should praise you, yet hereafter they will
blame you, will envy you, will assail your character; or if they do not, yet their
praise will not benefit you. It is not so with God. He delights in praising our
virtuous deeds. Have you spoken well, and obtained applause? What have you