THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.36, C.6.

"brightness" (Lk. 2:9) accompanied the angelic apparition, to
indicate that He who was just born was the "Brightness of" the
Father's "glory."
Reply to Objection 2: The righteous did not need the visible
apparition of the angel; on account of their perfection the interior
instinct of the Holy Ghost was enough for them.
Reply to Objection 3: The star which manifested Christ's birth
removed all occasion of error. For, as Augustine says (Contra Faust.
ii): "No astrologer has ever so far connected the stars with man's
fate at the time of his birth as to assert that one of the stars, at the
birth of any man, left its orbit and made its way to him who was just
born": as happened in the case of the star which made known the
birth of Christ. Consequently this does not corroborate the error of
those who "think there is a connection between man's birth and the
course of the stars, for they do not hold that the course of the stars
can be changed at a man's birth."
In the same sense Chrysostom says (Hom. vi in Matth.): "It is not an
astronomer's business to know from the stars those who are born,
but to tell the future from the hour of a man's birth: whereas the Magi
did not know the time of the birth, so as to conclude therefrom some
knowledge of the future; rather was it the other way about."
Reply to Objection 4: Chrysostom relates (Hom. ii in Matth.) that,
according to some apocryphal books, a certain tribe in the far east
near the ocean was in the possession of a document written by Seth,
referring to this star and to the presents to be offered: which tribe
watched attentively for the rising of this star, twelve men being
appointed to take observations, who at stated times repaired to the
summit of a mountain with faithful assiduity: whence they
subsequently perceived the star containing the figure of a small
child, and above it the form of a cross.
Or we may say, as may be read in the book De Qq. Vet. et Nov. Test.,
qu. lxiii, that "these Magi followed the tradition of Balaam," who said,
"'A star shall rise out of Jacob.' Wherefore observing this star to be a
stranger to the system of this world, they gathered that it was the
one foretold by Balaam to indicate the King of the Jews."
Or again, it may be said with Augustine, in a sermon on the Epiphany

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.36, C.6.

(ccclxxiv), that "the Magi had received a revelation through the
angels" that the star was a sign of the birth of Christ: and he thinks it
probable that these were "good angels; since in adoring Christ they
were seeking for salvation."
Or with Pope Leo, in a sermon on the Epiphany (xxxiv), that "besides
the outward form which aroused the attention of their corporeal
eyes, a more brilliant ray enlightened their minds with the light of
faith."