devised: and besides, the fault no longer lies with the dead, but with the living.
But to whom spoke he, "Unless you eat My flesh, and drink My blood, you have
no life in yourselves?" [John 6:53] To the living, or to the dead, tell me? And
again, "Unless a man be born again of water and of the Spirit, he cannot see the
kingdom of God." [John 3:5] For if this be permitted, and there be no need of the
mind of the receiver nor of his assent while he lives, what hinders both Greeks
and Jews thus to become believers, other men after their decease doing these
things in their stead?
But not to prolong fruitless toil in cutting asunder their petty spiders' webs ,
come let us unfold unto you the force of this expression. What then is Paul
speaking of?
2. But first I wish to remind you who are initiated of the response , which
on that evening they who introduce you to the mysteries bid you make; and then
I will also explain the saying of Paul: so this likewise will be clearer to you; we
after all the other things adding this which Paul now says. And I desire indeed
expressly to utter it, but I dare not on account of the uninitiated; for these add a
difficulty to our exposition, compelling us either not to speak clearly or to
declare unto them the ineffable mysteries. Nevertheless, as I may be able, I will
speak as through a veil.
As thus: after the enunciation of those mystical and fearful words, and the
awful rules of the doctrines which have come down from heaven, this also we
add at the end when we are about to baptize, bidding them say, "I believe in the
resurrection of the dead," and upon this faith we are baptized. For after we have
confessed this together with the rest, then at last are we let down into the
fountain of those sacred streams. This therefore Paul recalling to their minds
said, "if there be no resurrection, why are you then baptized for the dead ?" i.e.,
the dead bodies. For in fact with a view to this are you baptized, the resurrection
of your dead body, believing that it no longer remains dead. And thou indeed in
the words makest mention of a resurrection of the dead; but the priest, as in a
kind of image, signifies to you by very deed the things which you have believed

and confessed in words. When without a sign you believe, then he gives you the
sign also; when you have done your own part, then also does God fully assure
you. How and in what manner? By the water. For the being baptized and
immersed and then emerging, is a symbol of the descent into Hades and return
thence. Wherefore also Paul calls baptism a burial, saying, "Therefore we are
buried with Him by baptism into death." [Romans 6:4] By this he makes that
also which is to come credible, I mean, the resurrection of our bodies. For the
blotting out sins is a much greater thing than the raising up of a body. And this
Christ declaring, said, "For whether is easier to say, Your sins are forgiven, or to
say, Take up your bed, and walk?" [Matthew 9:5] "The former is the more
difficult," says He, "but since you disbelieve it as being hidden, and make the
easier instead of the more difficult the demonstration of my power, neither will I
refuse to afford you this proof." Then says He to the paralytic, "Arise, take up
your bed, and go unto your house."
"And how is this difficult," says one, "when it is possible to kings also and
rulers? For they too forgive adulterers and homicides." You are jesting, O man,
who sayest these things. For to forgive sins with God only is possible. But rulers
and kings, whether it is adulterers whom they forgive or homicides, release them
indeed from the present punishment; but their sin they do not purge out. Though
they should advance to offices them that have been forgiven, though they should
invest them with the purple itself, though they should set the diadem upon their
heads, yet so they would only make them kings, but could not free them from
their sin. It being God alone who does this; which accordingly in the Laver of
Regeneration He will bring to pass. For His grace touches the very soul, and
thence plucks up the sin by the root. Here is the reason why he that has been
forgiven by the king may be seen with his soul yet impure, but the soul of the
baptized no longer so, but purer than the very sun-beams, and such as it was
originally formed, nay rather much better than that. For it is blessed with a
Spirit, on every side enkindling it and making its holiness intense. And as when
you are recasting iron or gold you make it pure and new once more, just so the