they ask with the intent of learning, but the disciples gained even from hence.
4. "Then were there brought unto Him little children, that He should put His
hands on them, and pray: and the disciples rebuked them. But He said unto
them, Suffer the little children to come unto me, for of such is the kingdom of
Heaven. And He laid His hands on them, and departed thence." [Matthew 19:1315]
And wherefore did the disciples repel the little children? For dignity. What
then does He? Teaching them to be lowly, and to trample under foot worldly
pride, He does receive them, and takes them in His arms, and to such as them
promises the kingdom; which kind of thing He said before also. [Matthew 18:34]
Let us also then, if we would be inheritors of the Heavens, possess
ourselves of this virtue with much diligence. For this is the limit of true wisdom;
to be simple with understanding; this is angelic life; yes, for the soul of a little
child is pure from all the passions. Towards them who have vexed him he bears
no resentment, but goes to them as to friends, as if nothing had been done; and
how much soever he be beaten by his mother; after her he seeks, and her does he
prefer to all. Though thou show him the queen with a diadem, he prefers her not
to his mother clad in rags, but would choose rather to see her in these, than the
queen in splendor. For he uses to distinguish what pertains to him and what is
strange to him, not by its poverty and wealth, but by friendship. And nothing
more than necessary things does he seek, but just to be satisfied from the breast,
and then he leaves sucking. The young child is not grieved at what we are
grieved, as at loss of money and such things as that, and he does not rejoice
again at what we rejoice, namely, at these temporal things, he is not eager about
the beauty of persons.
Therefore He said, "of such is the kingdom of Heaven," that by choice we
should practise these things, which young children have by nature. For since the
Pharisees from nothing else so much as out of craft and pride did what they did,
therefore on every hand He charges the disciples to be single hearted, both

darkly hinting at those men, and instructing these. For nothing so much lifts up
unto haughtiness, as power and precedence. Forasmuch then as the disciples
were to enjoy great honors throughout the whole world, He preoccupies their
mind, not suffering them to feel anything after the manner of men, neither to
demand honors from the multitude, nor to have men clear the way before them.
For though these seem to be little things, yet are they a cause of great evils.
The Pharisees at least being thus trained were carried on into the very summit of
evil, seeking after the salutations, the first seats, the middle places, for from
these they were cast upon the shoal of their mad desire of glory, then from
thence upon impiety. So therefore those men went away having drawn upon
themselves a curse by their tempting, but the little children a blessing, as being
freed from all these.
Let us then also be like the little children, and "in malice be we babes."
[1 Corinthians 14:20] For it cannot be, it cannot be for one otherwise to see
Heaven, but the crafty and wicked must needs surely be cast into hell.
5. And before hell too, we shall here suffer the utmost ills. "For if you be
evil," it is said, "thou alone shall endure the evil; but if good, it is for yourself
and for your neighbor." Mark, at any rate, how this took place in the former
instances also. For neither was anything more wicked than Saul, nor more simple
and single-hearted than David. Which therefore was the stronger? Did not David
get him twice into his hands, and having the power to slay him, forebore? Had
he not him shut up as in a net and prison, and spared him? And this when both
others were urging him, and when he himself was able to accuse him of
countless charges; but nevertheless he suffered him to go away safe. And yet the
other was pursuing him with all his army, but he was, with a few desperate
fugitives, wandering and changing from place to place; nevertheless the fugitive
had the advantage of the king, forasmuch as the one came to the conflict with
simplicity, the other with wickedness.
For what could be more wicked than that man, who when he was leading
his armies, and bringing all his wars to a successful issue, and undergoing the