temple of God is guilty of sacrilege. Saint Bernard says that the neighbor is deprived of good example, because the fall of one and the ensuing scandal are a source of scandal to others; and he calls them, in cause at least, disturbers of unity and enemies of peace. The example of such a fall frightens many and makes them tepid in their spiritual progress. In the fallen there is danger of pride and vainglory, since they prefer their own judgment to the judgment of everyone else, usurping what is not their own by setting themselves up as judges in their own cause when the rightful judge is their superior. Besides these, there are also other disadvantages, such as overloading themselves with weapons which they cannot use, like David with the armor of Saul [1 Sam. 17:38-39]. They apply spurs to a spirited horse rather than the rein. Therefore there is need of discretion on this point to keep the practice of virtue between both extremes. Saint Bernard gives this advice: "Good will is not always to be trusted, but it must be bridled, regulated, especially in beginners," 6 if one wishes to benefit others without any disadvantage to himself, for he that is evil to himself, to whom will he be good? [Sir. 14:5].

Obedience is the Infallible Means for Gaining Discretion

If discretion seems to you to be something very rare and hard to come by, make up for it with obedience, whose counsel is certain. Hear what Saint Bernard says of those who wish to follow their own opinion: "Whatever is done without the approval or against the wishes of the spiritual father should be set down as vainglory, and not as something worthy of reward." 7 We should remember, as it is said in Holy Scripture, that it is like the sin of witchcraft to rebel, and like the crime of idolatry to refuse to obey [1 Sam. 15:23]. Thus if you wish to hold the middle way between the extremes of tepidity and excessive fervor, discuss your affairs with the superior and keep within the limits set down by obedience. If you have a great desire for mortification, use it rather in breaking your wills and bringing your judgments under the yoke of obedience rather than in weakening your bodies and afflicting them beyond due measure, especially during the years of your studies.

PART III - Ways of Exercising Zeal During Years of Study

Offer Your Studies to God

I should not wish you to think from what I have here written that I do not approve of what I have learned of some of your mortifications. I know that these and other holy follies have been profitably used by the saints and that they are useful to obtain self-mastery and bring down richer graces upon us, especially in the beginning. But for one who has acquired some mastery over his self-love, I hold that what I have written about bringing oneself to the golden mean of discretion is the better thing, provided one does not withdraw from obedience. It is this obedience that I recommend very earnestly to you, joined with that virtue which is a compendium of all the others and which Jesus Christ so earnestly recommends when He calls it His special commandment: This is my commandment, that you love one another [John 15:12]. And I wish that you preserve this union and lasting love, not only among yourselves, but that you extend it to everyone, and endeavor to enkindle in your souls the lively desire for the salvation of your neighbor, gauging the value of each soul from the price our Lord paid by His life's blood. This you do on the one hand by acquiring learning and on the other by increasing fraternal charity, making yourselves perfect instruments of God's grace and collaborators in the sublime work of leading God's creatures back to Him as to their last end. Do not think that in this period of time given to your studies you are of no use to your neighbor, for, besides the profit to yourself which well-ordered charity requires-Have pity on your own soul, pleasing God [Vulgate Sir. 30:24]-you are serving God's honor and glory in many ways. First, by your present labor and the intention with which you undertake and regulate everything for your neighbor's edification, just as soldiers waiting to get supplies of arms and munitions