And this again is the peculiarity of harlots, that they are his who gives the
gold. Even if he be a slave or a gladiator, or any person whatever, yet if he offers
their hire, they receive him. But the free, even should they be more noble than
all, they do not accept without the money. These men also do the same. They
turn away right thoughts when they bring no money; but they associate with the
abominable, and actually with those that fight with wild beasts, for the sake of
the gold, and associate with them shamelessly and destroy the beauty of the soul.
For as those women are naturally of odious appearance and black, and awkward
and gross, and formless and ill-shaped, and in all respects disgusting, such do the
souls of these men become, not able to conceal their deformity by their outward
paintings. For when the ill look is extreme, whatever they may devise, they
cannot succeed in their feigning.
For that shamelessness makes harlots, hear the prophet saying, "You were
shameless towards all; you had a harlot's countenance." [Jeremiah 3:3] This
may be said to the covetous also: "You were shameless towards all," not towards
these or those, but "towards all." How? Such an one respects neither father, nor
son, nor wife, nor friend, nor brother, nor benefactor, nor absolutely any one.
And why do I say friend, and brother, and father? He respects not God Himself,
but all [we believe] seems to him a fable; and he laughs, intoxicated by his great
lust, and not even admitting into his ears any of the things which might profit
him.
But O! Their absurdity! And then what things they say! "Woe to you, O
Mammon, and to him that has you not." At this I am torn to pieces with
indignation: for woe to those who say these things, though they say them in jest.
For tell me, has not God uttered such a threat as this, saying, "You cannot serve
two masters"? [Matthew 6:24] And do you set at nought the threat? Does not
Paul say that it is Idolatry, and does he not call "the covetous man an Idolater"?
[Ephesians 5:5]
8. And you stand laughing, raising a laugh after the manner of women of
the world who are on the stage. This has overthrown, this has cast down

everything. Our affairs, both our business and our politeness, are turned into
laughing; there is nothing steady, nothing grave. I say not these things to men of
the world only; but I know those whom I am hinting at. For the Church has been
filled with laughter. Whatever clever thing one may say, immediately there is
laughter among those present: and the marvelous thing is that many do not leave
off laughing even during the very time of the prayer.
Everywhere the devil leads the dance, he has entered into all, is master of
all. Christ is dishonored, is thrust aside; the Church is made no account of. Do ye
not hear Paul saying, Let "filthiness and foolish talking and jesting" [Ephesians
5:4] be put away from you? He places "jesting" along with "filthiness," and do
you laugh? What is "foolish talking"? That which has nothing profitable. And do
you, a solitary, laugh at all and relax your countenance? thou that art crucified?
thou that art a mourner? Tell me, do you laugh? Where do you hear of Christ
doing this? Nowhere: but that He was sad indeed oftentimes. For even when He
looked on Jerusalem, He wept; and when He thought on the Traitor He was
troubled; and when He was about to raise Lazarus, He wept; and do you laugh?
If he who grieves not over the sins of others deserves to be accused, of what
consideration will he be worthy, who is without sorrow for his own sins, yea
laughs at them? This is the season of grief and tribulation, of bruising and
bringing matter [the body], of conflicts and sweatings, and do you laugh? Do
you not see how Sarah was rebuked? Do you not hear Christ saying, "Woe to
them that laugh, for they shall weep"? [Luke 6:25] Thou chantest these things
every day, for, tell me, what do you say? "I have laughed?" By no means; but
what? "I labored in my groaning." [Psalm 6:6]
But perchance there are some persons so dissolute and silly as even during
this very rebuke to laugh, because forsooth we thus discourse about laughter. For
indeed such is their derangement, such their madness, that it does not feel the
rebuke.
The Priest of God is Standing, offering up the prayer of all: and are you
laughing, having no fears? And while he is offering up the prayers in trembling