imitating him? And observe how he puts no difference here but lays down one
law for all. For he does not say, "recompense not evil" to the believer, but to "no
man," be he heathen, be he contaminated, or what not. "Provide things honest in
the sight of all men."
Ver. 18. "If it be possible, as much as lies in you, live peaceably with all
men."
This is that: "let your light shine before men" [Matthew 5:16], not that we
are to live for vanity, but that we are not to give those who have a mind for it a
handle against us. Whence he says also in another place, "Give none offense,
neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church of God." [1
Corinthians 10:32] And in what follows he limits his meaning well, by saying,
"If it be possible." For there are cases in which it is not possible, as, for instance,
when we have to argue about religion, or to contend for those who are wronged.
And why be surprised if this be not universally possible in the case of other
persons, when even in the case of man and wife he broke through the rule? "But
if the unbelieving depart, let him depart." [1 Corinthians 7:15] And his meaning
is nearly as follows: Do your own part, and to none give occasion of war or
fighting, neither to Jew nor Gentile. But if you see the cause of religion suffering
anywhere, do not prize concord above truth, but make a noble stand even to
death. And even then be not at war in soul, be not averse in temper, but fight
with the things only. For this is the import of "as much as in you lies, be at peace
with all men." But if the other will not be at peace, do not thou fill your soul with
tempest, but in mind be friendly ([φίλος], several manuscripts [φιλόσοφος]) as I
said before, without giving up the truth on any occasion.
Ver. 19. "Dearly beloved, avenge not yourselves, but rather give place unto
wrath. For it is written, Vengeance is mine; I will repay, says the Lord."
Unto what wrath? To the wrath of God. Now since what the injured man
desires most to see is, himself having the pleasure of revenge, this very thing he
gives him in full measure, that if you dost not avenge yourself, he means, God
will be your avenger. Leave it then to Him to follow up your wrongs. For this is

the force of "give place unto wrath." Then to give further comfort, he brings the
quotation forward also, and after winning him more throughly to himself in this
way, he demands more Christian heroism ([φιλοσόφιάν]) of him, and says:
Ver. 20, 21. "If your enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him to drink;
for in so doing you shall heap coals of fire upon his head. Be not overcome of
evil, but overcome evil with good."
Why, he means, am I telling you that you must keep peace? For I even
insist upon your doing kindness. For he says, "give him to eat, and give him to
drink." Then as the command he gave was a very difficult and a great one, he
proceeds: "for in so doing you shall heap coals of fire upon his head." And this
he said both to humble the one by fear, and to make the other more readyminded through hope of a recompense. For he that is wronged, when he is
feeble, is not so much taken with any goods of his own as with the vengeance
upon the person who has pained him. For there nothing so sweet as to see an
enemy chastised. What he is longing for, then, that he gives him first, and when
he has let the venom go, then he again gives advice of a higher tone, saying, "Be
not overcome of evil." For he knew that if the enemy were a very brute, he would
not continue an enemy when he had been fed. And if the man injured be of ever
so little a soul, still when feeding him and giving him to drink, he will not
himself even have any farther craving for his punishment. Hence, out of
confidence in the result of the action, he does not simply threaten, but even
dwells largely upon the vengeance. For he did not say, "you shall take
vengeance" but, "you shall heap coals of fire upon his head." Then he further
declares him victor, by saying, "be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with
good." And he gives a kind of gentle hint, that one is not to do it with that
intention, since cherishing a grudge still would be "being overcome of evil." But
he did not say it at once, as he did not find it advisable yet. But when he had
disburdened the man of his anger, then he proceeded to say, "overcome evil with
good." Since this would be a victory. For the combatant is rather then the
conqueror, not when he brings himself under to take the blows, but when he