Here indeed my discourse is for both men and women. Bend your knees,
send forth groans, beseech your Master to be merciful: He is more moved by
prayers in the night, when you make the time for rest a time for mourning.
Remember what words that king uttered: "I have been weary with my groaning:
every night will I wash my bed, I will water my couch with my tears." [Psalm
6:6] However delicate a liver you may be, you are not more delicate than he:
however rich you may be, you are not richer than David. And again the same
Psalmist says, "At midnight I rose to give thanks unto You for the judgments of
Your righteousness." [Psalm 119:62] No vainglory then intrudes upon you: how
can it, when all are sleeping, and not looking at you? Then neither sloth nor
drowsiness invades you: how can they, when your soul is aroused by such great
things? After such vigils come sweet slumbers and wondrous revelations. Do
this, thou also the man, not the woman only. Let the house be a Church,
consisting of men and women. For think not because you are the only man, or
because she is the only woman there, that this is any hindrance. "For where
two," He says, "are gathered together in My Name, there am I in the midst of
them." [Matthew 18:20] Where Christ is in the midst, there is a great multitude.
Where Christ is, there needs must Angels be, needs must Archangels also and
the other Powers be there. Then you are not alone, seeing you have Him Who is
Lord of all. Hear again the prophet also saying, "Better is one that does the will
of the Lord, than ten thousand transgressors." [comp. Sirach 16:3] Nothing more
weak than a multitude of unrighteous men, nothing more strong than one man
who lives according to the law of God. If you have children wake up them also,
and let your house altogether become a Church through the night: but if they be
tender, and cannot endure the watching, let them stay for the first or second
prayer, and then send them to rest: only stir up yourself, establish yourself in the
habit. Nothing is better than that storehouse which receives such prayers as
these. Hear the Prophet speaking: "If I remembered You upon my bed, I thought
upon You in the dawn of the morning." [Psalm 63:7] But you will say: I have
labored much during the day, and I cannot. Mere pretext this and subterfuge. For

however much you have labored, you will not toil like the smith, who lets fall
such a heavy hammer from a great height upon the (metal flying off in) sparks,
and takes in the smoke with his whole body: and yet at this work he spends the
greater part of the night. You know also how the women, if there is need for us
to go into the country, or to go forth unto a vigil, watch through the whole night.
Then have thou also a spiritual forge, to fashion there not pots or cauldrons, but
your own soul, which is far better than either coppersmith or goldsmith can
fashion. Your soul, waxen old in sins, cast thou into the smelting-furnace of
confession: let fall the hammer from on high: that is, the condemnation of your
words ([τὥν ῥημάτων τὴν κατάγνωσιν]): light up the fire of the Spirit. You have
a far mightier craft (than theirs). You are beating into shape not vessels of gold,
but the soul, which is more precious than all gold, even as the smith hammers
out his vessel. For it is no material vessel that you are working at, but you are
freeing your soul from all imaginations belonging to this life. Let a lamp be by
your side, not that one which we burn, but that which the prophet had, when he
said, "Your law is a lamp unto my feet." [Psalm 119:105] Bring your soul to a red
heat, by prayer: when you see it hot enough, draw it out, and mould it into what
shape you will. Believe me, not fire so effectual to burn off rust, as night prayer
to remove the rust of our sins. Let the night-watchers, if no one else, shame us.
They, by man's law, go their rounds in the cold, shouting loudly, and walking
through lanes ([στενωπὥν]) and alleys, oftentimes drenched with rain and (all)
congealed with cold, for you and for your safety, and the protection of your
property. There is he taking such care for your property, while you take none
even for your soul. And yet I do not make you go your rounds in the open air
like him, nor shout loudly and rend your sides: but in your closet itself, or in
your bedchamber, bend your knees, and entreat your Lord. Why did Christ
Himself pass a whole night on the mountain? Was it not, that He might be an
ensample to us? Then is it that the plants respire, in the night, I mean: and then
also does the soul take in the dew even more than they. What the sun has parched
by day becomes cool again at night. More refreshing than all dew, the tears of