whereas the divine nature cannot be parted; whence it necessarily
follows that the Father in begetting the Son does not transmit any
part of His nature, but communicates His whole nature to Him, the
distinction only of origin remaining as explained above (Question 40,
Article 2).
Reply to Objection 1: When we say that the Son was born of the
Father, the preposition "of" designates a consubstantial generating
principle, but not a material principle. For that which is produced
from matter, is made by a change of form in that whence it is
produced. But the divine essence is unchangeable, and is not
susceptive of another form.
Reply to Objection 2: When we say the Son is begotten of the
essence of the Father, as the Master of the Sentences explains (Sent.
i, D, v), this denotes the habitude of a kind of active principle, and as
he expounds, "the Son is begotten of the essence of the Father"--that is, of the Father Who is essence; and so Augustine says (De
Trin. xv, 13): "When I say of the Father Who is essence, it is the same
as if I said more explicitly, of the essence of the Father."
This, however, is not enough to explain the real meaning of the
words. For we can say that the creature is from God Who is essence;
but not that it is from the essence of God. So we may explain them
otherwise, by observing that the preposition "of" [de] always
denotes consubstantiality. We do not say that a house is "of" [de]
the builder, since he is not the consubstantial cause. We can say,
however, that something is "of" another, if this is its consubstantial
principle, no matter in what way it is so, whether it be an active
principle, as the son is said to be "of" the father, or a material
principle, as a knife is "of" iron; or a formal principle, but in those
things only in which the forms are subsisting, and not accidental to
another, for we can say that an angel is "of" an intellectual nature. In
this way, then, we say that the Son is begotten 'of' the essence of the
Father, inasmuch as the essence of the Father, communicated by
generation, subsists in the Son.
Reply to Objection 3: When we say that the Son is begotten of the
essence of the Father, a term is added which saves the distinction.
But when we say that the three persons are 'of' the divine essence,
there is nothing expressed to warrant the distinction signified by the
preposition, so there is no parity of argument.

Reply to Objection 4: When we say "Wisdom was created," this may
be understood not of Wisdom which is the Son of God, but of
created wisdom given by God to creatures: for it is said, "He created
her [namely, Wisdom] in the Holy Ghost, and He poured her out over
all His works" (Ecclus. 1:9,10). Nor is it inconsistent for Scripture in
one text to speak of the Wisdom begotten and wisdom created, for
wisdom created is a kind of participation of the uncreated Wisdom.
The saying may also be referred to the created nature assumed by
the Son, so that the sense be, "From the beginning and before the
world was I made"---that is, I was foreseen as united to the creature.
Or the mention of wisdom as both created and begotten insinuates
into our minds the mode of the divine generation; for in generation
what is generated receives the nature of the generator and this
pertains to perfection; whereas in creation the Creator is not
changed, but the creature does not receive the Creator's nature.
Thus the Son is called both created and begotten, in order that from
the idea of creation the immutability of the Father may be
understood, and from generation the unity of nature in the Father
and the Son. In this way Hilary expounds the sense of this text of
Scripture (De Synod.). The other passages quoted do not refer to the
Holy Ghost, but to the created spirit, sometimes called wind,
sometimes air, sometimes the breath of man, sometimes also the
soul, or any other invisible substance.