so hard on us, as the expectation of evil: nothing that so keeps us up, and all but
gives us wings, as a good conscience. And this we may get a knowledge of even
by what takes place before our eyes. For they that dwell in a prison, and are in
expectation of sentence against them, let them have the enjoyment of luxury
repeated beyond count, live a more afflicting life than those that go a begging by
the by-roads, yet with nothing upon their consciences to trouble them. For the
expectation of a dreadful end will not let them perceive those pleasures which
they have in their hands. And why do I speak of prisoners? Why, as for those
that are living out of prison, and have a good fortune, yet have a bad conscience
about them, handicraftsmen that work for their bread, and spend the whole day
amid their labor, are in a far better plight than they. And for this reason too we
say, How miserable the gladiators are (though seeing them as we do in taverns,
drunken, luxurious, gormandizing), and call them the most miserable of men,
because the calamity of the end which they must expect is too great to admit of
comparison with that pleasure. Now if to them a life of this sort seems to be
pleasing, remember what I am continually telling you, that it is no such marvel
that a man who lives in vice should not flee from the misery and pain of vice.
For see how a thing so detestable as that, yet seems to be delectable to those who
practice it. Yet we do not on this account say, how happy they are, for this is just
the very reason why we think them pitiable, because they have no notion of the
evils they are among. And what would you say of adulterers, who for a little
pleasure undergo at once a disgraceful slavery, and a loss of money, and a
perpetual fear (Hor. Sat. II. vii. 58-67), and in fact the very life of a Cain, or
rather one that is even much worse than his; filled with fears for the present, and
trembling for the future, and suspecting alike friend and foe, and those that know
about it, and those that know nothing? Neither when they go to sleep are they
quit of this struggle, their bad conscience shaping out for them dreams that
abound with sundry terrors, and in this way horrifying them. Far otherwise is the
chaste man, seeing he passes the present life unshackled and at full liberty.
Weigh then against the little pleasure, the sundry fluctuations of these terrors,

and with the short labor of continency, the calm of an entire life; and you will
find the latter has more of pleasantness than the former. But as for the man that
is set upon plundering and laying hands upon other men's goods, tell me if he has
not to undergo countless pains in the way of running about, fawning upon slaves,
freemen, doorkeepers; alarming and threatening, acting shamelessly, watching,
trembling, in agony, suspecting everything. Far otherwise is the man that holds
riches in contempt, for he too enjoys pleasure in abundance, and lives with no
fear, and in perfect security. And if any one were to go through the other
instances of vice, he would find much trouble, and many rocks. But what is of
greater importance is, that in the case of virtue the difficulties come first, and the
pleasant part afterwards, so the trouble is even thus alleviated. But in the case of
vice, the reverse. After the pleasure, the pains and the punishments, so that by
these besides the pleasure is done away. For as he who waits for the crown,
perceives nothing of present annoyance, so he that has to expect the punishments
after the pleasures has no power of gathering in a gladness that is unalloyed,
since the fear puts everything in confusion. Or rather if any one were to
scrutinize the thing with care, even before the punishment which follows upon
these things, he would find that even at the very moment when vice is boldly
entered upon, a great deal of pain is felt. And, if you think fit, let us just examine
this in the case of those who plunder other men's goods. Or those who in any
way get together money, and setting aside the fears, and dangers, and trembling,
and agony, and care, and all these things, let us suppose the case of a man, who
has got rich without any annoyance, and feels sure about maintaining his present
fortune (which he has no means of doing, still for all that let it be assumed for
argument's sake). What sort of pleasure then is he to gather in from having so
much about him? On the contrary, it is just this very thing that will not let him be
glad-hearted. For as long as ever he desires other things besides, he is still upon
the rack. Because desire gives pleasure at the time it has come to a stand. If
thirsty, for instance, we feel refreshed, when we have drunk as much as we wish;
but so long as we keep thirsty, even if we were to have exhausted all the