struck, but only of his own individual malice, what says He? "Turn to him the
other also" [Matthew 5:39]; to show him that in submitting to the first thou were
not unwilling. For he that is lavish in suffering wrong, makes that his own which
is not his own act, by suffering himself to be smitten on the other cheek also, and
not merely by enduring the first blow. For this latter will have perhaps the
appearance even of cowardice; but that of a high philosophy.— Thus you will
show that it was for the sake of wisdom that you bore the first blow also. And so
in the present case, show here too, that you bear this slavery also willingly. The
man-pleaser then is no servant of Christ. The servant of Christ is not a manpleaser. [Galatians 1:10] For who that is the servant of God, makes it his object
to please men? And who that pleases men, can be a servant of God?
"From the heart," says he, "with good-will doing service." For since it is
possible to do service even with singleness of heart and not wrongfully, and yet
not with all one's might, but only so far as fulfilling one's bounden duty,
therefore he says, do it with alacrity, not of necessity, upon principle, not upon
constraint. If thus thou do service, you are no slave; if you do it upon principle,
if with good-will, if from the heart, and if for Christ's sake. For this is the
servitude that even Paul, the free man, serves, and exclaims, "For we preach not
ourselves, but Christ Jesus, as Lord, and ourselves as your servants for Jesus'
sake." [2 Corinthians 4:5] Look how he divests your slavery of its meanness. For
just in the same way as the man who has been robbed, if he gives still more to
him who has taken, is not ranked among those robbed, but rather among liberal
givers; not among those who suffer evil, but among those who do good; and
rather clothes the other with disgrace by his liberality, than is clothed with
disgrace by being robbed—so, I say, in this case, by his generosity he will
appear at once more high-minded, and by showing that he does not feel the
wrong, will put the other to shame.
Let us then do service to our masters for Christ's sake, "knowing," he
continues, "that whatsoever good thing each one does, the same shall he receive
of the Lord, whether he be bond or free." For inasmuch as it was probable that

many masters, as being unbelievers, would have no sense of shame, and would
make no return to their slaves for their obedience, observe how he has given
them encouragement, so that they may have no misgiving about the
remuneration, but may have full confidence respecting the recompense. For as
they who receive a benefit, when they make no return, make God a debtor to
their benefactors; so, I say, do masters also, if, when well-treated by you, they
fail to requite you, requite you the more, by rendering God your debtor.
Ver. 9. "And ye masters," he continues, "do the same things unto them."
The same things. What are these? "With good-will do service." However he
does not actually say, "do service," though by saying, "the same things," he
plainly shows this to be his meaning. For the master himself is a servant. "Not as
men-pleasers," he means, "and with fear and trembling": that is, toward God,
fearing lest He one day accuse you for your negligence toward your slaves.
"And forbear threatening;" be not irritating, he means, nor oppressive.
"Knowing that both their Master and yours is in Heaven."
Ah! How mighty a Master does he hint at here! How startling the
suggestion! It is this. "With what measure you measure, it shall be measured unto
you again" [Matthew 7:2]; lest you hear the sentence, "Thou wicked servant. I
forgave you all that debt." [Matthew 18:32]
"And there is no respect of persons," he says, "with Him."
Think not, he would say, that what is done towards a servant, He will
therefore forgive, because done to a servant. Heathen laws indeed as being the
laws of men, recognize a difference between these kinds of offenses. But the law
of the common Lord and Master of all, as doing good to all alike, and dispensing
the same rights to all, knows no such difference.
But should any one ask, whence is slavery, and why it has found entrance
into human life, (and many I know are both glad to ask such questions, and
desirous to be informed of them,) I will tell you. Slavery is the fruit of
covetousness, of degradation, of savagery; since Noah, we know, had no servant,
nor had Abel, nor Seth, no, nor they who came after them. The thing was the