Reply to Objection 2: Good is either the end, or something referred
to the end. And therefore, since the good of the worker consists in
the work, this fact also, that virtue makes the worker good, is
referred to the work, and consequently, to the power.
Reply to Objection 3: One accident is said to be the subject of
another, not as though one accident could uphold another; but
because one accident inheres to substance by means of another, as
color to the body by means of the surface; so that surface is said to
be the subject of color. In this way a power of the soul is said to be
the subject of virtue.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.56, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether one virtue can be in several powers?

Objection 1: It would seem that one virtue can be in several powers.
For habits are known by their acts. But one act proceeds in various
way from several powers: thus walking proceeds from the reason as
directing, from the will as moving, and from the motive power as
executing. Therefore also one habit can be in several powers.
Objection 2: Further, the Philosopher says (Ethic. ii, 4) that three
things are required for virtue, namely: "to know, to will, and to work
steadfastly." But "to know" belongs to the intellect, and "to will"
belongs to the will. Therefore virtue can be in several powers.
Objection 3: Further, prudence is in the reason since it is "the right
reason of things to be done" (Ethic. vi, 5). And it is also in the will:
for it cannot exist together with a perverse will (Ethic. vi, 12).
Therefore one virtue can be in two powers.
On the contrary, The subject of virtue is a power of the soul. But the
same accident cannot be in several subjects. Therefore one virtue
cannot be in several powers of the soul.
I answer that, It happens in two ways that one thing is subjected in
two. First, so that it is in both on an equal footing. In this way it is
impossible for one virtue to be in two powers: since diversity of
powers follows the generic conditions of the objects, while diversity
of habits follows the specific conditions thereof: and so wherever
there is diversity of powers, there is diversity of habits; but not vice
versa. In another way one thing can be subjected in two or more, not
on an equal footing, but in a certain order. And thus one virtue can
belong to several powers, so that it is in one chiefly, while it extends
to others by a kind of diffusion, or by way of a disposition, in so far
as one power is moved by another, and one power receives from
another.
Reply to Objection 1: One act cannot belong to several powers
equally, and in the same degree; but only from different points of
view, and in various degrees.
Reply to Objection 2: "To know" is a condition required for moral
virtue, inasmuch as moral virtue works according to right reason.