with the devil; not one shall remain even to death under the power of the
devil. And then follows what I have already cited above:7 "What shall we
then say to these things? If God be for us, who can be against us? He that
spared not His own Son, but delivered Him up for us all; how has He not
with Him also freely given us all things?". Why then should the death of Christ not have come to pass? Nay,
rather, why should not that death itself have been chosen above all else to
be brought to pass, to the passing by of the other innumerable ways
which He who is omnipotent could have employed to free us; that death, I
say, wherein neither was anything diminished or changed from His
divinity, and so great benefit was conferred upon men, from the
humanity which He took upon Him, that a temporal death, which was not
due, was rendered by the eternal Son of God, who was also the Son of
man, whereby He might free them from an eternal death which was due?
The devil was holding fast our sins, and through them was fixing us
deservedly in death. He discharged them, who had none of His own, and
who was led by him to death undeservedly. That blood was of such price,
that he who even slew Christ for a time by a death which was not due, can
as his due detain no one, who has put on Christ, in the eternal death
which was due. Therefore "God commendeth His love towards us, in that,
while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us. Much more then, being now
justified in His blood, we shall be saved from wrath through Him."
Justified, he says, in His blood,—justified plainly, in that we are freed
from all sin; and freed from all sin, because the Son of God, who knew no
sin, was slain for us. Therefore "we shall be saved from wrath through
Him;" from the wrath certainly of God, which is nothing else but just
retribution. For the wrath of God is not, as is that of man, a perturbation
of the mind; but it is the wrath of Him to whom Holy Scripture says in
another place, "But Thou, O Lord, mastering Thy power, judgest with
calmness." If, therefore, the just retribution of God has received such a
name, what can be the right understanding also of the reconciliation of
God, unless that then such wrath comes to an end? Neither were we
enemies to God, except as sins are enemies to righteousness; which being
forgiven, such enmities come to an end, and they whom He Himself
justifies are reconciled to the Just One. And yet certainly He loved them
even while still enemies, since "He spared not His own Son, but delivered

Him up for us all," when we were still enemies. And therefore the apostle
has rightly added: "For if, when we were enemies, we were reconciled to
God by the death of His Son," by which that remission of sins was made,
"much more, being reconciled, we shall be saved in His life." Saved in life,
who were reconciled by death. For who can doubt that He will give His
life for His friends, for whom, when enemies, He gave His death? "And
not only so," he says, "but we also joy in God, through our Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom we have now received the atonement." "Not only," he
says, "shall we be saved," but "we also joy;" and not in ourselves, but "in
God;" nor through ourselves, "but through our Lord Jesus Christ, by
whom we have now received the atonement," as we have argued above.
Then the apostle adds, "Wherefore, as by one man sin entered into the
world, and death by sin; and so death passed upon all men, in whom all
have sinned;" etc.: in which he disputes at some length concerning the
two men; the one the first Adam, through whose sin and death we, his
descendants, are bound by, as it were, hereditary evils; and the other the
second Adam, who is not only man, but also God, by whose payment for
us of what He owed not, we are freed from the debts both of our first
father and of ourselves. Further, since on account of that one the devil
held all who were begotten through his corrupted carnal concupiscence, it
is just that on account of this one he should loose all who are regenerated
through His immaculate spiritual grace.