THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.80, C.2.

received without its effect, is divided against spiritual eating, by
which one receives the effect of this sacrament, whereby a man is
spiritually united with Christ through faith and charity.
Reply to Objection 1: The same distinction is made regarding
Baptism and the other sacraments: for, some receive the sacrament
only, while others receive the sacrament and the reality of the
sacrament. However, there is a difference, because, since the other
sacraments are accomplished in the use of the matter, the receiving
of the sacrament is the actual perfection of the sacrament; whereas
this sacrament is accomplished in the consecration of the matter:
and consequently both uses follow the sacrament. On the other
hand, in Baptism and in the other sacraments that imprint a
character, they who receive the sacrament receive some spiritual
effect, that is, the character. which is not the case in this sacrament.
And therefore, in this sacrament, rather than in Baptism, the
sacramental use is distinguished from the spiritual use.
Reply to Objection 2: That sacramental eating which is also a
spiritual eating is not divided in contrast with spiritual eating, but is
included under it; but that sacramental eating which does not secure
the effect, is divided in contrast with spiritual eating; just as the
imperfect, which does not attain the perfection of its species, is
divided in contrast with the perfect.
Reply to Objection 3: As stated above (Question 73, Article 3), the
effect of the sacrament can be secured by every man if he receive it
in desire, though not in reality. Consequently, just as some are
baptized with the Baptism of desire, through their desire of baptism,
before being baptized in the Baptism of water; so likewise some eat
this sacrament spiritually ere they receive it sacramentally. Now this
happens in two ways. First of all, from desire of receiving the
sacrament itself, and thus are said to be baptized, and to eat
spiritually, and not sacramentally, they who desire to receive these
sacraments since they have been instituted. Secondly, by a figure:
thus the Apostle says (1 Cor. 10:2), that the fathers of old were
"baptized in the cloud and in the sea," and that "they did eat . . .
spiritual food, and . . . drank . . . spiritual drink." Nevertheless
sacramental eating is not without avail, because the actual receiving
of the sacrament produces more fully the effect of the sacrament
than does the desire thereof, as stated above of Baptism (Question
69, Article 4, ad 2).

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.80, C.2.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.80, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether it belongs to man alone to eat this

sacrament spiritually?
Objection 1: It seems that it does not belong to man alone to eat this
sacrament spiritually, but likewise to angels. Because on Ps. 77:25:
"Man ate the bread of angels," the gloss says: "that is, the body of
Christ, Who i's truly the food of angels." But it would not be so
unless the angels were to eat Christ spiritually. Therefore the angels
eat Christ spiritually.
Objection 2: Further, Augustine (Tract. xxvi in Joan.) says: By "this
meat and drink, He would have us to understand the fellowship of
His body and members, which is the Church in His predestinated
ones." But not only men, but also the holy angels belong to that
fellowship. Therefore the holy angels eat of it spiritually.
Objection 3: Further, Augustine in his book De Verbis Domini (Serm.
cxlii) says: "Christ is to be eaten spiritually, as He Himself declares:
'He that eateth My flesh and drinketh My blood, abideth in Me, and I
in him.'" But this belongs not only to men, but also to the holy
angels, in whom Christ dwells by charity, and they in Him.
Consequently, it seems that to eat Christ spiritually is not for men
only, but also for the angels.
On the contrary, Augustine (Tract. xxvi in Joan.) says: "Eat the
bread" of the altar "spiritually; take innocence to the altar." But
angels do not approach the altar as for the purpose of taking
something therefrom. Therefore the angels do not eat spiritually.
I answer that, Christ Himself is contained in this sacrament, not
under His proper species, but under the sacramental species.
Consequently there are two ways of eating spiritually. First, as Christ
Himself exists under His proper species, and in this way the angels
eat Christ spiritually inasmuch as they are united with Him in the
enjoyment of perfect charity, and in clear vision (and this is the
bread we hope for in heaven), and not by faith, as we are united with
Him here.
In another way one may eat Christ spiritually, as He is under the
sacramental species, inasmuch as a man believes in Christ, while
desiring to receive this sacrament; and this is not merely to eat