Luke xxi. 4. [The law of tithes abrogated; the law of Acts ii. 44, 45, morally binding. This seems to be our author's view.]

destroyer of himself. Wherefore did the Lord also declare: "Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites, for ye are like whited sepulchres. For the sepulchre appears beautiful outside, but within
it is full of dead men's bones, and all uncleanness; even so ye also outwardly appear righteous unto
men, but within ye are full of wickedness and hypocrisy." For while they were thought to offer
correctly so far as outward appearance went, they had in themselves jealousy like to Cain; therefore
they slew the Just One, slighting the counsel of the Word, as did also Cain. For [God] said to him,
"Be at rest;" but he did not assent. Now what else is it to "be at rest" than to forego purposed
violence? And saying similar things to these men, He declares: "Thou blind Pharisee, cleanse that
which is within the cup, that the outside may be clean also." And they did not listen to Him. For
Jeremiah says, "Behold, neither thine eyes nor thy heart are good; but [they are turned] to thy
covetousness, and to shed innocent blood, and for injustice, and for man-slaying, that thou mayest
do it." And again Isaiah saith, "Ye have taken counsel, but not of Me; and made covenants, [but]
not by My Spirit." In order, therefore, that their inner wish and thought, being brought to light,
may show that God is without blame, and worketh no evil —that God who reveals what is hidden
[in the heart], but who worketh not evil—when Cain was by no means at rest, He saith to him: "To
thee shall be his desire, and thou shalt rule over him." Thus did He in like manner speak to Pilate:
"Thou shouldest have no power at all against Me, unless it were given thee from above;" God
always giving up the righteous one [in this life to suffering], that he, having been tested by what
he suffered and endured, may [at last] be accepted; but that the evildÏr, being judged by the actions
he has performed, may be rejected. Sacrifices, therefore, do not sanctify a man, for God stands in
no need of sacrifice; but it is the conscience of the offerer that sanctifies the sacrifice when it is
pure, and thus moves God to accept [the offering] as from a friend. "But the sinner," says He, "who
kills a calf [in sacrifice] to Me, is as if he slew a dog."
4. Inasmuch, then, as the Church offers with single-mindedness, her gift is justly reckoned a
pure sacrifice with God. As Paul also says to the Philippians, "I am full, having received from
Epaphroditus the things that were sent from you, the odour of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable,
pleasing to God." For it behoves us to make an oblation to God, and in all things to be found
grateful to God our Maker, in a pure mind, and in faith without hypocrisy, in well-grounded hope,