3. Next he adds also the reason of the threat, that it is on good grounds, that
it is just; for this contributes to confidence, when we show that it is just.

Hebrews 10:28
For, he says, [Hebrews 10:28] "He that has despised Moses' law dies
without mercy, under two or three witnesses." "Without mercy," he says; so that
there is no pardon, no pity there although the law is of Moses; for he ordained
the most of it.
What is "under two or three"? If two or three bore witness, he means, they
immediately suffered punishment.

Hebrews 10:29
If then under the Old [Covenant], when the law of Moses is set at nought,
there is so great punishment, [Hebrews 10:29] "Of how much sorer punishment,
suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of
God and has counted the blood of the covenant an unholy [a common] thing,
and has done despite unto the Spirit of grace?"
And how does a man "tread under foot the Son of God"? When partaking of
Him in the mysteries (he would say) he has wrought sin, has he not trodden Him
under foot? Has he not despised Him? For just as we make no account of those
who are trodden under foot, so also, they who sin have made no account of
Christ; and so they have sinned. You are become the Body of Christ, and givest
you yourself to the devil, so that he treads you under foot.
"And accounted the blood a common thing," he says. What is "common"? It
is "unclean," or the having nothing beyond other things.
"And done despite unto the Spirit of grace." For he that accepts not a
benefit, does despite to the benefactor. He made you a son: and you wish to
become a slave. He came to dwell with you, and you bring in wicked
imaginations to Him. Christ wished to stay with you: and you tread Him down
by surfeiting, by drunkenness.
Let us listen, whoever partake of the mysteries unworthily: let us listen,
whoever approach that Table unworthily. "Give not" (He says) "that which is
holy unto the dogs, lest in time they trample them under their feet" [Matthew
7:6], that is, lest they despise, lest they repudiate [them]. Yet he did not say this,
but what was more fearful than this. For he constrains their souls by what is
fearful. For this also is adapted to convert, no less than consolation. And at the
same time he shows both the difference, and the chastisement, and sets forth the
judgment upon them, as though it were an evident matter. "Of how much sorer

punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy?" Here also he appears to
me to hint at the mysteries.

Hebrews 10:30-31
4. Next he adds testimony, saying, [Hebrews 10:30-31] "It is a fearful thing
to fall into the hands of the Living God." "For" it is written: "Vengeance
[belongs] unto Me, I will recompense, says the Lord. And again, The Lord shall
judge His people." "Let us fall," it is said, "into the hands of the Lord, and not
into the hands of men." [Sirach 2:18] But if you repent not, you shall "fall into
the hands of" God: that is fearful: it is nothing, to "fall into the hands of men."
When, he means, we see any man punished here, let us not be terrified at the
things present, but shudder at the things to come. "For according to His mercy,
so is His wrath." And, "His indignation will rest upon sinners." [Sirach 5:6]
At the same time too he hints at something else. For "Vengeance [belongs]
unto Me," he says, "I will recompense." This is said in regard to their enemies,
who are doing evil, not to those who are suffering evil. Here he is consoling
them too, all but saying, God abides for ever and lives, so that even if they
receive not [their reward] now, they will receive it hereafter. They ought to
groan, not we: for we indeed shall fall into their hands, but they into the hands of
God. For neither is it the sufferer who suffers the ill, but he that does it; nor is it
he who receives a benefit that is benefited, but the benefactor.
5. Knowing then these things, let us be patient as to suffering evil, forward
as to kindnesses. And this will be, if we think lightly of wealth and honor. He
that has stripped himself of those affections, is of all men most generous, and
more wealthy even than he who wears the purple. Do you see not how many
evils come through money? I do not say how many through covetousness, but
merely by our attachment to these things. For instance, if a man has lost his
money, he leads a life more wretched than any death. Why do you grieve, O
man? Why do you weep? Because God has delivered You from excessive
watching? Because thou dost not sit trembling and fearful? Again, if any one