sides, enveloping their mouth and their eyes and even their breath, did not cease
singing that sacred and mystical hymn to God, in company with the universe, but
standing in the midst of the pyre sent up their song of praise to the common Lord
of all with greater cheerfulness than they who abide in some flowery field: and
together with these three children I should think it proper to remind them also of
the lions which were in Babylon, and of Daniel and the den: [Daniel 6:24] and
not of this one only but also of another den, and the prophet Jeremiah, and the
mire in which he was smothered up to the neck. [Jeremiah 38:5] And emerging
from these dens, I would conduct these persons who put forward heat as an
excuse into the prison and exhibit Paul to them there, and Silas bound fast in the
stocks, covered with bruises and wounds lacerated all over their body with a
mass of stripes, yet singing praises to God at midnight and celebrating their holy
vigil. For is it not a monstrous thing that those holy men, both in the furnace and
the fire, and the den, and among wild beasts, and mire, and in a prison and the
stocks, and amidst stripes and jailers, and intolerable sufferings, never
complained of any of these things, but were continually uttering prayers and
sacred songs with much energy and fervent zeal, while we who have not
undergone any of their innumerable sufferings small or great, neglect our own
salvation on account of a scorching sun and a little short lived heat and toil, and
forsaking the assembly wander away, depraving ourselves by going to meetings
which are thoroughly unwholesome? When the dew of the divine oracles is so
abundant do you make heat your excuse? "The water which I will give him," says
Christ "shall be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting life;"
[John 4:14] and again; "He that believes in me as the Scripture has said, out of
his belly shall flow rivers of living water." [John 7:38] Tell me; when you have
spiritual wells and rivers, are you afraid of material heat? Now in the market
place where there is so much turmoil and crowding, and scorching wind, how is
it that you do not make suffocation and heat an excuse for absenting yourself?
For it is impossible for you to say that there you can enjoy a cooler temperature,
and that all the heat is concentrated here with us:— the truth is exactly the

reverse; here indeed owing to the pavement floor, and to the construction of the
building in other respects (for it is carried up to a vast height), the air is lighter
and cooler: whereas there the sun is strong in every direction, and there is much
crowding, and vapour and dust, and other things which add to discomfort far
more than these. Whence it is plain that these senseless excuses are the offspring
of indolence and of a supine disposition, destitute of the fire of the Holy Spirit.
3. Now these remarks of mine are not so much directed to them, as to you
who do not bring them forward, do not rouse them from their indolence, and
draw them to this table of salvation. Household slaves indeed when they have to
discharge some service in common, summon their fellow slaves, but you when
you are going to meet for this spiritual ministry suffer your fellow servants to be
deprived of the advantage by your neglect. "But what if they do not desire it?"
you say. Make them desire it by your continual importunity: for if they see you
insisting upon it they certainly will desire it. Nay these things are a mere excuse
and pretence. How many fathers at any rate are there here who have not their
sons standing with them? Was it so difficult for you to bring hither some of your
children? Whence it is clear that the absence of all the others who remain outside
is due not only to their own indolence, but also to your neglect. But now at least,
if never before, rouse yourselves up, and let each person enter the Church
accompanied by a member of his family: let them incite and urge one another to
the assembly here, the father his son, the son his father, the husbands their wives,
and the wives their husbands, the master his slave, brother his brother, friend his
friend: or rather let us not summon friends only but also enemies to this common
treasury of good things. If your enemy sees your care for his welfare, he will
undoubtedly relinquish his hatred.
Say to him: "are you not ashamed and do you not blush before the Jews
who keep their sabbath with such great strictness, and from the evening of it
abstain from all work? And if they see the sun verging towards setting on the day
of the Preparation they break off business, and cut short their traffic: and if any
one who has been making a purchase from them, before the evening, comes in