and of insolence: which is a difficult point to manage.
Now that these things should have occurred at "the third hour," was not
without cause. For the brightness of this fire is shown at the very time when
people are not engaged in their works, nor at dinner; when it is bright day, when
all are in the market-place. Do you observe also the freedom which fills his
speech? "And hearken to my words." And he added nothing, but, "This," says he,
"is that which was spoken by the prophet Joel; And it shall come to pass in the
last days." He shows, in fact, that the consummation is near at hand, and the
words, "In the last days," have a kind of emphasis. ["I will pour out," etc.] And
then, that he may not seem to limit the privilege to the sons only, he subjoins,
"And your old men shall dream dreams." Mark the sequence. First sons; just as
David said, "Instead of your fathers, were begotten your sons." [Psalm 45:17]
And again Malachi; "They shall turn the hearts of the fathers to the children.
And on my handmaidens, and on my servants." [Malachi 4:6] This also is a token
of excellence, for we have become His servants, by being freed from sin. And
great is the gift, since the grace passes over to the other sex also, not as of old, it
was limited to just one or two individuals, as Deborah and Huldah. He did not
say that it was the Holy Ghost, neither did he expound the words of the prophet;
but he merely brings in the prophecy to fight its own battle. As yet also he has
said nothing about Judas; and yet it was known to all what a doom and
punishment he had undergone; for nothing was more forcible than to argue with
them from prophecy: this was more forcible even than facts. For when Christ
performed miracles, they often contradicted Him. But when Christ brought
forward the prophet, saying, "The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit on my right hand,"
they were silent, and "no man," we read, "was able to answer Him a word."
[Psalm 90:1] And on all occasions He Himself also appealed to the Scriptures;
for instance, "If he called them gods to whom the word of God came." [John
10:35] And in many places one may find this. On this account here also Peter
says, "I will pour out of my spirit upon all flesh;" that is, upon the Gentiles also.
But he does not yet reveal this, nor give interpretations; indeed, it was better not

to do so (as also this obscure saying, "I will show wonders in heaven above," put
them the more in fear because it was obscure.) And it would have been more an
offense, had it been interpreted from the very first. Then besides, even as plain,
he passes over it, wishing to make them regard it as such. But after all, he does
interpret to them anon, when he discourses to them upon the resurrection, and
after he has paved the way by his discourse. (infra v. 39.) For since the good
things were not sufficient to allure them, [it is added, "And I will show wonders,
etc."]. Yet this has never been fulfilled. For none escaped then [in that former
judgment], but now the faithful did escape, in Vespasian's time. And this it is that
the Lord speaks of, "Except those days had been shortened, not all flesh should
be saved."— ["Blood, and fire, and vapor of smoke."] [Matthew 24:22] The
worst to come first; namely, the inhabitants to be taken, and then the city to be
razed and burnt. Then he dwelt upon the metaphor, bringing before the eyes of
the hearers the overthrow and the taking. "The sun shall be turned into darkness,
and the moon into blood." What means, the moon turned into blood? It denotes
the excess of the slaughter. The language is fraught with helpless dismay. (supra
p. 32.) "And it shall come to pass, every one who shall call upon the name of the
Lord shall be saved. Every one," he says: though he be priest (but he does not vet
reveal the meaning), though bond, though free. For there is no male nor female
in Christ Jesus, no bond, no free. [Galatians 3:28] Well may it be so, for all these
are but shadow. For if in king's palaces there is no high-born nor low-born, but
each appears according to his deeds; and in art, each is shown by his works;
much more in that school of wisdom ([φιλοσοφια]). "Every one who shall
invoke." Invoke: not any how, for it is written, "Not every one that says unto Me,
Lord, Lord:" but with ([διαθέσεως]) inward earnest affection, with a life more
than commonly good, with the confidence which is meet. Thus far, however, he
makes the discourse light, by introducing that which relates to faith, and that
terrible which relates to the punishment. For in the invocation is the salvation.
What, I pray you, is this you say? Do you talk of salvation for them after
the Cross? Bear with me a little. Great is the mercy of God. And this very fact