He speaks of the good things to come. This is with a view to their
temptations, that they should not seek their rest here. For lest any should say,
"And where is the good of their love toward the saints, if they themselves are in
affliction?" he says, "We rejoice that you are securing for yourselves a noble
reception in heaven." "Because of the hope," he says, "which is laid up." He
shows its secureness. "Whereof ye heard before in the word of the truth." Here
the expression is as if he would chide them, as having changed from it when they
had long held it.
"Whereof," says he, "ye heard before in the word of the truth of the Gospel."
And he bears witness to its truth. With good reason, for in it there is nothing
false.
"Of the Gospel." He does not say, "of the preaching," but he calls it the
"Gospel," continually reminding them of God's benefits. And having first
praised them, he next reminds them of these.
Ver. 6. "Which has come unto you, even as it is also in all the world."
He now gives them credit. "Is come," he said metaphorically. He means, it
did not come and go away, but that it remained, and was there. Then because to
the many the strongest confirmation of doctrines is that they hold them in
common with many, he therefore added, "As also it is in all the world."
It is present everywhere, everywhere victorious, everywhere established.
"And is bearing fruit, and increasing, as it does in you also."
"Bearing fruit." In works. "Increasing." By the accession of many, by
becoming firmer; for plants then begin to thicken when they have become firm.
"As also among you," says he.
He first gains the hearer by his praises, so that even though disinclined, he
may not refuse to hear him.
"Since the day ye heard it."
Marvelous! That you quickly came unto it and believed; and straightway,
from the very first, showed forth its fruits.
"Since the day ye heard, and knew the grace of God in truth."

Not in word, says he, nor in deceit, but in very deeds. Either then this is
what he means by "bearing fruit," or else, the signs and wonders. Because as
soon as you received it, so soon ye knew the grace of God. What then
immediately gave proofs of its inherent virtue, is it not a hard thing that that
should now be disbelieved?
Ver. 7. "Even as you learned of Epaphras our beloved fellow-servant."
He, it is probable, had preached there. "You learned" the Gospel. Then to
show the trustworthiness of the man, he says, "our fellow servant."
"Who is a faithful minister of Christ on your behalf; who also declared unto
us your love in the Spirit."
Doubt not, he says, of the hope which is to come: ye see that the world is
being converted. And what need to allege the cases of others? What happened in
your own is even independently a sufficient ground for belief, for, "ye knew the
grace of God in truth:" that is, in works. So that these two things, viz. the belief
of all, and your own too, confirm the things that are to come. Nor was the fact
one thing, and what Epaphras said, another. "Who is," says he, "faithful," that is,
true. How, "a minister on your behalf"? In that he had gone to him. "Who also
declared to us," says he, "your love in the Spirit," that is, the spiritual love ye
bear us. If this man be the minister of Christ; how say ye, that you approach God
by angels? "Who also declared unto us," says he, "your love in the Spirit." For
this love is wonderful and steadfast; all other has but the name. And there are
some persons who are not of this kind, but such is not friendship, wherefore also
it is easily dissolved.
There are many causes which produce friendship; and we will pass over
those which are infamous, (for none will take an objection against us in their
favor, seeing they are evil.) But let us, if you will, review those which are
natural, and those which arise out of the relations of life. Now of the social sort
are these, for instance; one receives a kindness, or inherits a friend from
forefathers, or has been a companion at table or in travel: or is neighbor to
another (and these are virtuous); or is of the same trade, which last however is