loved." [2 Corinthians 12:15] This, however, is near the end; but at present more
vehemently, "You are not straitened in us, but you are straitened in your own
affections," 'You receive one,' he says, 'but I a whole city, and so great a
population.' And he said not, 'ye do not receive us,' but, 'you are straitened;'
implying indeed the same thing but with forbearance and without touching them
too deeply.

2 Corinthians 6:13
"Now for a recompense in like kind (I speak as unto my children,) be ye also
enlarged."
And yet it is not an equal return, first to be loved, afterwards to love. For
even if one were to contribute that which is equal in amount, he is inferior in that
he comes to it second. 'But nevertheless I am not going to reckon strictly, ' says
he, 'and if you after having received the first advances from me do but show
forth the same amount, I am well-pleased and contented.' Then to show that to
do this was even a debt, and that what he said was void of flattery, he says, "I
speak as unto my children." What means, "as unto my children?" 'I ask no great
thing, if being your father I wish to be loved by you.' And see wisdom and
moderation of mind. He mentions not here his dangers on their behalf, and his
labors, and his deaths, although he had many to tell of: (so free from pride is he!)
but his love: and on this account he claims to be loved; 'because,' says he, 'I was
your father, because I exceedingly burn for you,' [for] it is often especially
offensive to the person beloved when a man sets forth his benefits to him; for he
seems to reproach. Wherefore Paul does not this; but, 'like children, love your
father,' says he, which rather proceeds from instinct ; and is the due of every
father. Then that he may not seem to speak these things for his own sake, he
shows that it is for their advantage even that he invites this love from them. And
therefore he added,

2 Corinthians 6:14-16
"Be not unequally yoked together with unbelievers."
He said not, 'Intermix not with unbelievers,' but rather dealing sharply with
them, as transgressing what was right, 'Suffer not yourselves to turn aside,' says
he, "For what fellowship have righteousness and iniquity?" Here in what follows
he institutes a comparison, not between his own love and theirs who corrupt
them, but between their nobleness and the others' dishonor. For thus his
discourse became more dignified and more beseeming himself, and would the
rather win them. Just as if one should say to a son that despised his parents, and
gave himself up to vicious persons, 'What are you doing, child? Do you despise
your father and prefer impure men filled with ten thousand vices? Do you not
know how much better and more respectable you are than they?' For so he
detaches him more [readily] from their society than if he should express
admiration of his father. For were he to say indeed, 'Do you not know how much
your father is better than they?' he will not produce so much effect; but if,
leaving mention of his father, he bring himself before them, saying, 'Do you not
know who you are and what they are? Do you not bear in mind your own high
birth and gentle blood, and their infamy? For what communion have you with
them, those thieves, those adulterers, those impostors?' by elevating him with
these praises of himself, he will quickly prepare him to break off from them. For
the former address indeed, he will not entertain with overmuch acceptance,
because the exalting of his father is an accusation of himself, when he is shown
to be not only grieving a father, but such a father; but in this case he will have no
such feeling. For none would choose not to be praised, and therefore, along with
these praises of him that hears, the rebuke becomes easy of digestion. For the
listener is softened, and is filled with high thoughts, and disdains the society of
those persons.