"Wherefore I pray you to take some meat: for this is for your health: for there
shall not an hair fall from the head of any of you. And when he had thus spoken,
he took bread, and gave thanks to God in presence of them all: and when he had
broken it, he began to eat. Then were they all of good cheer, and they also took
some meat," [Acts 27:34-36] seeing that there was no question about their lives
being saved. (d) "And we were in all in the ship two hundred threescore and
sixteen souls. And when they had eaten enough, they lightened the ship, and cast
out the wheat into the sea. And when it was day, they knew not the land: but they
discovered a certain creek with a shore, into the which they were minded, if it
were possible, to thrust in the ship. And when they had taken up the anchors,
they committed themselves unto the sea, and loosed the rudder bands, and
hoisted up the mainsail to the wind, and made toward shore." [Acts 27:37-41]
"They made towards shore," having given the rudder-handles to the wind: for
oftentimes they do it not in this way. They were borne along, having loosed the
rigging, i.e. the sails. "And falling into a place where two seas met, they ran the
ship aground; and the forepart stuck fast, and remained unmovable, but the
hinder part was broken with the violence of the waves;" for when there is a
strong wind, this is the consequence, the stern bearing the brunt (of the storm).
(a) "And the soldiers' counsel was to kill the prisoners, lest any of them should
swim out, and escape." [Acts 27:42] Again the devil tries to hinder the prophecy,
and they had a mind to kill some, but the centurion suffered them not, that he
might save Paul, so much was the centurion attached to him. "But the centurion,
willing to save Paul, kept them from their purpose; and commanded that they
which could swim should cast themselves first into the sea, and get to land: and
the rest, some on boards, and some on broken pieces of the ship. And so it came
to pass, that they escaped all safe to land." (v. 43, 44.) "And when they were
escaped, then they knew that the island was called Melita." [Acts 28:1] Do you
mark what good came of the storm? Why then it was no mark of their being
forsaken, that the storm came upon them. (c) Now this that happened was in
consequence of the season of the year; but the wonder is greater, that at such a

season they were saved from the midst of the dangers, both he, and for his sake
the rest, (e) and this too in the Hadriatic. There were two hundred and seventysix souls in all: no small matter this also, if indeed they believed. The voyage
was at an unseasonable time. (g) It is natural to suppose they would ask the
reason why they were sailing, and would learn all. Nor was it for nothing that the
voyage was so protracted; it afforded Paul an opportunity for teaching.
(Recapitulation.) And Paul says, "I perceive that (this voyage will be) with
hurt and loss." [Acts 27:10] And observe how unassuming the expression is.
That he may not seem to prophesy, but to speak as of conjecture, "I perceive,"
says he. For they would not have received it, had he said this at the outset. In fact
he does prophesy on this former occasion, as he does afterward, and says (there),
"The God whom I serve," leading them on. Then how comes it that it was not
"with loss" (of any) "of their lives?" It would have been so, but that God brought
them safe through it. For as far as depended on the nature of the thing, they had
perished, but God prevented it. Then, to show that it was not from conjecture
that he so spoke, the master of the ship said the contrary [Acts 27:11], and he a
man of experience in the matter: so far was it from being the case that Paul's
advice was given from conjecture. Moreover, the place suggested this same
(which the master said), "being not commodious;" and it was evident that from
conjecture "the more part advised" [Acts 27:12] as they did, rather than Paul.
Then, severe the storm (that ensued), deep the darkness: and that they may not
forget, the vessel also goes to pieces, and the grain is flung out and all beside,
that they may not have it in their power after this to be shameless. For this is
why the vessel goes to pieces, and their souls are tightly braced. Moreover, both
the storm and the darkness contributed not a little to his obtaining the hearing he
did. Accordingly observe how the centurion does as he bids him, insomuch that
he even let the boat go, and destroyed it. And if the sailors did not as yet comply
with his bidding, yet afterwards they do so: for in fact this is a reckless sort of
people. [Acts 27:13-20] "Sirs, you should have hearkened to me," etc. [Acts
27:21] One is not likely to have a good reception, when he chides in the midst of