either earth, or water, or tillage; but let the seeds be sown, and let him shed forth
his rays, and produce the ears of grain. But now if this work be not his alone, but
that of the rains also, wherefore is not the water a god also? But of this I speak
not yet. Why is not the earth too a god, and why not the dung, and the hoe? Shall
we then, tell me, worship all? Alas, what trifling! And indeed rather might the
ear of grain be produced without sun, than without earth and water; and so with
plants and all other things. Were there no earth, none of these things could ever
appear. And if any one, as children and women do, were to put some earth into a
pot, and to fill up the pot with a quantity of dung, and to place it under the roof,
plants, though they may be weak ones, will be produced from it. So that the
contribution of the earth and of the dung is greater, and these therefore we ought
to worship rather than the sun. He requires the sky, he requires the air, he
requires these waters, to prevent his doing harm, to be as bridles to curb the
fierceness of his power, and to restrain him from letting loose his rays over the
world, like some furious horse. And now tell me, where is he at night? Whither
has your god taken his departure? For this is not like a god, to be circumscribed
and limited. This is in fact the property of bodies only. But, say they, there is
some sort of power residing in him, and he has motion. Is this power then, I pray
you, itself God? Why then is it insufficient in itself, and why does it not restrain
the fire? For again, I come to the same argument. But what is that power? Is it
productive of light, or does it by the sun give light, though of itself possessing
none of these qualities? If so, then is the sun superior to it. How far shall we
unwind this maze?
Again, what is water? Is not that too, they say, a god? This again is a matter
of truly absurd disputation. Is that not a god, they say, which we make use of for
so many purposes? And so again, in like manner, of the earth. Truly "they walk
in the vanity of their mind, being darkened in their understanding."
But these words he is now using concerning life and conduct. The Greeks
are fornicators and adulterers. Of course. They who paint to themselves such
gods as these, will naturally do all these things; and if they can but escape the

eyes of men, there is no one to restrain them. For what will avail the argument of
a resurrection, if it appear to them a mere fable? Yea, and what that of the
torments of hell?— they too are but a fable. And mark the Satanic notion. When
they are told of gods who are fornicators, they deny that these are fables, but
believe them. Yet whenever any shall discourse to them of punishment, "these,"
they say, "are poets, men who turn everything into fable, that man's happy
condition may be on all sides overturned."
But the philosophers, it is said, discovered something truly grand, and far
better than these. How? They who introduced fate, and who tell us that nothing
is providential, and that there is no one to care for anything, but that all things
consist of atoms? Or, others again who say that God is a body? Or who, tell me,
are they? Are they those who would turn the souls of men into the souls of dogs,
and would pervade mankind that one was once a dog, and a lion, and a fish?
How long will you go on and never cease trifling, "being darkened in the
understanding"? For they say and do all things as though they were indeed in the
dark, both in those things which concern doctrine, and those which concern life
and conduct; for the man who is in darkness sees none of the things which lie
before him, but oftentimes when he sees a rope, he will take it for a live serpent;
or again, if he is caught by a hedge, he will think that a man or an evil spirit has
hold of him, and great is the alarm, and great the perturbation. Such as these are
the things they fear. "There were they in great fear," it says, "where no fear was"
[Psalm 53:5]; but the things which they ought to fear, these they fear not. But
just as children in their nurses' arms thrust their hands incautiously into the fire,
and boldly into the candle also, and yet are scared at a man clothed in sackcloth;
just so these Greeks, as if they were really always children, (as some one also
among themselves has said, the Greeks are always children,) fear those things
that are no sins, such as filthiness of the body, the pollution of a funeral, a bed,
or the keeping of days, and the like: whereas those which are really sins,
unnatural lust, adultery, fornication, of these they make no account at all. No,
you may see a man washing himself from the pollution of a dead body, but from