FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.90, C.3.

Now in every genus, that which belongs to it chiefly is the principle
of the others, and the others belong to that genus in subordination to
that thing: thus fire, which is chief among hot things, is the cause of
heat in mixed bodies, and these are said to be hot in so far as they
have a share of fire. Consequently, since the law is chiefly ordained
to the common good, any other precept in regard to some individual
work, must needs be devoid of the nature of a law, save in so far as it
regards the common good. Therefore every law is ordained to the
common good.
Reply to Objection 1: A command denotes an application of a law to
matters regulated by the law. Now the order to the common good, at
which the law aims, is applicable to particular ends. And in this way
commands are given even concerning particular matters.
Reply to Objection 2: Actions are indeed concerned with particular
matters: but those particular matters are referable to the common
good, not as to a common genus or species, but as to a common
final cause, according as the common good is said to be the
common end.
Reply to Objection 3: Just as nothing stands firm with regard to the
speculative reason except that which is traced back to the first
indemonstrable principles, so nothing stands firm with regard to the
practical reason, unless it be directed to the last end which is the
common good: and whatever stands to reason in this sense, has the
nature of a law.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.90, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the reason of any man is competent to

make laws?
Objection 1: It would seem that the reason of any man is competent
to make laws. For the Apostle says (Rm. 2:14) that "when the
Gentiles, who have not the law, do by nature those things that are of
the law . . . they are a law to themselves." Now he says this of all in
general. Therefore anyone can make a law for himself.
Objection 2: Further, as the Philosopher says (Ethic. ii, 1), "the
intention of the lawgiver is to lead men to virtue." But every man can
lead another to virtue. Therefore the reason of any man is competent
to make laws.
Objection 3: Further, just as the sovereign of a state governs the
state, so every father of a family governs his household. But the
sovereign of a state can make laws for the state. Therefore every
father of a family can make laws for his household.
On the contrary, Isidore says (Etym. v, 10): "A law is an ordinance of
the people, whereby something is sanctioned by the Elders together
with the Commonalty."
I answer that, A law, properly speaking, regards first and foremost
the order to the common good. Now to order anything to the
common good, belongs either to the whole people, or to someone
who is the viceregent of the whole people. And therefore the making
of a law belongs either to the whole people or to a public personage
who has care of the whole people: since in all other matters the
directing of anything to the end concerns him to whom the end
belongs.
Reply to Objection 1: As stated above (Article 1, ad 1), a law is in a
person not only as in one that rules, but also by participation as in
one that is ruled. In the latter way each one is a law to himself, in so
far as he shares the direction that he receives from one who rules
him. Hence the same text goes on: "Who show the work of the law
written in their hearts."
Reply to Objection 2: A private person cannot lead another to virtue
efficaciously: for he can only advise, and if his advice be not taken, it