ashamed? Yea, he gloried in this very thing.
But you will say, "Who is there now to be compared with the virtue of
Paul?" I too am aware that there is no one, yet not on this account are those who
live now to be despised: for if for Christ's sake thou give honor, though one be
last of all, yet if he be a believer he shall justly be honored. For suppose a
general and a common soldier both present themselves before you, being friends
of the king, and you open your house to both: in which of their persons would
you seem to pay most honor to the king? Plainly in that of a soldier. For there
were in the general, beside his loyalty to the king, many other things apt to win
such a mark of respect from you: but the soldier had nothing else but his loyalty
to the king.
Wherefore God bade us call to our suppers and our feasts the lame, and the
maimed, and those who cannot repay us; for these are most of all properly called
good deeds which are done for God's sake. Whereas if you entertain some great
and distinguished man, it is not such pure mercy, what you do, but some portion
many times is assigned to yourself also, both by vain-glory, and by the return of
the favor, and by your rising in many men's estimation on account of your guest.
At any rate, I think I could point out many who with this view pay court to the
more distinguished among the saints, namely, that by their means they may
enjoy a greater intimacy with rulers, and that they may find them thenceforth
more useful in their own affairs and to their families. And many such favors do
they ask in recompense from those saints; a thing which mars the repayment of
their hospitality, they seeking it with such a mind.
And why need I say this about the saints? Since he who seeks, even from
God, the reward of his labors in the present life and follows after virtue for this
world's good, is sure to diminish his recompense. But he that asks for all his
crowns wholly there, is found far more admirable; like that Lazarus, who even
now is "receiving" [Luke 16:25] there all "his good things;" like those Three
Children, who when they were on the point of being thrown into the furnace
said, [Daniel 17:17-18] "There is a God in heaven able to deliver us; and if not,

be it known unto you, O king, that we serve not your gods, nor worship the
golden image which you have set up:" like Abraham, who even offered his son
and slew him; and this he did, not for any reward, but esteeming this one thing
the greatest recompense, to obey the Lord.
These let us also imitate. For so shall we be visited with a return of all our
good deeds and that abundantly, because we do all with such a mind as this: so
shall we obtain also the brighter crowns. And God grant that we may all obtain
them, through the grace and loving-kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with
Whom, to the Father and the Holy Spirit, be glory, power, honor, now,
henceforth, and for everlasting ages. Amen.