SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.156, C.4.

according to the letter of the law; and in this respect it pertains to
equity. The other point is a certain moderation of a man's inward
disposition, so that he does not exercise his power of inflicting
punishment. This belongs properly to clemency, wherefore Seneca
says (De Clementia ii, 3) that "it is temperance of the soul in
exercising the power of taking revenge." This moderation of soul
comes from a certain sweetness of disposition, whereby a man
recoils from anything that may be painful to another. Wherefore
Seneca says (De Clementia ii, 3) that "clemency is a certain
smoothness of the soul"; for, on the other hand, there would seem to
be a certain roughness of soul in one who fears not to pain others.
Reply to Objection 2: The annexation of secondary to principal
virtues depends on the mode of virtue, which is, so to speak, a kind
of form of the virtue, rather than on the matter. Now meekness and
clemency agree with temperance in mode, as stated above, though
they agree not in matter.
Reply to Objection 3: "Unsoundness" is corruption of "soundness."
Now just as soundness of body is corrupted by the body lapsing
from the condition due to the human species, so unsoundness of
mind is due to the mind lapsing from the disposition due to the
human species. This occurs both in respect of the reason, as when a
man loses the use of reason, and in respect of the appetitive power,
as when a man loses that humane feeling whereby "every man is
naturally friendly towards all other men" (Ethic. viii, 1). The
unsoundness of mind that excludes the use of reason is opposed to
prudence. But that a man who takes pleasure in the punishment of
others is said to be of unsound mind, is because he seems on this
account to be devoid of the humane feeling which gives rise to
clemency.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.156, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether clemency and meekness are the greatest

virtues?
Objection 1: It would seem that clemency and meekness are the
greatest virtues. For virtue is deserving of praise chiefly because it
directs man to happiness that consists in the knowledge of God.
Now meekness above all directs man to the knowledge of God: for it
is written (James 1:21): "With meekness receive the ingrafted word,"
and (Ecclus. 5:13): "Be meek to hear the word" of God. Again,
Dionysius says (Ep. viii ad Demophil.) that "Moses was deemed
worthy of the Divine apparition on account of his great meekness."
Therefore meekness is the greatest of virtues.
Objection 2: Further, seemingly a virtue is all the greater according
as it is more acceptable to God and men. Now meekness would
appear to be most acceptable to God. For it is written (Ecclus.
1:34,35): "That which is agreeable" to God is "faith and meekness";
wherefore Christ expressly invites us to be meek like unto Himself
(Mt. 11:29), where He says: "Learn of Me, because I am meek and
humble of heart"; and Hilary declares [Comment. in Matth. iv, 3] that
"Christ dwells in us by our meekness of soul." Again, it is most
acceptable to men; wherefore it is written (Ecclus. 3:19): "My son, do
thy works in meekness, and thou shalt be beloved above the glory of
men": for which reason it is also declared (Prov. 20:28) that the
King's "throne is strengthened by clemency." Therefore meekness
and clemency are the greatest of virtues.
Objection 3: Further, Augustine says (De Serm. Dom. in Monte i, 2)
that "the meek are they who yield to reproaches, and resist not evil,
but overcome evil by good." Now this seems to pertain to mercy or
piety which would seem to be the greatest of virtues: because a
gloss of Ambrose [Hilary the deacon] on 1 Tim. 4:8, "Piety is
profitable to all things," observes that "piety is the sum total of the
Christian religion." Therefore meekness and clemency are the
greatest virtues.
On the contrary, They are not reckoned as principal virtues, but are
annexed to another, as to a principal, virtue.
I answer that, Nothing prevents certain virtues from being greatest,
not indeed simply, nor in every respect, but in a particular genus. It