Here he clearly puts forward what I have stated: for the expressions "we
were kept" and "shut up," signify nothing else than the security given by the
commandments of the Law; which like a fortress fenced them round with fear
and a life conformable to itself, and so preserved them unto Faith.
Ver. 24. "So that the Law has been our tutor to bring us unto Christ, that we
might be justified by faith."
Now the Tutor is not opposed to the Preceptor, but cooperates with him,
ridding the youth from all vice, and having all leisure to fit him for receiving
instructions from his Preceptor. But when the youth's habits are formed, then the
Tutor leaves him, as Paul says.
Ver. 25, 26. "But now that faith has come which leads to perfect manhood
we are no longer under a tutor. For you are all sons of God through faith in
Christ Jesus."
The Law then, as it was our tutor, and we were kept shut up under it, is not
the adversary but the fellow-worker of grace; but if when grace has come, it
continues to hold us down, it becomes an adversary; for if it confines those who
ought to go forward to grace, then it is the destruction of our salvation. If a
candle which gave light by night, kept us, when it became day, from the sun, it
would not only not benefit, it would injure us; and so does the Law, if it stands
between us and greater benefits. Those then are the greatest traducers of the Law,
who still keep it, just as the tutor makes a youth ridiculous, by retaining him with
himself, when time calls for his departure. Hence Paul says, "But after faith has
come, we are no longer under a tutor." We are then no longer under a tutor, "for
you are all sons of God." Wonderful! see how mighty is the power of Faith, and
how he unfolds as he proceeds! Before, he showed that it made them sons of the
Patriarch, "Know therefore," says he, "that they which be of faith, the same are
sons of Abraham;" now he proves that they are sons of God also, "For you are
all," says he, "sons of God through faith, which is in Christ Jesus;" by Faith, not
by the Law. Then, when he has said this great and wonderful thing, he names
also the mode of their adoption,

Ver. 27. "For as many of you as were baptized into Christ, did put on
Christ."
Why does he not say, "For as many of you as have been baptized into
Christ, have been born of God?" for this was what directly went to prove that
they were sons—because he states it in a much more awful point of view; If
Christ be the Son of God, and you have put on Him, thou who hast the Son
within you, and art fashioned after His pattern, hast been brought into one
kindred and nature with Him.
Ver. 28. "There can be neither Jew nor Greek, there can be neither bond nor
free, there can be no male and female: for you all are one in Christ Jesus."
See what an insatiable soul! For having said, "We are all made children of
God through Faith," he does not stop there, but tries to find something more
exact, which may serve to convey a still closer oneness with Christ. Having said,
"you have put on Christ," even this does not suffice Him, but by way of
penetrating more deeply into this union, he comments on it thus: "You are all
One in Christ Jesus," that is, you have all one form and one mould, even
Christ's. What can be more awful than these words! He that was a Greek, or Jew,
or bond-man yesterday, carries about with him the form, not of an Angel or
Archangel, but of the Lord of all, yea displays in his own person the Christ.
Ver. 29. "And if you are Christ's, then are you Abraham's seed, heirs
according to promise."
Here, you observe, he proves what he had before stated concerning the seed
of Abraham—that to him and to his seed the promises were given.