else it would not be in act. But when once it exists under one form it
is in potentiality to others. On the other hand, the intellect does not
receive substantial being through the intelligible species; and
therefore there is no comparison.
Reply to Objection 3: If questions be put in an orderly fashion they
proceed from universal self-evident principles to what is particular.
Now by such a process knowledge is produced in the mind of the
learner. Wherefore when he answers the truth to a subsequent
question, this is not because he had knowledge previously, but
because he thus learns for the first time. For it matters not whether
the teacher proceed from universal principles to conclusions by
questioning or by asserting; for in either case the mind of the
listener is assured of what follows by that which preceded.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the intelligible species are derived by the

soul from certain separate forms?
Objection 1: It would seem that the intelligible species are derived by
the soul from some separate forms. For whatever is such by
participation is caused by what is such essentially; for instance, that
which is on fire is reduced to fire as the cause thereof. But the
intellectual soul forasmuch as it is actually understanding,
participates the thing understood: for, in a way, the intellect in act is
the thing understood in act. Therefore what in itself and in its
essence is understood in act, is the cause that the intellectual soul
actually understands. Now that which in its essence is actually
understood is a form existing without matter. Therefore the
intelligible species, by which the soul understands, are caused by
some separate forms.
Objection 2: Further, the intelligible is to the intellect, as the sensible
is to the sense. But the sensible species which are in the senses,
and by which we sense, are caused by the sensible object which
exists actually outside the soul. Therefore the intelligible species, by
which our intellect understands, are caused by some things actually
intelligible, existing outside the soul. But these can be nothing else
than forms separate from matter. Therefore the intelligible forms of
our intellect are derived from some separate substances.
Objection 3: Further, whatever is in potentiality is reduced to act by
something actual. If, therefore, our intellect, previously in
potentiality, afterwards actually understands, this must needs be
caused by some intellect which is always in act. But this is a
separate intellect. Therefore the intelligible species, by which we
actually understand, are caused by some separate substances.
On the contrary, If this were true we should not need the senses in
order to understand. And this is proved to be false especially from
the fact that if a man be wanting in a sense, he cannot have any
knowledge of the sensibles corresponding to that sense.
I answer that, Some have held that the intelligible species of our
intellect are derived from certain separate forms or substances. And
this in two ways. For Plato, as we have said (Article 1), held that the
forms of sensible things subsist by themselves without matter; for