exposed to accidents the present life is, since things every day din in our ears
more loudly than a trumpet, the worthlessness, the ridiculousness, the
shamefulness, the dangers, the pitfalls, of the present scene. What defence then
shall we have to set up for pursuing things so subject to hazards, and laden with
shame, with so much eagerness, and leaving things unfailing, which will make
us glorious and bright, and giving our whole selves up to the thraldom of
money? For the slavery to these things is worse than any bondage. And this they
know who have been counted worthy to obtain their freedom from it. That ye
then may also feel this goodly liberty, burst the bonds asunder, spring out of the
snare. And let there be no gold lying by in your houses, but that which is more
precious than millions of money, alms and love to man, for your treasure. For
this gives us boldness toward God, but the other covers us with deep shame, and
causes the devil to bear hard ([σφοδρὸν πνεἵν]) upon us. Why then arm your
enemy, and make him stronger? Arm your right hand against him, and transfer
all the splendor of your house into your soul, and stow away all your fortune in
your mind, and instead of a chest and a house, let heaven keep your gold. And
let us put all our property about our own selves; for we are much better than the
walls, and more dignified than the pavement. Why then do we, to the neglect of
our own selves, waste all our attention upon those things, which when we are
gone we can no longer reach, and often even while we stay here we cannot keep
hold of, when we might have such riches as to be found not in this life only, but
also in that, in the easiest circumstances? For he who carries about his farms and
house and gold upon his soul, wherever he appears, appears with all this wealth.
And how is this possible to be effected? One may ask. It is possible, and that
with the utmost ease. For if you transfer them to Heaven by the poor man's hand,
you will transfer them entire into your own soul. And if death should afterwards
come upon you, no one will take them from you, but you will depart to be rich in
the next world too. This was the kind of treasure Tabitha had. Hence it was not
her house that proclaimed her wealth, nor the walls, nor the stones, nor the
pillars, but the bodies of widows furnished with dress, and their tears that were

shed, and death that played the runaway, and life that came back again. Let us
also make unto ourselves such-like treasures, let us build up for ourselves suchlike houses. In this way we shall have God for our Fellow-worker, and we
ourselves shall be workers together with Him. For Himself brought the poor
from not being into being, and you will prevent them, after they have been
brought into life and being, from perishing with hunger and other distress, by
tending them and setting them upright, staying up the Temple of God in every
quarter. What can be equal to this in respect both of utility and of glory? Or if as
yet you have not gained any clear notion of the great adornment He bestowed
upon you when He bade you relieve poverty, consider this point with yourself. If
He had given you so great power, that you were able to set up again even the
Heaven if it were falling, would you not think the thing an honor far too great for
you? See now He has held you worthy of a greater honor. For that which in His
esteem is more precious than the Heavens, He has trusted you to repair. For of
all things visible there is nothing in God's esteem equal to man. For Heaven and
earth and sea did He make for him, and finds more pleasure in dwelling with him
than in the Heaven. And yet we, though with a knowledge of this, bestow no
attention nor forethought upon the temples of God; but leaving them in a
neglected state, we provide houses splendid and large for ourselves. This is why
we are devoid of all good things, and greater beggars than the poorest poor,
because we pride ourselves in these houses which we cannot take away with us
when we go hence, and leave those alone which we might move away along
with our own selves. For the bodies of the poor after dissolution must needs rise
again; and God, Who has given this charge, will bring them forth, and praise
those who have taken care of them, and treat such with regard ([θαυμάσεται]),
because when they were on the point of falling to ruin at one time by starvation,
at another by nakedness and cold, these repaired them by all means in their
power. But still, even with all these praises set before us, we loiter yet, and
decline undertaking this honorable charge. And Christ indeed has not where to
lodge, but goes about a stranger, and naked, and hungry, and you set up houses