SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.85, C.4.

itself, may be offered in oblation. But it may happen accidentally that
one may not make an oblation of what one possesses lawfully; for
instance if it be detrimental to another person, as in the case of a
son who offers to God the means of supporting his father (which our
Lord condemns, Mt. 15:5), or if it give rise to scandal or contempt, or
the like.
Reply to Objection 1: In the Old Law it was forbidden to make an
offering of the hire of a strumpet on account of its uncleanness, and
in the New Law, on account of scandal, lest the Church seem to
favor sin if she accept oblations from the profits of sin.
Reply to Objection 2: According to the Law, a dog was deemed an
unclean animal. Yet other unclean animals were redeemed and their
price could be offered, according to Lev. 27:27, "If it be an unclean
animal, he that offereth it shall redeem it." But a dog was neither
offered nor redeemed, both because idolaters used dogs in
sacrifices to their idols, and because they signify robbery, the
proceeds of which cannot be offered in oblation. However, this
prohibition ceased under the New Law.
Reply to Objection 3: The oblation of a blind or lame animal was
declared unlawful for three reasons. First, on account of the purpose
for which it was offered, wherefore it is written (Malach. 1:8): "If you
offer the blind in sacrifice, is it not evil?" and it behooved sacrifices
to be without blemish. Secondly, on account of contempt, wherefore
the same text goes on (Malach. 1:12): "You have profaned" My name,
"in that you say: The table of the Lord is defiled and that which is
laid thereupon is contemptible." Thirdly, on account of a previous
vow, whereby a man has bound himself to offer without blemish
whatever he has vowed: hence the same text says further on
(Malach. 1:14): "Cursed is the deceitful man that hath in his flock a
male, and making a vow offereth in sacrifice that which is feeble to
the Lord." The same reasons avail still in the New Law, but when
they do not apply the unlawfulness ceases.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.85, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether men are bound to pay first-fruits?

Objection 1: It would seem that men are not bound to pay first-fruits.
After giving the law of the first-born the text continues (Ex. 13:9): "It
shall be as a sign in thy hand," so that, apparently, it is a ceremonial
precept. But ceremonial precepts are not to be observed in the New
Law. Neither therefore ought first-fruits to be paid.
Objection 2: Further, first-fruits were offered to the Lord for a special
favor conferred on that people, wherefore it is written (Dt. 26:2,3):
"Thou shalt take the first of all thy fruits . . . and thou shalt go to the
priest that shall be in those days, and say to him: I profess this day
before the Lord thy God, that I am come into the land, for which He
swore to our fathers, that He would give it us." Therefore other
nations are not bound to pay first-fruits.
Objection 3: That which one is bound to do should be something
definite. But neither in the New Law nor in the Old do we find
mention of a definite amount of first-fruits. Therefore one is not
bound of necessity to pay them.
On the contrary, It is laid down (16, qu. vii, can. Decimas): "We
confirm the right of priests to tithes and first-fruits, and everybody
must pay them."
I answer that, First-fruits are a kind of oblation, because they are
offered to God with a certain profession (Dt. 26); where the same
passage continues: "The priest taking the basket containing the firstfruits from the hand of him that bringeth the first-fruits, shall set it
before the altar of the Lord thy God," and further on (Dt. 26:10) he is
commanded to say: "Therefore now I offer the first-fruits of the land,
which the Lord hath given me." Now the first-fruits were offered for a
special reason, namely, in recognition of the divine favor, as though
man acknowledged that he had received the fruits of the earth from
God, and that he ought to offer something to God in return,
according to 1 Paral 29:14, "We have given Thee what we received of
Thy hand." And since what we offer God ought to be something
special, hence it is that man was commanded to offer God his firstfruits, as being a special part of the fruits of the earth: and since a
priest is "ordained for the people "in the things that appertain to
God" (Heb. 5:1), the first-fruits offered by the people were granted to