how long shall there be in you thoughts of your labors?" [Jeremiah 4:14] Let us
also wash ourselves, not with mire, but with fair water, with alms-doing, not
with covetousness. First get free from rapine, and then show forth almsdeeds.
Let us "decline from evil, and do good." [Psalm 37:27] Stay your hands from
covetousness, and so bring them to almsgiving. But if with the same hands we
strip one set of persons, though we may not clothe the others with what has been
taken from them, yet we shall not thus escape punishment. For that which is the
groundwork of the propitiation is made the groundwork of all wickedness. Better
not show mercy, than show it thus; since for Cain also it had been better not to
have brought his offering at all. Now if he who brought too little angered God,
when one gives what is another's, how shall not he anger Him? "I commanded
you," He will say, "not to steal, and do you honor Me from that you have stolen?
What do you think? That I am pleased with these things?" Then shall He say to
you, "You thought wickedly that I am even such an one as yourself; I will rebuke
you, and set before your face your sins." [Psalm 50:21, Septuagint] But may it
not come to pass that any one of us hear this voice, but having wrought pure
almsdeeds, and having our lamps burning, so may we enter into the bridechamber by the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom
with the Father and the Holy Ghost be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Homily 74 on the Gospel of John
John 14:8-9
"Philip says unto Him, Lord, show us the Father, and it suffices us. Jesus says
unto him, Have I been so long time with you, and yet have you not known Me,
Philip? He who has seen Me, has seen the Father."
1. The Prophet said to the Jews, "You had the countenance of a harlot, thou
were shameless towards all men." [Jeremiah 3:3, Septuagint] Now it seems
fitting to use this expression not only against that city, but against all who
shamelessly set their faces against the truth. For when Philip said to Christ,
"Show us the Father," He replied, "Have I been so long time with you, and have
you not known Me, Philip?" And yet there are some Who even after these words
separate the Father from the Son. What proximity do you require closer than
this? Indeed from this very saying some have fallen into the malady of Sabellius.
But let us, leaving both these and those as involved in directly opposite error,
consider the exact meaning of the words. "Have I been so long time with you,
and have you not known Me, Philip?" He says. What then? Replies Philip, "Are
you the Father after whom I enquire?" "No," He says. On this account He said
not, "have you not known Him," but, "have you not known Me," declaring
nothing else but this, that the Son is no other than what the Father is, yet
continuing to be a Son. But how came Philip to ask this question? Christ had
said, "If you had known Me, you should have known My Father also" [John
14:7], and He had often said the same to the Jews. Since then Peter and the Jews
had often asked Him, "Who is the Father?" since Thomas had asked Him, and
no one had learned anything clear, but His words were still not understood;
Philip, in order that He might not seem to be importunate and to trouble Him by
asking in his turn after the Jews, "Show us the Father," added, "and it suffices
us," "we seek no more." Yet Christ had said, "If you had known Me, you should