a carpenter as her betrothed husband; and is born in a shed, and laid in a manger:
and choosing His disciples, He chose not orators and wise men, not rich men and
nobly born, but poor men, and of poor families, and in every way
undistinguished; and providing His table, at one time He sets before Himself
barley loaves, and at another at the very moment commands the disciples to buy
at the market. And making His couch, He makes it of grass, and putting on
raiment, He clothes Himself in what is cheap, and in no respect different from
the common sort; and a house He did not so much as possess. And if He had to
go from place to place, He did this travelling on foot, and so travelling, as even
to grow weary. And sitting, He requires no throne nor pillow, but sits on the
ground, sometimes in the mountain, and sometimes by the well, and not merely
by the well, but also alone, and talks with a Samaritan woman.
Again, setting measures of sorrow, when He had need to mourn, He weeps
moderately, everywhere setting us rules, as I have said, and limits how far one
ought to proceed, and not any further. So for this intent now also, since it
happens that some are weak and have need of beasts to carry them, in this too He
fixes a measure, showing that one ought not to yoke horses or mules to be borne
by them, but to use an ass, and not to proceed further, and everywhere to be
limited by the want.
But let us look also at the prophecy, that by words, that by acts. What then
is the prophecy? "Behold, your King comes to you, meek, and riding on an ass,
and a young colt;" [Zechariah 9:9] not driving chariots, like the rest of the kings,
not demanding tributes, not thrusting men off, and leading about guards, but
displaying His great meekness even hereby.
Ask then the Jew, what King came to Jerusalem borne on an ass? Nay, he
could not mention, but this alone.
But He did these things, as I said, signifying beforehand the things to come.
For here the church is signified by the colt, and the new people, which was once
unclean, but which, after Jesus sat on them, became clean. And see the image
preserved throughout. I mean that the disciples loose the asses. For by the

apostles, both they and we were called; by the apostles were we brought near.
But because our acceptance provoked them also to emulation, therefore the ass
appears following the colt. For after Christ has sat on the Gentiles, then shall
they also come moving us to emulation. And Paul declaring this, said, "That
blindness in part is happened to Israel, until the fullness of the Gentiles be come
in; and so all Israel shall be saved." [Romans 11:25-26] For that it was a
prophecy is evident from what is said. For neither would the prophet have cared
to express with such great exactness the age of the ass, unless this had been so.
But not these things only are signified by what is said, but also that the
apostles should bring them with ease. For as here, no man gainsaid them so as to
keep the asses, so neither with regard to the Gentiles was any one able to prevent
them, of those who were before masters of them.
But He does not sit on the bare colt, but on the apostles' garments. For after
they had taken the colt, they then gave up all, even as Paul also said, "I will very
gladly spend and be spent for your souls." [2 Corinthians 12:15]
But mark how tractable the colt, how being unbroken, and having never
known the rein, he was not restive, but went on orderly; which thing itself was a
prophecy of the future, signifying the submissiveness of the Gentiles, and their
sudden conversion to good order. For all things did that word work, which said,
"Loose him, and bring him to me:" so that the unmanageable became orderly,
and the unclean thenceforth clean.
3. But see the baseness of the Jews. He had wrought so many miracles, and
never were they thus amazed at Him; but when they saw a multitude running
together, then they marvel. "For all the city was moved, saying, Who is this? But
the multitudes said, This is Jesus the prophet of Nazareth of Galilee." And when
they thought they were saying something great, even then were their thoughts
earthly, and low, and dragging on the ground.
But these things He did, not as displaying any pomp, but at once, as I have
said, both fulfilling a prophecy, and teaching self-denial, and at the same time
also comforting His disciples, who were grieving for His death, and showing