SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.122, C.9.

spiritual delight of virtue, without the copious assistance of God's
grace, which has more strength to raise the soul to the Divine things
in which it delights, than bodily pains have to afflict it. Thus the
Blessed Tiburtius, while walking barefoot on the burning coal, said
that he felt as though he were walking on roses.
Yet the virtue of fortitude prevents the reason from being entirely
overcome by bodily pain. And the delight of virtue overcomes
spiritual sorrow, inasmuch as a man prefers the good of virtue to the
life of the body and to whatever appertains thereto. Hence the
Philosopher says (Ethic. ii, 3; iii, 9) that "it is not necessary for a
brave man to delight so as to perceive his delight, but it suffices for
him not to be sad."
Reply to Objection 1: The vehemence of the action or passion of one
power hinders the action of another power: wherefore the pain in his
senses hinders the mind of the brave man from feeling delight in its
proper operation.
Reply to Objection 2: Deeds of virtue are delightful chiefly on
account of their end; yet they can be painful by their nature, and this
is principally the case with fortitude. Hence the Philosopher says
(Ethic. iii, 9) that "to perform deeds with pleasure does not happen in
all virtues, except in so far as one attains the end."
Reply to Objection 3: In the brave man spiritual sorrow is overcome
by the delight of virtue. Yet since bodily pain is more sensible, and
the sensitive apprehension is more in evidence to man, it follows
that spiritual pleasure in the end of virtue fades away, so to speak, in
the presence of great bodily pain.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.122, C.10.

### ARTICLE 9. Whether fortitude deals chiefly with sudden

occurrences?
Objection 1: It seems that fortitude does not deal chiefly with sudden
occurrences. For it would seem that things occur suddenly when
they are unforeseen. But Tully says (De Invent. Rhet. ii) that
"fortitude is the deliberate facing of danger, and bearing of toil."
Therefore fortitude does not deal chiefly with sudden happenings.
Objection 2: Further, Ambrose says (De Offic. i): "The brave man is
not unmindful of what may be likely to happen; he takes measures
beforehand, and looks out as from the conning-tower of his mind, so
as to encounter the future by his forethought, lest he should say
afterwards: This befell me because I did not think it could possibly
happen." But it is not possible to be prepared for the future in the
case of sudden occurrences. Therefore the operation of fortitude is
not concerned with sudden happenings.
Objection 3: Further, the Philosopher says (Ethic. iii, 8) that the
"brave man is of good hope." But hope looks forward to the future,
which is inconsistent with sudden occurrences. Therefore the
operation of fortitude is not concerned with sudden happenings.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. iii, 8) that "fortitude is
chiefly about sudden dangers of death."
I answer that, Two things must be considered in the operation of
fortitude. One is in regard to its choice: and thus fortitude is not
about sudden occurrences: because the brave man chooses to think
beforehand of the dangers that may arise, in order to be able to
withstand them, or to bear them more easily: since according to
Gregory (Hom. xxv in Evang.), "the blow that is foreseen strikes with
less force, and we are able more easily to bear earthly wrongs, if we
are forearmed with the shield of foreknowledge." The other thing to
be considered in the operation of fortitude regards the display of the
virtuous habit: and in this way fortitude is chiefly about sudden
occurrences, because according to the Philosopher (Ethic. iii, 8) the
habit of fortitude is displayed chiefly in sudden dangers: since a
habit works by way of nature. Wherefore if a person without
forethought does that which pertains to virtue, when necessity urges
on account of some sudden danger, this is a very strong proof that