SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.60, C.2.

community as a part to the whole. Now a twofold order may be
considered in relation to a part. In the first place there is the order of
one part to another, to which corresponds the order of one private
individual to another. This order is directed by commutative justice,
which is concerned about the mutual dealings between two persons.
In the second place there is the order of the whole towards the parts,
to which corresponds the order of that which belongs to the
community in relation to each single person. This order is directed
by distributive justice, which distributes common goods
proportionately. Hence there are two species of justice, distributive
and commutative.
Reply to Objection 1: Just as a private individual is praised for
moderation in his bounty, and blamed for excess therein, so too
ought moderation to be observed in the distribution of common
goods, wherein distributive justice directs.
Reply to Objection 2: Even as part and whole are somewhat the
same, so too that which pertains to the whole, pertains somewhat to
the part also: so that when the goods of the community are
distributed among a number of individuals each one receives that
which, in a way, is his own.
Reply to Objection 3: The act of distributing the goods of the
community, belongs to none but those who exercise authority over
those goods; and yet distributive justice is also in the subjects to
whom those goods are distributed in so far as they are contented by
a just distribution. Moreover distribution of common goods is
sometimes made not to the state but to the members of a family, and
such distribution can be made by authority of a private individual.
Reply to Objection 4: Movement takes its species from the term
"whereunto." Hence it belongs to legal justice to direct to the
common good those matters which concern private individuals:
whereas on the contrary it belongs to particular justice to direct the
common good to particular individuals by way of distribution.
Reply to Objection 5: Distributive and commutative justice differ not
only in respect of unity and multitude, but also in respect of different
kinds of due: because common property is due to an individual in
one way, and his personal property in another way.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.60, C.2.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.60, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the mean is to be observed in the same

way in distributive as in commutative justice?
Objection 1: It would seem that the mean in distributive justice is to
be observed in the same way as in commutative justice. For each of
these is a kind of particular justice, as stated above (Article 1). Now
the mean is taken in the same way in all the parts of temperance or
fortitude. Therefore the mean should also be observed in the same
way in both distributive and commutative justice.
Objection 2: Further, the form of a moral virtue consists in observing
the mean which is determined in accordance with reason. Since,
then, one virtue has one form, it seems that the mean for both
should be the same.
Objection 3: Further, in order to observe the mean in distributive
justice we have to consider the various deserts of persons. Now a
person's deserts are considered also in commutative justice, for
instance, in punishments; thus a man who strikes a prince is
punished more than one who strikes a private individual. Therefore
the mean is observed in the same way in both kinds of justice.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. v, 3,4) that the mean in
distributive justice is observed according to "geometrical
proportion," whereas in commutative justice it follows "arithmetical
proportion."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), in distributive justice
something is given to a private individual, in so far as what belongs
to the whole is due to the part, and in a quantity that is proportionate
to the importance of the position of that part in respect of the whole.
Consequently in distributive justice a person receives all the more of
the common goods, according as he holds a more prominent
position in the community. This prominence in an aristocratic
community is gauged according to virtue, in an oligarchy according
to wealth, in a democracy according to liberty, and in various ways
according to various forms of community. Hence in distributive
justice the mean is observed, not according to equality between
thing and thing, but according to proportion between things and
persons: in such a way that even as one person surpasses another,
so that which is given to one person surpasses that which is allotted