since what is reality only is not essential to the sacrament, and that
which is the sacrament is transitory; while that which is sacrament
and reality is said to remain. Wherefore it follows that inward
character itself is essentially and principally the sacrament of Order.
Reply to Objection 2: Although in Baptism there is conferred a
spiritual power to receive the other sacraments, for which reason it
imprints a character, nevertheless this is not its principal effect, but
the inward cleansing; wherefore Baptism would be given even
though the former motive did not exist. On the other hand, order
denotes power principally. Wherefore the character which is a
spiritual power is included in the definition of Order, but not in that
of Baptism.
Reply to Objection 3: In Baptism there is given a certain spiritual
potentiality to receive, and consequently a somewhat passive
potentiality. But power properly denotes active potentiality, together
with some kind of preeminence. Hence this definition is not
applicable to Baptism.
Reply to Objection 4: The word "order" is used in two ways. For
sometimes it denotes the relation itself, and thus it is both in the
inferior and in the superior, as the objection states; but it is not thus
that we use the word here. On the other hand, it denotes the degree
which results in the order taken in the first sense. And since the
notion of order as relation is observed where we first meet with
something higher than another, it follows that this degree of preeminence by spiritual power is called Order.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether Order is a sacrament?

Objection 1: It would seem that Order is not a sacrament. For a
sacrament, according to Hugh of St. Victor (De Sacram. i) "is a
material element." Now Order denotes nothing of the kind, but rather
relation or power; since Order is a part of power according to
Isidore. Therefore it is not a sacrament.
Objection 2: Further, the sacraments do not concern the Church
triumphant. Yet Order is there, as in the angels. Therefore it is not a
sacrament.
Objection 3: Further, just as spiritual authority, which is Order, is
given by means of consecration, so is secular authority, since kings
also are anointed, as stated above (Question 19, Article 3, ad 2). But
the kingly power is not a sacrament. Therefore neither is order of
which we speak now.
On the contrary, It is mentioned by all among the seven sacraments
of the Church.
Further, "the cause of a thing being such, is still more so." Now
Order is the cause of man being the dispenser of the other
sacraments. Therefore Order has more reason for being a sacrament
than the others.
I answer that, As stated above (Question 29, Article 1; TP, Question
60), a sacrament is nothing else than a sanctification conferred on
man with some outward sign. Wherefore, since by receiving orders a
consecration is conferred on man by visible signs, it is clear that
Order is a sacrament.
Reply to Objection 1: Although Order does not by its name express a
material element, it is not conferred without some material element.
Reply to Objection 2: Power must needs be proportionate to the
purpose for which it is intended. Now the communication of divine
things, which is the purpose for which spiritual power is given, is not
effected among the angels by means of sensible signs, as is the
case among men. Hence the spiritual power that is Order is not
bestowed on the angels by visible signs, as on men. Wherefore