2 Corinthians 1:10-11
"Who delivered us out of so great deaths. "
He said not, "from so great dangers," at once showing the insupportable
severity of the trials, and confirming the doctrine I have mentioned. For whereas
the Resurrection was a thing future, he shows that it happens every day: for
when [God] lifts up again a man who is despaired of and has been brought to the
very gates of Hades, He shows none other thing than a resurrection, snatching
out of the very jaws of death him that had fallen into them: whence in the case of
those despaired of and then restored either out of grievous sickness or
insupportable trials, it is an ordinary way of speaking to say, We have seen a
resurrection of the dead in his case.
"And we have set our hope that He will also still deliver us; ye also helping
together on our behalf by your supplication, that for the gift bestowed upon us
by the means of many , thanks may be given by many persons on our behalf."
Since the words, "that we should not trust in ourselves," might seem to be a
common charge and an accusation that pointed to some among them; he softens
again what he said, by calling their prayers a great protection and at the same
time showing that [this] our life must be throughout a scene of conflict. For in
those words, "And we have set our hope that He will also still deliver us," he
predicts a future sleet of many trials: but still no where anything of being
forsaken, but of succor again and support. Then, lest on hearing that they were to
be continually in perils they should be cast down, he showed before the use of
perils; for instance, "that we should not trust in ourselves;" that is, that he may
keep us in continual humility, and that their salvation may be wrought; and many
other uses besides; the being partakers with Christ; ("for," says he, "the
sufferings of Christ abound in us;") the suffering for the faithful; ("for," says he,
"whether we be afflicted, it is for your comfort and salvation;") the superior

lustre this last (i.e., their salvation) should shine with ; "which," says he, "works"
[in you] "in the patient enduring of the same sufferings;" their being made
hardy; and besides all these, that of seeing the resurrection vividly portrayed
before their eyes: for, "He has delivered us out of so great death;" being of an
earnest mind and ever looking unto Him, "for," says he, "we have set our hope
that he will deliver" us; its rivetting them to prayers, for he says, "ye also helping
together on our behalf by your supplication." Thus having shown the gain of
affliction and then having made them energetic: he anoints once more their
spirits [for the combat], and animates them to virtue by witnessing great things
of their prayers, for that to these God had granted Paul; as he says, "You helping
together on our behalf by prayer." But what is this: "That for the gift bestowed
upon us by means of many , thanks may be given by many on our behalf? He
delivered us from those deaths," says he, "ye also helping together by prayer;"
that is, praying all of you for us. For "the gift bestowed upon us," that is, our
being saved, He was pleased to grant to you all, in order that many persons
might give Him thanks, because that many also received the boon.
5. And this he said, at once to stir them up to prayer for others, and to
accustom them always to give thanks to God for whatever befalls others,
showing that He too wills this exceedingly. For they that are careful to do both
these for others, will much more for themselves show an example of both. And
besides this, he both teaches them humility and leads on to more fervent love.
For if he who was so high above them owns himself to have been saved by their
prayers: and that to their prayers himself had been granted as a boon of God,
think what their modesty and disposition ought to have been. And observe, I
pray you, this also; that even if God does any thing in mercy, yet prayer does
mightily contribute thereunto. For at the first he attributed his salvation to His
mercies; for "The God of mercies," he says, Himself "delivered us," but here to
the prayers also. For on him too that owed the ten thousand talents He had mercy
after that he fell at His feet; [Matthew 18:24-27] although it is written, that
"being moved with compassion, He loosed him." And again to the "woman of