heirs together with Him:" He "the Life," we "the living:" He "the Resurrection,"
we "those who rise again:" He "the Light," we "the enlightened." All these
things indicate unity; and they allow no void interval, not even the smallest. For
he that removes but to a little distance will go on till he has become very far
distant. For so the body, receiving though it be but a small cut by a sword,
perishes: and the building, though there be but a small chink, falls to decay: and
the branch, though it be but a little while cut off from the root, becomes useless.
So that this trifle is no trifle, but is even almost the whole. Whenever then we
commit some little fault or even negligence, let us not overlook that little; since
this, being disregarded, quickly becomes great. So also when a garment has
begun to be torn and is neglected, it is apt to prolong its rent all throughout; and
a roof, when a few tiles have fallen, being disregarded, brings down the whole
house.
8. These things then let us bear in mind, and never slight the small things,
lest we fall into those which are great. But if so be that we have slighted them
and have come into the abyss of evils, not even when we have come there let us
despond, lest we fall into recklessness ([καρηβαρίαν]). For to emerge from
thence is hard ever after, for one who is not extremely watchful; not because of
the distance alone, but of the very position, too, wherein we find ourselves. For
sin also is a deep, and is wont to bear down and crush. And just as those who
have fallen into a well cannot with ease get out, but will want others to draw
them up; so also is he that has come into any depth of sins. To such then we must
lower ropes and draw them up. Nay rather, we need not others only, but
ourselves also, that we for our part may fasten on ourselves and ascend, I say not
so much as we have descended, but much further, if we be willing: for why? God
also helps: for He wills not the death of a sinner so much as his conversion. Let
no one then despair; let no one have the feeling of the ungodly; for to them
properly belongs this kind of sin: "an ungodly man having come into any depth
of evils, makes light of it. " So that it is not the multitude of men's sins which
causes their despair, but their ungodly mind.

Shouldest thou then have gone all lengths in wickedness, yet say unto
yourself, God is loving unto men and he desires our salvation: for "though your
sins be as scarlet, I will whiten you as snow," [Isaiah 1:10. Septuagint] says He;
and unto the contrary habit I will change you. Let us not therefore give up in
despair; for to fall is not so grievous, as to lie where we have fallen; nor to be
wounded so dreadful, as after wounds to refuse healing. "For who shall boast
that he has his heart chaste? Or who shall say confidently that he is pure from
sin?" [Proverbs 20:9. Septuagint] These things I say not to make you more
negligent, but to prevent your despairing.
Would you know how good our Master is? The Publican went up full of ten
thousand wickednesses, and saying only, "Be merciful unto me," went down
justified. [St. 48 13, 14] Yea, God says by the prophet, "Because of sin for some
little season I grieved him, [Isaiah 57:17-18. Septuagint] and I saw that ([εἶδον
δτι] not in Sept.) he was grieved and went sorrowful, and I healed his ways"
([ἰασάμην αὐτὸν], Sept.) What is there equal to this loving-kindness? On
condition [ἲνα στυγνάση] . See John 8:56. [ἲνα ἴδη τὴν ἡμέραν] of his "being but
sorrowful," so he speaks, "I forgave him his sins." But we do not even this:
wherefore we especially provoke God to wrath. (For he, who by little things
even is made propitious, when He meets not with so much as these, is of course
indignant and exacts of us the last penalty; for this comes of exceeding
contempt.) Who is there, for instance, that has ever become melancholy for his
sins? Who has bemoaned himself? Who has beaten his breast? Who has taken
anxious thought? Not one, to my thinking. But days without number do men
weep for dead servants; for the loss of money: while as to the soul which we are
ruining day by day, we give it not a thought. How then will you be able to render
God propitious, when you know not even that you have sinned?
"Yea," says some one, "I have sinned." "Yea," is your word to me with the
tongue: say it to me with your mind, and with the word mourn heavily, that you
may have continual cheerfulness. Since, if we did grieve for our sins, if we
mourned heavily over our offenses, nothing else could give us sorrow, this one