set "over His household to give them their measure of wheat." Hence
he is guilty of unfaithfulness who gives any man Divine things above
his measure: and whoso promotes the unworthy does this.
Wherefore he commits a mortal crime, as being unfaithful to his
sovereign Lord, especially since this is detrimental to the Church
and to the Divine honor which is promoted by good ministers. For a
man would be unfaithful to his earthly lord were he to place
unworthy subjects in his offices.
Reply to Objection 1: God never so abandons His Church that apt
ministers are not to be found sufficient for the needs of the people, if
the worthy be promoted and the unworthy set aside. And though it
were impossible to find as many ministers as there are now, it were
better to have few good ministers than many bad ones, as the
blessed Clement declares in his second epistle to James the brother
of the Lord.
Reply to Objection 2: Temporal things are not to be sought but for
the sake of spiritual things. Wherefore all temporal advantage should
count for nothing, and all gain be despised for the advancement of
spiritual good.
Reply to Objection 3: It is at least required that the ordainer know
that nothing contrary to holiness is in the candidate for ordination.
But besides this he is required to take the greatest care, in
proportion to the Order or office to be enjoined, so as to be certain of
the qualifications of those to be promoted, at least from the
testification of others. This is the meaning of the Apostle when he
says (1 Tim. 5:22): "Impose not hands lightly on any man."

### ARTICLE 5. Whether a man who is in sin can without sin

exercise the Order he has received?
Objection 1: It would seem that one who is in sin can without sin
exercise the order he has received. For since, by virtue of his office,
he is bound to exercise his order, he sins if he fails to do so. If
therefore he sins by exercising it, he cannot avoid sin: which is
inadmissible.
Objection 2: Further, a dispensation is a relaxation of the law.
Therefore although by rights it would be unlawful for him to exercise
the order he has received, it would be lawful for him to do so by
dispensation.
Objection 3: Further, whoever co-operates with another in a mortal
sin, sins mortally. If therefore a sinner sins mortally by exercising his
order, he who receives or demands any Divine thing from him also
sins mortally: and this seems absurd.
Objection 4: Further, if he sins by exercising his order, it follows that
every act of his order that he performs is a mortal sin; and
consequently since many acts concur in the one exercise of his
order, it would seem that he commits many mortal sins: which
seems very hard.
On the contrary, Dionysius says (Ep. ad Demophil.): "It seems
presumptuous for such a man, one to wit who is not enlightened, to
lay hands on priestly things; he is not afraid nor ashamed, all
unworthy that he is to take part in Divine things, with the thought
that God does not see what he sees in himself; he thinks, by false
pretense, to cheat Him Whom he falsely calls his Father; he dares to
utter in the person of Christ, words polluted by his infamy, I will not
call them prayers, over the Divine symbols." Therefore a priest is a
blasphemer and a cheat if he exercises his order unworthily, and
thus he sins mortally: and in like manner any other person in orders.
Further, holiness of life is required in one who receives an order, that
he may be qualified to exercise it. Now a man sins mortally if he
present himself for orders in mortal sin. Much more therefore does
he sin mortally whenever he exercises his order.