separation of the Father or the Holy Spirit. And let him so say one
essence, as not to think one to be either greater or better than, or in any
respect differing from, another. Yet not that the Father Himself is both
Son and Holy Spirit, or whatever else each is singly called in relation to
either of the others; as Word, which is not said except of the Son, or Gift,
which is not said except of the Holy Spirit. And on this account also they
admit the plural number, as it is written in the Gospel, "I and my Father
are one." He has both said "one," and "we are3 one," according to
essence, because they are the same God; "we are," according to relation,
because the one is Father, the other is Son. Sometimes also the unity of
the essence is left unexpressed, and the relatives alone are mentioned in
the plural number: "My Father and I will come unto him, and make our
abode with him." We will come, and we will make our abode, is the plural
number, since it was said before, "I and my Father," that is, the Son and
the Father, which terms are used relatively to one another. Sometimes
the meaning is altogether latent, as in Genesis: "Let us make man after
our image and likeness." Both let us make and our is said in the plural,
and ought not to be received except as of relatives. For it was not that
gods might make, or make after the image and likeness of gods; but that
the Father, and Son, and Holy Spirit might make after the image of the
Father, and Son, and Holy Spirit, that man might subsist as the image of
God. And God is the Trinity. But because that image of God was not made
altogether equal to Him, as being not born of Him, but created by Him; in
order to signify this, he is in such way the image as that he is "after the
image," that is, he is not made equal by parity, but approaches to Him by
a sort of likeness. For approach to God is not by intervals of place, but by
likeness, and withdrawal from Him is by unlikeness. For there are some
who draw this distinction, that they will have the Son to be the image, but
man not to be the image, but "after the image." But the apostle refutes
them, saying, "For a man indeed ought not to cover his head, forasmuch
as he is the image and glory of God." He did not say after the image, but
the image. And this image, since it is elsewhere spoken of as after the
image, is not as if it were said relatively to the Son, who is the image equal
to the Father; otherwise he would not say after our image. For how our,
when the Son is the image of the Father alone? But man is said to be
"after the image," on account, as we have said, of the inequality of the
likeness; and therefore after our image, that man might be the image of

the Trinity; not equal to the Trinity as the Son is equal to the Father, but
approaching to it, as has been said, by a certain likeness; just as nearness
may in a sense be signified in things distant from each other, not in
respect of place, but of a sort of imitation. For it is also said, "Be ye
transformed by the renewing of your mind;" to whom he likewise says,
"Be ye therefore imitators of God as dear children." For it is said to the
new man, "which is renewed to the knowledge of God, after the image of
Him that created him." Or if we choose to admit the plural number, in
order to meet the needs of argument, even putting aside relative terms,
that so we may answer in one term when it is asked what three, and say
three substances or three persons; then let no one think of any bulk or
interval, or of any distance of howsoever little unlikeness, so that in the
Trinity any should be understood to be even a little less than another, in
whatsoever way one thing can be less than another: in order that there
may be neither a confusion of persons, nor such a distinction as that
there should be any inequality. And if this cannot be grasped by the
understanding, let it be held by faith, until He shall dawn in the heart
who says by the prophet, "If ye will not believe, surely ye shall not
understand."