way for the heresies.
For let us examine the matter. For even if he gave permission to preach as
they preached, not even thus was he opening the way for the heresies. How so?
In that they preached healthfully; though the aim and purpose on which they
acted was corrupted, still the preaching itself was not changed, and they were
forced so to preach. And why? Because, had they preached otherwise than as
Paul preached, had they taught otherwise than as he taught, they would not have
increased the wrath of the Emperor. But now by furthering his preaching, by
teaching in the same way, and making disciples as he did, they had power to
exasperate the Emperor, when he saw the multitude of the disciples numerous.
But then some wicked and senseless man, taking hold of this passage, says,
Verily they would have done the contrary, they would have driven off those who
had already believed, instead of making believers to abound, had they wished to
annoy him. What shall we answer? That they looked to this thing only, how they
might involve him in present danger, and leave him no escape; and thus they
thought to grieve him, and to quench the Gospel, rather than in the other way.
By that other course they would have extinguished the wrath of the
Emperor, they would have let him go at large and preach again; but by this
course they thought that because of him all would be ruined, could they but
destroy him. The many however could not have this intention, but certain bitter
men alone.
Then "and therein," says he, "I rejoice, yea, and will rejoice." What means,
"yea, I will rejoice"? Even if this be done still more, he means. For they
coöperate with me even against their will; and will receive punishment for their
toil, while I, who contributed nothing thereto, shall receive reward. Is there
anything beyond this villainy of the Devil, to contrive the punishment of the
preaching, and vengeance for the toils? Do you see with how many evils he
pierces through his own! How else would a hater and an enemy of their salvation
have arranged all this? Do you see how he who wages war against the truth has
no power, but rather wounds himself, as one who kicks against the goads?

Ver. 19. "For I know," says he, "that this shall turn to my salvation through
your supplication, and the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ."
Nothing is more villainous than the Devil. So does he everywhere involve
his own in unprofitable toils, and rends them. Not only does he not suffer them
to obtain the prizes, but he even subjects them to punishment.
For not only does he command them the preaching of the Gospel, but
likewise fasting and virginity, in such sort as will not only deprive them of their
reward, but will bring down heavy evil on those who pursue that course.
Concerning whom he says elsewhere, also, "Branded in their own conscience as
with a hot iron." [1 Timothy 4:2]
Wherefore, I beseech you, let us give thanks to God for all things, since he
has both lightened our toil, and increased our reward. For such as among them
live in virginity enjoy not the rewards, which they do who among us live
chastely in wedlock; but they who live as virgins among the heretics are subject
to the condemnation of the fornicators. All this springs from their not acting with
a right aim, but as accusing God's creatures, and His unspeakable Wisdom.
Let us not then be sluggish. God has placed before us contests within
measure, having no toil. Yet let us not despise them for this. For if the heretics
put themselves to the stretch in unprofitable toils, what excuse shall we have if
we will not endure those which are less, and which have a greater reward? For
which of Christ's ordinances is burdensome? Which is grievous? Are you unable
to live a virgin life? You are permitted to marry. Are you unable to strip yourself
of all you have? You are permitted to supply the needs of others from what you
have. Let "your abundance be a supply for their want." [2 Corinthians 8:14]
These things indeed appear burdensome. What things? I mean to despise money,
and to overcome the desires of the body. But His other commands require no
cost, no violence. For tell me, what violence is there in speaking no ill, in simply
abstaining from slander? What violence is there in envying not another man's
goods? What violence in not being led away by vain-glory? To be tortured, and
endure it, is the part of strength. The exercise of philosophy is the part of