SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.32, C.2.

external loss, or of a bodily injury, in so much as the contrary good
of virtue is more akin to charity than the good of the body or of
external things. Therefore fraternal correction is an act of charity
rather than the healing of a bodily infirmity, or the relieving of an
external bodily need. There is another correction which applies a
remedy to the sin of the wrongdoer, considered as hurtful to others,
and especially to the common good. This correction is an act of
justice, whose concern it is to safeguard the rectitude of justice
between one man and another.
Reply to Objection 1: This gloss speaks of the second correction
which is an act of justice. Or if it speaks of the first correction, then it
takes justice as denoting a general virtue, as we shall state further
on (Question 58, Article 5), in which sense again all "sin is
iniquity" (1 Jn. 3:4), through being contrary to justice.
Reply to Objection 2: According to the Philosopher (Ethic. vi, 12),
prudence regulates whatever is directed to the end, about which
things counsel and choice are concerned. Nevertheless when,
guided by prudence, we perform some action aright which is
directed to the end of some virtue, such as temperance or fortitude,
that action belongs chiefly to the virtue to whose end it is directed.
Since, then, the admonition which is given in fraternal correction is
directed to the removal of a brother's sin, which removal pertains to
charity, it is evident that this admonition is chiefly an act of charity,
which virtue commands it, so to speak, but secondarily an act of
prudence, which executes and directs the action.
Reply to Objection 3: Fraternal correction is not opposed to
forbearance with the weak, on the contrary it results from it. For a
man bears with a sinner, in so far as he is not disturbed against him,
and retains his goodwill towards him: the result being that he strives
to make him do better.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.32, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether fraternal correction is a matter of

precept?
Objection 1: It would seem that fraternal correction is not a matter of
precept. For nothing impossible is a matter of precept, according to
the saying of Jerome [Pelagius, Expos. Symb. ad Damas]: "Accursed
be he who says that God has commanded any. thing impossible."
Now it is written (Eccles. 7:14): "Consider the works of God, that no
man can correct whom He hath despised." Therefore fraternal
correction is not a matter of precept.
Objection 2: Further, all the precepts of the Divine Law are reduced
to the precepts of the Decalogue. But fraternal correction does not
come under any precept of the Decalogue. Therefore it is not a
matter of precept.
Objection 3: Further, the omission of a Divine precept is a mortal sin,
which has no place in a holy man. Yet holy and spiritual men are
found to omit fraternal correction: since Augustine says (De Civ. Dei
i, 9): "Not only those of low degree, but also those of high position,
refrain from reproving others, moved by a guilty cupidity, not by the
claims of charity." Therefore fraternal correction is not a matter of
precept.
Objection 4: Further, whatever is a matter of precept is something
due. If, therefore, fraternal correction is a matter of precept, it is due
to our brethren that we correct them when they sin. Now when a man
owes anyone a material due, such as the payment of a sum of
money, he must not be content that his creditor come to him, but he
should seek him out, that he may pay him his due. Hence we should
have to go seeking for those who need correction, in order that we
might correct them; which appears to be inconvenient, both on
account of the great number of sinners, for whose correction one
man could not suffice, and because religious would have to leave the
cloister in order to reprove men, which would be unbecoming.
Therefore fraternal correction is not a matter of precept.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Verb. Dom. xvi, 4): "You
become worse than the sinner if you fail to correct him." But this
would not be so unless, by this neglect, one omitted to observe
some precept. Therefore fraternal correction is a matter of precept.