Pope granted to anyone who visited a certain church, an indulgence
of seven years, which indulgence was granted by Blessed Gregory
for the Roman Stations.
Hence others say that the quantity of remission accorded in an
indulgence is not to be measured by the devotion of the recipient, as
the first opinion suggested, nor according to the quantity of what is
given, as the second opinion held; but according to the cause for
which the indulgence is granted, and according to which a person is
held deserving of obtaining such an indulgence. Thus according as a
man approached near to that cause, so would he obtain remission in
whole or in part. But neither will this explain the custom of the
Church, who assigns, now a greater, now a lesser indulgence, for the
same cause: thus, under the same circumstances, now a year's
indulgence, now one of only forty days, according to the
graciousness of the Pope, who grants the indulgence, is granted to
those who visit a church. Wherefore the amount of the remission
granted by the indulgence is not to be measured by the cause for
which a person is worthy of an indulgence.
We must therefore say otherwise that the quantity of an effect is
proportionate to the quantity of the cause. Now the cause of the
remission of punishment effected by indulgences is no other than
the abundance of the Church's merits, and this abundance suffices
for the remission of all punishment. The effective cause of the
remission is not the devotion, or toil, or gift of the recipient; nor,
again, is it the cause for which the indulgence was granted. We
cannot, then, estimate the quantity of the remission by any of the
foregoing, but solely by the merits of the Church---and these are
always superabundant. Consequently, according as these merits are
applied to a person so does he obtain remission. That they should
be so applied demands, firstly, authority to dispense this treasure.
secondly, union between the recipient and Him Who merited it---and
this is brought about by charity; thirdly, there is required a reason
for so dispensing this treasury, so that the intention, namely, of
those who wrought these meritorious works is safeguarded, since
they did them for the honor of God and for the good of the Church in
general. Hence whenever the cause assigned tends to the good of
the Church and the honor of God, there is sufficient reason for
granting an indulgence.
Hence, according to others, indulgences have precisely the efficacy
claimed for them, provided that he who grants them have the

authority, that the recipient have charity, and that, as regards the
cause, there be piety which includes the honor of God and the profit
of our neighbor. Nor in this view have we "too great a market of the
Divine mercy" [St. Bonaventure, Sent. iv, D, 20], as some maintain,
nor again does it derogate from Divine justice, for no punishment is
remitted, but the punishment of one is imputed to another.
Reply to Objection 1: As stated above (Question 19, Article 3) there
are two keys, the key of orders and the key of jurisdiction. The key of
orders is a sacramental: and as the effects of the sacraments are
fixed, not by men but by God, the priest cannot decide in the tribunal
of confession how much shall be remitted by means of the key of
orders from the punishment due; it is God Who appoints the amount
to be remitted. On the other hand the key of jurisdiction is not
something sacramental, and its effect depends on a man's decision.
The remission granted through indulgences is the effect of this key,
since it does not belong to the dispensation of the sacraments, but
to the distribution of the common property of the Church: hence it is
that legates, even though they be not priests, can grant indulgences.
Consequently the decision of how much punishment is to be
remitted by an indulgence depends on the will of the one who grants
that indulgence. If, however, he remits punishment without sufficient
reason, so that men are enticed to substitute mere nothings, as it
were, for works of penance, he sins by granting such indulgences,
although the indulgence is gained fully.
Reply to Objection 2: Although indulgences avail much for the
remission of punishment, yet works of satisfaction are more
meritorious in respect of the essential reward, which infinitely
transcends the remission of temporal punishment.
Reply to Objection 3: When an indulgence is granted in a general
way to anyone that helps towards the building of a church, we must
understand this to mean a help proportionate to the giver: and in so
far as he approaches to this, he will gain the indulgence more or less
fully. Consequently a poor man by giving one penny would gain the
full indulgence, not so a rich man, whom it would not become to give
so little to so holy and profitable a work; Just as a king would not be
said to help a man if he gave him an "obol."
Reply to Objection 4: A person who lives near the church, and the
priest and clergy of the church, gain the indulgence as much as
those who come perhaps a distance of a thousand days' journey: