confess.
Furthermore, the order of the procession of each one agrees with
this conclusion. For it was said above (Question 27, Articles 2,4;
Question 28, Article 4), that the Son proceeds by the way of the
intellect as Word, and the Holy Ghost by way of the will as Love. Now
love must proceed from a word. For we do not love anything unless
we apprehend it by a mental conception. Hence also in this way it is
manifest that the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Son.
We derive a knowledge of the same truth from the very order of
nature itself. For we nowhere find that several things proceed from
one without order except in those which differ only by their matter;
as for instance one smith produces many knives distinct from each
other materially, with no order to each other; whereas in things in
which there is not only a material distinction we always find that
some order exists in the multitude produced. Hence also in the order
of creatures produced, the beauty of the divine wisdom is displayed.
So if from the one Person of the Father, two persons proceed, the
Son and the Holy Ghost, there must be some order between them.
Nor can any other be assigned except the order of their nature,
whereby one is from the other. Therefore it cannot be said that the
Son and the Holy Ghost proceed from the Father in such a way as
that neither of them proceeds from the other, unless we admit in
them a material distinction; which is impossible.
Hence also the Greeks themselves recognize that the procession of
the Holy Ghost has some order to the Son. For they grant that the
Holy Ghost is the Spirit "of the Son"; and that He is from the Father
"through the Son." Some of them are said also to concede that "He
is from the Son"; or that "He flows from the Son," but not that He
proceeds; which seems to come from ignorance or obstinacy. For a
just consideration of the truth will convince anyone that the word
procession is the one most commonly applied to all that denotes
origin of any kind. For we use the term to describe any kind of origin;
as when we say that a line proceeds from a point, a ray from the sun,
a stream from a source, and likewise in everything else. Hence,
granted that the Holy Ghost originates in any way from the Son, we
can conclude that the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Son.
Reply to Objection 1: We ought not to say about God anything which
is not found in Holy Scripture either explicitly or implicitly. But
although we do not find it verbally expressed in Holy Scripture that

the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Son, still we do find it in the sense
of Scripture, especially where the Son says, speaking of the Holy
Ghost, "He will glorify Me, because He shall receive of Mine" (Jn.
16:14). It is also a rule of Holy Scripture that whatever is said of the
Father, applies to the Son, although there be added an exclusive
term; except only as regards what belongs to the opposite relations,
whereby the Father and the Son are distinguished from each other.
For when the Lord says, "No one knoweth the Son, but the Father,"
the idea of the Son knowing Himself is not excluded. So therefore
when we say that the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father, even
though it be added that He proceeds from the Father alone, the Son
would not thereby be at all excluded; because as regards being the
principle of the Holy Ghost, the Father and the Son are not opposed
to each other, but only as regards the fact that one is the Father, and
the other is the Son.
Reply to Objection 2: In every council of the Church a symbol of faith
has been drawn up to meet some prevalent error condemned in the
council at that time. Hence subsequent councils are not to be
described as making a new symbol of faith; but what was implicitly
contained in the first symbol was explained by some addition
directed against rising heresies. Hence in the decision of the council
of Chalcedon it is declared that those who were congregated
together in the council of Constantinople, handed down the doctrine
about the Holy Ghost, not implying that there was anything wanting
in the doctrine of their predecessors who had gathered together at
Nicaea, but explaining what those fathers had understood of the
matter. Therefore, because at the time of the ancient councils the
error of those who said that the Holy Ghost did not proceed from the
Son had not arisen, it was not necessary to make any explicit
declaration on that point; whereas, later on, when certain errors rose
up, another council [Council of Rome, under Pope Damasus]
assembled in the west, the matter was explicitly defined by the
authority of the Roman Pontiff, by whose authority also the ancient
councils were summoned and confirmed. Nevertheless the truth was
contained implicitly in the belief that the Holy Ghost proceeds from
the Father.
Reply to Objection 3: The Nestorians were the first to introduce the
error that the Holy Ghost did not proceed from the Son, as appears
in a Nestorian creed condemned in the council of Ephesus. This
error was embraced by Theodoric the Nestorian, and several others
after him, among whom was also Damascene. Hence, in that point