gain the present life, you had gained nothing. I know the worth of that which I
offer you. The bargainers and traffickers in worldly goods do not act thus. They,
when they can impose on whom they will, give a little to receive a great deal. It
is not so with God. He gives the greater by far for the less.
Tell me, if you were to go to a merchant, and he were to set before you two
stones, one of little worth, and the other very precious, and sure to fetch a large
amount of wealth; if he allowed you for the price of the cheap one to carry off
the more costly, should you complain of him? No! You would rather admire his
liberality. So now, two lives are set before us, the one temporal, the other eternal.
These God offers us for sale, but He would sell us the latter rather than the
former. Why do we complain, like silly children, that we receive the more
precious? Is it possible then to purchase life for money? Yes, when what we
bestow is our own, and not the property of another; when we do not practice an
imposture. But, you say, henceforth the goods are mine. They are not yours after
rapine. They are still your neighbor's, though thou were a thousand times the
master of them. For if you should receive a deposit, it would not be your own
even for the short season that the depositor was traveling, though it might be laid
up with you. If therefore that is not ours, which we received with the consent and
thanks of those who deposited it, even for the short period that we retain it, much
less is that ours, which we plundered against the will of its owner. He is the
master of it, however long you may withhold it. But Virtue is really our own; as
for money, even our own is not strictly ours, much less that of others. Today it is
ours, tomorrow it belongs to another. What is of virtue is our own possession.
This does not suffer loss, like other things, but is entirely possessed by all who
have it. This therefore let us acquire, and let us despise riches, that we may be
able to attain those real goods, of which God grant that we may be thought
worthy to partake, through the grace and lovingkindness, etc.

## Homily 7 on Second Timothy

[2 Timothy 3:1-7]
"This know also, that in the last days perilous times shall come. For men
shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers,
disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, Without natural affection, trucebreakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good,
Traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God;
Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof; from such turn away.
For of this sort are they, which creep into houses, and lead captive silly women
laden with sins, led away with various lusts and pleasures, Ever learning, and
never able to come to the knowledge of the truth."
He had said in the former Epistle, that "the Spirit speaks expressly, that in
the latter times some shall depart from the faith" [1 Timothy 4:1-2]; and
elsewhere in this Epistle he foretells that something of this kind will afterwards
happen; and here again he does the same thing: "This know, that in the last days
perilous times shall come." And this he pronounces not only from the future, but
from the past; "As Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses." And again from
reasoning; "In a great house there are not only vessels of gold and of silver." But
why does he do this? In order that Timothy may not be troubled, nor any one of
us, when there are evil men. If there were such in the time of Moses, and will be
hereafter, it is no wonder that there are such in our times.
"In the last days perilous times shall come," he says, that is, exceeding bad
times. How shall times be perilous? He says it not blaming the days, nor the
times, but the men of those times. For thus it is customary with us to speak of
good times or evil times, from the events that happen in them, caused by men.
Immediately he sets down the root and fountain, whence these and all other evils
spring, that is, overweeningness. He that is seized with this passion is careless