## Homily 2 on the Statues
Spoken in Antioch in the Old Church, as it was called, while he was a
presbyter, on the subject of the calamity that had befallen the city in
consequence of the tumult connected with the overthrow of the Statues of the
Emperor Theodosius, the Great and Pious. And on the saying of the Apostle,
"Charge them that are rich that they be not high-minded," 1 Timothy 6:17 .
And against covetousness.
1. What shall I say, or what shall I speak of? The present season is one for
tears, and not for words; for lamentation, not for discourse; for prayer, not for
preaching. Such is the magnitude of the deeds daringly done; so incurable is the
wound, so deep the blow, even beyond the power of all treatment, and craving
assistance from above. Thus it was that Job, when he had lost all, sat himself
down upon a dunghill; and his friends heard of it, and came, and seeing him,
while yet afar off, they rent their garments, and sprinkled themselves with ashes,
and made great lamentation. [Job 2:8, 12] The same thing now ought all the
cities around to do, to come to our city and to lament with all sympathy what has
befallen us. He then sat down on his dunghill; she is now seated in the midst of a
great snare. For even as the devil then leaped violently the flocks, and herds, and
all the substance of the just man, so now has he raged against this whole city.
But then, as well as now, God permitted it; then, indeed, that he might make the
just man more illustrious by the greatness of his trials; and now, that he may
make us more sober-minded by the extremity of this tribulation. Allow me to
mourn over our present state. We have been silent seven days, even as the
friends of Job were. [Job 2:13] Allow me to open my mouth today, and to bewail
this common calamity.
2. Who, beloved, has bewitched us? Who has envied us? Whence has all
this change come over us? Nothing was more dignified than our city! Now,

never was anything more pitiable! The populace so well ordered and quiet, yea,
even like a tractable and well tamed steed, always submissive to the hands of its
rulers, has now so suddenly started off with us, as to have wrought such evils, as
one can hardly dare to mention.
I mourn now and lament, not for the greatness of that wrath which is to be
expected, but for the extravagance of the frenzy which has been manifested! For
although the Emperor should not be provoked, or in anger, although he were
neither to punish, nor take vengeance; how, I pray, are we to bear the shame of
all that has been done? I find the word of instruction broken off by lamentation;
scarcely am I able to open my mouth, to part my lips, to move my tongue, or to
utter a syllable! So, even like a curb, the weight of grief checks my tongue, and
keeps back what I would say.
3. Aforetime there was nothing happier than our city; nothing more
melancholy than it is now become. As bees buzzing around their hive, so before
this the inhabitants every day flitted about the forum, and all pronounced us
happy in being so numerous. But behold now, this hive has become solitary! For
even as smoke does those bees, so fear has driven away our swarms; and what
the prophet says, bewailing Jerusalem, we may fitly say now, "Our city has
become 'like a terebinth that has lost its leaves, and as a garden that has no
water.'" [Isaiah 1:30] For in like manner as a garden when its irrigation fails,
exhibits the trees stripped of their leaves, and bare of their fruits, so has it now
fared with our city. For the help from above having forsaken her, she stands
desolate stripped of almost all her inhabitants.
4. Nothing is sweeter than one's own country; but now, it has come to pass
that nothing is more bitter! All flee from the place which brought them forth, as
from a snare. They desert it as they would a dungeon; they leap out of it, as from
a fire. And just as when a house is seized upon by the flames, not only those who
dwell therein, but all who are near, take their flight from it with the utmost haste,
eager to save but their bare bodies; even so now too, when the wrath of the
Emperor is expected to come as a fire from above, every one presses to go forth