baptism. Wherefore also he said to Him when He came, "I have need to be
baptized by You, and You come to me?"
And he said not, "And are You baptized of me?" nay, for this he feared to
say: but what? "And You come to me?" What then does Christ? What He did
afterwards with respect to Peter, this did He then also. For so he too would have
forbidden Him to wash his feet, but when he had heard, "What I do you know not
now, but you shall know hereafter," and "you have no part with me," [John 13:78] he speedily withdrew from his determination, and went over to the contrary.
And this man again in like manner, when he had heard, "Suffer it to be so now,
for thus it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness," straightway obeyed. For they
were not unduly contentious, but they manifested both love and obedience, and
made it their study to be ruled by their Lord in all things.
And mark how He urges him on that very ground which chiefly caused him
to look doubtfully on what was taking place; in that He did not say, "thus it is
just," but "thus it becomes." For, inasmuch as the point unworthy of Him was in
his mind chiefly this, His being baptized by His servant, He stated this rather
than anything else, which is directly opposed to that impression: as though He
had said, "Is it not as unbecoming that you avoid and forbiddest this? Nay, for
this self-same cause I bid you suffer it, that it is becoming, and that in the highest
degree."
And He did not merely say, "suffer," but He added, "now." "For it will not
be so forever," says He, "but you shall see me such as you desire, for the present,
however, endure this." Next He shows also how this "becomes" Him. How then
does it so? "In that we fulfill the whole law;" and to express this He said, "all
righteousness." For righteousness is the fulfilling of the commandments. "Since
then we have performed all the rest of the commandments," says He, "and this
alone remains, it also must be added: because I have come to do away the curse
that is appointed for the transgression of the law. I must therefore first fulfill it
all, and having delivered you from its condemnation, in this way bring it to an
end. It becomes me therefore to fulfill the whole law, by the same rule that it

becomes me to do away the curse that is written against you in the law: this
being the very purpose of my assuming flesh, and coming hither."
2. "Then he suffers Him. And Jesus, when He was baptized, went up
straightway out of the water; and, lo, the heavens were opened unto Him, and he
saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove, and lighting upon Him."
For inasmuch as many supposed that John was greater than He, because
John had been brought up all his time in the wilderness, and was son of a chief
priest, and was clothed with such raiment, and was calling all men unto his
baptism, and had been born of a barren mother; while Jesus, first of all, was of a
damsel of ordinary rank (for the virgin birth was not yet manifest to all); and
besides, He had been brought up in an house, and held converse with all men,
and wore this common raiment; they suspected Him to be less than John,
knowing as yet nothing of those secret things—and it fell out moreover that He
was baptized of John, which thing added support to this surmise, even if none of
those mentioned before had existed; for it would come into their mind that this
man was one of the many (for were He not one of the many, He would not have
come with the many to the baptism), but that John was greater than He and far
more admirable:— in order therefore that this opinion might not prevail with the
multitude, the very heavens are opened, when He is baptized, and the Spirit
comes down, and a voice with the Spirit, proclaiming the dignity of the Only
Begotten. For since the voice that said, "This is my beloved Son," would seem to
the multitude rather to belong to John, for It added not, "This that is baptized,"
but simply This, and every hearer would conceive it to be said concerning the
baptizer, rather than the baptized, partly on account of the Baptist's own dignity,
partly for all that has been mentioned; the Spirit came in form of a dove, drawing
the voice towards Jesus, and making it evident to all, that This was not spoken of
John that baptized, but of Jesus who was baptized.
And how was it, one may say, that they did not believe, when these things
came to pass? Because in the days of Moses also many wonderful works were
done, albeit not such as these; and after all those, the voices, and the trumpets,