not an abrogation of authority but a demonstration of agreement. How then does
He say here "Nevertheless not as I will but as You will"? Perhaps I have excited a
great conflict in your mind, but be on the alert: for although many words have
been uttered I know well that your zeal is still fresh: for the discourse is now
hastening on to the solution. Why then has this form of speech been employed?
Attend carefully, The doctrine of the incarnation was very hard to receive. For
the exceeding measure of His lovingkindness and the magnitude of His
condescension were full of awe, and needed much preparation to be accepted.
For consider what a great thing it was to hear and to learn that God the ineffable,
the incorruptible, the unintelligible, the invisible, the incomprehensible, in
whose hand are the ends of the earth, who looks upon the earth, and causes it to
tremble, who touches the mountains, and makes them smoke, the weight of
whose condescension not even the Cherubim were able to bear but veiled their
faces by the shelter of their wings, that this God who surpasses all
understanding, and baffles all calculation, having passed by angels, archangels,
and all the spiritual powers above, deigned to become man, and to take flesh
formed of earth and clay, and enter the womb of a virgin, and be borne there the
space of nine months, and be nourished with milk, and suffer all things to which
man is liable. Inasmuch then as that which was to happen was so strange as to be
disbelieved by many even when it had taken place, He first of all sends prophets
beforehand, announcing this very fact. For instance the patriarch predicted it
saying "You sprang from a tender shoot my son: you lied down and slumber as a
lion;" [Genesis 49:9] and Esaias saying "Behold the Virgin shall conceive and
bear a son and they shall call His name Emmanuel;" [Isaiah 7:14] and elsewhere
again "We beheld Him as a young child, as a root in a dry ground;" [Isaiah 53:2]
and by the dry ground he means the virgin's womb. And again "unto us a child is
born, unto us a son is given," [Isaiah 9:6] and again "there shall come forth a rod
out of the root of Jesse, and a flower shall spring out of his root." [Isaiah 11:1]
And Baruch in the book of Jeremiah says "this is our God: no other shall be
reckoned by the side of Him: He found out every path of knowledge and gave it

to Jacob His servant, and Israel his beloved. After these things also He appeared
upon the earth, and held converse with men." And David signifying His
incarnate presence said "He shall come down like the rain into a fleece of wool,
and like the drop which distills upon the earth" because He noiselessly and
gently entered into the Virgin's womb.
4. But these proofs alone did not suffice, but even when He had come, lest
what had taken place should be deemed an illusion, He warranted the fact not
only by the sight but by duration of time and by passing through all the phases
incident to man. For He did not enter once for all into a man matured and
completely developed, but into a virgin's womb, so as to undergo the process of
gestation and birth and suckling and growth, and by the length of the time and
the variety of the stages of growth to give assurance of what had come to pass.
And not even here were the proofs concluded, but even when bearing about the
body of flesh He suffered it to experience the infirmities of human nature and to
be hungry, and thirsty, and to sleep and feel fatigue; finally also when He came
to the cross He suffered it to undergo the pains of the flesh. For this reason also
streams of sweat flowed down from it and an angel was discovered
strengthening it, and He was sad and down-cast: for before He uttered these
words He said "my soul is troubled, and exceeding sorrowful ever unto death."
[Matthew 26:38] If then after all these things have taken place the wicked mouth
of the devil speaking through Marcion of Pontus, and Valentinus, and
Manichæus of Persia and many more heretics, has attempted to overthrow the
doctrine of the Incarnation and has vented a diabolical utterance declaring that
He did not become flesh, nor was clothed with it, but that this was mere fancy,
and illusion, a piece of acting and pretence, although the sufferings, the death,
the burial, the thirst, cry aloud against this teaching; supposing that none of these
things had happened would not the devil have sown these wicked doctrines of
impiousness much more widely? For this reason, just as He hungered, as He
slept, as He felt fatigue, as He ate and drank, so also did He deprecate death,
thereby manifesting his humanity, and that infirmity of human nature which does