FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.20, C.3.

the external action is good. But if the will be good from its intention
of the end, this is not enough to make the external action good: and
if the will be evil either by reason of its intention of the end, or by
reason of the act willed, it follows that the external action is evil.
Reply to Objection 1: If the good tree be taken to signify the good
will, it must be in so far as the will derives goodness from the act
willed and from the end intended.
Reply to Objection 2: A man sins by his will, not only when he wills
an evil end; but also when he wills an evil act.
Reply to Objection 3: Voluntariness applies not only to the interior
act of the will, but also to external actions, inasmuch as they
proceed from the will and the reason. Consequently the difference of
good and evil is applicable to both the interior and external act.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.20, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the goodness and malice of the external

action are the same as those of the interior act?
Objection 1: It would seem that the goodness and malice of the
interior act of the will are not the same as those of the external
action. For the principle of the interior act is the interior
apprehensive or appetitive power of the soul; whereas the principle
of the external action is the power that accomplishes the movement.
Now where the principles of action are different, the actions
themselves are different. Moreover, it is the action which is the
subject of goodness or malice: and the same accident cannot be in
different subjects. Therefore the goodness of the interior act cannot
be the same as that of the external action.
Objection 2: Further, "A virtue makes that, which has it, good, and
renders its action good also" (Ethic. ii, 6). But the intellective virtue
in the commanding power is distinct from the moral virtue in the
power commanded, as is declared in Ethic. i, 13. Therefore the
goodness of the interior act, which belongs to the commanding
power, is distinct from the goodness of the external action, which
belongs to the power commanded.
Objection 3: Further, the same thing cannot be cause and effect;
since nothing is its own cause. But the goodness of the interior act
is the cause of the goodness of the external action, or vice versa, as
stated above (Articles 1,2). Therefore it is not the same goodness in
each.
On the contrary, It was shown above (Question 18, Article 6) that the
act of the will is the form, as it were, of the external action. Now that
which results from the material and formal element is one thing.
Therefore there is but one goodness of the internal and external act.
I answer that, As stated above (Question 17, Article 4), the interior
act of the will, and the external action, considered morally, are one
act. Now it happens sometimes that one and the same individual act
has several aspects of goodness or malice, and sometimes that it
has but one. Hence we must say that sometimes the goodness or
malice of the interior act is the same as that of the external action,
and sometimes not. For as we have already said (Articles 1,2), these
two goodnesses or malices, of the internal and external acts, are