## On the Priesthood — Book II
1. That it is possible then to make use of deceit for a good purpose, or rather
that in such a case it ought not to be called deceit, but a kind of good
management worthy of all admiration, might be proved at greater length; but
since what has already been said suffices for demonstration, it would be irksome
and tedious to lengthen out my discourse upon the subject. And now it will
remain for you to prove whether I have not employed this art to your advantage.
Basil: And what kind of advantage have I derived from this piece of good
management, or wise policy, or whatever you may please to call it, so as to
persuade me that I have not been deceived by you?
Chrysostom: What advantage, pray, could be greater than to be seen doing
those things which Christ with his own lips declared to be proofs of love to
Himself? [John 21:15-17] For addressing the leader of the apostles He said,
"Peter, do you love me?" and when he confessed that he did, the Lord added, "if
you love me tend my sheep." The Master asked the disciple if He was loved by
him, not in order to get information (how should He who penetrates the hearts of
all men?), but in order to teach us how great an interest He takes in the
superintendence of these sheep. This being plain, it will likewise be manifest that
a great and unspeakable reward will be reserved for him whose labors are
concerned with these sheep, upon which Christ places such a high value. For
when we see any one bestowing care upon members of our household, or upon
our flocks, we count his zeal for them as a sign of love towards ourselves: yet all
these things are to be bought for money:— with how great a gift then will He
requite those who tend the flock which He purchased, not with money, nor
anything of that kind, but by His own death, giving his own blood as the price of
the herd. Wherefore when the disciple said, "You know Lord that I love You," and
invoked the beloved one Himself as a witness of his love, the Saviour did not

stop there, but added that which was the token of love. For He did not at that
time wish to show how much Peter loved Him, but how much He Himself loved
His own Church, and he desired to teach Peter and all of us that we also should
bestow much zeal upon the same. For why did God not spare His only-begotten
Son, but delivered Him up, although the only one He had? It was that He might
reconcile to Himself those who were disposed towards Him as enemies, and
make them His peculiar people. For what purpose did He shed His blood? It was
that He might win these sheep which He entrusted to Peter and his successors.
Naturally then did Christ say, "Who then is the faithful and wise servant, whom
his lord shall make ruler over His household." Again, the words are those of one
who is in doubt, yet the speaker did not utter them in doubt, but just as He asked
Peter whether he loved Him, not from any need to learn the affection of the
disciple, but from a desire to show the exceeding depth of his own love: so now
also when He says, "Who then is the faithful and wise servant?" he speaks not as
being ignorant who is faithful and wise, but as desiring to set forth the rarity of
such a character, and the greatness of this office. Observe at any rate how great
the reward is— "He will appoint him," he says, "ruler over all his goods."
[Matthew 24:47]
2. Will you, then, still contend that you were not rightly deceived, when you
are about to superintend the things which belong to God, and are doing that
which when Peter did the Lord said he should be able to surpass the rest of the
apostles, for His words were, "Peter, do you love me more than these?" Yet He
might have said to him, "If you love me practise fasting, sleeping on the ground,
and prolonged vigils, defend the wronged, be as a father to orphans, and supply
the place of a husband to their mother." But as a matter of fact, setting aside all
these things, what does He say? "Tend my sheep." For those things which I have
already mentioned might easily be performed by many even of those who are
under authority, women as well as men; but when one is required to preside over
the Church, and to be entrusted with the care of so many souls, the whole female
sex must retire before the magnitude of the task, and the majority of men also;