answer he does not produce immediately, it being a useful thing not to do so, but
he first stops the disputant's mouth, saying as follows,
Ver. 20. "Nay but, O man, who are you that repliest against God?"
This he does to take down the objector's unseasonable inquisitiveness, and
excessive curiosity, and to put a check upon it, and teach him to know what God
is, and what man, and how incomprehensible His foreknowledge is, and how far
above our reason, and how obedience to Him in all points is binding. So when he
has made this preparatory step in his hearer, and has hushed and softened down
his spirit, then with great felicity he introduces the answer, having made what he
says easy of admittance with him. And he does not say, it is impossible to
answer questions of this kind, but that (5 manuscripts No, but what? That) it is
presumptuous to raise them. For our business is to obey what God does, not to
be curious even if we do not know the reason of them. Wherefore he said, "Who
are you that repliest against God?" You see how very light he makes of him,
how he bears down his swelling spirit! "Who are you?" are you a sharer of His
power? [compare Job 38] nay, are you sitting in judgment upon God? Why in
comparison with Him you can not have a being even! nor this or that sort of
being, but absolutely none! For the expression, "who are you?" does much more
set him at naught than "you are nothing." And he takes other ways of showing
further his indignation in the question, and does not say, "Who are you that"
answerest "God?" but, "that repliest against," that is, that gainsayest, and that
opposest. For the saying things ought to be so, and ought not to be so, is what a
man does that "replies against." See how he scares them, how he terrifies them,
how he makes them tremble rather than be questioning and curious. This is what
an excellent teacher does; he does not follow his disciples' fancy everywhere, but
leads them to his own mind, and pulls up the thorns, and then puts the seed in,
and does not answer at once in all cases to the questions put to him.
Ver. 20, 2l. "Shall the thing formed say to Him that formed it, Why have You
made me thus? Hath not the potter [Read Jeremiah 18:1-10] power, of the same
lump to make one vessel unto honor, and another unto dishonor?"

Here it is not to do away with free-will that he says this, but to show, up to
what point we ought to obey God. For in respect of calling God to account, we
ought to be as little disposed to it as the clay is. For we ought to abstain not from
gainsaying or questioning only, but even from speaking or thinking of it at all,
and to become like that lifeless matter, which follows the potter's hands, and lets
itself be drawn about anywhere he may please. And this is the only point he
applied the illustration to, not, that is, to any enunciation of the rule of life, but to
the complete obedience and silence enforced upon us. And this we ought to
observe in all cases, that we are not to take the illustrations quite entire, but after
selecting the good of them, and that for which they were introduced, to let the
rest alone. As, for instance, when he says, "He couched, he lay down as a lion;"
[Numbers 24:9] let us take out the indomitable and fearful part, not the brutality,
nor any other of the things belonging to a lion. And again, when He says, "I will
meet them as a bereaved bear" [Hosea 13:8], let us take the vindictiveness. And
when he says, "our God is a consuming fire" [Hebrews 12:29], the wasting
power exerted in punishing. So also here must we single out the clay, the potter,
and the vessels. And when he does go on to say, "Hath not the potter power over
the clay, of the same lump to make one vessel unto honor, and another unto
dishonor?" do not suppose that this is said by Paul as an account of the creation,
nor as implying a necessity over the will, but to illustrate the sovereignty and
difference of dispensations; for if we do not take it in this way, various
incongruities will follow, for if here he were speaking about the will, and those
who are good and those not so, He will be Himself the Maker of these, and man
will be free from all responsibility. And at this rate, Paul will also be shown to be
at variance with himself, as he always bestows chief honor upon free choice.
There is nothing else then which he here wishes to do, save to persuade the
hearer to yield entirely to God, and at no time to call Him to account for
anything whatever. For as the potter (he says) of the same lump makes what he
pleases, and no one forbids it; thus also when God, of the same race of men,
punishes some, and honors others, be not thou curious nor meddlesome herein,