But see how He introduces His law: how "He called the multitude, and said
unto them, Hear and understand." [Matthew 15:11]
Thus He does by no means simply reveal it to them, but by respect and
courtesy, first, He makes His saying acceptable (for this the evangelist declares
by saying, "He called them unto Him"): and secondly, by the time also; in that
after their refutation, and His victory over them, and the accusation by the
prophet, then He begins His legislation, when they too would more easily
receive His sayings.
And He does not merely call them unto Him, but also makes them more
attentive. For "understand," says He, that is, "consider, rouse yourselves; for of
that sort is the law now about to be enacted. For if they set aside the law, even
unseasonably, for their own tradition, and you hearkened; much more ought ye
to hearken unto me, who at the proper season am leading you unto a higher rule
of self restraint."
And He did not say, "The observance of meats is nothing, neither that
Moses had given wrong injunctions, nor that of condescension He did so;" but in
the way of admonition and counsel, and taking His testimony from the nature of
the things, He says: "Not the things that go into the mouth, defile the man, but
the things that go out of the mouth;" [Matthew 15:11] resorting to nature herself
both in His enactment and in His demonstration. Yet they hearing all this, made
no reply, neither did they say, "What sayest Thou? When God has given charges
without number concerning the observance of meats, do you make such laws?"
But since He had utterly stopped their mouths, not by refuting them only, but
also by publishing their craft, and exposing what was done by them in secret,
and revealing the secrets of their mind; their mouths were stopped, and so they
went away.
But mark, I pray you, how He does not yet venture distinctly to set Himself
with boldness against the meats. Therefore neither did He say "the meats," but,
"the things that enter in defile not the man;" which it was natural for them to
suspect concerning the unwashen hands also. For He indeed was speaking of

meats, but it would be understood of these matters too.
Why, so strong was the feeling of scruple about the meats, that even after
the resurrection Peter said, "Not so, Lord, for I have never eaten anything
common or unclean." [Acts 10:14] For although it was for the sake of others that
He said this, and in order to leave Himself a justification against his censurers,
by pointing out that he actually remonstrated, and not even so was excused,
nevertheless it implies the depth of their impression on that point.
Wherefore you see He Himself also at the beginning spoke not openly
concerning meats, but, "The things that go into the mouth;" and again, when He
had seemed afterwards to speak more plainly, He veiled it by His conclusion,
saying, "But to eat with unwashen hands defiles not the man:" [Matthew 15:20]
that He might seem to have had His occasion from thence, and to be still
discoursing of the same. Therefore He said not, "To eat meats defiles not a man,"
but is as though He were speaking on that other topic; that they may have
nothing to say against it.
4. When therefore they had heard these things, "the Pharisees," it is said,
"were offended," [Matthew 15:12] not the multitudes. For "His disciples," so it is
said, "came and said unto Him, Do you know that the Pharisees were offended,
when they heard the saying?" Yet surely nothing had been said unto them.
What then says Christ? He did not remove the offense in respect of them,
but reproved them, saying, "Every plant which my heavenly Father has not
planted, shall be rooted up." [Matthew 15:13] For He is wont both to despise
offenses, and not to despise them. Elsewhere, for example, He says, "But lest we
should offend them, cast an hook into the sea:" [Matthew 17:27] but here He
says, "Let them alone, they be blind leaders of the blind: and if the blind lead the
blind, both shall fall into the ditch."
But these things His disciples said, not as grieving for those men only, but
as being themselves also slightly perplexed. But because they dared not say so in
their own person, they would fain learn it by their telling Him of others. And as
to its being so, hear how after this the ardent and ever-forward Peter came to