is dissolved on either side, because the marriage is not imperfect as
to the bond, although it is sometimes imperfect as to its effect.
Hence it is in punishment of the unbelieving wife rather than by
virtue of the previous marriage that she is forbidden to marry again.
If however she be afterwards converted, she may be allowed by
dispensation to take another husband, should her husband have
taken another wife.
Reply to Objection 4: The husband ought not to take a vow of
continence nor enter into a second marriage, if after his conversion
there be a reasonable hope of the conversion of his wife, because
the wife's conversion would be more difficult if she knew she was
deprived of her husband. If however there be no hope of her
conversion, he can take Holy orders or enter religion, having first
besought his wife to be converted. And then if the wife be converted
after her husband has received Holy orders, her husband must not
be restored to her, but she must take it as a punishment of her tardy
conversion that she is deprived of her husband.
Reply to Objection 5: The bond of fatherhood is not dissolved by
disparity of worship, as the marriage bond is: wherefore there is no
comparison between an inheritance and a wife.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether other sins dissolve marriage?

Objection 1: It would seem that other sins besides unbelief dissolve
marriage. For adultery is seemingly more directly opposed to
marriage than unbelief is. But unbelief dissolves marriage in a
certain case so that it is lawful to marry again. Therefore adultery
has the same effect.
Objection 2: Further, just as unbelief is spiritual fornication, so is
any kind of sin. If, then unbelief dissolves marriage because it is
spiritual fornication, for the same reason any kind of sin will dissolve
marriage.
Objection 3: Further, it is said (Mt. 5:30): "If thy right hand scandalize
thee, pluck it off and cast it from thee," and a gloss of Jerome says
that "by the hand and the right eye we may understand our brother,
wife, relatives and children." Now these become obstacles to us by
any kind of sin. Therefore marriage can be dissolved on account of
any kind of sin.
Objection 4: Further, covetousness is idolatry according to Eph. 5:5.
Now a wife may be put away on account of idolatry. Therefore in like
manner she can be put away on account of covetousness, as also on
account of other sins graver than covetousness.
Objection 5: Further, the Master says this expressly (Sent. iv, D, 30).
On the contrary, It is said (Mt. 5:32): "Whosoever shall put away his
wife, excepting for the cause of fornication, maketh her to commit
adultery."
Further, if this were true, divorces would be made all day long, since
it is rare to find a marriage wherein one of the parties does not fall
into sin.
I answer that, Bodily fornication and unbelief have a special
contrariety to the goods of marriage, as stated above (Article 3).
Hence they are specially effective in dissolving marriages.
Nevertheless it must be observed that marriage is dissolved in two
ways. In one way as to the marriage tie, and thus marriage cannot be
dissolved after it is ratified, neither by unbelief nor by adultery. But if