dead, some now, some hereafter; that I shall demand account from all men of
their transgressions, that I shall judge righteously, and recompense those who
have walked uprightly." Now since all these were assertions, since the things
asserted were important, and since no clear proof of them had as yet been
afforded to the Jews but one rather indistinct, He puts their objection first when
He is about to proceed to establish His assertions, speaking somewhat in this
way if not in these very words: "Perhaps you will say, you assert all this, but you
are not a credible witness, since you testify of yourself." First then checking their
disputatious spirit by setting forth what they would say, and showing that He
knew the secrets of their hearts, and giving this first proof of His power, after
stating the objection He supplies other proofs clear and indisputable, producing
three witnesses to what He said, namely, the works wrought by Him, the witness
of the Father, and the preaching of John. And He puts first the less important
witness of John. For after saying, "There is another that bears witness of Me,
and I know that his witness is true," He adds,

John 5:33
"You sent unto John, and he bore witness unto the truth."
Yet if Your witness be not true, how sayest Thou, "I know that the testimony
of John is true, and that he has borne witness to the truth"? And do you see (O
man) how clear it hence is, that the expression, "My witness is not true," was
addressed to their secret thoughts?
2. "What then," says some one, "if John bore witness partially." That the
Jews might not assert this, see how He removes this suspicion. For He said not,
"John testified of Me," but, "You first sent to John, and you would not have sent
had ye not deemed him trustworthy." Nay, what is more, they had sent not to ask
him about Christ, but about himself, and the man whom they deemed
trustworthy in what related to himself they would much more deem so in what
related to another. For it is, so to speak, the nature of us all not to give so much
credit to those who speak of themselves as to those who speak of others; yet him
they deemed so trustworthy as not to require even concerning himself any other
testimony. For they who were sent said not, "What do you say concerning
Christ?" but, "Who are you? What do you say of yourself?" So great admiration
felt they for the man. Now to all this Christ made allusion by saying, "You sent
unto John." And on this account the Evangelist has not merely related that they
sent, but is exact as to the persons sent that they were Priests and of the
Pharisees, not common or abject persons, nor such as might be corrupted or
cheated, but men able to understand exactly what he said.

John 5:34
"But I receive not testimony from man."
"Why then have You brought forward that of John?" His testimony was not
the "testimony of man," for, says he, "He that sent me to baptize with water, He
said unto me." [John 1:33] So that John's testimony was the testimony of God;
for having learned from Him he said what he did. But that none should ask,
"Whence is it clear that he learned from God?" and stop at this, He abundantly
silences them by still addressing Himself to their thoughts. For neither was it
likely that many would know these things; they had hitherto given heed unto
John as to one who spoke of himself, and therefore Christ says, "I receive not
testimony from man." And that the Jews might not ask, "And if You were not
about to receive the testimony of man, and by it to strengthen Yourself, why have
You brought forward this man's testimony?" see how He corrects this
contradiction by what He adds. For after saying, "I receive not testimony from
man," He has added,
"But these things I say, that you may be saved."
What He says is of this kind; "I, being God, needed not the witness of John
which is man's witness, yet because ye gave more heed to him, believe him more
trustworthy than any, ran to him as to a prophet, (for all the city was poured
forth to Jordan,) and have not believed on Me, even when working miracles,
therefore I remind you of that witness of his."