and immediately their souls were knit together. "They were all of one heart and
of one soul." So that even setting aside almsgiving, the parting with riches is
attended with gain. And these things I have said, that those who have not
succeeded to an inheritance from their forefathers may not be cast down, as if
they had less than those who are wealthy. For if they please they have more. For
they will more readily incline to almsgiving, like the widow, and they will have
no occasion for enmity towards their neighbor, and they will enjoy freedom in
every respect. Such an one cannot be threatened with the confiscation of his
goods, and he is superior to all wrongs. As those who fly unincumbered with
clothes are not easily caught, but they who are incumbered with many garments
and a long train are soon overtaken, so it is with the rich man and the poor. The
one, though he be taken, will easily make his escape, while the other, though he
be not detained, is incumbered by cords of his own, by numberless cares,
distresses, passions, provocations, all which overwhelm the soul, and not these
alone, but many other things which riches draw after them. It is much more
difficult for a rich man to be moderate and to live frugally, than for the poor,
more difficult for him to be free from passion. Then he, you say, will have the
greater reward.— By no means.— What, not if he overcomes greater
difficulties?— But these difficulties were of his own seeking. For we are not
commanded to become rich, but the reverse. But he prepares for himself so
many stumbling-blocks and impediments.
Others not only divest themselves of riches, but macerate their bodies, as
travelers in the narrow way. Instead of doing this, you heat more intensely the
furnace of your passions, and gettest more about you. Go therefore into the
broad way, for it is that which receives such as you. But the narrow way is for
those who are afflicted and straitened, who bear along with them nothing but
those burdens, which they can carry through it, as almsgiving, love for mankind,
goodness, and meekness. These if you bear, you will easily find entrance, but if
you take with you arrogance, a soul inflamed with passions, and that load of
thorns, wealth, there is need of wide room for you to pass, nor will you well be

able to enter into the crowd without striking others, and coming down upon them
on your way. In this case a wide distance from others is required. But he who
carries gold and silver, I mean the achievements of virtue, does not cause his
neighbors to flee from him, but brings men nearer to him, even to link
themselves with him. But if riches in themselves are thorns, what must
covetousness be? Why do you take that away with you? Is it to make the flame
greater by adding fuel to that fire? Is not the fire of hell sufficient? Consider how
the Three Children overcame the furnace. Imagine that to be hell. With
tribulation were they plunged into it, bound and fettered; but within they found
large room; not so they that stood around without.
Something of this kind even now will be experienced, if we will manfully
resist the trials that encompass us. If we have hope in God, we shall be in
security, and have ample room, and those who bring us into these straits shall
perish. For it is written, "Whoso digs a pit shall fall therein." [Sirach 26:27]
Though they bind our hands and our feet, the affliction will have power to set us
loose. For observe this miracle. Those whom men had bound, the fire set free.
As if certain persons were delivered up to the servants of their friends, and the
servants, from regard to the friendship of their master, instead of injuring them,
should treat them with much respect; so the fire, when as it knew that the Three
Children were the friends of its Lord, burst their fetters, set them free, and let
them go, and became to them as a pavement, and was trodden under their feet.
And justly, since they had been cast into it for the glory of God. Let us, as many
of us as are afflicted, hold fast these examples.
But behold, they were delivered from their affliction, you say, and we are
not. True, they were delivered, and justly; since they did not enter into that
furnace expecting deliverance, but as if to die outright. For hear what they say:
"There is a God in Heaven, Who will deliver us. But if not, be it known unto you,
O King, that we will not serve your gods, nor worship the golden image which
you have set up." [Daniel 3:17-18] But we, as if bargaining on the chastisements
of the Lord, even fix a time, saying, "If He does not show mercy till this time."