Further, things of the one species have one fixed way of origin:
wherefore animals begotten of putrefaction are never of the same
species as those begotten of seed, as the Commentator says on
Phys. viii. Now the natural way of man's origin is for him to be
begotten of a like in species: and such is not the case in the
resurrection. Therefore it will not be natural.
I answer that, A movement or an action stands related to nature in
three ways. For there is a movement or action whereof nature is
neither the principle nor the term: and such a movement is
sometimes from a principle above nature as in the case of a glorified
body; and sometimes from any other principle whatever; for
instance, the violent upward movement of a stone which terminates
in a violent rest. Again, there is a movement whereof nature is both
principle and term: for instance, the downward movement of a stone.
And there is another movement whereof nature is the term, but not
the principle, the latter being sometimes something above nature (as
in giving sight to a blind man, for sight is natural, but the principle of
the sight-giving is above nature), and sometimes something else, as
in the forcing of flowers or fruit by artificial process. It is impossible
for nature to be the principle and not the term, because natural
principles are appointed to definite effects, beyond which they
cannot extend.
Accordingly the action or movement that is related to nature in the
first way can nowise be natural, but is either miraculous if it come
from a principle above nature, or violent if from any other principle.
The action or movement that is related to nature in the second way is
simply natural: but the action that is related to nature in the third way
cannot be described as natural simply, but as natural in a restricted
sense, in so far, to wit, as it leads to that which is according to
nature: but it is called either miraculous or artificial or violent. For,
properly speaking, natural is that which is according to nature, and a
thing is according to nature if it has that nature and whatever results
from that nature (Phys. ii, 1). Consequently, speaking simply,
movement cannot be described as natural unless its principle be
natural.
Now nature cannot be the principle of resurrection, although
resurrection terminates in the life of nature. For nature is the
principle of movement in the thing wherein nature is---either the
active principle, as in the movement of heavy and light bodies and in

the natural alterations of animals---or the passive principle, as in the
generation of simple bodies. The passive principle of natural
generation is the natural passive potentiality which always has an
active principle corresponding to it in nature, according to
Metaphysics viii, 1: nor as to this does it matter whether the active
principle in nature correspond to the passive principle in respect of
its ultimate perfection, namely the form; or in respect of a
disposition in virtue of which it demands the ultimate form, as in the
generation of a man according to the teaching of faith, or in all other
generations according to the opinions of Plato and Avicenna. But in
nature there is no active principle of the resurrection, neither as
regards the union of the soul with the body, nor as regards the
disposition which is the demand for that union: since such a
disposition cannot be produced by nature, except in a definite way
by the process of generation from seed. Wherefore even granted a
passive potentiality on the part of the body, or any kind of inclination
to its union with the soul, it is not such as to suffice for the
conditions of natural movement. Therefore the resurrection, strictly
speaking, is miraculous and not natural except in a restricted sense,
as we have explained.
Reply to Objection 1: Damascene is speaking of those things that are
found in all individuals and are caused by the principles of nature.
For supposing by a divine operation all men to be made white, or to
be gathered together in one place, as happened at the time of the
deluge, it would not follow that whiteness or existence in some
particular place is a natural property of man.
Reply to Objection 2: From natural things one does not come by a
demonstration of reason to know non-natural things, but by the
induction of reason one may know something above nature, since
the natural bears a certain resemblance to the supernatural. Thus the
union of soul and body resembles the union of the soul with God by
the glory of fruition, as the Master says (Sent. ii, D, 1): and in like
manner the examples, quoted by the Apostle and Gregory, are
confirmatory evidences of our faith in the resurrection.
Reply to Objection 3: This argument regards an operation which
terminates in something that is not natural but contrary to nature.
Such is not the resurrection, and hence the argument is not to the
point.
Reply to Objection 4: The entire operation of nature is subordinate to