towards it? Deaden the senses, and then learn something of the things one needs
to know! What would be more foolish than a soul, if from the first it had the
senses deadened? If the deadening of but a single part, I mean of the brain,
becomes a marring of it altogether; if all the rest should be deadened, what
would it be good for? Show me a soul without a body. Do you not hear
physicians say, The presence of disease sadly enfeebles the soul? How long will
you put off hanging yourselves? Is the body material? Tell me. "To be sure, it is."
Then you ought to hate it. Why do you feed, why cherish it? You ought to get
quit of this prison. But besides: "God cannot overcome matter, unless he
([συμπλακἥ]) implicate himself with it: for he cannot issue orders to it (O
feebleness!) until he close with it, and ([σταθἥ]) take his stand (say you) through
the whole of it!" And a king indeed does all by commanding; but God, not by
commanding the evil! In short, if it were unparticipant of all good, it could not
subsist at all. For Evil cannot subsist, unless it lay hold upon somewhat of the
accidents of Virtue: so that if it had been heretofore all unmixed with virtue, it
would have perished long ago: for such is the condition of evils. Let there be a
profligate man, let him put upon himself no restraint whatever, will he live ten
days? Let there be a robber, and devoid of all conscience in his dealings with
every one, let him be such even to his fellow robbers, will he be able to live? Let
there be a thief, void of all shame, who knows not what blushing is, but steals
openly in public. It is not in the nature of evils to subsist, unless they get some
small share at least in good. So that hereupon, according to these men, God gave
them their subsistence. Let there be a city of wicked men; will it stand? But let
them be wicked, not only with regard to the good, but towards each other. Why,
it is impossible such a city should stand. Truly, "professing themselves to be
wise, they became fools." [Romans 1:22] If bodily substance be evil, then all
things visible exist idly, and in vain, both water and earth, and sun, and air; for
air is also body, though not solid. It is in point then to say, "The wicked have told
me foolish things." [Psalm 119:85] But let not us endure them, let us block up
our ears against them. For there is, yea, there is, a resurrection of bodies. This

the sepulchre which is at Jerusalem declares, this the pillar to which He was
bound, when He was scourged. For, "We ate and drank with Him," it is said. Let
us then believe in the Resurrection, and do things worthy of it, that we may
attain to the good things which are to come, through Christ Jesus our Lord, with
Whom to the Father, and the Holy Ghost together, be power, honor, now and for
ever, world without end. Amen.