charging His disciples, on every occasion, concerning charity, and teaching them
that the devil, to subvert it, leaves nothing undone.
3. Having then uttered His second refutation, He adds also a third, thus
saying:
"How can one enter into the strong man's house, and spoil his goods,
except he first bind the strong man, and then spoil his goods?"
For that Satan cannot possibly cast out Satan is evident from what has been
said; but that neither in any other way is it possible to cast him out, except one
first get the better of him, this too is acknowledged by all.
What then is established hereby? The former statement, with more
abundant evidence. "Why, I am so far," says He, "from using the devil as an ally,
that I make war upon him, and bind him; and an infallible proof thereof is the
plundering of his goods." See how the contrary is proved, of what they were
attempting to establish. For whereas they wished to show, that not by His own
power does He cast out devils, He shows that not only the devils, but even their
very chief leader is held by Him bound with all authority; and that over him,
before them, did He prevail by His own power. And this is evident from the
things that are done. For if he be the prince, and they subjects, how, except he
were worsted, and made to bow down, could they have been spoiled?
And here His saying seems to me to be a prophecy likewise. For not only, I
suppose, are the evil spirits the goods of the devil, but also the men that are
doing his works. Therefore to declare that He does not only cast out devils, but
also will drive away all error from the world, and will put down his sorceries,
and make all his arts useless, He said these things.
And He said not, He will take away, but "He will spoil," to express what is
done with authority. But He calls him "strong," not because he is so by nature,
God forbid, but declaring his former tyranny, which arose from our remissness.
4. "He that is not with me is against me, and he that gathers not with me
scatters abroad." [Matthew 12:30]
Behold also a fourth refutation. For what is my desire? Says He. To bring

men to God, to teach virtue, to proclaim the kingdom. What, that of the devil,
and the evil spirits? The contrary to these. How then should he that gathers not
with me, nor is at all with me, be likely to co-operate with me? And why do I say
co-operate? Nay, on the contrary, his desire is rather to scatter abroad my goods.
He then who is so far from cooperating that he even scatters abroad, how should
he have exhibited such unanimity with me, as with me to cast out the devils?
Now it is a natural surmise that He said this not of the devil only, but
Himself also of Himself, as being for His part against the devil, and scattering
abroad his goods. And how, one may say, is he that is not with me against me?
By this very fact, of his not gathering. But if this be true, much more he that is
against him. For if he that does not co-operate is an enemy, much more he that
wages war.
But all these things He says, to indicate His enmity against the devil, how
great and unspeakable it is. For tell me, if you must go to war with any one, he
that is not willing to fight on your side, by this very fact is he not against you?
And if elsewhere He says, "He that is not against you is for you," it is not
contrary to this. For here He signified one actually against them, but there He
points to one who in part is on their side: "For they cast out devils," it is said "in
Your name."
But to me He seems here to be hinting also at the Jews, setting them on the
devil's side. For they too were against Him, and were scattering what He
gathered. As to the fact that He was hinting at them also, He declared it by
speaking thus,
"Therefore I say unto you, that all manner of sin and blasphemy shall be
forgiven unto men."
5. Thus having defended Himself, and refuted their objection, and proved
the vanity of their shameless dealings, He proceeds to alarm them. For this too is
no small part of advice and correction, not only to plead and persuade, but to
threaten also; which He does in many passages, when making laws and giving
counsel.