Phil. iii. 29, etc.

and corruptible, it becomes immortal and incorruptible, not after its own proper substance, but after
the mighty working of the Lord, who is able to invest the mortal with immortality, and the corruptible
with incorruption. And therefore he says, "that mortality may be swallowed up of life. He who
has perfected us for this very thing is God, who also has given unto us the earnest of the Spirit."
He uses these words most manifestly in reference to the flesh; for the soul is not mortal, neither is
the spirit. Now, what is mortal shall be swallowed up of life, when the flesh is dead no longer, but
remains living and incorruptible, hymning the praises of God, who has perfected us for this very
thing. In order, therefore, that we may be perfected for this, aptly does he say to the Corinthians,
"Glorify God in your body." Now God is He who gives rise to immortality.
4. That he uses these words with respect to the body of flesh, and to none other, he declares to
the Corinthians manifestly, indubitably, and free from all ambiguity: "Always bearing about in our
body the dying of Jesus, that also the life of Jesus Christ might be manifested in our body. For
if we who live are delivered unto death for Jesus' sake, it is that the life of Jesus may also be
manifested in our mortal flesh." And that the Spirit lays hold on the flesh, he says in the same
Epistle, "That ye are the epistle of Christ, ministered by us, inscribed not with ink, but with the
Spirit of the living God, not in tables of stone, but in the fleshly tables of the heart." If, therefore,
in the present time, fleshly hearts are made partakers of the Spirit, what is there astonishing if, in
the resurrection, they receive that life which is granted by the Spirit? Of which resurrection the
apostle speaks in the Epistle to the Philippians: "Having been made conformable to His death, if
by any means I might attain to the resurrection which is from the dead." In what other mortal
flesh, therefore, can life be understood as being manifested, unless in that substance which is also
put to death on account of that confession which is made of God? —as he has himself declared,
"If, as a man, I have fought with beasts at Ephesus, what advantageth it me if the dead rise not?
For if the dead rise not, neither has Christ risen. Now, if Christ has not risen, our preaching is vain,
and your faith is vain. In that case, too, we are found false witnesses for God, since we have testified
observes: "The interpretation of the Scriptural reference by the translator suggests the suspicion that the greater number of such
references have come in from the margin."

that He raised up Christ, whom [upon that supposition] He did not raise up. For if the dead rise
not, neither has Christ risen. But if Christ be not risen, your faith is vain, since ye are yet in your
sins. Therefore those who have fallen asleep in Christ have perished. If in this life only we have
hope in Christ, we are more miserable than all men. But now Christ has risen from the dead, the
first-fruits of those that sleep; for as by man [came] death, by man also [came] the resurrection of
the dead."
5. In all these passages, therefore, as I have already said, these men must either allege that the
apostle expresses opinions contradicting himself, with respect to that statement, "Flesh and blood
cannot inherit the kingdom of God;" or, on the other hand, they will be forced to make perverse
and crooked interpretations of all the passages, so as to overturn and alter the sense of the words.
For what sensible thing can they say, if they endeavour to interpret otherwise this which he writes:
"For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal put on immortality;" and, "That
the life of Jesus may be made manifest in our mortal flesh;" and all the other passages in which
the apostle does manifestly and clearly declare the resurrection and incorruption of the flesh? And
thus shall they be compelled to put a false interpretation upon passages such as these, they who do
not choose to understand one correctly.