taken away on account of his iniquity, but his blood will I require at the
watchman's hands." [Ezekiel 33:6]
2. Cease then to urge us on to a penalty so inevitable; for our discourse is
not about an army, or a kingdom; but about an office which needs the virtues of
an angel. For the soul of the Priest ought to be purer than the very sunbeams, in
order that the Holy Spirit may not leave him desolate, in order that he may be
able to say, "Now I live; and yet no longer I, but Christ lives in me."
[Galatians 2:20] For if they who dwell in the desert, and are removed far from
the city and the market-place, and the tumult therein, and who enjoy all their
time a haven of rest, and of peacefulness, are not willing to rely on the security
of that manner of life, but add to it numberless other safeguards, hedging
themselves round on every side, and studying both to speak and to act with great
circumspection, so that to the utmost extent of human power they may draw near
to God with assurance, and with unstained purity, what power and strength, do
you think, does the ordained Priest need so as to be able to tear his soul away
from every defilement, and to keep its spiritual beauty unsullied? For he has
need of far greater purity than they; and whoever has need of greater purity, he
too is subject to more pressing temptations than they, which are able to defile
him, unless by using constant self-denial and much labor, he renders his soul
inaccessible to them. For beauty of face, elegance of movement, an affected gait
and lisping voice, pencilled eyebrows and enamelled cheeks, elaborate braiding
and dyeing of hair, costliness of dress, variety of golden ornaments, and the
glory of precious stones, the scent of perfumes, and all those other matters to
which womankind devote themselves, are enough to disorder the mind, unless it
happen to be hardened against them, through much austerity of self restraint.
Now to be disturbed indeed by such things is nothing wonderful. But on the
other hand, that the devil should be able to hit and shoot down the souls of men
by the opposite of these— this is a matter which fills us with astonishment and
perplexity.
3. For ere now some men who have escaped these snares, have been caught

by others widely differing from these. For even a neglected appearance, unkempt
hair, squalid dress, and an unpainted face, simple behavior, and homely
language, unstudied gait, and unaffected voice, a life of poverty, a despised,
unpatronized and lonely condition, have first drawn on the beholder to pity, and
next to utter ruin; and many who have escaped the former nets, in the way of
gold ornaments and perfumes, and apparel, and all the rest, of which I have
spoken as connected with them, have easily fallen into these so widely differing
from them, and have perished. When then both by poverty and by riches, both by
the adornment and the neglect of the personal appearance, both by studied and
unaffected manners, in short by all those means which I have enumerated, war is
kindled in the soul of the beholder, and its artifices surround him on every side,
how will he be able to breathe freely while so many snares encompass him? And
what hiding-place will he be able to find— I do not say so as to avoid being
forcibly seized by them (for this is not altogether difficult)— but so as to keep
his own soul undisturbed by polluting thoughts?
And I pass by honors, which are the cause of countless evils. For those
which come from the hands of women are ruinous to the vigor of self-restraint,
and often overthrow it when a man does not know how to watch constantly
against such designs; while those which come from the hands of men, unless a
man receive them with much nobleness of mind, he is seized with two contrary
emotions, servile flattery and senseless pride. To those who patronize him, he is
obliged to cringe; and towards his inferiors he is puffed up, on account of the
honors which the others confer, and is driven into the gulf of arrogance. We have
mentioned these matters indeed, but how harmful they actually are, no one could
well learn without experience. For not only these snares, but greater and more
delusive than these, he must needs encounter, who has his conversation in the
world. But he who is content with solitude, has freedom from all this, and if at
any time a strange thought creates a representation of this kind, the image is
weak, and capable of being speedily subdued, because there is no fuel added to
the flame from without, arising from actual sight. For the recluse has but himself