The punctuation and exact meaning are very uncertain.

3. On this account, therefore, the Lord Himself, who is Emmanuel from the Virgin, is the
sign of our salvation, since it was the Lord Himself who saved them, because they could not be
saved by their own instrumentality; and, therefore, when Paul sets forth human infirmity, he says:
"For I know that there dwelleth in my flesh no good thing," showing that the "good thing" of
our salvation is not from us, but from God. And again: "Wretched man that I am, who shall deliver
me from the body of this death?" Then he introduces the Deliverer, [saying,] "The grace of Jesus
Christ our Lord." And Isaiah declares this also, [when he says:] "Be ye strengthened, ye hands that
hang down, and ye feeble knees; be ye encouraged, ye feeble-minded; be comforted, fear not:
behold, our God has given judgment with retribution, and shall recompense: He will come Himself,
and will save us." Here we see, that not by ourselves, but by the help of God, we must be saved.
4. Again, that it should not be a mere man who should save us, nor [one] without flesh—for
the angels are without flesh—[the same prophet] announced, saying: "Neither an elder, nor
angel, but the Lord Himself will save them because He loves them, and will spare them: He will
Himself set them free." And that He should Himself become very man, visible, when He should
be the Word giving salvation, Isaiah again says: "Behold, city of Zion: thine eyes shall see our
salvation." And that it was not a mere man who died for us, Isaiah says: "And the holy Lord
remembered His dead Israel, who had slept in the land of sepulture; and He came down to preach
His salvation to them, that He might save them." And Amos (Micah) the prophet declares the
same: "He will turn again, and will have compassion upon us: He will destroy our iniquities, and
will cast our sins into the depths of the sea." And again, specifying the place of His advent, he
says: "The Lord hath spoken from Zion, and He has uttered His voice from Jerusalem." And
followed the rendering by Massuet.

Isa. xxv. 3.

Isa. lxiii. 9.
Trypho, [chap. lxxii. and notes, Dial. with Trypho, in this volume,] brings it forward as an argument against him, and directly
accuses the Jews of having fraudulently removed it from the sacred text. It is, however, to be found in no ancient version of
Jewish Targum, which fact may be regarded as a decisive proof of its spuriousness.

that it is from that region which is towards the south of the inheritance of Judah that the Son of
God shall come, who is God, and who was from Bethlehem, where the Lord was born [and] will
send out His praise through all the earth, thus says the prophet Habakkuk: "God shall come from
the south, and the Holy One from Mount Effrem. His power covered the heavens over, and the
earth is full of His praise. Before His face shall go forth the Word, and His feet shall advance in
the plains." Thus he indicates in clear terms that He is God, and that His advent was [to take
place] in Bethlehem, and from Mount Effrem which is towards the south of the inheritance, and
that [He is] man. For he says, "His feet shall advance in the plains:" and this is an indication proper
to man.