There is yet another reason why the human soul abounds in a variety
of powers---because it is on the confines of spiritual and corporeal
creatures; and therefore the powers of both meet together in the
soul.
Reply to Objection 1: The intellectual soul approaches to the Divine
likeness, more than inferior creatures, in being able to acquire
perfect goodness; although by many and various means; and in this
it falls short of more perfect creatures.
Reply to Objection 2: A unified power is superior if it extends to
equal things: but a multiform power is superior to it, if it is over
many things.
Reply to Objection 3: One thing has one substantial existence, but
may have several operations. So there is one essence of the soul,
with several powers.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the powers are distinguished by their

acts and objects?
Objection 1: It would seem that the powers of the soul are not
distinguished by acts and objects. For nothing is determined to its
species by what is subsequent and extrinsic to it. But the act is
subsequent to the power; and the object is extrinsic to it. Therefore
the soul's powers are not specifically distinct by acts and objects.
Objection 2: Further, contraries are what differ most from each other.
Therefore if the powers are distinguished by their objects, it follows
that the same power could not have contrary objects. This is clearly
false in almost all the powers; for the power of vision extends to
white and black, and the power to taste to sweet and bitter.
Objection 3: Further, if the cause be removed, the effect is removed.
Hence if the difference of powers came from the difference of
objects, the same object would not come under different powers.
This is clearly false; for the same thing is known by the cognitive
power, and desired by the appetitive.
Objection 4: Further, that which of itself is the cause of anything, is
the cause thereof, wherever it is. But various objects which belong
to various powers, belong also to some one power; as sound and
color belong to sight and hearing, which are different powers, yet
they come under the one power of common sense. Therefore the
powers are not distinguished according to the difference of their
objects.
On the contrary, Things that are subsequent are distinguished by
what precedes. But the Philosopher says (De Anima ii, 4) that "acts
and operations precede the powers according to reason; and these
again are preceded by their opposites," that is their objects.
Therefore the powers are distinguished according to their acts and
objects.
I answer that, A power as such is directed to an act. Wherefore we
seek to know the nature of a power from the act to which it is
directed, and consequently the nature of a power is diversified, as
the nature of the act is diversified. Now the nature of an act is
diversified according to the various natures of the objects. For every