sooner even than pictured ones, it is effaced. From these things make your mind
pass to the true beauty. 'But,' says he, ' I do not see beauty of soul.' But if you
will choose, you shall see it: and as the absent beautiful may be with the mind
admired, though with one's eyes unseen, so it is possible to see without eyes
beauty of soul. Have you not often sketched a beauteous form, and felt moved
unto the drawing? Image also now beauty of soul, and revel in that loveliness.
'But,' says he, 'I do not see things incorporeal.' And yet we see these, rather than
the corporeal, with the mind. Therefore it is, for instance, that although we see
them not, we admire angels also and archangels, and habits of character, and
virtue of soul. And if you see a man considerate and moderate, you will more
admire him than that beautiful countenance. And if you see one insulted, yet
bearing it; wronged, yet giving way, admire and love such, even though they be
striken in age. For such a thing is the beauty of the soul; even in old age it has
many enamored of it, and it never fades, but blooms for ever. In order then that
we also may gain this beauty, let us go in quest of those that have it, and be
enamored of them. For so shall we too be able, when we have attained this
beauty, to obtain the good things eternal, whereof may all we partake, through
the grace and love towards men of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the
Father, with the Holy Spirit, be glory and might, for ever and ever. Amen.

## Homily 8 on Second Corinthians

2 Corinthians 4:1-2
Therefore seeing we have this ministry, even as we obtained mercy we faint
not, but we have renounced the hidden things of shame.
Seeing he had uttered great things and had set himself and all the faithful
before Moses, aware of the height and greatness of what he had said, observe
how he moderates his tone again. For it was necessary on account of the false
Apostles to exalt his hearers also, and again to calm down that swelling; yet not
to do it away, since this would be a trifler's part. Wherefore he manages this in
another manner, by showing that not of their own merits was it, but all of the
loving-kindness of God. Wherefore also he says, "Therefore seeing we have this
ministry." For nothing more did we contribute, except that we became ministers,
and made ourselves subservient to the things given by God. Wherefore he said
not 'largess ,' nor 'supply ,' but 'ministry.' Nor was he contented with this even,
but added, "as we obtained mercy." For even this itself, he says, the ministering
to these things, is of mercy and loving-kindness. Yet it is mercy's to deliver from
evils, not to give so many good things besides: but the mercy of God includes
this also.
"We faint not." And this indeed is to be imputed to His loving-kindness. For
the clause, "as we obtained mercy," take to be said with reference both to the
"ministry," and to the words, "we faint not." And observe how earnestly he
endeavors to lower his own things. 'For,' says he, 'that one who has been counted
worthy of such and so great things, and this from mercy only and lovingkindness, should show forth such labors, and undergo dangers, and endure
temptations, is no great matter. Therefore we not only do not sink down, but we
even rejoice and speak boldly.' For instance, having said, "we faint not," he