have relation not to such passions only, but to others; such as
temperance, which relates not only to sorrow, but also to joy; and
fortitude, which relates not only to fear, but also to daring and hope.
Thus the act of temperance could exist in the primitive state, so far
as it moderates pleasure; and in like manner, fortitude, as
moderating daring and hope, but not as moderating sorrow and fear.
Reply to Objection 3: appears from what has been said above.
Reply to Objection 4: Perseverance may be taken in two ways: in one
sense as a particular virtue, signifying a habit whereby a man makes
a choice of persevering in good; in that sense Adam possessed
perseverance. In another sense it is taken as a circumstance of
virtue; signifying a certain uninterrupted continuation of virtue; in
which sense Adam did not possess perseverance.
Reply to Objection 5: appears from what has been said above.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the actions of the first man were less

meritorious than ours are?
Objection 1: It would seem that the actions of the first man were less
meritorious than ours are. For grace is given to us through the
mercy of God, Who succors most those who are most in need. Now
we are more in need of grace than was man in the state of
innocence. Therefore grace is more copiously poured out upon us;
and since grace is the source of merit, our actions are more
meritorious.
Objection 2: Further, struggle and difficulty are required for merit; for
it is written (2 Tm. 2:5): "He . . . is not crowned except he strive
lawfully" and the Philosopher says (Ethic. ii, 3): "The object of virtue
is the difficult and the good." But there is more strife and difficulty
now. Therefore there is greater efficacy for merit.
Objection 3: Further, the Master says (Sent. ii., D, xxiv) that "man
would not have merited in resisting temptation; whereas he does
merit now, when he resists." Therefore our actions are more
meritorious than in the primitive state.
On the contrary, if such were the case, man would be better off after
sinning.
I answer that, Merit as regards degree may be gauged in two ways.
First, in its root, which is grace and charity. Merit thus measured
corresponds in degree to the essential reward, which consists in the
enjoyment of God; for the greater the charity whence our actions
proceed, the more perfectly shall we enjoy God. Secondly, the
degree of merit is measured by the degree of the action itself. This
degree is of two kinds, absolute and proportional. The widow who
put two mites into the treasury performed a deed of absolutely less
degree than the others who put great sums therein. But in
proportionate degree the widow gave more, as Our Lord said;
because she gave more in proportion to her means. In each of these
cases the degree of merit corresponds to the accidental reward,
which consists in rejoicing for created good.
We conclude therefore that in the state of innocence man's works
were more meritorious than after sin was committed, if we consider