nature, one can exist without the other; as a thing knowable can
exist without the knowledge of it, as the Philosopher says (Praedic.
v). But relative things which are said of God and creatures are not
simultaneous in nature. Therefore a relation can be predicated of
God to the creature even without the existence of the creature; and
thus these names "Lord" and "Creator" are predicated of God from
eternity, and not temporally.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Trin. v) that this relative
appellation "Lord" is applied to God temporally.
I answer that, The names which import relation to creatures are
applied to God temporally, and not from eternity.
To see this we must learn that some have said that relation is not a
reality, but only an idea. But this is plainly seen to be false from the
very fact that things themselves have a mutual natural order and
habitude. Nevertheless it is necessary to know that since relation
has two extremes, it happens in three ways that a relation is real or
logical. Sometimes from both extremes it is an idea only, as when
mutual order or habitude can only go between things in the
apprehension of reason; as when we say a thing "the same as itself."
For reason apprehending one thing twice regards it as two; thus it
apprehends a certain habitude of a thing to itself. And the same
applies to relations between "being" and "non-being" formed by
reason, apprehending "non-being" as an extreme. The same is true
of relations that follow upon an act of reason, as genus and species,
and the like.
Now there are other relations which are realities as regards both
extremes, as when for instance a habitude exists between two things
according to some reality that belongs to both; as is clear of all
relations, consequent upon quantity; as great and small, double and
half, and the like; for quantity exists in both extremes: and the same
applies to relations consequent upon action and passion, as motive
power and the movable thing, father and son, and the like.
Again, sometimes a relation in one extreme may be a reality, while in
the other extreme it is an idea only; and this happens whenever two
extremes are not of one order; as sense and science refer
respectively to sensible things and to intellectual things; which,
inasmuch as they are realities existing in nature, are outside the

order of sensible and intellectual existence. Therefore in science and
in sense a real relation exists, because they are ordered either to the
knowledge or to the sensible perception of things; whereas the
things looked at in themselves are outside this order, and hence in
them there is no real relation to science and sense, but only in idea,
inasmuch as the intellect apprehends them as terms of the relations
of science and sense. Hence the Philosopher says (Metaph. v) that
they are called relative, not forasmuch as they are related to other
things, but as others are related to them. Likewise for instance, "on
the right" is not applied to a column, unless it stands as regards an
animal on the right side; which relation is not really in the column,
but in the animal.
Since therefore God is outside the whole order of creation, and all
creatures are ordered to Him, and not conversely, it is manifest that
creatures are really related to God Himself; whereas in God there is
no real relation to creatures, but a relation only in idea, inasmuch as
creatures are referred to Him. Thus there is nothing to prevent these
names which import relation to the creature from being predicated of
God temporally, not by reason of any change in Him, but by reason
of the change of the creature; as a column is on the right of an
animal, without change in itself, but by change in the animal.
Reply to Objection 1: Some relative names are imposed to signify the
relative habitudes themselves, as "master" and "servant," "father,"
and "son," and the like, and these relatives are called predicamental
[secundum esse]. But others are imposed to signify the things from
which ensue certain habitudes, as the mover and the thing moved,
the head and the thing that has a head, and the like: and these
relatives are called transcendental [secundum dici]. Thus, there is
the same two-fold difference in divine names. For some signify the
habitude itself to the creature, as "Lord," and these do not signify
the divine substance directly, but indirectly, in so far as they
presuppose the divine substance; as dominion presupposes power,
which is the divine substance. Others signify the divine essence
directly, and consequently the corresponding habitudes, as
"Saviour," "Creator," and suchlike; and these signify the action of
God, which is His essence. Yet both names are said of God
temporarily so far as they imply a habitude either principally or
consequently, but not as signifying the essence, either directly or
indirectly.
Reply to Objection 2: As relations applied to God temporally are only