own. And why speak I of garments and golden ornaments? Why, if one would
grant me the whole world in possession, the mere nail of Paul I should esteem
more powerful than all that dominion: his poverty than all luxury: his dishonor,
than all glory: his nakedness than all riches: no security would I compare with
the buffeting of that sacred head: no diadem, with the stones to which he was a
mark. This crown let us long for, beloved: and if persecution be not now, let us
mean while prepare ourselves. For neither was he of whom we speak glorious by
persecutions alone: for he said also, [1 Corinthians 9:27. ὑποπιέζω] rec. text,
[ὑπωπίαζω] "I keep under my body;" now in this one may attain excellence
without persecutions. And he exhorted not to [Romans 3:14] "make provision for
the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof." And again, [1 Timothy 6:8] "Having food
and covering, let us be therewith content." For to these purposes we have no
need of persecutions. And the wealthy too he sought to moderate, saying, [1
Timothy 6:9] "They that desire to be rich fall into temptation."
If therefore we also thus exercise ourselves, when we enter into the contest
we shall be crowned: and though there be no persecution before us, we shall
receive for these things many rewards. But if we pamper the body and live the
life of a swine, even in peace we shall often sin and bear shame.
Do you see not with whom we wrestle? With the incorporeal powers. How
then, being ourselves flesh, are we to get the better of these? For if wrestling
with men one have need to be temperate in diet, much more with evil spirits. But
when together with fullness of flesh we are also bound down to wealth, whence
are we to overcome our antagonists? For wealth is a chain, a grievous chain, to
those who know not how to use it; a tyrant savage and inhuman, imposing all his
commands by way of outrage on those who serve him. Howbeit, if we will, this
bitter tyranny we shall depose from its throne, and make it yield to us, instead of
commanding. How then shall this be? By distributing our wealth unto all. For so
long as it stands against us, each single handed, like any robber in a wilderness it
works all its bad ends: but when we bring it forth among others, it will master us
no more, holden as it will be in chains, on all sides, by all men.

8. And these things I say, not because riches are a sin: the sin is in not
distributing them to the poor, and in the wrong use of them. For God made
nothing evil but all things very good; so that riches too are good; i.e. if they do
not master their owners; if the wants of our neighbors be done away by them.
For neither is that light good which instead of dissipating darkness rather makes
it intense: nor should I call that wealth, which instead of doing away poverty
rather increases it. For the rich man seeks not to take from others but to help
others: but he that seeks to receive from others is no longer rich, but is
emphatically poor. So that it is not riches that are an evil, but the needy mind
which turns wealth into poverty. These are more wretched than those who ask
alms in the narrow streets, carrying a wallet and mutilated in body. I say, clothed
in rags as they are, not so miserable as those in silks and shining garments.
Those who strut in the market-place are more to be pitied than those who haunt
the crossings of the streets, and enter into the courts, and cry from their cellars,
and ask charity. For these for their part do utter praises to God, and speak words
of mercy and a strict morality. And therefore we pity them, and stretch out the
hand, and never find fault with them. But those who are rich to bad purpose;
cruelty and inhumanity, ravening and satanical lust, are in the words they belch
out. And therefore by all are they detested and laughed to scorn. Do but
consider; which of the two among all men is reckoned disgraceful, to beg of the
rich or the poor. Every one, I suppose, sees it at once:— of the poor. Now this, if
you mark it, is what the rich do; for they dared not apply to those who are richer
than themselves: whereas those who beg do so of the wealthy: for one beggar
asks not alms of another, but of a rich man; but the rich man tears the poor in
pieces.
Again tell me, which is the more dignified, to receive from those who are
willing and are obliged to you, or when men are unwilling, to compel and tease
them? Clearly not to trouble those who are unwilling. But this also the rich do:
for the poor receive from willing hands, and such as are obliged to them; but the
rich from persons unwilling and repugnant, which is an indication of greater