Neither did He say, that the other continues unpunished, but, "do not thou
punish;" at once both enhancing the fear of him that smites, if he persist, and
comforting him who is smitten.
9. But these things we have said, as one might say them incidentally,
concerning all the commandments. Now we must go on to that which is before
us, and keep to the thread of what had been affirmed. "He that is angry with his
brother without a cause shall be in danger of the judgment:" so He speaks. Thus
He has not altogether taken the thing away: first, because it is not possible, being
a man, to be freed from passions: we may indeed get the dominion over them,
but to be altogether without them is out of the question.
Next, because this passion is even useful, if we know how to use it at the
suitable time. See, for instance, what great good was wrought by that anger of
Paul, which he felt against the Corinthians, on that well-known occasion; and
how, as it delivered them from a grievous pest, so by the same means again he
recovered the people of the Galatians likewise, which had fallen aside; and
others too beside these. What then is the proper time for anger? When we are not
avenging ourselves, but checking others in their lawless freaks, or forcing them
to attend in their negligence.
And what is the unsuitable time? When we do so as avenging ourselves:
which Paul also forbidding, said "Avenge not yourselves, dearly beloved, but
rather give place unto wrath." [Romans 12:19] When we are contending for
riches: yea, for this has he also taken away, where he says, "Why do ye not rather
take wrong? Why do ye not rather suffer yourselves to be defrauded?"
[1 Corinthians 6:7] For as this last sort is superfluous, so is the first necessary
and profitable. But most men do the contrary; becoming like wild beasts when
they are injured themselves, but remiss and cowardly when they see despite done
to another: both which are just opposite to the laws of the Gospel.
Being angry then is not a transgression, but being so unseasonably. For this
cause the prophet also said, "Be angry, and sin not."
10. "And whosoever shall say to his brother, Raca, shall be in danger of the

council."
By the council in this place He means the tribunal of the Hebrews: and He
has mentioned this now, on purpose that He might not seem everywhere to play
the stranger and innovator.
But this word, "Raca," is not an expression of a great insolence, but rather
of some contempt and slight on the part of the speaker. For as we, giving orders
either to our servants, or to any very inferior person, say, "Away with you; you
here, tell such an one:" so they who make use of the Syrians' language say,
"Raca," putting that word instead of "you." But God, the lover of man, roots up
even the least faults, commanding us to behave to one another in seemly manner,
and with due respect; and this with a view of destroying hereby also the greater.
"But whosoever shall say, You fool, shall be in danger of hell fire."
To many this commandment has appeared grievous and galling, if for a
mere word we are really to pay so great a penalty. And some even say that it was
spoken rather hyperbolically. But I fear lest, when we have deceived ourselves
with words here, we may in deeds there suffer that extreme punishment.
For wherefore, tell me, does the commandment seem overburdensome? Do
you not know that most punishments and most sins have their beginning from
words? Yea, for by words are blasphemies, and denials are by words, and
revilings, and reproaches, and perjuries, and bearing false witness. Regard not
then its being a mere word, but whether it have not much danger, this do thou
inquire. Are you ignorant that in the season of enmity, when wrath is inflamed,
and the soul kindled, even the least thing appears great, and what is not very
reproachful is counted intolerable? And often these little things have given birth
even to murder, and overthrown whole cities. For just as where friendship is,
even grievous things are light, so where enmity lies beneath, very trifles appear
intolerable. And however simply a word be spoken, it is surmised to have been
spoken with an evil meaning. And as in fire: if there be but a small spark, though
thousands of planks lie by, it does not easily lay hold of them; but if the flame
have waxed strong and high, it readily seizes not planks only, but stones, and all