greatest care of himself. As regards infirmity then enough has now been said.
But if it is separation from me which causes your despondency expect release
from this. And I have not said this now merely to encourage you, but I am sure
that it really will be the case. For if it were not destined to happen, I should long
ago, so at least I think, have departed from this world, considering the trials
which have been inflicted on me. For to pass over all that occurred in
Constantinople, after my departure thence, you may understand what sufferings I
endured on that long and cruel journey, most of which were sufficient to produce
death; what I endured after my arrival here, after my removal from Cucusus, and
after my sojourn in Arabissus. Yet I have survived all these things, and now I am
in sound health, and great security, so that all Armenians are astonished that with
such a feeble and flimsy frame as mine I can support such an intolerable amount
of cold, or that I can breathe at all, when those who are habituated to the winter
are suffering from it in no common degree. Nevertheless I have remained
uninjured up to the present day, having escaped the hands of robbers who have
repeatedly attacked us, and yet in daily want of the necessaries of life, and
deprived of the use of a bath; and although since my sojourn here I have been
constantly without this luxury I am now so established in the habit that I do not
even long for the comfort to be derived from it, but am in sounder health than
before. And neither the inclemency of the climate, nor the desolation of the
region, nor the scarcity of provisions, nor the lack of attendants, nor the
unskillfulness of physicians, nor the deprivation of the bath, nor perpetual
confinement in one chamber as in a prison, and the impossibility of moving
about which I always used continually to need, nor perpetual contact with fire
and smoke, nor fear of robbers, nor a constant state of siege, nor anything else of
this kind has got the better of me; on the contrary I am in a sounder condition of
health than I was elsewhere, although I then received great care and attention.
Taking all these things then into consideration pray shake off the despondency
which now oppresses you, and do not exact inordinate and cruel penances from
yourself. I sent you the treatise which I have lately written, that "no one can

harm the man who does not injure himself," and the letter which I now send your
honour contends for the same position. I beg you therefore to go over it
constantly, and if your health permits you, recite it aloud. For if you will, it may
prove an effectual remedy for you. But if you are contentious with me, and do
not try to cure yourself, and will not rouse yourself from these dismal swamps of
despondency in spite of the unlimited amount of advice and exhortation which
you enjoy I shall not on my part readily consent to send you frequent and long
letters, if you are not to derive any benefit in the way of cheerfulness from them.
How then shall I know this? Not by your merely saying so, but by a practical
proof, inasmuch as you lately affirmed that it was nothing but despondency
which caused this sickness of yours. Since then you have yourself made this
confession I shall not believe that you have got rid of your despondency unless
you have got rid of your bodily infirmity. For if it is the former which causes
your disorder, as you say in your letter, it is obvious that when that has been
dispersed the other will be removed at the same time, and when the root has been
plucked up, the branches perish with it—and if the branches continue flowering
and flourishing, and producing an unnatural amount of fruit I cannot believe that
you have been set free from the root of your distress. Therefore do not show me
words but facts, and, if you get well, you will see letters sent to you again
exceeding the limits of former communications. Deem it then no small
consolation that I am alive, and in good health, and that in the midst of such
circumstances I have been set free from sickness and infirmity, which, as I know,
is a great annoyance and vexation to my enemies. It follows therefore that you
should deem this the greatest encouragement, and the crown of your consolation.
Do not call your household desolate, which has now a higher place assigned to it
in Heaven by reason of the sufferings which it endures. I was grievously
distressed on account of Pelagius the monk. Consider therefore what great
rewards they deserve who bravely hold their ground, when men who pass their
time in such a habit of discipline and endurance are found susceptible of
degradation.