other, have by the lust of vainglory overcome both, lavishing their money
unsparingly, and practising temperance to no (good) purpose; others again, who
are exceedingly vainglorious, have despised that evil affection, submitting to
many vile disgraces for the sake of their amours, or for the sake of their money:
others again, that they may satiate their anger, have chosen to suffer losses
without end, and care for none of them, provided only they may work their own
will. And yet, what passion can do with us, the fear of God is impotent to effect!
Why speak I of passion? What shame before men can do with us, the fear of God
has not the strength to effect! Many are the things we do right and wrong, from a
feeling of shame before men; but God we fear not. How many have been shamed
by regard to the opinions of men into flinging away money! How many have
mistakenly made it a point of honor to give themselves up to the service of their
friends (only), to their hurt! How many from respect for their friendships have
been shamed into numberless wrong acts! Since then both passion and regard for
the opinion of men are able to put us upon doing wrong things and right, it is idle
to say, "we cannot:" we can, if we have the mind: and we ought to have the
mind. Why can you not overcome the love of glory, when others do overcome it,
having the same soul as thou, and the same body; bearing the same form, and
living the same life? Think of God, think of the glory that is from above: weigh
against that the things present, and you will quickly recoil from this worldly
glory. If at all events thou covet glory, covet that which is glory, indeed. What
kind of glory is it, when it begets infamy? What kind of glory, when it compels
one to desire the honor of those who are inferior, and stands in need of that? Real
honor is the gaining the esteem of those who are greater than one's self. If at all
events you are enamoured of glory, be thou rather enamoured of that which
comes from God. If enamoured of that glory you despise this world's glory, you
shall see how ignoble this is: but so long as you see not that glory, neither will
you be able to see this, how foul it is, how ridiculous. For as those who are under
the spell of some wicked, hideously ugly woman, so long as they are in love
with her, cannot see her ill-favoredness, because their passion spreads a darkness

over their judgment: so is it here also: so long as we are possessed with the
passion, we cannot perceive what a thing it is. How then might we be rid of it?
Think of those who (for the sake of glory) have spent countless sums, and now
are none the better for it: think of the dead, what glory they got, and (now) this
glory is nowhere abiding, but all perished and come to naught: bethink you how
it is only a name, and has nothing real in it. For say, what is glory? Give me
some definition. "The being admired by all," you will say. With justice, or also
not with justice? For if it be not with justice, this is not admiration, but
crimination ([κατηγορία]), and flattery, and misrepresentation ([διαβολή]). But if
you say, With justice, why that is impossible: for in the populace there are no
right judgments; those that minister to their lusts, those are the persons they
admire. And if you would (see the proof of this), mark those who give away
their substance to the harlots, to the charioteers, to the dancers. But you will say,
we do not mean these, but those who are just and upright, and able to do great
and noble good acts. Would that they wished it, and they soon would do good:
but as things are, they do nothing of the kind. Who, I ask you, now praises the
just and upright man? Nay, it is just the contrary. Could anything be more
preposterous than for a just man, when doing any such good act, to seek glory of
the many— as if an artist of consummate skill, employed upon an Emperor's
portrait, should wish to have the praises of the ignorant! Moreover, a man who
looks for honor from men, will soon enough desist from the acts which virtue
enjoins. If he will needs be gaping for their praises, he will do just what they
wish, not what himself wishes. What then would I advise you? You must look
only to God, to the praise that is from Him, perform all things which are pleasing
to Him, and go after the good things (that are with Him), not be gaping for
anything that is of man: for this mars both fasting and prayer and almsgiving,
and makes all our good deeds void. Which that it be not our case, let us flee this
passion. To one thing alone let us look, to the praise which is from God, to the
being accepted of Him, to the commendation from our common Master; that,
having passed through our present life virtuously, we may obtain the promised