much more we that have been nurtured in so many lessons of strict virtue?
And how is it reasonable, asks one, that they that have never heard of hell,
should fall into hell? For they will say, "If you had threatened hell, we should
have feared more, and have been sobered." To be sure; (is it not so?) at our rate
of living now, who hear daily the sayings about hell, and give no heed at all.
And besides, there is this also to be said; that he who is not restrained by
the judgments in sight, much less will he be restrained by those others. For the
less reasonable sort, and those of a grosser disposition, are wont to be sobered
rather by things which are at hand, and straightway to happen, than by such as
will come to pass a long time after. "But over us," one may say, "a greater fear is
suspended, and herein were they wronged." By no means. For first, there are not
the same measures set to us as to them, but much greater for us. Now they that
have undertaken greater labors, ought to enjoy greater help. And it is no little
help, that our fear has been increased. And if we have an advantage over them in
knowing things to come, they have an advantage over us in that the severe
punishments are presently laid upon them.
But there is something else, which the multitude say with respect to this
also. For "where," say they, "is God's justice, when any one for sinning here, is
punished both here and there?" Would ye then I should put you in mind of your
own sayings, that you may no longer give us trouble, but furnish the solution
from within yourselves. I have heard many of our people, if haply they were told
of a murderer cut off in a court of justice, how they had indignation, and talked
in this way: "This unholy and accursed wretch, having perpetrated thirty
murders, or even many more, has himself undergone one death only; and where
is the justice of it?" So that you yourselves confess, that one death is not
sufficient for punishment; how give ye then an opposite sentence now. Because
not others but yourselves are the objects of your judgment: so great a hindrance
is self-love to our perceiving what is just. Because of this, when we are judging
others, we search out all things with strictness, but when we are sitting in
judgment on ourselves, we are blinded. Since if we were to search into these

things in our own case too, as we do with regard to other men, we should give an
uncorrupt sentence. For we also have sins, deserving not two or three, but ten
thousand deaths. And to pass over all the rest, let us recollect ourselves, as many
of us as partake unworthily of the mysteries; such men being guilty of the body
and blood of Christ. Wherefore, when you are talking of the murderer, take
account of yourself also. For he indeed has murdered a man, but you are under
the guilt of slaying the Lord; and he, not having partaken of mysteries, but we,
while enjoying the benefit of the sacred table.
And what are they that bite and devour their brethren, and pour out such
abundance of venom? What is he that robs the poor of their food? For if he who
imparts not of his own, is such as I have said, much more he that takes the things
of others. How many robbers do the covetous surpass in wickedness! How many
murderers and robbers of tombs, the rapacious! And how many after spoiling
men are desirous even of their blood!
"Nay," says he, "God forbid." Now you say, God forbid. When you have an
enemy, then say, God forbid, and call to mind what has been said, and show forth
a life full of great strictness; lest the portion of Sodom await us also, lest we
suffer the lot of Gomorrha, lest we undergo the ills of the Tyrians and Sidonians;
or rather, lest we offend Christ, which were a thing more grievous and more to
be feared than all.
For though to many hell seem to be a fearful thing, yet I for my part will not
cease continually to say, that this is more grievous and fearful than any hell; and
you I entreat to be of the same mind. For so shall we both be delivered from hell,
and enjoy the glory that is bestowed of Christ; unto which may we all attain, by
the grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and
might forever and ever. Amen.