SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.176, C.2.

pertains to the gift of tongues, but also speaks with effect, and this
pertains to the grace "of the word."
This happens in three ways. First, in order to instruct the intellect,
and this is the case when a man speaks so as "to teach." Secondly,
in order to move the affections, so that a man willingly hearkens to
the word of God. This is the case when a man speaks so as "to
please" his hearers, not indeed with a view to his own favor, but in
order to draw them to listen to God's word. Thirdly, in order that men
may love that which is signified by the word, and desire to fulfill it,
and this is the case when a man so speaks as "to sway" his hearers.
In order to effect this the Holy Ghost makes use of the human tongue
as of an instrument; but He it is Who perfects the work within. Hence
Gregory says in a homily for Pentecost (Hom. xxx in Ev.): "Unless
the Holy Ghost fill the hearts of the hearers, in vain does the voice of
the teacher resound in the ears of the body."
Reply to Objection 1: Even as by a miracle God sometimes works in
a more excellent way those things which nature also can work, so
too the Holy Ghost effects more excellently by the grace of words
that which art can effect in a less efficient manner.
Reply to Objection 2: The Apostle is speaking there of the word that
relies on human eloquence without the power of the Holy Ghost.
Wherefore he says just before (1 Cor. 4:19): "I . . . will know, not the
speech of them that are puffed up, but the power": and of himself he
had already said (1 Cor. 2:4): "My speech and my preaching was not
in the persuasive words of human wisdom, but in the showing of the
spirit and power."
Reply to Objection 3: As stated above, the grace of the word is given
to a man for the profit of others. Hence it is withdrawn sometimes
through the fault of the hearer, and sometimes through the fault of
the speaker. The good works of either of them do not merit this
grace directly, but only remove the obstacles thereto. For sanctifying
grace also is withdrawn on account of a person's fault, and yet he
does not merit it by his good works, which, however, remove the
obstacles to grace.
Reply to Objection 4: As stated above, the grace of the word is
directed to the profit of others. Now if a man communicates his faith
to others this is by the word of knowledge or of wisdom. Hence

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.176, C.2.

Augustine says (De Trin. xiv, 1) that "to know how faith may profit
the godly and be defended against the ungodly, is apparently what
the Apostle means by knowledge." Hence it was not necessary for
him to mention the word of faith, but it was sufficient for him to
mention the word of knowledge and of wisdom.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.176, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the grace of the word of wisdom and