of Babylon came, and all his host, against Jerusalem, and pitched against it, and
built a wall against it round about, and the city was besieged until the eleventh
year of king Zedekiah, and the ninth day of the month, and there was no bread
for the people to eat, and the city was broken up." [2 Kings 25:1-4] He might
indeed, at once from the first day, have delivered them up, and have given them
into the hands of their enemies; but He permitted that they should first be wasted
for the space of three years, and experience a most distressing siege; to the end
that during this interval, being humbled by the terror of the forces without, or the
famine that oppressed the city within, they might compel the king, however
unwillingly, to submit to the barbarian; and some alleviation might be obtained
for the sin committed. And to prove that this is true, and no conjecture of my
own, hear what He says to him by the prophet: "If you shall go forth to the king
of Babylon's princes, then your soul shall live, and this city shall not be burned
with fire; and you shall live, and your house. But if you will not go forth to the
king of Babylon's princes, then shall this city be given into the hand of the
Chaldeans; and they shall burn it with fire, and you shall not escape out of their
hand. And the king said, I am afraid of the Jews that are fallen to the Chaldeans,
lest they deliver me into their hands and they mock me. But Jeremiah said, They
shall not deliver you. Obey, I beseech you, the word of the Lord, which I speak
unto you; so shall it be better for you, and your soul shall live. But if you refuse
to go forth, this is the word that the Lord has showed me. All the women that are
left in the king of Judah's house, shall be brought forth to the king of Babylon's
princes; and those shall say, The men who are at peace with you have deceived
you, and have prevailed over you; they shall prevail when your feet slip; they are
turned away from you, and they shall bring out all your wives, and your children
to the Chaldeans, and you shall not escape out of their hand, for you shall be
taken by the hand of the king of Babylon, and this city shall be burned with fire."
[Jeremiah 38:17-23]
10. But when He did not prevail with him by this address, but he remained
in his sin and transgression, after three years, God delivered up the city,

displaying at once His own clemency and the ingratitude of that king. And
entering in with the utmost ease, they "burnt the house of the Lord, and the
king's house, and the houses of Jerusalem, and every great house, the captain of
the guard burnt, and overthrew the wall of Jerusalem;" and everywhere there
was the fire of the barbarian, the oath being the conductor of the conflagration,
and carrying about the flame in all directions. "And the captain of the guard
carried away the rest of the people that were left in the city, and the fugitives that
fell away to the king of Babylon. [Jeremiah 39:9] And the pillars of brass that
were in the house of the Lord the Chaldeans broke up, and the bases, and the
brazen sea that was in the house of the Lord, did the Chaldees break in pieces.
And the pots, and the flesh-hooks, and the bowls, and the censers, and all the
vessels of brass wherewith they ministered, took they away. And the firepans, and
all the golden and silver bowls they took away. Moreover, Nebuzaradan, the
captain of the guard, took away the two pillars, and the bases, and the sea which
Solomon had made in the house of the Lord. And they took away Seraiah the
chief priest, and Zephaniah the second priest, and the three keepers of the door;
and out of the city one eunuch that was set over the men of war; and five men
that were in the king's presence; and Shaphan the chief captain, and the
principal scribe, and threescore men. And he took these, and brought them to the
king of Babylon, and the king smote them, and slew them." [2 Kings 25:13-20]
11. Be mindful therefore, I pray, now of the "flying sickle" that "rests in the
swearer's house;" and "destroys the walls and the timber and the stones." Be
mindful, I pray, how this oath entered into the city, and overturned houses, and
temple, and walls, and splendid buildings, and made the city an heap; and that
neither the Holy of Holies, nor the sacred vessels, nor any thing else could ward
off that punishment and vengeance, for that the oath had been transgressed! The
city, indeed, was thus miserably destroyed. But the king endured what was still
more wretched and deplorable. [2 Kings 25:4-7] And as the flying sickle
overthrew the buildings, so did it also cut him down in his flight. For "the king,"
it says, "went forth by night, by way of the gate, and the Chaldeans encompassed