SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.1, C.8.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether it is necessary for the salvation of all,

that they should believe explicitly in the mystery of Christ?
Objection 1: It would seem that it is not necessary for the salvation
of all that they should believe explicitly in the mystery of Christ. For
man is not bound to believe explicitly what the angels are ignorant
about: since the unfolding of faith is the result of Divine revelation,
which reaches man by means of the angels, as stated above (Article
6; FP, Question 111, Article 1). Now even the angels were in
ignorance of the mystery of the Incarnation: hence, according to the
commentary of Dionysius (Coel. Hier. vii), it is they who ask (Ps.
23:8): "Who is this king of glory?" and (Is. 63:1): "Who is this that
cometh from Edom?" Therefore men were not bound to believe
explicitly in the mystery of Christ's Incarnation.
Objection 2: Further, it is evident that John the Baptist was one of
the teachers, and most nigh to Christ, Who said of him (Mt. 11:11)
that "there hath not risen among them that are born of women, a
greater than" he. Now John the Baptist does not appear to have
known the mystery of Christ explicitly, since he asked Christ (Mt.
11:3): "Art Thou He that art to come, or look we for another?"
Therefore even the teachers were not bound to explicit faith in
Christ.
Objection 3: Further, many gentiles obtained salvation through the
ministry of the angels, as Dionysius states (Coel. Hier. ix). Now it
would seem that the gentiles had neither explicit nor implicit faith in
Christ, since they received no revelation. Therefore it seems that it
was not necessary for the salvation of all to believe explicitly in the
mystery of Christ.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Corr. et Gratia vii; Ep. cxc):
"Our faith is sound if we believe that no man, old or young is
delivered from the contagion of death and the bonds of sin, except
by the one Mediator of God and men, Jesus Christ."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 5; Question 1, Article 8), the
object of faith includes, properly and directly, that thing through
which man obtains beatitude. Now the mystery of Christ's
Incarnation and Passion is the way by which men obtain beatitude;
for it is written (Acts 4:12): "There is no other name under heaven

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.1, C.8.

given to men, whereby we must be saved." Therefore belief of some
kind in the mystery of Christ's Incarnation was necessary at all times
and for all persons, but this belief differed according to differences
of times and persons. The reason of this is that before the state of
sin, man believed, explicitly in Christ's Incarnation, in so far as it was
intended for the consummation of glory, but not as it was intended to
deliver man from sin by the Passion and Resurrection, since man
had no foreknowledge of his future sin. He does, however, seem to
have had foreknowledge of the Incarnation of Christ, from the fact
that he said (Gn. 2:24): "Wherefore a man shall leave father and
mother, and shall cleave to his wife," of which the Apostle says (Eph.
5:32) that "this is a great sacrament . . . in Christ and the Church,"
and it is incredible that the first man was ignorant about this
sacrament.
But after sin, man believed explicitly in Christ, not only as to the
Incarnation, but also as to the Passion and Resurrection, whereby
the human race is delivered from sin and death: for they would not,
else, have foreshadowed Christ's Passion by certain sacrifices both
before and after the Law, the meaning of which sacrifices was known
by the learned explicitly, while the simple folk, under the veil of those
sacrifices, believed them to be ordained by God in reference to
Christ's coming, and thus their knowledge was covered with a veil,
so to speak. And, as stated above (Question 1, Article 7), the nearer
they were to Christ, the more distinct was their knowledge of Christ's
mysteries.
After grace had been revealed, both learned and simple folk are
bound to explicit faith in the mysteries of Christ, chiefly as regards
those which are observed throughout the Church, and publicly
proclaimed, such as the articles which refer to the Incarnation, of
which we have spoken above (Question 1, Article 8). As to other
minute points in reference to the articles of the Incarnation, men
have been bound to believe them more or less explicitly according to
each one's state and office.
Reply to Objection 1: The mystery of the Kingdom of God was not
entirely hidden from the angels, as Augustine observes (Gen. ad lit.
v, 19), yet certain aspects thereof were better known to them when
Christ revealed them to them.
Reply to Objection 2: It was not through ignorance that John the
Baptist inquired of Christ's advent in the flesh, since he had clearly