FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.49, C.5.

is not in a state of potentiality to another form, as we said in the FP,
Question 56, Article 2, there is no need for disposition or habit in
respect of the form, or even in respect of operation, since the nature
of the heavenly body is not in a state of potentiality to more than one
fixed movement.
The third condition is that in disposing the subject to one of those
things to which it is in potentiality, several things should occur,
capable of being adjusted in various ways: so as to dispose the
subject well or ill to its form or to its operation. Wherefore the simple
qualities of the elements which suit the natures of the elements in
one single fixed way, are not called dispositions or habits, but
"simple qualities": but we call dispositions or habits, such things as
health, beauty, and so forth, which imply the adjustment of several
things which may vary in their relative adjustability. For this reason
the Philosopher says (Metaph. v, text. 24,25) that "habit is a
disposition": and disposition is "the order of that which has parts
either as to place, or as to potentiality, or as to species," as we have
said above (Article 1, ad 3). Wherefore, since there are many things
for whose natures and operations several things must concur which
may vary in their relative adjustability, it follows that habit is
necessary.
Reply to Objection 1: By the form the nature of a thing is perfected:
yet the subject needs to be disposed in regard to the form by some
disposition. But the form itself is further ordained to operation,
which is either the end, or the means to the end. And if the form is
limited to one fixed operation, no further disposition, besides the
form itself, is needed for the operation. But if the form be such that it
can operate in diverse ways, as the soul; it needs to be disposed to
its operations by means of habits.
Reply to Objection 2: Power sometimes has a relation to many
things: and then it needs to be determined by something else. But if
a power has not a relation to many things, it does not need a habit to
determine it, as we have said. For this reason the natural forces do
not perform their operations by means of habits: because they are of
themselves determined to one mode of operation.
Reply to Objection 3: The same habit has not a relation to good and
evil, as will be made clear further on (Question 54, Article 3):
whereas the same power has a relation to good and evil. And,
therefore, habits are necessary that the powers be determined to

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.49, C.5.

good.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.50, C.1.

## QUESTION 50 — OF THE SUBJECT OF HABITS

Prologue
We consider next the subject of habits: and under this head there are
six points of inquiry:
(1) Whether there is a habit in the body?
(2) Whether the soul is a subject of habit, in respect of its essence or
in respect of its power?
(3) Whether in the powers of the sensitive part there can be a habit?
(4) Whether there is a habit in the intellect?
(5) Whether there is a habit in the will?
(6) Whether there is a habit in separate substances?