The preparation of this English translation has been an example of generous and wholehearted Jesuit collaboration. In this it imitates the way in which the original documents came into being. The delegates to the Thirty-first and Thirty-second General Congregations renewed the Society's law in accord with Vatican II. Members of the Jesuit Curia in Rome labored long and hard over many years to provide, in several preliminary drafts of annotated Constitutions and Complementary Norms, a formal structure for this renovation. Consultations with experts from around the world were part of this process. Province congregations convened before the Thirty-fourth General Congregation examined such drafts in detail. The members themselves of the Thirty-fourth Congregation in special commissions and in general sessions throughout the time of the congregation carefully considered every portion of the texts and their implications. After the final comprehensive vote on March 18, 1995, that formally put these texts into place in the life of the Society, many members of the Curia once again labored with dedication over a period of many months to prepare the definitive and official Latin text.

So, too, with this English-language volume. The basis for the English text of the Constitutions is the translation by George E. Ganss, S.J., originally published in 1971. This has been corrected, revised, and updated in the last several years, with a view to eventual publication, along with his commentary and cross-references, in the Institute of Jesuit Sources' two volumes of collected writings of Saint Ignatius (currently in preparation). A first-draft English translation of the Complementary Norms was prepared by Carl J. Moell, S.J., at that time resident in Rome serving as the assistant procurator general of the Society. George Ganss, John McCarthy, Martin O'Keefe, Martin Palmer, and Nicholas Pope, all members of the Society of Jesus associated with the Institute of Jesuit Sources, then entered into the lengthy and detailed preparation of this edition. They worked at everything from translating the comprehensive Latin index to scrutinizing and revising with editorial acumen each page of the translations of both Constitutions and Norms; from verifying footnotes to handcrafting virtually every page of the camera-ready copy; from proofreading the entire text to preparing for the worldwide distribution of copies of this volume.

John W. Padberg, S.J.
Director and General Editor
The Institute of Jesuit Sources

## PREFACE of Very Reverend Peter-Hans Kolvenbach, Superior General of the Society of Jesus

1. General Congregation 33 mandated that when our own law was being brought into conformity with the requirements of the new universal law of the Church regarding religious institutes (namely, the 1983 Code of Canon Law for the Latin Church and the 1993 Code of Canon Law of the Eastern Churches) we should see to it that the preparations for the complete revision of our own law, to be put into final form by the next general congregation, should be made with appropriate studious effort. For the Society had for some time regarded such a revision of our law as desirable; and studies for getting it ready had already been undertaken some years prior to this at the urging and under the leadership of Reverend Father Pedro Arrupe, although he himself was not able to see these brought to a conclusion.