unbegotten; for Paul seems to have feared some such thing as this; wherefore he
says, "Except Him who did put all things under Him." [1 Corinthians 15:27] This
it is impious even to think of. Since if being less than Him who begot Him, and
of a different Substance, He had been deemed equal, would He not have used
every means that this might not be thought? But now He does the contrary,
saying, "If I do not the works of Him that sent Me, believe Me not." [John 10:37]
Indeed His saying, that "I am in the Father and the Father in Me" [John 14:10],
intimates to us the equality. It would have behooved, if He had been inferior, to
refute this opinion with much vehemence, and not at all to have said, "I am in
the Father and the Father in me" [John 10:30], or that, "We are One," or that,
"He that has seen Me, has seen the Father." [John 14:9] Thus also, when His
discourse was concerning power, He said, "I and the Father are One"; and when
His discourse was concerning authority, He said again, "For as the Father raises
up the dead and quickens them, even so the Son quickens whom He wilt" [John
5:21]; which it would be impossible that He should do were He of a different
substance; or even allowing that it were possible, yet it would not have behooved
to say this, lest they should suspect that the substance was one and the same.
Since if in order that they may not suppose Him to be an enemy of God, He
often even utters words unsuited to Him, much more should He then have done
so; but now, His saying, "That they should honor the Son even as they honor the
Father" [John 5:23]; His saying, "The works which He does, I do also" [John
5:19]; His saying that He is "the Resurrection, and the Life, and the Light of the
world" [c. xi. 25; 100:viii. 12], are the expressions of One making Himself equal
to Him who begot Him, and confirming the suspicion which they entertained. Do
you see how He makes this speech and defense, to show that He broke not the
Law, and that He not only does not remove, but even confirms the opinion of His
equality with the Father? So also when they said, "Thou blaspheme, because you
make yourself God" [John 10:33], from equality of works He established this
thing.
2. And why say I that the Son did this, when the Father also who took not

the flesh does the same thing? For He also endured that many lowly things
should be said concerning Him for the salvation of the hearers. For the, "Adam,
where are you?" [Genesis 3:9], and, "That I may know whether they have done
altogether according to the cry of it" [Genesis 18:21]; and, "Now I know that you
fear God" [Genesis 22:12]; and, "If they will hear" [Ezekiel 3:11]; and, "If they
will understand" [Deuteronomy 5:29]; and, "Who shall give the heart of this
people to be so?" and the expression, "There is none like You among the gods, O
Lord" [Psalm 80:29]; these and many other like sentences in the Old Testament,
if a man should pick them out, he will find to be unworthy of the dignity of God.
In the case of Ahab it is said, "Who shall entice Ahab for Me?" [2 Chronicles
18:19] And the continually preferring Himself to the gods of the heathen in the
way of comparison, all these things are unworthy of God. Yet in another way
they are made worthy of Him, for He is so kind, that for our salvation He cares
not for expressions which become His dignity. Indeed, the becoming man is
unworthy of Him, and the taking the form of a servant, and the speaking humble
words, and the being clothed in humble (garments), unworthy if one looks to His
dignity, but worthy if one consider the unspeakable riches of His lovingkindness.
And there is another cause of the humility of His words. What is that? It is that
they knew and confessed the Father, but Him they knew not. Wherefore He
continually betakes Himself to the Father as being confessed by them, because
He Himself was not as yet deemed worthy of credit; not on account of any
inferiority of His own, but because of the folly and infirmity of the hearers. On
this account He prays, and says, "Father, I thank You that You have heard Me."
For if He quickens whom He will, and quickens in like manner as does the
Father, wherefore does He call upon Him?
But it is time now to go through the passage from the beginning. "Then they
took up the stone where the dead man lay. And Jesus lifted up His eyes, and said,
Father, I thank You that You have heard Me. And I knew that You hear Me
always, but because of the people that stand by I said it, that they might believe
that You have sent Me." Let us then ask the heretic, Did He receive an impulse