the art. Granted, however, an actually infinite number of things, for
instance, an infinitude of men, or an infinitude in continuous
quantity, as an infinitude of air, as some of the ancients held; yet it is
manifest that these would have a determinate and finite being,
because their being would be limited to some determinate nature.
Hence they would be measurable as regards the knowledge of God.

### ARTICLE 13. Whether the knowledge of God is of future

contingent things?
Objection 1: It seems that the knowledge of God is not of future
contingent things. For from a necessary cause proceeds a necessary
effect. But the knowledge of God is the cause of things known, as
said above (Article 8). Since therefore that knowledge is necessary,
what He knows must also be necessary. Therefore the knowledge of
God is not of contingent things.
Objection 2: Further, every conditional proposition of which the
antecedent is absolutely necessary must have an absolutely
necessary consequent. For the antecedent is to the consequent as
principles are to the conclusion: and from necessary principles only
a necessary conclusion can follow, as is proved in Poster. i. But this
is a true conditional proposition, "If God knew that this thing will be,
it will be," for the knowledge of God is only of true things. Now the
antecedent conditional of this is absolutely necessary, because it is
eternal, and because it is signified as past. Therefore the consequent
is also absolutely necessary. Therefore whatever God knows, is
necessary; and so the knowledge of God is not of contingent things.
Objection 3: Further, everything known by God must necessarily be,
because even what we ourselves know, must necessarily be; and, of
course, the knowledge of God is much more certain than ours. But
no future contingent things must necessarily be. Therefore no
contingent future thing is known by God.
On the contrary, It is written (Ps. 32:15), "He Who hath made the
hearts of every one of them; Who understandeth all their works," i.e.
of men. Now the works of men are contingent, being subject to free
will. Therefore God knows future contingent things.
I answer that, Since as was shown above (Article 9), God knows all
things; not only things actual but also things possible to Him and
creature; and since some of these are future contingent to us, it
follows that God knows future contingent things.
In evidence of this, we must consider that a contingent thing can be
considered in two ways; first, in itself, in so far as it is now in act:
and in this sense it is not considered as future, but as present;

neither is it considered as contingent (as having reference) to one of
two terms, but as determined to one; and on account of this it can be
infallibly the object of certain knowledge, for instance to the sense of
sight, as when I see that Socrates is sitting down. In another way a
contingent thing can be considered as it is in its cause; and in this
way it is considered as future, and as a contingent thing not yet
determined to one; forasmuch as a contingent cause has relation to
opposite things: and in this sense a contingent thing is not subject
to any certain knowledge. Hence, whoever knows a contingent effect
in its cause only, has merely a conjectural knowledge of it. Now God
knows all contingent things not only as they are in their causes, but
also as each one of them is actually in itself. And although
contingent things become actual successively, nevertheless God
knows contingent things not successively, as they are in their own
being, as we do but simultaneously. The reason is because His
knowledge is measured by eternity, as is also His being; and eternity
being simultaneously whole comprises all time, as said above
(Question 10, Article 2). Hence all things that are in time are present
to God from eternity, not only because He has the types of things
present within Him, as some say; but because His glance is carried
from eternity over all things as they are in their presentiality. Hence it
is manifest that contingent things are infallibly known by God,
inasmuch as they are subject to the divine sight in their presentiality;
yet they are future contingent things in relation to their own causes.
Reply to Objection 1: Although the supreme cause is necessary, the
effect may be contingent by reason of the proximate contingent
cause; just as the germination of a plant is contingent by reason of
the proximate contingent cause, although the movement of the sun
which is the first cause, is necessary. So likewise things known by
God are contingent on account of their proximate causes, while the
knowledge of God, which is the first cause, is necessary.
Reply to Objection 2: Some say that this antecedent, "God knew this
contingent to be future," is not necessary, but contingent; because,
although it is past, still it imports relation to the future. This however
does not remove necessity from it; for whatever has had relation to
the future, must have had it, although the future sometimes does not
follow. On the other hand some say that this antecedent is
contingent, because it is a compound of necessary and contingent;
as this saying is contingent, "Socrates is a white man." But this also
is to no purpose; for when we say, "God knew this contingent to be
future," contingent is used here only as the matter of the word, and