the one, the damage is in money, to himself, it is in the soul; to destruction, and
to punishment. Again, let another be envious: is it not himself he has injured?
For such is the nature of injustice: to its own author first it does incalculable
hurt. "Yes, but to another also?" True, but nothing worth considering: or rather,
not even a little— nay, it even benefits him. For let there be—as the whole
matter lies most in these examples—let there be some poor man, having but little
property and (barely) provided with necessary food, and another rich and
wealthy, and having much power, and then let him take the poor man's property,
and strip him naked, and give him up to starvation, while he shall luxuriate in
what he has unjustly taken from the other: not only has he not hurt that man at
all— he has even benefited him, while himself he has not only not benefited, but
even hurt. For how should it be otherwise? In the first place, harassed by an evil
conscience, and day by day condemning himself and being condemned by all
men: and then, secondly, in the judgment to come. But the other, how is he
benefited? Because to suffer ill and bear it nobly, is great gain: for it is a doing
away of sins, this suffering of ill, it is a training to philosophy, it is a discipline
of virtue. Let us see which of the two is in evil case, this man or that. For the
one, if he be a man of well-ordered mind, will bear it nobly: the other will be
every day in a constant tremor and misgiving: which then is hurt, this man or
that? "You talk idly," say you: "for when a man has nothing to eat, and is forced
to bewail himself and to feel himself very wretched, or comes and begs, and gets
nothing, is not that a ruining of both soul and body?" No, it is you that talk idly:
for I show facts in proof. For say, does none of the rich feel himself wretched?
What then? Is poverty the cause of his wretchedness? "But he does not starve."
And what of that? The greater is the punishment, when having riches he does
this. For neither does wealth make a man strong-minded, nor poverty make him
weak: otherwise none of those living in wealth would pass a wretched life, nor
would any of those in poverty (not) curse his fate. But that yours is indeed the
idle talk, I will make manifest to you from hence. Was Paul in poverty or in
wealth? Did he suffer hunger, or did he not? You may hear himself saying, "In

hunger and thirst." [2 Corinthians 11:27] Did the prophets suffer hunger, or did
they not? They too had a hard time of it. "Again, you fetch up Paul to me, again
the prophets, some ten or twenty men." But whence shall I bring examples?
"Show me from the many some who bear ills nobly." But the rare is ever such:
however, if you will, let us examine the matter as it is in itself. Let us see whose
is the greater and sharper care, whose the more easy to be borne. The one is
solicitous about his necessary food, the other about numberless matters, freed
from that care. The rich man is not afraid on the score of hunger, but he is afraid
about other things: oftentimes for his very life. The poor man is not free from
anxiety about food, but he is free from other anxieties, he has safety, has
quietness, has security.
If to injure another is not an evil, but a good, wherefore are we ashamed?
Wherefore do we cover our faces? Wherefore, being reproached, are we vexed
and disconcerted? If the being injured is not a good thing, wherefore do we pride
ourselves, and glory in the thing, and justify ourselves on its account? Would
you learn how this is better than that? Observe those who are in the one
condition, and those who are in the other. Wherefore are laws? Wherefore are
courts of justice? Wherefore punishments? Is it not, on account of those men, as
being diseased and unsound? But the pleasure lies great, you will say. Let us not
speak of the future: let us look into the present. What is worse than a man who is
under such a suspicion as this? What more precarious? What more unsound? Is
he not always in a state of shipwreck? Even if he do any just thing, he is not
credited, condemned as he is by all on account of his power (of injuring): for in
all who dwell with him he has accusers: he cannot enjoy friendship: for none
would readily choose to become the friend of a man who has such a character,
for fear of becoming implicated with him in the opinion held of him. As if he
were a wild beast, all men turn away from him; as from a pest, a foe, a manslayer, and an enemy of nature, so they shrink from the unjust man. If he who
has wronged another happen to be brought into a court of justice, he does not
even need an accuser, his character condemns him in place of any accuser. Not