further addition to good or evil. Consequently, good will in the
blessed will not be a merit but a reward, and evil will in the damned
will be not a demerit but a punishment only. For works of virtue
belong especially to the state of happiness and their contraries to
the state of unhappiness (Ethic. i, 9,10).
On the other hand, some say that, before the judgment day, both the
good merit and the damned demerit. But this cannot apply to the
essential reward or to the principal punishment, since in this respect
both have reached the term. Possibly, however, this may apply to the
accidental reward, or secondary punishment, which are subject to
increase until the day of judgment. Especially may this apply to the
demons, or to the good angels, by whose activities some are drawn
to salvation, whereby the joy of the blessed angels is increased, and
some to damnation, whereby the punishment of the demons is
augmented [FP, Question 62, Article 9, ad 3; SS, Question 13, Article
4, ad 2; where St. Thomas tacitly retracts the opinion expressed here
as to merit or demerit.].
Reply to Objection 1: It is in the highest degree unprofitable to have
reached the highest degree of evil, the result being that the damned
are incapable of demerit. Hence it is clear that they gain no
advantage from their sin.
Reply to Objection 2: Men who are damned are not occupied in
drawing others to damnation, as the demons are, for which reason
the latter demerit as regards their secondary punishment [FP,
Question 62, Article 9, ad 3; SS, Question 13 , Article 4, ad 2; where
St. Thomas tacitly retracts the opinion expressed here as to merit or
demerit].
Reply to Objection 3: The reason why they are not excused from
demerit is not because they are under the necessity of sinning, but
because they have reached the highest of evils.
However, the necessity of sinning whereof we are ourselves the
cause, in so far as it is a necessity, excuses from sin, because every
sin needs to be voluntary: but it does not excuse, in so far as it
proceeds from a previous act of the will: and consequently the whole
demerit of the subsequent sin would seem to belong to the previous
sin.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether the damned can make use of the

knowledge they had in this world?
Objection 1: It would seem that the damned are unable to make use
of the knowledge they had in this world. For there is very great
pleasure in the consideration of knowledge. But we must not admit
that they have any pleasure. Therefore they cannot make use of the
knowledge they had heretofore, by applying their consideration
thereto.
Objection 2: Further, the damned suffer greater pains than any pains
of this world. Now in this world, when one is in very great pain, it is
impossible to consider any intelligible conclusions, through being
distracted by the pains that one suffers. Much less therefore can one
do so in hell.
Objection 3: Further, the damned are subject to time. But "length of
time is the cause of forgetfulness" (Phys. lib. iv, 13). Therefore the
damned will forget what they knew here.
On the contrary, It is said to the rich man who was damned (Lk.
16:25): "Remember that thou didst receive good things in thy
lifetime," etc. Therefore they will consider about the things they
knew here.
Further, the intelligible species remain in the separated soul, as
stated above (Question 70, Article 2, ad 3; FP, Question 89, Articles
5,6). Therefore, if they could not use them, these would remain in
them to no purpose.
I answer that, Even as in the saints on account of the perfection of
their glory, there will be nothing but what is a matter of joy so there
will be nothing in the damned but what is a matter and cause of
sorrow; nor will anything that can pertain to sorrow be lacking, so
that their unhappiness is consummate. Now the consideration of
certain things known brings us joy, in some respect, either on the
part of the things known, because we love them, or on the part of the
knowledge, because it is fitting and perfect. There may also be a
reason for sorrow both on the part of the things known, because
they are of a grievous nature, and on the part of the knowledge, if we
consider its imperfection; for instance a person may consider his