FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.6, C.4.

to act; and sometimes without even an interior act, as when one
does not will to act.
Reply to Objection 1: We apply the word "voluntary" not only to that
which proceeds from the will directly, as from its action; but also to
that which proceeds from it indirectly as from its inaction.
Reply to Objection 2: "Not to wish" is said in two senses. First, as
though it were one word, and the infinitive of "I-do-not-wish."
Consequently just as when I say "I do not wish to read," the sense is,
"I wish not to read"; so "not to wish to read" is the same as "to wish
not to read," and in this sense "not to wish" implies involuntariness.
Secondly it is taken as a sentence: and then no act of the will is
affirmed. And in this sense "not to wish" does not imply
involuntariness.
Reply to Objection 3: Voluntariness requires an act of knowledge in
the same way as it requires an act of will; namely, in order that it be
in one's power to consider, to wish and to act. And then, just as not
to wish, and not to act, when it is time to wish and to act, is
voluntary, so is it voluntary not to consider.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.6, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether violence can be done to the will?

Objection 1: It would seem that violence can be done to the will. For
everything can be compelled by that which is more powerful. But
there is something, namely, God, that is more powerful than the
human will. Therefore it can be compelled, at least by Him.
Objection 2: Further, every passive subject is compelled by its active
principle, when it is changed by it. But the will is a passive force: for
it is a "mover moved" (De Anima iii, 10). Therefore, since it is
sometimes moved by its active principle, it seems that sometimes it
is compelled.
Objection 3: Further, violent movement is that which is contrary to
nature. But the movement of the will is sometimes contrary to
nature; as is clear of the will's movement to sin, which is contrary to
nature, as Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iv, 20). Therefore the
movement of the will can be compelled.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Civ. Dei v, 10) that what is done
by the will is not done of necessity. Now, whatever is done under
compulsion is done of necessity: consequently what is done by the
will, cannot be compelled. Therefore the will cannot be compelled to
act.
I answer that, The act of the will is twofold: one is its immediate act,
as it were, elicited by it, namely, "to wish"; the other is an act of the
will commanded by it, and put into execution by means of some
other power, such as "to walk" and "to speak," which are
commanded by the will to be executed by means of the motive
power.
As regards the commanded acts of the will, then, the will can suffer
violence, in so far as violence can prevent the exterior members
from executing the will's command. But as to the will's own proper
act, violence cannot be done to the will.
The reason of this is that the act of the will is nothing else than an
inclination proceeding from the interior principle of knowledge: just
as the natural appetite is an inclination proceeding from an interior
principle without knowledge. Now what is compelled or violent is