Let us not therefore lift up ourselves, but let us declare ourselves
unprofitable, that we may become profitable. For if you call yourself approved,
you have become unprofitable, though thou were approved; but if useless, you
have become profitable, even though thou were reprobate.
7. Wherefore it is necessary to forget our good actions. "Yet how is it
possible," one may say, "not to know these things with which we are well
acquainted?" How do you say? Offending your Lord perpetually, you live
delicately, and laughest, and dost not so much as know that you have sinned, but
hast consigned all to oblivion; and of your good actions can you not put away
the memory? And yet fear is a stronger kind of thing. But we do the very
contrary; on the one hand, while each day we are offending, we do not so much
as put it before our mind; on the other, if we give a little money to a poor person,
this we are ever revolving. This kind of conduct comes of utter madness, and it
is a very great loss to him who so makes his reckoning. For the secure
storehouse of good works is to forget our good works. And as with regard to
raiment and gold, when we expose them in a market-place, we attract many illmeaning persons; but if we put them by at home and hide them, we shall deposit
them all in security: even so with respect to our good deeds; if we are
continually keeping them in memory, we provoke the Lord, we arm the enemy,
we invite him to steal them away; but if no one know of them, besides Him who
alone ought to know, they will lie in safety.
Be not therefore for ever parading them, lest some one should take them
away. As was the case with the Pharisee, for bearing them about upon his lips;
whence also the devil caught them away. And yet it was with thanksgiving he
made mention of them, and referred the whole to God. But not even did this
suffice Him. For it is not thanksgiving to revile others, to be vainglorious before
many, to exalt one's self against them that have offended. Rather, if you are
giving thanks to God, be content with Him only, and publish it not unto men,
neither condemn your neighbor; for this is not thanksgiving. Would you learn
words of thanksgiving? Hearken unto the Three Children, saying, "We have

sinned, we have transgressed. You are righteous, O Lord, in all that you have
done unto us, because you have brought all things upon us by a true judgment."
For to confess one's own sins, this is to give thanks with confession unto God: a
kind of thing which implies one to be guilty of numberless offenses, yet not to
have the due penalty exacted. This man most of all is the giver of thanks.
8. Let us beware therefore of saying anything about ourselves, for this
renders us both odious with men and abominable to God. For this reason, the
greater the good works we do, the less let us say of ourselves; this being the way
to reap the greatest glory both with men and with God. Or rather, not only glory
from God, but a reward, yea, a great recompense. Demand not therefore a
reward that you may receive a reward. Confess yourself to be saved by grace,
that He may profess Himself a debtor to you; and not for your good works only,
but also for such rightness of mind. For when we do good works, we have Him
debtor for our good works only; but when we do not so much as think we have
done any good work, then also for this disposition itself; and more for this, than
for the other things: so that this is equivalent to our good works. For should this
be absent, neither will they appear great. For in the same way, we too, when we
have servants, [Luke 17:10] do then most approve them when, after having
performed all their service with good will, they do not think they have done
anything great. Wherefore, if you would make your good deeds great, do not
think them to be great, and then they will be great.
It was in this way that the centurion also said, "I am not fit that you should
enter under my roof;" because of this, he became worthy, and was "marvelled at"
[Matthew 8:8] above all Jews. On this wise again Paul says, "I am not meet to be
called an apostle;" [1 Corinthians 15:9] because of this he became even first of
all. So likewise John: "I am not meet to loose the latchet of His shoe;" because
of this he was the "friend of the Bridegroom," and the hand which he affirmed to
be unworthy to touch His shoes, this did Christ draw unto His own head. So
Peter too said, "Depart from me, for I am a sinful man;" [Luke 5:8] because of
this he became a foundation of the Church.