anointed, both Herod, and Pontius Pilate, together with the Gentiles and the
people of Israel, for to do whatsoever Your hand and Your counsel determined
before to be done. And now, Lord, behold their threatenings." [Acts 4:27-29]
Observe their largeness of mind ([φιλοσοφίαν]). These are not words of
imprecation. In saying, their threatenings, they do not mean this or that thing
specifically threatened, but only in general, the fact of their threatening, perhaps,
as being formidable. In fact, the writer is concise in his narrative. And observe,
they do not say, "Crush them, cast them down;" but what? "And grant unto Your
servants, that with all boldness they may speak Your word." Let us also learn
thus to pray. And yet how full of wrath one would be, when fallen among men
intent upon killing him, and making threats to that effect? How full of
animosity? But not so these saints. "By stretching forth Your hand to heal, and
that signs and wonders may be done by the Name of Your holy Child Jesus."
[Acts 4:30] If in that Name the mighty deeds are wrought, great will be the
boldness.
"And when they had prayed, the place was shaken where they were
assembled together." [Acts 4:31] This was the proof that they were heard, and of
His visitation. "And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost." What means,
"They were filled?" It means, They were inflamed; and the Gift burned up within
them. "And they spoke the word of God with boldness. And the multitude of them
that believed were of one heart and of one soul." [Acts 4:32] Do you see that
together with the grace of God they also contributed their part? For everywhere
it ought to be well observed, that together with the grace of God they do their
part likewise. Just as Peter said above, "Silver and gold have I none"; and again,
that "they were all together." [Acts 3:6] But in this place, having mentioned that
they were heard, the sacred writer proceeds to speak also of them, what virtue
they showed. Moreover, he is just about to enter upon the narrative of Sapphira
and Ananias, and with a view to show the detestable conduct of that pair, he first
discourses of the noble behavior of the rest. Now say, did their love beget their
poverty, or the poverty the love? In my opinion, the love begot the poverty, and

then the poverty drew tight the cords of love. For observe what he says: "They
were all of one heart and of one soul." Behold, heart and soul are what make the
"together." "Neither said any of them that anything of the things which he
possessed was his own; but they had all things common. And with great power
the Apostles rendered their testimony ([ἀ] [πεδίδουν]) of the resurrection." [Acts
4:33] The phrase betokens them to be as persons put in trust with a deposit: he
speaks of it as a debt or obligation: that is, their testimony they with boldness did
render, or pay off, to all. "And great grace was upon them all. Neither was there
any among them that lacked." [Acts 4:34] Their feeling was just as if they were
under the paternal roof, all for awhile sharing alike. It is not to be said, that
though indeed they maintained the rest, yet they did it with the feeling that the
means whereof they maintained them were still their own. No, the admirable
circumstance is this, that they first alienated their property, and so maintained the
rest, on purpose that the maintenance might not come as of their own private
means, but as of the common property. "For as many as were possessors of
lands or houses sold them, and brought the price of the things that were sold,
and laid them down at the Apostles' feet; and distribution was made unto every
man according as he had need." [Acts 4:35] A great mark of honor this, that
"they laid them at the Apostles' feet. And Joses, who by the Apostles was
surnamed Barnabas, ('which is, being interpreted, The son of consolation.')"
[Acts 4:36] I do not think that this is the same with the companion of Matthias;
for that person was also called Justus and [Barsabas, but this, Joses and]
"Barnabas" ["son of consolation"]. I suppose he also received the name from his
virtue, as being qualified and suited for this duty. "A Levite, and of the country of
Cyprus by birth." Observe on all occasions how the writer indicates the breaking
up of the Law. But how was he also a "Cyprian by birth?" Because they then
even removed to other countries, and still were called Levites. "Having land,
sold it, and brought the price, and laid it at the Apostles' feet. "
Let us now look over again what has been said. ["And being let go, they
went to their own company, and reported all that the chief priests and elders had