So that if it seem good, let us leave Adam, and inquire what is the
difference between the angels and this company of them who on earth sing and
say, "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will towards men."
And their dress is suitable to their manliness. For not indeed, like those with
trailing garments, the enervated and mincing, are they dressed, but like those
blessed angels, Elijah, Elisha, John, like the apostles; their garments being made
for them, for some of goat's hair, for some of camel's hair, and there are some for
whom skins suffice alone, and these long worn.
Then, after they have said those songs, they bow their knees, and entreat the
God who was the object of their hymns for things, to the very thought of which
some do not easily arrive. For they ask nothing of things present, for they have
no regard for these, but that they may stand with boldness before the fearful
judgment-seat, when the Only-Begotten Son of God has come to judge quick
and dead, and that no one may hear the fearful voice that says, "I know you not,"
and that with a pure conscience and many good deeds they may pass through this
toilsome life, and sail over the angry sea with a favorable wind. And he leads
them in their prayers, who is their Father, and their ruler.
After this, when they have risen up and finished those holy and continual
prayers, the sun being risen, they depart each one to their work, gathering thence
a large supply for the needy.
4. Where now are they who give themselves to devilish choirs, and harlot's
songs, and sit in theatres? For I am indeed ashamed to make mention of them;
nevertheless, because of your infirmity it is needful to do even this. For Paul too
says, "Like as you have yielded your members servants to uncleanness, even so
now yield your members servants to righteousness unto holiness."
Come let us also therefore compare the company that is made up of harlot
women, and prostituted youths on the stage, and this same that consists of these
blessed ones in regard of pleasure, for which most of all, many of the careless
youths are taken in their snares. For we shall find the difference as great as if any
one heard angels singing above that all-harmonious melody of theirs, and dogs

and swine howling and grunting on the dunghill. For by the mouths of these
Christ speaks, by their tongues the devil.
But is the sound of pipes joined to them with unmeaning noise, and
unpleasing show, when cheeks are puffed out, and their strings stretched to
breaking? But here the grace of the Spirit pours forth a sound, using, instead of
flute or lyre or pipes, the lips of the saints.
Or rather, whatever we may say, it is not possible to set forth the pleasure
thereof, because of them that are riveted to their clay, and their brick-making?
Therefore I would even wish to take one of those who are mad about these
matters, and to lead him off there, and to show him the choir of those saints, and
I should have no more need for these words. Nevertheless, though we speak unto
miry ones, we will try, though by word, still little by little, to draw them out of
the slime and the fens. For there the hearer receives straightway the fire of illicit
love; for as though the sight of the harlot were not enough to set the mind on
fire, they add the mischief also from the voice; but here even should the soul
have any such thing, it lays it aside straightway. But not their voice only, nor
their countenance, but even their clothes do more than these confound the
beholders. And should it be some poor man of the grosser and heedless sort,
from the sight he will cry out ten thousand times in bitter despair, and will say to
himself, "The harlot, and the prostituted boy, children of cooks and cobblers,
and often even of slaves live in such delicacy, and I a freeman, and born of
freemen, choosing honest labor, am not able so much as to imagine these things
in a dream;" and thus he will go his way inflamed with discontent.
But in the case of the monks there is no such result, but rather the contrary
altogether. For when he shall see children of rich men and descendants of
illustrious ancestors clothed in such garments as not even the lowest of the poor,
and rejoicing in this, consider how great a consolation against poverty he will
receive as he goes away. And should he be rich, he returns sobered, become a
better man. Again in the theatre, when they see the harlot clothed with golden
ornaments, while the poor man will lament, and bemoan, seeing his own wife