we have ascertained by enquiry; and we give thanks to God that we have not
sown our seed upon rocks, nor dropped it amidst thorns; and that we have
neither needed much time, nor long delay, in order that we might reap the
harvest. On this account I have you continually upon my heart. On this account I
do not feel the labours of teaching, being eased of the burden by the profit of the
hearer. This reward is, indeed, sufficient to recruit our strength, to give us wings,
to elevate us, and to persuade us to undergo the utmost toil on your behalf.
2. Since therefore you have manifested much generosity of feeling, suffer
us to discharge the further debt of which we gave a promise the other day;
although indeed I see not all present who were here when I made the promise.
What, I would ask, can be the cause of this? What has repelled them from our
table? He that has partaken of a bodily meal, it would seem, has thought it an
indignity after receiving material food, to come to the hearing of the divine
oracles. But not rightly do they think thus. For if this were improper, Christ
would not have gone through His large and long discourses after that mystic
supper; and if this had been unsuitable, He would not, when He had fed the
multitude in the desert, have communicated His discourses to them after that
meal. For (if one must say something startling on this point), the hearing of the
divine oracles at that time is especially profitable. For when you have made up
your mind that after eating and drinking you must repair also to the assembly,
you will assuredly be careful, though perchance with reluctance, of the duty of
sobriety; and wilt neither be led away at any time into excess of wine, or
gluttony. For the thought, and the expectation of entering the church, schools
you to partake of food and drink with becoming decency; lest, after you have
entered there, and joined your brethren, you should appear ridiculous to all
present, by smelling of wine, and unmannerly eructation. These things I now
speak not to you who are now present, but to the absent; that they may learn
them through your means. For it is not having eaten that hinders one's hearing,
but listlessness. But while deeming it to be a condemnation not to fast, you then
add another fault, which is far greater and heavier, in not being a partaker of this

sacred food; and having nourished the body, you consume the soul with famine.
Yet what kind of apology have you for doing this? For in the matter of fasting
you have, perhaps, bodily weakness to plead, but what have you to say with
respect to hearing? For surely weakness of body is no impediment to your
partaking of the divine oracles! If I had said, "Let no one who has breakfasted
mix with us;" "let no one who has eaten be a hearer," you would have had some
kind of excuse; but now, when we would fain drag, entice, and beseech you to
come, what apology can you have for turning away from us? The unfit hearer is
not he that has eaten and drunk; but he who gives no heed to what is said, who
yawns, and is slack in attention, having his body here, but his mind wandering
elsewhere, and such a one, though he may be fasting, is an unprofitable hearer.
On the other hand, the man who is in earnest, who is watchful and keeps his
mind in a state of attention, though he may have eaten and drunk, will be our
most suitable hearer of all. For this rule, indeed, very properly prevails with
relation to the secular tribunals and councils. Inasmuch as they know not how to
be spiritually wise, therefore they eat not to nourishment, but to bursting; and
they drink often to excess. For this reason, as they render themselves unfit for
the management of their affairs, they shut up the court-houses and councilchambers in the evening and at midday. But here there is nothing of this sort—
God forbid! But he who has eaten will rival him who fasts, as far as regards
sobriety of soul; for he eats and drinks, not so as to distend the stomach, or to
darken the reason, but in such a way as to recruit the strength of the body when it
has become weakened.
3. But enough of this admonition. It is time now to deal with our subject;
although our mind holds back and shrinks from giving this instruction, on
account of those who are not come. And just as an affectionate mother when she
is about to spread out her table, grieves and laments when all her children are not
there, thus also do I now suffer; and when I think of the absence of our brethren,
I am reluctant to discharge my debt. But you have it in your power to rid me of
this tardiness. For if you promise me that you will convey to them an exact