FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.17, C.3.

Reply to Objection 3: Impulse to action is in irrational animals
otherwise than in man. For the impulse of man to action arises from
the directing reason; wherefore his impulse is one of command. On
the other hand, the impulse of the irrational animal arises from
natural instinct; because as soon as they apprehend the fitting or the
unfitting, their appetite is moved naturally to pursue or to avoid.
Wherefore they are directed by another to act; and they themselves
do not direct themselves to act. Consequently in them is impulse but
not command.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.17, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether use precedes command?

Objection 1: It would seem that use precedes command. For
command is an act of the reason presupposing an act of the will, as
stated above (Article 1). But, as we have already shown (Question 16,
Article 1), use is an act of the will. Therefore use precedes command.
Objection 2: Further, command is one of those things that are
ordained to the end. But use is of those things that are ordained to
the end. Therefore it seems that use precedes command.
Objection 3: Further, every act of a power moved by the will is called
use; because the will uses the other powers, as stated above
(Question 16, Article 1). But command is an act of the reason as
moved by the will, as stated above (Article 1). Therefore command is
a kind of use. Now the common precedes the proper. Therefore use
precedes command.
On the contrary, Damascene says (De Fide Orth. ii, 22) that impulse
to action precedes use. But impulse to operation is given by
command. Therefore command precedes use.
I answer that, use of that which is directed to the end, in so far as it
is in the reason referring this to the end, precedes choice, as stated
above (Question 16, Article 4). Wherefore still more does it precede
command. On the other hand, use of that which is directed to the
end, in so far as it is subject to the executive power, follows
command; because use in the user is united to the act of the thing
used; for one does not use a stick before doing something with the
stick. But command is not simultaneous with the act of the thing to
which the command is given: for it naturally precedes its fulfilment,
sometimes, indeed, by priority of time. Consequently it is evident
that command precedes use.
Reply to Objection 1: Not every act of the will precedes this act of the
reason which is command; but an act of the will precedes, viz.
choice; and an act of the will follows, viz. use. Because after
counsel's decision, which is reason's judgment, the will chooses;
and after choice, the reason commands that power which has to do
what was chosen; and then, last of all, someone's will begins to use,
by executing the command of reason; sometimes it is another's will,