whole property open to all. You see these were noble women, hindered no way
by their sex in the course of virtue. And this is as might be expected. "For in
Christ Jesus there is neither male nor female." [Galatians 3:28] And what he had
said of the former, that he said also of this. For of her also he had said, "she has
been a succorer of many, and of myself also." So too of this woman "not only I
give thanks, but also all the Churches of the Gentiles." Now that in this he might
not seem to be a flatterer, he also adduces a good many more witnesses to these
women.
Ver. 5. "Likewise greet the Church that is in their house."
For she had been so estimable as even to make their house a Church, both
by making all in it believers, and because they opened it to all strangers. For he
was not in the habit of calling any houses Churches, save where there was much
piety, and much fear of God deeply rooted in them. And on this ground he said
to the Corinthians also, "Salute Aquila and Priscilla, with the Church that is in
their house." [1 Corinthians 16:19] And when writing about Onesimus, "Paul
unto Philemon, and to the beloved Apphia, and to the Church that is in their
house." [Philemon 1, 2] For it is possible for a man even in the married state to
be worthy of being looked up to, and noble. See then how these were in that state
and became very honorable, and yet their occupation was far from being
honorable; for they were "tent-makers." Still their virtue covered all this, and
made them more conspicuous than the sun. And neither their trade nor their
marriage [συζυγία] cf. Philippians 4:3 was any hurt to them, but the love which
Christ required of them, that they exhibited. "For greater love has no man than
this, He says, that a man lay down his life for his friends." [John 15:13] And that
which is a proof of being a disciple, they achieve, since they took up the Cross
and followed Him. For they who did this for Paul, would much rather have
displayed their fortitude in Christ's behalf.
Let rich and poor both hear all this. For if they who lived from their labor,
and were managers of a workshop, exhibited such profuseness as to be of service
to many Churches; what pardon can they expect, who are rich, and yet neglect

the poor? For they were not sparing even of their blood for the sake of God's
will, but you are sparing even of scanty sums, and many times sparest not your
own soul. But in regard to the teacher were they so, and not so with regard to the
disciples? Nay even this cannot be said. For "the churches of the Gentiles," he
says, "thank them." And yet they were of the Jews. But still they had such a clear
([εἰλικρινὥς]) faith, as to minister unto them also with all willingness. Such
ought women to be, not adorning themselves with "broidered hair, or gold, or
costly array" [1 Timothy 2:9], but in these good deeds. For what empress pray,
was so conspicuous or so celebrated as this wife of the tent-maker? She is in
everybody's mouth, not for ten or twenty years, but until the coming of Christ,
and all proclaim her fame for things such as adorn far more than any royal
diadem. For what is greater or so great, as to have been a succorer of Paul? At
her own peril to have saved the teacher of the world? And consider: how many
empresses there are that no one speaks of. But the wife of the tent-maker is
everywhere reported of with the tent-maker (meaning perhaps St. Paul); and the
width that the sun sees over, is no more of the world than what the glory of this
woman runs unto. Persians, and Scythians, and Thracians, and they who dwell in
the uttermost parts of the earth, sing of the Christian spirit of this woman, and
bless it. How much wealth, how many diadems and purples would you not be
glad to venture upon obtaining such a testimony? For no one can say either, that
in dangers they were of this character, and lavish with their money, and yet
neglected the preaching. For he calls them "fellow-workers and helpers" on this
ground. And this "chosen vessel" [Acts 9:15] does not feel ashamed to call a
woman his helper but even finds an honor in doing so. For it is not the sex
([φίσει]) that he minds, but the will is what he honors. What is equal to this
ornament? Where now is wealth overflowing on every side? And where the
adorning of the person? And where is vainglory? Learn that the dress of woman
is not that put about the body, but that which decorates the soul, which is never
put off, which does not lie in a chest, but is laid up in the heavens. Look at their
labor for the preaching, the crown in martyrdom, the munificence in money, the