## Homily 2 on Second Thessalonians

2 Thessalonians 1:1-2
"Paul, and Silvanus, and Timothy, unto the Church of the Thessalonians in
God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ: Grace to you and peace from God
the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ."
The greater part of men do and devise all things with a view to ingratiate
themselves with rulers, and with those who are greater than themselves; and they
account it a great thing, and think themselves happy, if they can obtain that
object. But if to obtain favor with men is so great an advantage, how great must
it be to find favor with God? On this account he always thus prefaces his Epistle,
and invokes this upon them, knowing that if this be granted, there will be
nothing afterwards grievous, but whatever troubles there may be, all will be done
away. And that you may learn this, Joseph was a slave a young man,
inexperienced, unformed, and suddenly the direction of a house was committed
to his hands, and he had to render an account to an Egyptian master. And you
know how prone to anger and unforgiving that people is, and when authority and
power is added, their rage is greater, being inflamed by power. And this too is
manifest from what he did afterwards. For when the mistress made accusation,
he bore with it. And yet it was not the part of those who held the garment, but of
him who was stripped, to have suffered violence. For he ought to have said, If he
had heard that you raised your voice, as you say, he would have fled, and if he
had been guilty, he would not have waited for the coming of his master. But
nevertheless he took nothing of this sort into consideration, but unreasonably
giving way altogether to anger, he cast him into prison. So thoughtless a person
was he. And yet even from other things he might have conjectured the good
disposition and the intelligence of the man. But nevertheless, because he was
very unreasonable, he never considered any such thing. He therefore who had to

do with such a harsh master, and who was entrusted with the administration of
his whole house, being a stranger, and solitary, and inexperienced; when God
shed abundant grace upon him, passed through all, as if his temptations had not
even existed, both the false accusation of his mistress, and the danger of death,
and the prison, and at last came to the royal throne.
This blessed man therefore saw how great is the grace of God, and on this
account he invokes it upon them. And another thing also he effects, wishing to
render them well-disposed to the remaining part of the Epistle; that, though he
should reprove and rebuke them, they might not break away from him. For this
reason he reminds them before all things of the grace of God, mollifying their
hearts, that, even if there be affliction, being reminded of the grace by which
they were saved from the greater evil, they may not despair at the less, but may
thence derive consolation. As also elsewhere in an Epistle he has said, "For if,
while we were enemies, we were reconciled to God through the death of His Son,
much more, being reconciled, shall we be saved by His life." [Romans 5:10]
"Grace to you and peace," he says, "from God the Father and the Lord
Jesus Christ."
Ver. 3. "We are bound to give thanks to God always for you, brethren, even
as it is meet."
Again a sign of great humility. For he led them to reflect and consider, that
if for our good actions others do not admire us first, but God, much more also
ought we. And in other respects too he raises up their spirits, because they suffer
such things as are not worthy of tears and lamentations, but of thanksgiving to
God. But if Paul is thankful for the good of others, what will they suffer, who not
only are not thankful, but even pine at it.
"For that your faith grows exceedingly, and the love of each one of you all
toward one another abounds."
And how, you say, can faith increase? That is when we suffer something
dreadful for it. It is a great thing for it to be established, and not to be carried
away by reasonings. But when the winds assail us, when the rains burst upon us,