SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.68, C.2.

to the form of law. Hence if he refuse to tell the truth which he is
under obligation to tell, or if he mendaciously deny it, he sins
mortally. If, on the other hand, the judge asks of him that which he
cannot ask in accordance with the order of justice, the accused is
not bound to satisfy him, and he may lawfully escape by appealing
or otherwise: but it is not lawful for him to lie.
Reply to Objection 1: When a man is examined by the judge
according to the order of justice, he does not lay bare his own guilt,
but his guilt is unmasked by another, since the obligation of
answering is imposed on him by one whom he is bound to obey.
Reply to Objection 2: To lie, with injury to another person, in order to
rescue a man from death is not a purely officious lie, for it has an
admixture of the pernicious lie: and when a man lies in court in order
to exculpate himself, he does an injury to one whom he is bound to
obey, since he refuses him his due, namely an avowal of the truth.
Reply to Objection 3: He who lies in court by denying his guilt, acts
both against the love of God to whom judgment belongs, and against
the love of his neighbor, and this not only as regards the judge, to
whom he refuses his due, but also as regards his accuser, who is
punished if he fail to prove his accusation. Hence it is written (Ps.
140:4): "Incline not my heart to evil words, to make excuses in sins":
on which words a gloss says: "Shameless men are wont by lying to
deny their guilt when they have been found out." And Gregory in
expounding Job 31:33, "If as a man I have hid my sin," says (Moral.
xxii, 15): "It is a common vice of mankind to sin in secret, by lying to
hide the sin that has been committed, and when convicted to
aggravate the sin by defending oneself."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.68, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether it is lawful for the accused to defend

himself with calumnies?
Objection 1: It would seem lawful for the accused to defend himself
with calumnies. Because, according to civil law (Cod. II, iv, De
transact. 18), when a man is on trial for his life it is lawful for him to
bribe his adversary. Now this is done chiefly by defending oneself
with calumnies. Therefore the accused who is on trial for his life
does not sin if he defend himself with calumnies.
Objection 2: Further, an accuser who is guilty of collusion with the
accused, is punishable by law (Decret. II, qu. iii, can. Si quem
poenit.). Yet no punishment is imposed on the accused for collusion
with the accuser. Therefore it would seem lawful for the accused to
defend himself with calumnies.
Objection 3: Further, it is written (Prov. 14:16): "A wise man feareth
and declineth from evil, the fool leapeth over and is confident." Now
what is done wisely is no sin. Therefore no matter how a man
declines from evil, he does not sin.
On the contrary, In criminal cases an oath has to be taken against
calumnious allegations (Extra, De juramento calumniae, cap.
Inhaerentes): and this would not be the case if it were lawful to
defend oneself with calumnies. Therefore it is not lawful for the
accused to defend himself with calumnies.
I answer that, It is one thing to withhold the truth, and another to
utter a falsehood. The former is lawful sometimes, for a man is not
bound to divulge all truth, but only such as the judge can and must
require of him according to the order of justice; as, for instance,
when the accused is already disgraced through the commission of
some crime, or certain indications of his guilt have already been
discovered, or again when his guilt is already more or less proven.
On the other hand it is never lawful to make a false declaration.
As regards what he may do lawfully, a man can employ either lawful
means, and such as are adapted to the end in view, which belongs to
prudence; or he can use unlawful means, unsuitable to the proposed
end, and this belongs to craftiness, which is exercised by fraud and
guile, as shown above (Question 55, Articles 3, seqq.). His conduct