THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.17, C.2.

not reckon numerically with the Divine Nature, which is predicated of
the Father and Son.
Reply to Objection 5: In the mystery of the Divine Trinity the Divine
Nature is predicated, even in the abstract of the three Persons;
hence it may be said simply that the three Persons are one. But in
the mystery of the Incarnation both natures are not predicated in the
abstract of Christ; hence it cannot be said simply that Christ is two.
Reply to Objection 6: Two signifies what has duality, not in another,
but in the same thing of which "two" is predicated. Now what is
predicated is said of the suppositum, which is implied by the word
"Christ." Hence, although Christ has duality of nature, yet, because
He has not duality of suppositum, it cannot be said that Christ is two.
Reply to Objection 7: Otherwise implies diversity of accident. Hence
diversity of accident suffices for anything to be called "otherwise"
simply. But "another thing" implies diversity of substance. Now not
merely the nature, but also the suppositum is said to be a substance,
as is said Metaph. v, text. 15. Hence diversity of nature does not
suffice for anything to be called "another thing" simply, unless there
is diversity of suppositum. But diversity of nature makes "another
thing" relatively, i.e. in nature, if there is no diversity of suppositum.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.17, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether there is only one being in Christ?

Objection 1: It would seem that in Christ there is not merely one
being, but two. For Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii, 13) that
whatever follows the nature is doubled in Christ. But being follows
the nature, for being is from the form. Hence in Christ there are two
beings.
Objection 2: Further, the being of the Son of God is the Divine Nature
itself, and is eternal: whereas the being of the Man Christ is not the
Divine Nature, but is a temporal being. Therefore there is not only
one being in Christ.
Objection 3: Further, in the Trinity, although there are three Persons,
yet on account of the unity of nature there is only one being. But in
Christ there are two natures, though there is one Person. Therefore
in Christ there is not only one being.
Objection 4: Further, in Christ the soul gives some being to the body,
since it is its form. But it does not give the Divine being, since this is
uncreated. Therefore in Christ there is another being besides the
Divine being; and thus in Christ there is not only one being.
On the contrary, Everything is said to be a being, inasmuch as it is
one, for one and being are convertible. Therefore, if there were two
beings in Christ, and not one only, Christ would be two, and not one.
I answer that, Because in Christ there are two natures and one
hypostasis, it follows that things belonging to the nature in Christ
must be two; and that those belonging to the hypostasis in Christ
must be only one. Now being pertains both to the nature and to the
hypostasis; to the hypostasis as to that which has being---and to the
nature as to that whereby it has being. For nature is taken after the
manner of a form, which is said to be a being because something is
by it; as by whiteness a thing is white, and by manhood a thing is
man. Now it must be borne in mind that if there is a form or nature
which does not pertain to the personal being of the subsisting
hypostasis, this being is not said to belong to the person simply, but
relatively; as to be white is the being of Socrates, not as he is
Socrates, but inasmuch as he is white. And there is no reason why
this being should not be multiplied in one hypostasis or person; for