other works, is guilty of transgressing the law, and consequently will
be punished eternally.
I answer that, As Augustine says in the book quoted above (De Civ.
Dei xxi, 22), some have maintained that not all who have professed
the Catholic faith will be freed from eternal punishment, but only
those who persevere in works of mercy, although they be guilty of
other crimes. But this cannot stand, because without charity nothing
can be acceptable to God, nor does anything profit unto eternal life
in the absence of charity. Now it happens that certain persons
persevere in works of mercy without having charity. Wherefore
nothing profits them to the meriting of eternal life, or to exemption
from eternal punishment, as may be gathered from 1 Cor. 13:3. Most
evident is this in the case of those who lay hands on other people's
property, for after seizing on many things, they nevertheless spend
something in works of mercy. We must therefore conclude that all
whosoever die in mortal sin, neither faith nor works of mercy will
free them from eternal punishment, not even after any length of time
whatever.
Reply to Objection 1: Those will obtain mercy who show mercy in an
ordinate manner. But those who while merciful to others are
neglectful of themselves do not show mercy ordinately, rather do
they strike at themselves by their evil actions. Wherefore such
persons will not obtain the mercy that sets free altogether, even if
they obtain that mercy which rebates somewhat their due
punishment.
Reply to Objection 2: The reason why the discussion refers only to
the works of mercy is not because eternal punishment will be
inflicted on none but those who omit those works, but because
eternal punishment will be remitted to those who after sinning have
obtained forgiveness by their works of mercy, making unto
themselves "friends of the mammon of iniquity" (Lk. 16:9).
Reply to Objection 3: Our Lord said this to those who ask that their
debt be forgiven, but not to those who persist in sin. Wherefore the
repentant alone will obtain by their works of mercy the forgiveness
that sets them free altogether.
Reply to Objection 4: The gloss of Ambrose speaks of the
inconstancy that consists in venial sin, from which a man will be

freed through the works of mercy after the punishment of purgatory,
which he calls a scourging. Or, if he speaks of the inconstancy of
mortal sin, the sense is that those who while yet in this life fall into
sins of the flesh through frailty are disposed to repentance by works
of mercy. Wherefore such a one will not perish, that is to say, he will
be disposed by those works not to perish, through grace bestowed
on him by our Lord, Who is blessed for evermore. Amen.