whereby we understand, as the impression of colour in the eye is not that which is seen,
but that whereby we see. On the other hand, that which is understood is the nature
(ratio) of things existing outside the soul, as also it is things existing outside the soul that
are seen with the bodily sight: for to this end were arts and sciences invented, that
things might be known in their natures (naturis).
Still it does not follow that, if sciences are of universal truths, universals should subsist
by themselves outside the soul, as Plato supposed. For though for the truth of
knowledge it is necessary that the knowledge should answer to the thing, still it is not
necessary that the mode of the knowledge and the mode of the thing should be the
same: for properties that are united in the thing are sometimes known separately. Thus
one and the same thing is white and sweet: still sight takes cognisance only of the
whiteness, and taste only of the sweetness. Thus again intellect understands a line
drawn in sensible matter apart from that sensible matter, though it might understand it
also along with the sensible matter. This difference arises according to the
diversity of intellectual impressions received in the intellect, which some times are the
likeness of quantity only, sometimes of a sensible quantitative substance. In like manner
also, though the nature of genus and species never exists except in concrete
individuals, still the intellect understands the nature of genus and species without
understanding the individualising elements; and this is the meaning of understanding
universals. And so these two positions are reconciled, that universals have no
subsistence outside the soul; and yet that the intellect, understanding universals,
understands things which are outside the soul.
The fact of the intellect understanding the nature of genus and species stripped of its
individualising elements, arises from the condition of the intellectual impression received
in understanding, which impression is rendered immaterial by the active intellect,
inasmuch as it is abstracted from matter and materialising conditions whereby a thing is
individualised. And therefore the sentient faculties can take no cognisance of universals,
since they cannot receive an immaterial form, seeing that they receive always in a
bodily organ.
It is not therefore necessary that the intellectual impression of this and that intelligence
should be numerically one: for it would follow thereupon that the act of understanding in
them both was also numerically one, since activity follows form, which is the principle of
species: but it is necessary, to the end that one object should be understood by both
minds, that there should be a like impression of one and the same object in them both.
And this is possible enough, although the intellectual impressions differ in number: for
there is no difficulty in having different images of one thing; hence the contingency of
one than being seen by several persons. There is nothing inconsistent then with
the universalising knowledge of the understanding in their being different intellectual
impressions in different minds. Nor need it ensue, because these intellectual
impressions are many in number and the same in species, that they are not actual but
only potential terms of understanding, as is the case with other individual things. Mere
individuality is not inconsistent with intelligibility: for we must admit the potential and
active intellects themselves, if we may suppose the two to subsist apart, united to no