land and sea. And by way of showing this he said to the Romans, "Now I would
not that you should be ignorant, brethren, that ofttimes I have purposed to come
to you, and have been hindered until the present; in order that I might have some
fruit also among you, as among the rest of the Gentiles too. Both to Greeks and
barbarians, both to wise and those without understanding I am a debtor."
[Romans 1:13-14] Every day therefore he was in anxious thought at one moment
for Corinthians, at another for Macedonians; how Philippians, how
Cappadocians, how Galatians, how Athenians, how they who inhabited Pontus,
how all together were. But all the same, having had the whole world put into his
hands, he continually cared not for entire nations only, but also for each single
man; and now indeed he dispatched a letter on behalf of Onesimus, and now on
behalf of him who among the Corinthians had committed fornication. For neither
used he to regard this— that it was the individual who had sinned and needed
advocacy; but that it was a human being; a human being, the living thing most
precious to God; and for whose sake the Father had not spared even the Onlybegotten.
5. For do not tell me that this or that man is a runaway slave, or a robber or
thief, or laden with countless faults, or that he is a mendicant and abject, or of
low value and worthy of no account; but consider that for his sake the Christ
died; and this suffices you for a ground for all solicitude. Consider what sort of
person he must be, whom Christ valued at so high a price as not to have spared
even his own blood. For neither, if a king had chosen to sacrifice himself on any
one's behalf, should we have sought out another demonstration of his being some
one great and of deep interest to the King— I fancy not— for his death would
suffice to show the love of him who had died towards him. But as it is not man,
not angel, not archangel; but the Lord of the heavens himself, the only-begotten
Son of God himself having clothed himself with flesh, freely gave himself on
our behalf. Shall we not do everything, and take every trouble, so that the men
who have been thus valued may enjoy every solicitude at our hands? And what
kind of defence shall we have? What allowance? This at least is the very thing

by way of declaring which Paul also said, "Do not by your meat destroy him for
whose sake Christ died." [Romans 14:15] For desiring to shame, and to bring to
solicitude, and to persuade to care for their neighbours, those who despise their
brethren, and look down upon them as being weak, instead of all else he set
down the Master's death.
Sitting then in the prison he wrote the letter to the Philippians from that so
great distance. For such as this is the love that is according to God: it is
interrupted by no one of human things, since it has its roots from above in the
heavens and its recompense. And what says he? "Now I desire that you should
know, brethren." [Philippians 1:12] Do you see solicitude for his scholars? Do
you see a teacher's carefulness? Hear too of loving affection of scholars towards
their teacher, that you may know that this was what made them strong and
unconquerable— the being bound together with one another. For if "Brother
helped by brother is as a strong city;" far more so many bound together by the
bonds of love would have entirely repulsed the plotting of the wicked demon.
That indeed then Paul was bound up with the disciples, requires not even any
demonstration further nor argument for us, since in truth even when in bonds he
anxiously cared for them, and each day, he was also dying for them, burning
with his longing.
6. And that the disciples too were bound up with Paul with all perfectness;
and that not men only, but women also, hear what he says about Phœbe. "Now I
commend to you Phœbe the sister, being a deaconess of the Church which is in
Cenchreæ; that you may receive her in the Lord worthily of the saints, and stand
by her, in whatever matter she may require you, since she has proved a helper of
many; and of me myself." [Romans 16:1-2] But in this instance he bore witness
to her of her zeal so far as help went (only:) but Priscilla and Aquilla went as far
even as death for Paul's sake; and about them he thus writes, saying, "Aquila and
Priscilla salute you, who for my life's sake laid down their own neck;"
[Romans 16:3-4] for death clearly. And about another again writing to these very
persons he says, "Because he went as far as death; having counselled ill for his