but that their Mother, the seed of the Father, proclaimed the mysteries of truth through such men,
even as also through the prophets, while the Demiurge was ignorant [of the proceeding], then I
answer, in the first place, that the things which were predicted were not of such a nature as to be
intelligible to no one; for the men themselves knew what they were saying, as did also their disciples,
and those again succeeded these. And, in the next place, if either the Mother or her seed knew and
proclaimed those things which were of the truth (and the Father is truth), then on their theory
the Saviour spoke falsely when He said, "No one knoweth the Father but the Son," unless indeed
they maintain that their seed or Mother is No-one.
8. Thus far, then, by means of [ascribing to their Æons] human feelings, and by the fact that
they largely coincide in their language with many of those who are ignorant of God, they have been
seen plausibly drawing a certain number away [from the truth]. They lead them on by the use of
those [expressions] with which they have been familiar, to that sort of discourse which treats of all
things, setting forth the production of the Word of God, and of Zoe, and of Nous, and bringing into
the world, as it were, the [successive] emanations of the Deity. The views, again, which they
propound, without either plausibility or parade, are simply lies from beginning to end. Just as those
who, in order to lure and capture any kind of animals, place their accustomed food before them,
gradually drawing them on by means of the familiar aliment, until at length they seize it, but, when
they have taken them captive, they subject them to the bitterest of bondage, and drag them along
with violence whithersoever they please; so also do these men gradually and gently persuading
[others], by means of their plausible speeches, to accept of the emission which has been mentioned,
then bring forward things which are not consistent, and forms of the remaining emissions which
are not such as might have been expected. They declare, for instance, that [ten] Æons were sent
forth by Logos and Zoe, while from Anthropos and Ecclesia there proceeded twelve, although they
have neither proof, nor testimony, nor probability, nor anything whatever of such a nature [to
support these assertions]; and with equal folly and audacity do they wish it to be believed that from
Logos and Zoe, being Æons, were sent forth Bythus and Mixis, Ageratos and Henosis, Autophyes
and Hedone, Acinetos and Syncrasis, Monogenes and Macaria. Moreover, [as they affirm,] there
were sent forth, in a similar way, from Anthropos and Ecclesia, being Æons, Paracletus and Pistis,
Patricos and Elpis, Metricos and Agape, Ainos and Synesis, Ecclesiasticus and Macariotes, Theletos
and Sophia.
9. The passions and error of this Sophia, and how she ran the risk of perishing through her
investigation [of the nature] of the Father, as they relate, and what took place outside of the Pleroma,
and from what sort of a defect they teach that the Maker of the world was produced, I have set forth
in the preceding book, describing in it, with all diligence, the opinions of these heretics. [I have