livelihood by one's own labour is a matter of more anxiety than living on the possessions
which one had before, especially if they were a modest competency. And the Lord
seems to forbid manual labour to His disciples in the text: Behold the fowls of the air, for
they sow not, neither do they reap: consider the lilies of the field how they grow, they
labour not, neither do they spin (Matt. vi, 26, 28). Moreover this mode of living is
inadequate. Many desire a perfect life, who have not the capacity for earning their
livelihood by labour, not having been brought up thereto: also there is the possibility of
sickness. And no little time must be spent in labour to suffice for earning a livelihood:
many spend their whole time in labour, and yet can scarcely live. Thus the votaries of
voluntary poverty will be hindered from study and spiritual exercises; and their poverty
will be more of a hindrance than a help to the perfection of their life.
Reply. In the case of rich men, their possessions involve solicitude in getting them or
keeping them; and the heart of the owner is drawn to them; inconveniences which do
not happen to one whose sole object is to gain his daily bread by the labour of his
hands. Little time is sufficient, and little solicitude is necessary, for gaining by the labour
of one's hands enough to support nature: but for gathering riches and superfluities, as
craftsmen in the world propose, much time has to be spent and much solicitude shown.
Our Lord in the Gospel has not forbidden labour of the hands, but anxiety of mind about
the necessaries of life. He did not say, Do not labour, but, Be not solicitous. And this
precept He enforces by an argument from less to greater. For if divine providence
sustains birds and lilies, which are of inferior condition, and cannot labour at those
works whereby men get their livelihood, much more will it provide for men, who are of
worthier condition, and to whom it has given ability to win their livelihood by their own
labours. It is the exception for a man not to be able to win enough to live upon by the
labour of his hands; and an institution is not to be rejected for exceptional cases. The
remedy is, for him whose labour is not enough to keep him, to be helped out either by
others of the same society, who can make more by their labour than is necessary for
them, or by others who are well off. Nor need those who are content with little spend
much time in seeking a livelihood by the labour of their hands: so they are not much
hindered from spiritual works, especially as in working with their hands they can think of
God and praise Him.
Fourth mode. To live on the alms contributed by others, who retain their wealth. This
seems to have been the method observed by our Lord: for it is said that sundry women
followed Christ, and ministered to him out of their means (Luke viii, 2, 3).
Criticism. It seems irrational for one to abandon his own and live on an other's property,
-- or for one to receive of another and pay him back nothing in return. There is no
impropriety in ministers of the altar and preachers, to whom the people are indebted for
doctrine and other divine gifts, receiving support at their hands: for the labourer is
worthy of his hire, as the Lord says (Matt. x, 10); and the Apostle, the Lord hath
ordained that they who preach the gospel should live by the gospel (1 Cor. ix, 14). But it
is an apparent absurdity for these persons who minister to the people in no office to
receive the necessaries of life from the people. Others moreover, who through sickness
and poverty cannot help themselves, must lose their alms through these professors of