shares in the children, and in all other things.
Have you a little daughter? Look to it lest she inherit the mischief, for they
are wont to form their manners according to their nurture, and to imitate their
mothers' behavior. Be a pattern to your daughter of modesty, deck yourself with
that adorning, and see that thou despise the other; for that is in truth an
ornament, the other a disfigurement. Enough has been said. Now God that made
the world, and has given to us the ornament of the soul, adorn us, and clothe us
with His own glory, that all shining brightly in good works, and living unto His
glory, we may send up glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit,
now and always, etc.

## Homily 11 on Colossians

[Colossians 4:5, 6]
"Walk in wisdom toward them that are without, redeeming the time. Let
your speech be always with grace, seasoned with salt, that you may know how
you ought to answer each one."
What Christ said to His disciples, that does Paul also now advise. And what
did Christ say? "Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves: be ye
therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves." [Matthew 10:16] That is, be
upon your guard, giving them no handle against you. For therefore it is added,
"towards them that are without," in order that we may know that against our own
members we have no need of so much caution as against those without. For
where brethren are, there are both many allowances and kindnesses. There is
indeed need of caution even here; but much more without, for it is not the same
to be among enemies and foes, and among friends.
Then because he had alarmed them, see how again he encourages them;
"Redeeming," he says, "the time": that is, the present time is short. Now this he
said, not wishing them to be crafty, nor hypocrites, (for this is not a part of
wisdom, but of senselessness,) but what? In matters wherein they harm you not,
he means, give them no handle; as he says also, when writing to the Romans,
"Render to all their dues: tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to whom
custom, honor to whom honor." [Romans 13:7] On account of the Preaching
alone have thou war, he says, let this war have none other origin. For though
they were to become our foes for other causes besides, yet neither shall we have
a reward, and they will become worse, and will seem to have just complaints
against us. For instance, if we pay not the tribute, if we render not the honors
that are due, if we be not lowly. Do you see not Paul, how submissive he is,
where he was not likely to harm the Preaching. For hear him saying to Agrippa,

"I think myself happy, because I shall answer for myself this day before you,
especially because I know you to be expert in all customs and questions which
are among the Jews." [Acts 26:2-3] But had he thought it his duty to insult the
ruler, he would have spoiled everything. And hear too those of blessed Peter's
company, how gently they answer the Jews, saying, "we must obey God rather
than men." [Acts 5:29] And yet men who had renounced their own lives, might
both have insulted, and have done anything whatever; but for this object they
had renounced their lives, not that they might win vainglory, (for that way had
been vainglorious,) but that they might preach and speak all things with
boldness. That other course marks want of moderation.
"Let your speech be always with grace, seasoned with salt"; that is, that this
graciousness may not lapse into indifferentism. For it is possible to be simply
agreeable, it is possible also to be so with due seemliness. "That ye may know
how ye ought to answer each one." So that one ought not to discourse alike to
all, Greeks, I mean, and Brethren. By no means, for this were the very extreme
of senselessness.
Ver. 7. "All my affairs shall Tychicus make known unto you, the beloved
brother and faithful minister and fellow-servant in the Lord."
Admirable! How great is the wisdom of Paul! Observe, he does not put
everything into his Epistles, but only things necessary and urgent. In the first
place, being desirous of not drawing them out to a length; and secondly, to make
his messenger more respected, by his having also somewhat to relate; thirdly,
showing his own affection towards him; for he would not else have entrusted
these communications to him. Then, there were things which ought not to be
declared in writing. "The beloved brother," he says. If beloved, he knew all, and
he concealed nothing from him. "And faithful minister and fellow-servant in the
Lord." If "faithful," he will speak no falsehood; if "a fellow-servant," he has
shared his trials, so that he has brought together from all sides the grounds of
trustworthiness.
Ver. 8. "Whom I have sent unto you for this very purpose."