dismissed: for it was not about this that I originally demanded an explanation;
but if you have any just answer to make to those who are without, I would gladly
hear what you have to say. Wherefore, abandoning this vain contest, tell me what
defence I shall make, both to those who have honored you and to those who are
distressed on their account, considering them to be insulted.
7. Chrysostom: This is just the point to which I am finally hastening, for as
my explanation to you has been completed I shall easily turn to this part of my
defence. What then is the accusation made by these persons, and what are their
charges? They say that they have been insulted and grievously wronged by me
because I have not accepted the honor which they wished to confer upon me.
Now in the first place I say that no account should be taken of the insult shown
to men, seeing that by paying honor to them I should be compelled to offend
God. And I should say to those who are displeased that it is not safe to take
offense at these things, but does them much harm. For I think that those who stay
themselves on God and look to Him alone, ought to be so religiously disposed as
not to account such a thing an insult, even if they happened to be a thousand
times dishonored. But that I have not gone so far as even to think of daring
anything of this kind is manifest from what I am about to say. For if indeed I had
been induced by arrogance and vainglory, as you have often said some
slanderously affirm, to assent to my accusers, I should have been one of the most
iniquitous of mankind, having treated great and excellent men, my benefactors
moreover, with contempt. For if men ought to be punished for wronging those
who have never wronged them, how ought we to honor those who have
spontaneously preferred to honor us? For no one could possibly say that they
were requiting me for any benefits small or great which they had received at my
hands. How great a punishment then would one deserve if one requited them in
the contrary manner. But if such a thing never entered my mind, and I declined
the heavy burden with quite a different intention, why do they refuse to pardon
me (even if they do not consent to approve), but accuse me of having selfishly
spared my own soul? For so far from having insulted the men in question I

should say that I had even honored them by my refusal.
And do not be surprised at the paradoxical nature of my remark, for I shall
supply a speedy solution of it.
8. For had I accepted the office, I do not say all men, but those who take
pleasure in speaking evil, might have suspected and said many things concerning
myself who had been elected and concerning them, the electors: for instance,
that they regarded wealth, and admired splendor of rank, or had been induced by
flattery to promote me to this honor: indeed I cannot say whether some one
might not have suspected that they were bribed by money. Moreover, they would
have said, "Christ called fishermen, tentmakers, and publicans to this dignity,
whereas these men reject those who support themselves by daily labor: but if
there be any one who devotes himself to secular learning, and is brought up in
idleness, him they receive and admire. For why, pray, have they passed by men
who have undergone innumerable toils in the service of the Church, and
suddenly dragged into this dignity one who has never experienced any labors of
this kind, but has spent all his youth in the vain study of secular learning." These
things and more they might have said had I accepted the office: but not so now.
For every pretext for maligning is now cut away from them, and they can neither
accuse me of flattery, nor the others of receiving bribes, unless some choose to
act like mere madmen. For how could one who used flattery and expended
money in order to obtain the dignity, have abandoned it to others when he might
have obtained it? For this would be just as if a man who had bestowed much
labor upon the ground in order that the grain field might be laden with abundant
produce, and the presses overflow with wine, after innumerable toils and great
expenditure of money were to surrender the fruits to others just when it was time
to reap his grain and gather in his vintage. Do you see that although what was
said might be far from the truth, nevertheless those who wished to calumniate
the electors would then have had a pretext for alleging that the choice was made
without fair judgment and consideration. But as it is I have prevented them from
being open mouthed, or even uttering a single word on the subject. Such then