the name of Christians, so let all have to say, that Antioch alone, of all the cities
throughout the world, has expelled all oaths from her own borders. Yea, rather,
should this be done, she will not be herself crowned alone, but will also carry
others along with her to the same pitch of zeal. And as the name of Christians
having had its origin here, has as it were from a kind of fountain overflown all
the world, even so this good work, having taken its root and starting-point from
hence, will make all men that inhabit the earth your disciples; so that a double
and treble reward may arise to you, at once on account of your own good works,
and of the instruction afforded to others. This will be to you the brightest of
diadems! This will make your city a mother city, not on earth, but in the
heavens! This will stand by us at That Day, and bring us the crown of
righteousness; which God grant that we may all obtain, through the grace and
lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father, together with
the Holy Spirit, be glory, now and ever, and world without end. Amen.

## Homily 15 on the Statues
Again on the calamity of the city of Antioch. That fear is every way
profitable. That sorrow is more useful than laughter. And upon the saying,
"Remember that you walk in the midst of snares." And that it is worse to exact
an oath, than to commit murder.
1. Today, and on the former Sabbath, it had behooved us to enter on the
subject of fasting; nor let any one suppose that what I said was unseasonable.
For on the days of the fast, counsel and admonition on that subject are indeed not
at all necessary; the very presence of these days exciting even those who are the
most remiss to the effort of fasting. But since many men, both when about to
enter upon the fast, as if the belly were on the point of being delivered over to a
sort of lengthened seige, lay in beforehand a stock of gluttony and drunkenness;
and again, on being set at liberty, going forth as from a long famine and a
grievous prison, run to the table with unseemly greediness, just as if they were
striving to undo again the advantage gained through the fast, by an excess of
gluttony; it might have been needful, that then as well as now, we should agitate
the subject of temperance. Nevertheless, we have neither lately said any thing of
that kind, neither shall we now speak upon it. For the fear of the impending
calamity suffices, instead of the strongest admonition and counsel, to sober the
soul of every one. For who is there so miserable and degraded, as to be drunken
in such a tempest? Who is there so insensible, when the city is thus agitated, and
such a shipwreck is threatened, as not to become abstemious and watchful, and
more thoroughly reformed by this distress than by any other sort of admonition
and counsel? For discourse will not be able to effect as much as fear does. And
this very thing it is now possible to show from the events which have taken
place. How many words then did we spend before this in exhorting many that
were listless, and counselling them to abstain from the theatres, and the