1 Corinthians 1:8
7. "Who shall also confirm you unto the end, that you may be
unreprovable." Here he seems to court them, but the saying is free from all
flattery; for he knows also how to press them home; as when he says, [1
Corinthians 4:18-21] "Now some are puffed up as though I would not come to
you:" and again, "What will you? Shall I come unto you with a rod, or in love,
and in the spirit of meekness?" And, [2 Corinthians 13:3] "Since you seek a
proof of Christ speaking in me." But he is also covertly accusing them: for, to
say, "He shall confirm," and the word "unreprovable" marks them out as still
wavering, and liable to reproof.
But do thou consider how he always fastens them as with nails to the Name
of Christ. And not any man nor teacher, but continually the Desired One Himself
is remembered by him: setting himself, as it were to arouse those who were
heavy-headed after some debauch. For no where in any other Epistle does the
Name of Christ occur so continually. But here it is, many times in a few verses;
and by means of it he weaves together, one may say, the whole of the proem.
Look at it from the beginning. "Paul called [to be] an Apostle of Jesus Christ, to
them that have been sanctified in Jesus Christ, who call upon the Name of our
Lord Jesus Christ, grace [be] unto you and peace from God the Father, and the
Lord Jesus Christ. I thank my God for the grace which has been given you by
Jesus Christ, even as the testimony of Christ has been confirmed in you, waiting
for the revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall confirm you unreprovable
in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. God is faithful, by whom you have been
called into the fellowship of His Son Jesus Christ our Lord. And I beseech you by
the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ." Do you see the constant repetition of the
Name of Christ? From whence it is plain even to the most unobservant, that not
by chance nor unwittingly he does this, but in order that by incessant application

of that glorious Name he may foment their inflammation, and purge out the
corruption of the disease.

1 Corinthians 1:9
8. "God is faithful, by whom you were called unto the fellowship of His
Son." Wonderful! How great a thing says he here! How vast in the magnitude of
the gift which he declares! Into the fellowship of the Only-Begotten have you
been called, and do you addict yourselves unto men? What can be worse than
this wretchedness? And how have you been called? By the Father. For since
"through Him," and "in Him," were phrases which he was constantly employing
in regard of the Son, lest men might suppose that he so mentions Him as being
less, he ascribes the same to the Father. For not by this one and that one, says he,
but "by the Father" have you been called; by Him also have you been
"enriched." Again, "you have been called;" ye did not yourselves approach. But
what means, "into the fellowship of His Son?" Hear him declaring this very thing
more clearly elsewhere. [2 Timothy 2:12] If we suffer, we shall also reign with
Him; if we die with Him, we shall also live with Him. Then, because it was a
great thing which He had said, he adds an argument fraught with unanswerable
conviction; for, says he, "God is faithful," i.e. "true." Now if "true," what things
He has promised He will also perform. And He has promised that He will make
us partakers of His only-begotten Son; for to this end also did He call us. For
[Romans 11:29] "His gifts, and the calling of God," are without repentance.
These things, by a kind of divine art he inserts thus early, lest after the
vehemence of the reproofs they might fall into despair. For assuredly God's part
will ensue, if we be not quite impatient of His rein. ([ἀφηνιάσωμεν]) As the
Jews, being called, would not receive the blessings; but this was no longer of
Him that called, but of their lack of sense. For He indeed was willing to give, but
they, by refusing to receive, cast themselves away. For, had He called to a
painful and toilsome undertaking, not even in that case were they pardonable in
making excuse; however, they would have been able to say that so it was: but if