FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.103, C.5.

scandal, should have hidden things pertaining to the truth of life and
doctrine, and that they should have made use of pretense, in things
pertaining to the salvation of the faithful; therefore Augustine (Epist.
lxxxii) more fittingly distinguished three periods of time. One was the
time that preceded the Passion of Christ, during which the legal
ceremonies were neither deadly nor dead: another period was after
the publication of the Gospel, during which the legal ceremonies are
both dead and deadly. The third is a middle period, viz. from the
Passion of Christ until the publication of the Gospel, during which
the legal ceremonies were dead indeed, because they had neither
effect nor binding force; but were not deadly, because it was lawful
for the Jewish converts to Christianity to observe them, provided
they did not put their trust in them so as to hold them to be
necessary unto salvation, as though faith in Christ could not justify
without the legal observances. On the other hand, there was no
reason why those who were converted from heathendom to
Christianity should observe them. Hence Paul circumcised Timothy,
who was born of a Jewish mother; but was unwilling to circumcise
Titus, who was of heathen nationality.
The reason why the Holy Ghost did not wish the converted Jews to
be debarred at once from observing the legal ceremonies, while
converted heathens were forbidden to observe the rites of
heathendom, was in order to show that there is a difference between
these rites. For heathenish ceremonial was rejected as absolutely
unlawful, and as prohibited by God for all time; whereas the legal
ceremonial ceased as being fulfilled through Christ's Passion, being
instituted by God as a figure of Christ.
Reply to Objection 2: According to Jerome, Peter withdrew himself
from the Gentiles by pretense, in order to avoid giving scandal to the
Jews, of whom he was the Apostle. Hence he did not sin at all in
acting thus. On the other hand, Paul in like manner made a pretense
of blaming him, in order to avoid scandalizing the Gentiles, whose
Apostle he was. But Augustine disapproves of this solution: because
in the canonical Scripture (viz. Gal. 2:11), wherein we must not hold
anything to be false, Paul says that Peter "was to be blamed."
Consequently it is true that Peter was at fault: and Paul blamed him
in very truth and not with pretense. Peter, however, did not sin, by
observing the legal ceremonial for the time being; because this was
lawful for him who was a converted Jew. But he did sin by excessive
minuteness in the observance of the legal rites lest he should
scandalize the Jews, the result being that he gave scandal to the

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.103, C.5.

Gentiles.
Reply to Objection 3: Some have held that this prohibition of the
apostles is not to be taken literally, but spiritually: namely, that the
prohibition of blood signifies the prohibition of murder; the
prohibition of things strangled, that of violence and rapine; the
prohibition of things offered to idols, that of idolatry; while
fornication is forbidden as being evil in itself: which opinion they
gathered from certain glosses, which expound these prohibitions in
a mystical sense. Since, however, murder and rapine were held to be
unlawful even by the Gentiles, there would have been no need to
give this special commandment to those who were converted to
Christ from heathendom. Hence others maintain that those foods
were forbidden literally, not to prevent the observance of legal
ceremonies, but in order to prevent gluttony. Thus Jerome says on
Ezech. 44:31 ("The priest shall not eat of anything that is dead"): "He
condemns those priests who from gluttony did not keep these
precepts."
But since certain foods are more delicate than these and more
conducive to gluttony, there seems no reason why these should
have been forbidden more than the others.
We must therefore follow the third opinion, and hold that these foods
were forbidden literally, not with the purpose of enforcing
compliance with the legal ceremonies, but in order to further the
union of Gentiles and Jews living side by side. Because blood and
things strangled were loathsome to the Jews by ancient custom;
while the Jews might have suspected the Gentiles of relapse into
idolatry if the latter had partaken of things offered to idols. Hence
these things were prohibited for the time being, during which the
Gentiles and Jews were to become united together. But as time went
on, with the lapse of the cause, the effect lapsed also, when the truth
of the Gospel teaching was divulged, wherein Our Lord taught that
"not that which entereth into the mouth defileth a man" (Mt. 15:11);
and that "nothing is to be rejected that is received with
thanksgiving" (1 Tim. 4:4). With regard to fornication a special
prohibition was made, because the Gentiles did not hold it to be
sinful.