THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.83, C.4.

unto Me, thou shalt not build it of hewn stones." Again, the altar is
commanded to be made of "setim-wood," covered "with brass" (Ex.
27:1,2), or "with gold" (Ex. 25). Consequently, it seems unfitting for
the Church to make exclusive use of altars made of stone.
Objection 6: Further, the chalice with the paten represents Christ's
tomb, which was "hewn in a rock," as is narrated in the Gospels.
Consequently, the chalice ought to be of stone, and not of gold or of
silver or tin.
Objection 7: Further, just as gold is the most precious among the
materials of the altar vessels, so are cloths of silk the most precious
among other cloths. Consequently, since the chalice is of gold, the
altar cloths ought to be made of silk and not of linen.
Objection 8: Further, the dispensing and ordering of the sacraments
belong to the Church's ministers, just as the ordering of temporal
affairs is subject to the ruling of secular princes; hence the Apostle
says (1 Cor. 4:1): "Let a man so esteem us as the ministers of Christ
end the dispensers of the mysteries of God." But if anything be done
against the ordinances of princes it is deemed void. Therefore, if the
various items mentioned above are suitably commanded by the
Church's prelates, it seems that the body of Christ could not be
consecrated unless they be observed; and so it appears to follow
that Christ's words are not sufficient of themselves for consecrating
this sacrament: which is contrary to the fact. Consequently, it does
not seem fitting for such ordinances to be made touching the
celebration of this sacrament.
On the contrary, The Church's ordinances are Christ's own
ordinances; since He said (Mt. 18:20): "Wherever two or three are
gathered together in My name, there am I in the midst of them."
I answer that, There are two things to be considered regarding the
equipment of this sacrament: one of these belongs to the
representation of the events connected with our Lord's Passion;
while the other is connected with the reverence due to the
sacrament, in which Christ is contained verily, and not in figure only.
Hence we consecrate those things which we make use of in this
sacrament; both that we may show our reverence for the sacrament,
and in order to represent the holiness which is the effect of the

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.83, C.4.

Passion of Christ, according to Heb. 13:12: "Jesus, that He might
sanctify the people by His own blood," etc.
Reply to Objection 1: This sacrament ought as a rule to be
celebrated in a house, whereby the Church is signified, according to
1 Tim. 3:15: "That thou mayest know how thou oughtest to behave
thyself in the house of God, which is the Church of the living God."
Because "outside the Church there is no place for the true sacrifice,"
as Augustine says (Liber Sentent. Prosp. xv). And because the
Church was not to be confined within the territories of the Jewish
people, but was to be established throughout the whole world,
therefore Christ's Passion was not celebrated within the city of the
Jews, but in the open country, that so the whole world might serve
as a house for Christ's Passion. Nevertheless, as is said in De
Consecr., dist. 1, "if a church be not to hand, we permit travelers to
celebrate mass in the open air, or in a tent, if there be a consecrated
altar-table to hand, and the other requisites belonging to the sacred
function."
Reply to Objection 2: The house in which this sacrament is
celebrated denotes the Church, and is termed a church; and so it is
fittingly consecrated, both to represent the holiness which the
Church acquired from the Passion, as well as to denote the holiness
required of them who have to receive this sacrament. By the altar
Christ Himself is signified, of Whom the Apostle says (Heb. 13:15):
"Through Him we offer a sacrifice of praise to God." Hence the
consecration of the altar signifies Christ's holiness, of which it was
said (Lk. 1:35): "The Holy one born of thee shall be called the Son of
God." Hence we read in De Consecr., dist. 1: "It has seemed pleasing
for the altars to be consecrated not merely with the anointing of
chrism, but likewise with the priestly blessing."
And therefore, as a rule, it is not lawful to celebrate this sacrament
except in a consecrated house. Hence it is enacted (De Consecr.,
dist. 1): "Let no priest presume to say mass except in places
consecrated by the bishop." And furthermore because pagans and
other unbelievers are not members of the Church, therefore we read
(De Consecr., dist. 1): "It is not lawful to bless a church in which the
bodies of unbelievers are buried, but if it seem suitable for
consecration, then, after removing the corpses and tearing down the
walls or beams, let it be rebuilt. If, however, it has been already
consecrated, and the faithful lie in it, it is lawful to celebrate mass
therein." Nevertheless in a case of necessity this sacrament can be