SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.160, C.3.

lack of daring is. On the other hand, humility suppresses hope or
confidence in self more than it uses it; wherefore excessive selfconfidence is more opposed to humility than lack of confidence is.
Reply to Objection 4: Excess in outward expenditure and parade is
wont to be done with a view of boasting, which is suppressed by
humility. Accordingly humility has to do, in a secondary way, with
externals, as signs of the inward movement of the appetite.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.160, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether one ought, by humility, to subject oneself

to all men?
Objection 1: It would seem that one ought not, by humility, to subject
oneself to all men. For, as stated above (Article 2, ad 3), humility
consists chiefly in man's subjection to God. Now one ought not to
offer to a man that which is due to God, as is the case with all acts of
religious worship. Therefore, by humility, one ought not to subject
oneself to man.
Objection 2: Further, Augustine says (De Nat. et Gratia xxxiv):
"Humility should take the part of truth, not of falsehood." Now some
men are of the highest rank, who cannot, without falsehood, subject
themselves to their inferiors. Therefore one ought not, by humility, to
subject oneself to all men.
Objection 3: Further no one ought to do that which conduces to the
detriment of another's spiritual welfare. But if a man subject himself
to another by humility, this is detrimental to the person to whom he
subjects himself; for the latter might wax proud, or despise the
other. Hence Augustine says in his Rule (Ep. ccxi): "Lest through
excessive humility the superior lose his authority." Therefore a man
ought not, by humility, to subject himself to all.
On the contrary, It is written (Phil. 2:3): "In humility, let each esteem
others better than themselves."
I answer that, We may consider two things in man, namely that which
is God's, and that which is man's. Whatever pertains to defect is
man's: but whatever pertains to man's welfare and perfection is
God's, according to the saying of Osee 13:9, "Destruction is thy own,
O Israel; thy help is only in Me." Now humility, as stated above
(Article 1, ad 5; Article 2, ad 3), properly regards the reverence
whereby man is subject to God. Wherefore every man, in respect of
that which is his own, ought to subject himself to every neighbor, in
respect of that which the latter has of God's: but humility does not
require a man to subject what he has of God's to that which may
seem to be God's in another. For those who have a share of God's
gifts know that they have them, according to 1 Cor. 2:12: "That we
may know the things that are given us from God." Wherefore without
prejudice to humility they may set the gifts they have received from

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.160, C.4.