On the contrary, The Philosopher says (De Anima iii, 4) that "things
are intelligible in proportion as they are separate from matter."
Therefore material things must needs be understood according as
they are abstracted from matter and from material images, namely,
phantasms.
I answer that, As stated above (Question 84, Article 7), the object of
knowledge is proportionate to the power of knowledge. Now there
are three grades of the cognitive powers. For one cognitive power,
namely, the sense, is the act of a corporeal organ. And therefore the
object of every sensitive power is a form as existing in corporeal
matter. And since such matter is the principle of individuality,
therefore every power of the sensitive part can only have knowledge
of the individual. There is another grade of cognitive power which is
neither the act of a corporeal organ, nor in any way connected with
corporeal matter; such is the angelic intellect, the object of whose
cognitive power is therefore a form existing apart from matter: for
though angels know material things, yet they do not know them save
in something immaterial, namely, either in themselves or in God. But
the human intellect holds a middle place: for it is not the act of an
organ; yet it is a power of the soul which is the form the body, as is
clear from what we have said above (Question 76, Article 1). And
therefore it is proper to it to know a form existing individually in
corporeal matter, but not as existing in this individual matter. But to
know what is in individual matter, not as existing in such matter, is
to abstract the form from individual matter which is represented by
the phantasms. Therefore we must needs say that our intellect
understands material things by abstracting from the phantasms; and
through material things thus considered we acquire some
knowledge of immaterial things, just as, on the contrary, angels
know material things through the immaterial.
But Plato, considering only the immateriality of the human intellect,
and not its being in a way united to the body, held that the objects of
the intellect are separate ideas; and that we understand not by
abstraction, but by participating things abstract, as stated above
(Question 84, Article 1).
Reply to Objection 1: Abstraction may occur in two ways: First, by
way of composition and division; thus we may understand that one
thing does not exist in some other, or that it is separate therefrom.
Secondly, by way of simple and absolute consideration; thus we
understand one thing without considering the other. Thus for the

intellect to abstract one from another things which are not really
abstract from one another, does, in the first mode of abstraction,
imply falsehood. But, in the second mode of abstraction, for the
intellect to abstract things which are not really abstract from one
another, does not involve falsehood, as clearly appears in the case
of the senses. For if we understood or said that color is not in a
colored body, or that it is separate from it, there would be error in
this opinion or assertion. But if we consider color and its properties,
without reference to the apple which is colored; or if we express in
word what we thus understand, there is no error in such an opinion
or assertion, because an apple is not essential to color, and
therefore color can be understood independently of the apple.
Likewise, the things which belong to the species of a material thing,
such as a stone, or a man, or a horse, can be thought of apart from
the individualizing principles which do not belong to the notion of
the species. This is what we mean by abstracting the universal from
the particular, or the intelligible species from the phantasm; that is,
by considering the nature of the species apart from its individual
qualities represented by the phantasms. If, therefore, the intellect is
said to be false when it understands a thing otherwise than as it is,
that is so, if the word "otherwise" refers to the thing understood; for
the intellect is false when it understands a thing otherwise than as it
is; and so the intellect would be false if it abstracted the species of a
stone from its matter in such a way as to regard the species as not
existing in matter, as Plato held. But it is not so, if the word
"otherwise" be taken as referring to the one who understands. For it
is quite true that the mode of understanding, in one who
understands, is not the same as the mode of a thing in existing:
since the thing understood is immaterially in the one who
understands, according to the mode of the intellect, and not
materially, according to the mode of a material thing.
Reply to Objection 2: Some have thought that the species of a
natural thing is a form only, and that matter is not part of the
species. If that were so, matter would not enter into the definition of
natural things. Therefore it must be said otherwise, that matter is
twofold, common, and "signate" or individual; common, such as
flesh and bone; and individual, as this flesh and these bones. The
intellect therefore abstracts the species of a natural thing from the
individual sensible matter, but not from the common sensible matter;
for example, it abstracts the species of man from "this flesh and
these bones," which do not belong to the species as such, but to the
individual (Metaph. vii, Did. vi, 10), and need not be considered in the