to go to the man who has provoked us when he says "Forgive your debtors in
order that your Father may also forgive your trespasses." For He did not
propose a small reward, but one which far exceeds the magnitude of the
achievement. Considering all these things then, and counting the recompense
which is given in this case and remembering that to wipe away sins does not
entail much labour and zeal, let us pardon those who have wronged us. For that
which others scarcely accomplish, I mean the blotting out of their own sins by
means of fasting and lamentations, and prayers, and sackcloth, and ashes, this it
is possible for us easily to effect without sackcloth and ashes and fasting if only
we blot out anger from our heart, and with sincerity forgive those who have
wronged us. May the God of peace and love, having banished from our soul all
wrath and bitterness, and anger, deign to grant that we being closely knit one to
another according to the proper adjustment of the parts, [Ephesians 4:16] may
with one accord, one mouth and one soul continually offer up our hymns of
thanksgiving due to Him: for to Him be glory and power for ever and ever.
Amen.

## Homily Against Publishing the Errors

of the Brethren
1. [I account] you happy for the zeal, beloved, with which you flock into
the Father's house. For from this zeal I have ground for feeling confidence about
your health also with respect to the soul; for indeed the school of the Church is
an admirable surgery— a surgery, not for bodies, but for souls. For it is spiritual,
and sets right, not fleshly wounds, but errors of the mind, and of these errors and
wounds the medicine is the word. This medicine is compounded, not from the
herbs growing on the earth, but from the words proceeding from heaven— this
no hands of physicians, but tongues of preachers have dispensed. On this
account it lasts right through; and neither is its virtue impaired by length of time,
nor defeated by any strength of diseases. For certainly the medicines of
physicians have both these defects; for while they are fresh they display their
proper strength, but when much time has passed; just as those bodies which have
grown old; they become weaker; and often too the difficult character of maladies
is wont to baffle them; since they are but human. Whereas the divine medicine is
not such as this; but after much time has intervened, it still retains all its inherent
virtue. Ever since at least Moses was born (for from thence dates the beginning
of the Scripture) it has healed so many human beings; and not only has it not lost
its proper power, but neither has any disease ever yet overcome it. This medicine
it is not possible to get by payment of silver; but he who has displayed sincerity
of purpose and disposition goes his way having it all. On account of this both
rich and poor alike obtain the benefit of this healing process. For where there is a
necessity to pay down money the man of large means indeed shares the benefit;
but the poor man often has to go away deprived of the gain, since his income
does not suffice him for the making up of the medicine. But in this case, since it
is not possible to pay down silver coin, but it is needful to display faith and a