THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.69, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether grace and virtues are bestowed on man

by Baptism?
Objection 1: It seems that grace and virtues are not bestowed on
man by Baptism. Because, as stated above (Question 62, Article 1,
ad 1), the sacraments of the New Law "effect what they signify." But
the baptismal cleansing signifies the cleansing of the soul from guilt,
and not the fashioning of the soul with grace and virtues. Therefore
it seems that grace and virtues are not bestowed on man by
Baptism.
Objection 2: Further, one does not need to receive what one has
already acquired. But some approach Baptism who have already
grace and virtues: thus we read (Acts 10:1,2): "There was a certain
man in Cesarea, named Cornelius, a centurion of that which is called
the Italian band, a religious man and fearing God"; who,
nevertheless, was afterwards baptized by Peter. Therefore grace and
virtues are not bestowed by Baptism.
Objection 3: Further, virtue is a habit: which is defined as a "quality
not easily removed, by which one may act easily and pleasurably."
But after Baptism man retains proneness to evil which removes
virtue; and experiences difficulty in doing good, in which the act of
virtue consists. Therefore man does not acquire grace and virtue in
Baptism.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (Titus 3:5,6): "He saved us by the
laver of regeneration," i.e. by Baptism, "and renovation of the Holy
Ghost, Whom He hath poured forth upon us abundantly," i.e. "unto
the remission of sins and the fulness of virtues," as a gloss
expounds. Therefore the grace of the Holy Ghost and the fulness of
virtues are given in Baptism.
I answer that, As Augustine says in the book on Infant Baptism (De
Pecc. Merit. et Remiss. i) "the effect of Baptism is that the baptized
are incorporated in Christ as His members." Now the fulness of
grace and virtues flows from Christ the Head to all His members,
according to Jn. 1:16: "Of His fulness we all have received." Hence it
is clear that man receives grace and virtues in Baptism.
Reply to Objection 1: As the baptismal water by its cleansing

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.69, C.5.

signifies the washing away of guilt, and by its refreshment the
remission of punishment, so by its natural clearness it signifies the
splendor of grace and virtues.
Reply to Objection 2: As stated above (Article 1, ad 2; Question 68,
Article 2) man receives the forgiveness of sins before Baptism in so
far as he has Baptism of desire, explicitly or implicitly; and yet when
he actually receives Baptism, he receives a fuller remission, as to the
remission of the entire punishment. So also before Baptism
Cornelius and others like him receive grace and virtues through their
faith in Christ and their desire for Baptism, implicit or explicit: but
afterwards when baptized, they receive a yet greater fulness of grace
and virtues. Hence in Ps. 22:2, "He hath brought me up on the water
of refreshment," a gloss says: "He has brought us up by an increase
of virtue and good deeds in Baptism."
Reply to Objection 3: Difficulty in doing good and proneness to evil
are in the baptized, not through their lacking the habits of the
virtues, but through concupiscence which is not taken away in
Baptism. But just as concupiscence is diminished by Baptism, so as
not to enslave us, so also are both the aforesaid defects diminished,
so that man be not overcome by them.