to minister to the wicked tyranny of this gluttony; what would you not have
done, if this natural mean were abolished? Would you not have spent your whole
time upon it? Would it then have been well to strengthen a lust so unreasonable,
and not prevent the harm arising from excess? And to how many other harms
would not this have given birth?
But O the senseless ones! Who wallowing as in mire, in drunkeness and all
other debauchery, when they have got a little sober again, sit down and do
nothing but utter such sort of sayings, 'Why does this end in this way?' when
they ought to be condemning their own transgressions. For instead of what thou
now sayest, 'Why has He set bounds? Why do not all things go on without any
order?' say, 'Why do we not cease from being drunken? Why are we never
satiated? Why are we more senseless than creatures without reason?' For these
things they ought to ask one another, and to hearken to the voice of the Apostle
and learn how many good things he witnesses to the Corinthians proceed from
almsgiving, and to seize upon this treasure. For to contemn money makes men
approved, as he said; and provides that God be glorified; and warms love; and
works in men loftiness of soul; and constitutes them priests, yea of a priesthood
that brings great reward. For the merciful man is not arrayed in a vest reaching to
the feet, nor does he carry about bells, nor wear a crown; but he is wrapped in
the robe of loving-kindness, a holier than the sacred vestment; and is anointed
with oil, not composed of material elements, but produced by the Spirit, and he
bears a crown of mercies, for it is said, "Who crowns you with pity and mercies;"
[Psalm 103:4] and instead of wearing a plate bearing the Name of God, is
himself like to God. For how? "You," says He, "shall be like unto your Father
which is in heaven." [Matthew 5:45]
Would you see His altar also? Bezaleel built it not, nor any other but God
Himself; not of stones, but of a material brighter than the heaven, of reasonable
souls. But the priest enters into the holy of holies. Into yet more awful places
may thou enter when you offer this sacrifice, where none is present but "your
Father, Which sees in secret," [Matthew 6:4] where no other beholds. 'And how,'

says one, 'is it possible that none should behold, when the altar stands in public
view?' Because this it is that is admirable, that in those times double doors and
veils made the seclusion: but now, though doing your sacrifice in public view,
you may do it as in the holy of holies, and in a far more awful manner. For when
you do it not for display before men; though the whole world has seen, none has
seen, because you have so done it. For He said not simply, "Do" it "not before
men," but added, "to be seen of them." [Matthew 6:1] This altar is composed of
the very members of Christ, and the body of the Lord is made your altar. That
then revere; on the flesh of the Lord you sacrifice the victim. This altar is more
awful even than this which we now use, not only than that used of old. Nay,
clamor not. For this altar is admirable because of the sacrifice that is laid upon it:
but that, the merciful man's, not only on this account, but also because it is even
composed of the very sacrifice which makes the other to be admired. Again, this
is but a stone by nature; but become holy because it receives Christ's Body: but
that is holy because it is itself Christ's Body. So that this beside which thou, the
layman, standest, is more awful than that. Whether then does Aaron seem to you
anything in comparison of this, or his crown, or his bells, or the holy of holies?
For what need is there henceforth to make our comparison refer to Aaron's altar,
when even compared with this, it has been shown to be so glorious? But you
honor indeed this altar, because it receives Christ's body; but him that is himself
the body of Christ you treat with contumely, and when perishing, neglectest.
This altar may thou everywhere see lying, both in lanes and in market places,
and may sacrifice upon it every hour; for on this too is sacrifice performed. And
as the priest stands invoking the Spirit, so do you too invoke the Spirit, not by
speech, but by deeds. For nothing does so sustain and kindle the fire of the
Spirit, as this oil largely poured out. But if you would see also what becomes of
the things laid upon it, come hither, and I will show you them. What then is the
smoke, what the sweet savor of this altar? Praise and thanksgiving. And how far
does it ascend? As far as unto heaven? By no means, but it passes beyond the
heaven itself, and the heaven of heaven, and arrives even at the throne of the