FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.103, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether, at the time of the Law, the ceremonies of

the Old Law had any power of justification?
Objection 1: It would seem that the ceremonies of the Old Law had
the power of justification at the time of the Law. Because expiation
from sin and consecration pertains to justification. But it is written
(Ex. 39:21) that the priests and their apparel were consecrated by the
sprinkling of blood and the anointing of oil; and (Lev. 16:16) that, by
sprinkling the blood of the calf, the priest expiated "the sanctuary
from the uncleanness of the children of Israel, and from their
transgressions and . . . their sins." Therefore the ceremonies of the
Old Law had the power of justification.
Objection 2: Further, that by which man pleases God pertains to
justification, according to Ps. 10:8: "The Lord is just and hath loved
justice." But some pleased God by means of ceremonies, according
to Lev. 10:19: "How could I . . . please the Lord in the ceremonies,
having a sorrowful heart?" Therefore the ceremonies of the Old Law
had the power of justification.
Objection 3: Further, things relating to the divine worship regard the
soul rather than the body, according to Ps. 18:8: "The Law of the
Lord is unspotted, converting souls." But the leper was cleansed by
means of the ceremonies of the Old Law, as stated in Lev. 14. Much
more therefore could the ceremonies of the Old Law cleanse the soul
by justifying it.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (Gal. 2): "If there had been a law
given which could justify, Christ died in vain," i.e. without cause. But
this is inadmissible. Therefore the ceremonies of the Old Law did not
confer justice.
I answer that, As stated above (Question 102, Article 5, ad 4), a
twofold uncleanness was distinguished in the Old Law. One was
spiritual and is the uncleanness of sin. The other was corporal,
which rendered a man unfit for divine worship; thus a leper, or
anyone that touched carrion, was said to be unclean: and thus
uncleanness was nothing but a kind of irregularity. From this
uncleanness, then, the ceremonies of the Old Law had the power to
cleanse: because they were ordered by the Law to be employed as
remedies for the removal of the aforesaid uncleannesses which were

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.103, C.3.

contracted in consequence of the prescription of the Law. Hence the
Apostle says (Heb. 9:13) that "the blood of goats and of oxen, and
the ashes of a heifer, being sprinkled, sanctify such as are defiled, to
the cleansing of the flesh." And just as this uncleanness which was
washed away by such like ceremonies, affected the flesh rather than
the soul, so also the ceremonies themselves are called by the
Apostle shortly before (Heb. 9:10) justices of the flesh: "justices of
the flesh," says he, "being laid on them until the time of correction."
On the other hand, they had no power of cleansing from
uncleanness of the soul, i.e. from the uncleanness of sin. The reason
of this was that at no time could there be expiation from sin, except
through Christ, "Who taketh away the sins of the world" (Jn. 1:29).
And since the mystery of Christ's Incarnation and Passion had not
yet really taken place, those ceremonies of the Old Law could not
really contain in themselves a power flowing from Christ already
incarnate and crucified, such as the sacraments of the New Law
contain. Consequently they could not cleanse from sin: thus the
Apostle says (Heb. 10:4) that "it is impossible that with the blood of
oxen and goats sin should be taken away"; and for this reason he
calls them (Gal. 4:9) "weak and needy elements": weak indeed,
because they cannot take away sin; but this weakness results from
their being needy, i.e. from the fact that they do not contain grace
within themselves.
However, it was possible at the time of the Law, for the minds of the
faithful, to be united by faith to Christ incarnate and crucified; so that
they were justified by faith in Christ: of which faith the observance of
these ceremonies was a sort of profession, inasmuch as they
foreshadowed Christ. Hence in the Old Law certain sacrifices were
offered up for sins, not as though the sacrifices themselves washed
sins away, but because they were professions of faith which
cleansed from sin. In fact, the Law itself implies this in the terms
employed: for it is written (Lev. 4:26; 5:16) that in offering the
sacrifice for sin "the priest shall pray for him . . . and it shall be
forgiven him," as though the sin were forgiven, not in virtue of the
sacrifices, but through the faith and devotion of those who offered
them. It must be observed, however, that the very fact that the
ceremonies of the Old Law washed away uncleanness of the body,
was a figure of that expiation from sins which was effected by Christ.
It is therefore evident that under the state of the Old Law the
ceremonies had no power of justification.