SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.185, C.2.

Therefore religious belong to the state of perfection.
Moreover Dionysius says (Eccl. Hier. vi) that those who are called
servants of God, by reason of their rendering pure service and
subjection to God, are united to the perfection beloved of Him.
I answer that, As stated above (Question 141, Article 2) that which is
applicable to many things in common is ascribed antonomastically
to that to which it is applicable by way of excellence. Thus the name
of "fortitude" is claimed by the virtue which preserves the firmness
of the mind in regard to most difficult things, and the name of
"temperance," by that virtue which tempers the greatest pleasures.
Now religion as stated above (Question 81, Article 2; Article 3, ad 2)
is a virtue whereby a man offers something to the service and
worship of God. Wherefore those are called religious
antonomastically, who give themselves up entirely to the divine
service, as offering a holocaust to God. Hence Gregory says (Hom.
xx in Ezech.): "Some there are who keep nothing for themselves, but
sacrifice to almighty God their tongue, their senses, their life, and
the property they possess." Now the perfection of man consists in
adhering wholly to God, as stated above (Question 184, Article 2),
and in this sense religion denotes the state of perfection.
Reply to Objection 1: To offer something to the worship of God is
necessary for salvation, but to offer oneself wholly, and one's
possessions to the worship of God belongs to perfection.
Reply to Objection 2: As stated above (Question 81, Article 1, ad 1;
Article 4, ad 1,2; Question 85, Article 3) when we were treating of the
virtue of religion, religion has reference not only to the offering of
sacrifices and other like things that are proper to religion, but also to
the acts of all the virtues which in so far as these are referred to
God's service and honor become acts of religion. Accordingly if a
man devotes his whole life to the divine service, his whole life
belongs to religion, and thus by reason of the religious life that they
lead, those who are in the state of perfection are called religious.
Reply to Objection 3: As stated above (Question 184, Articles 4,6)
religion denotes the state of perfection by reason of the end
intended. Hence it does not follow that whoever is in the state of
perfection is already perfect, but that he tends to perfection. Hence
Origen commenting on Mt. 19:21, "If thou wilt be perfect," etc., says

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.185, C.2.

(Tract. viii in Matth.) that "he who has exchanged riches for poverty
in order to become perfect does not become perfect at the very
moment of giving his goods to the poor; but from that day the
contemplation of God will begin to lead him to all the virtues." Thus
all are not perfect in religion, but some are beginners, some
proficient.
Reply to Objection 4: The religious state was instituted chiefly that
we might obtain perfection by means of certain exercises, whereby
the obstacles to perfect charity are removed. By the removal of the
obstacles of perfect charity, much more are the occasions of sin cut
off, for sin destroys charity altogether. Wherefore since it belongs to
penance to cut out the causes of sin, it follows that the religious
state is a most fitting place for penance. Hence (XXXIII, qu. ii, cap.
Admonere) a man who had killed his wife is counseled to enter a
monastery which is described as "better and lighter," rather than to
do public penance while remaining in the world.