FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.107, C.3.

His Divine power, which is ever active among things; and because
He worked miracles by His Divine power, which is ever active among
things; and because His works were concerned with the salvation of
man, while the Pharisees were concerned for the well-being of
animals even on the sabbath; and again because on account of
urgency He excused His disciples for gathering the ears of corn on
the sabbath. But He did seem to break the sabbath according to the
superstitious interpretation of the Pharisees, who thought that man
ought to abstain from doing even works of kindness on the sabbath;
which was contrary to the intention of the Law.
Reply to Objection 4: The reason why the ceremonial precepts of the
Law are not mentioned in Mt. 5 is because, as stated above (ad 1),
their observance was abolished by their fulfilment. But of the judicial
precepts He mentioned that of retaliation: so that what He said about
it should refer to all the others. With regard to this precept, He taught
that the intention of the Law was that retaliation should be sought
out of love of justice, and not as a punishment out of revengeful
spite, which He forbade, admonishing man to be ready to suffer yet
greater insults; and this remains still in the New Law.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.107, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the New Law is contained in the Old?

Objection 1: It would seem that the New Law is not contained in the
Old. Because the New Law consists chiefly in faith: wherefore it is
called the "law of faith" (Rm. 3:27). But many points of faith are set
forth in the New Law, which are not contained in the Old. Therefore
the New Law is not contained in the Old.
Objection 2: Further, a gloss says on Mt. 5:19, "He that shall break
one of these least commandments," that the lesser commandments
are those of the Law, and the greater commandments, those
contained in the Gospel. Now the greater cannot be contained in the
lesser. Therefore the New Law is not contained in the Old.
Objection 3: Further, who holds the container holds the contents. If,
therefore, the New Law is contained in the Old, it follows that
whoever had the Old Law had the New: so that it was superfluous to
give men a New Law when once they had the Old. Therefore the New
Law is not contained in the Old.
On the contrary, As expressed in Ezech. 1:16, there was "a wheel in
the midst of a wheel," i.e. "the New Testament within the Old,"
according to Gregory's exposition.
I answer that, One thing may be contained in another in two ways.
First, actually; as a located thing is in a place. Secondly, virtually; as
an effect in its cause, or as the complement in that which is
incomplete; thus a genus contains its species, and a seed contains
the whole tree, virtually. It is in this way that the New Law is
contained in the Old: for it has been stated (Article 1) that the New
Law is compared to the Old as perfect to imperfect. Hence
Chrysostom, expounding Mk. 4:28, "The earth of itself bringeth forth
fruit, first the blade, then the ear, afterwards the full corn in the ear,"
expresses himself as follows: "He brought forth first the blade, i.e.
the Law of Nature; then the ear, i.e. the Law of Moses; lastly, the full
corn, i.e. the Law of the Gospel." Hence then the New Law is in the
Old as the corn in the ear.
Reply to Objection 1: Whatsoever is set down in the New Testament
explicitly and openly as a point of faith, is contained in the Old
Testament as a matter of belief, but implicitly, under a figure. And