FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.60, C.2.

receives the form from the agent, but not in the same kind
specifically as the agent, as is the case with non-univocal causes of
generation: thus an animal is generated by the sun. In this case the
forms received into matter are not of one species, but vary according
to the adaptability of the matter to receive the influx of the agent: for
instance, we see that owing to the one action of the sun, animals of
various species are produced by putrefaction according to the
various adaptability of matter.
Now it is evident that in moral matters the reason holds the place of
commander and mover, while the appetitive power is commanded
and moved. But the appetite does not receive the direction of reason
univocally so to say; because it is rational, not essentially, but by
participation (Ethic. i, 13). Consequently objects made appetible by
the direction of reason belong to various species, according to their
various relations to reason: so that it follows that moral virtues are
of various species and are not one only.
Reply to Objection 1: The object of the reason is truth. Now in all
moral matters, which are contingent matters of action, there is but
one kind of truth. Consequently, there is but one virtue to direct all
such matters, viz. prudence. On the other hand, the object of the
appetitive power is the appetible good, which varies in kind
according to its various relations to reason, the directing power.
Reply to Objection 2: This formal element is one generically, on
account of the unity of the agent: but it varies in species, on account
of the various relations of the receiving matter, as explained above.
Reply to Objection 3: Moral matters do not receive their species from
the last end, but from their proximate ends: and these, although they
be infinite in number, are not infinite in species.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.60, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether moral virtues about operations are

different from those that are about passions?
Objection 1: It would seem that moral virtues are not divided into
those which are about operations and those which are about
passions. For the Philosopher says (Ethic. ii, 3) that moral virtue is
"an operative habit whereby we do what is best in matters of
pleasure or sorrow." Now pleasure and sorrow are passions, as
stated above (Question 31, Article 1; Question 35, Article 1).
Therefore the same virtue which is about passions is also about
operations, since it is an operative habit.
Objection 2: Further, the passions are principles of external action. If
therefore some virtues regulate the passions, they must, as a
consequence, regulate operations also. Therefore the same moral
virtues are about both passions and operations.
Objection 3: Further, the sensitive appetite is moved well or ill
towards every external operation. Now movements of the sensitive
appetite are passions. Therefore the same virtues that are about
operations are also about passions.
On the contrary, The Philosopher reckons justice to be about
operations; and temperance, fortitude and gentleness, about
passions (Ethic. ii, 3,7; v, 1, seqq.).
I answer that, Operation and passion stand in a twofold relation to
virtue. First, as its effects; and in this way every moral virtue has
some good operations as its product; and a certain pleasure or
sorrow which are passions, as stated above (Question 59, Article 4,
ad 1).
Secondly, operation may be compared to moral virtue as the matter
about which virtue is concerned: and in this sense those moral
virtues which are about operations must needs differ from those
which are about passions. The reason for this is that good and evil,
in certain operations, are taken from the very nature of those
operations, no matter how man may be affected towards them: viz. in
so far as good and evil in them depend on their being commensurate
with someone else. In operations of this kind there needs to be some
power to regulate the operations in themselves: such are buying and