thing, they used to say, 'This is a gift to God, whereby you would be profited by
me, and you can not have it.' And two evils hence arose: on the one hand they
did not bring them to God, on the other they defrauded their parents under the
name of the offering, alike insulting their parents for God's sake, and God for
their parents' sake." But He does not say this at once, but first rehearses the law,
by which He signifies His earnest desire that parents should be honored. For,
"honor," says He, "your father and your mother, that you may live long upon the
earth." And again, "He that curses father or mother, let him die the death."
[Exodus 21:17]
But He, omitting the first, the reward appointed for them that honor their
parents, states that which is more awful, the punishment, I mean, threatened to
such as dishonor them; desiring both to dismay them, and to conciliate such as
have understanding; and He implies them to be for this worthy of death. For if he
who dishonors them in word is punished, much more ye, who do so in deed, and
who not only dishonor, but also teach it to others. "You then who ought not so
much as to live, how find ye fault with the disciples?"
"And what wonder is it, if you offer such insults to me, who am as yet
unknown, when even to the Father you are found doing the like?" For
everywhere He both asserts and implies, that from Him they began with this
their arrogance.
But some do also otherwise interpret, "It is a gift, by whatsoever you might
be profited by me;" that is, I owe you no honor, but it is a free gift from me to
you, if indeed I do honor you. But Christ would not have mentioned an insult of
that sort.
And Mark again makes this plainer, by saying, "It is Corban, by whatsoever
you might be profited by me;" [Mark 7:11] which means, not a gift and present,
but properly an offering.
Having then signified that they who were trampling on the law could not be
justly entitled to blame men for transgressing a command of certain elders, He
points out this same thing again from the prophet likewise. Thus, having once

laid hold of them severely, He proceeds further: as on every occasion He does,
bringing forward the Scriptures, and so evincing Himself to be in accordance
with God.
And what says the prophet? "This people honors me with their lips, but
their heart is far from me. But in vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines
the commandments of men."
Do you see a prophecy in exact accordance with His sayings, and from the
very first proclaiming beforehand their wickedness? For what Christ laid to their
charge now, of this Isaiah also spoke from the very first; that the words of God
they despise, "for in vain do they worship me," says He; but of their own they
make much account, "teaching," says He, "for doctrines the commandments of
men." Therefore with reason the disciples keep them not.
3. Having, you see, given them their mortal blow; and from the facts first,
then from their own suffrage, then from the prophet having aggravated the
charge, with them indeed He discourses not at all, incorrigibly disposed as they
are now come to be, but directs His speech to the multitudes, so as to introduce
His doctrine, great and high, and full of much strictness; and taking occasion
from the former topic, He proceeds to insert that which is greater, casting out
also the observance of meats.
But see when. When He had cleansed the leper, when He had repealed the
Sabbath, when He had shown Himself King of earth and sea, when He had made
laws, when He had remitted sins, when He had raised dead men, when He had
afforded them many proofs of His Godhead, then He discourses of meats.
For indeed all the religion of the Jews is comprised in this; if you take this
away, you have even taken away all. For hereby He signifies, that circumcision
too must be abrogated. But of Himself He does not prominently introduce this
(forasmuch as that was older than the other commandments, and had higher
estimation), but He enacts it by His disciples. For so great a thing was it, that
even the disciples after so long a time being minded to do it away, first practise
it, and so put it down. [Acts 16:3]