And he himself too, in order to maintain the fashion of his pride, exhibits
the conduct of a slave to the common sort, flattering, courting them, serving a
servitude more grievous than that of one bought for money.
Knowing then all these things, let us lay down these passions, that we may
not both pay a penalty here, and there be punished without end. Let us become
lovers of virtue. For so both before reaching the kingdom we shall reap the
greatest benefits here, and when we are departed there we shall partake of the
eternal blessings; unto which God grant we may all attain by the grace and love
towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and might world
without end. Amen.

## Homily 63 on Matthew

Matt. XIX. 16.
"And, behold, one came and said unto Him, Good Master, by doing what,
shall I inherit eternal life?"
Some indeed accuse this young man, as one dissembling and ill-minded,
and coming with a temptation to Jesus, but I, though I would not say he was not
fond of money, and under subjection to his wealth, since Christ in fact convicted
him of being such a character, yet a dissembler I would by no means call him,
both because it is not safe to venture on things uncertain, and especially in
blame, and because Mark has taken away this suspicion; for he says, that
"having come running unto Him, and kneeling to Him, he besought Him," and
that "Jesus beheld him, and loved him." [Mark 10:17-21]
But great is the tyranny of wealth, and it is manifest hence; I mean, that
though we be virtuous as to the rest, this ruins all besides. With reason has Paul
also affirmed it to be the root of all evils in general. "For the love of money is the
root of all evils," he says.
Wherefore then does Christ thus reply to him, saying, "There is none
good?" Because He came unto Him as a mere man, and one of the common sort,
and a Jewish teacher; for this cause then as a man He discourses with him. And
indeed in many instances He replies to the secret thoughts of them that come
unto Him; as when He says, "We worship we know what;" [John 4:22] and, "If I
bear witness of myself, my witness is not true." [John 5:31] When therefore He
says, "There is none good;" not as putting Himself out from being good does He
say this, far from it; for he said not, "Why do you call me good? I am not good;"
but, "there is none good," that is, none among men.
And when He says this self-same thing, He says it not as depriving even
men of goodness, but in contradistinction to the goodness of God. Wherefore

also He added, "But one, that is, God;" and He said not, "but my Father," that
you might learn that He had not revealed Himself to the young man. So also
further back He called men evil, saying, "If you, being evil, know how to give
good gifts to your children." [Matthew 7:11] For indeed there too He called them
evil, not as condemning the whole race as evil (for by "ye," He means not "ye
men"), but comparing the goodness that is in men with the goodness of God, He
thus named it; therefore also He added, "How much more shall your Father give
good things to them that ask Him?" And what was there to urge Him, or what the
profit that He should answer in this way? He leads him on little by little, and
teaches him to be far from all flattery, drawing him off from the things upon
each, and fastening him upon God, and persuading him to seek after the things to
come, and to know that which is really good, and the root and fountain of all
things, and to refer the honors to Him.
Since also when He says, "Call no one master upon earth," it is in
contradistinction to Himself He says this, and that they might learn what is the
chief sovereignty over all things that are. For neither was it a small forwardness
the young man had shown up to this time in having fallen into such a desire; and
when of the rest some were tempting, some were coming to Him for the cure of
diseases, either their own or others, he for eternal life was both coming to Him,
and discoursing with Him. For fertile was the land and rich, but the multitude of
the thorns choked the seed. Mark at any rate how he is prepared thus far for
obedience to the commandments. For "By doing what," he says, "shall I inherit
eternal life?" So ready was he for the performance of the things that should be
told him. But if he had come unto Him, tempting Him, the evangelist would
have declared this also to us, as He does also with regard to the others, as in the
case of the lawyer. And though himself had been silent, Christ could not have
suffered him to lie concealed, but would have convicted him plainly, or at least
would have intimated it, so that he should not seem to have deceived Him, and
to be hidden, and thereby have suffered hurt.
If he had come unto Him tempting, he would not have departed sorrowing