what it does not possess; but also the loving and the delighting in
what it does possess. In this respect will is said to be in God, as
having always good which is its object, since, as already said, it is
not distinct from His essence.
Reply to Objection 3: A will of which the principal object is a good
outside itself, must be moved by another; but the object of the divine
will is His goodness, which is His essence. Hence, since the will of
God is His essence, it is not moved by another than itself, but by
itself alone, in the same sense as understanding and willing are said
to be movement. This is what Plato meant when he said that the first
mover moves itself.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether God wills things apart from Himself?

Objection 1: It seems that God does not will things apart from
Himself. For the divine will is the divine existence. But God is not
other than Himself. Therefore He does not will things other than
Himself.
Objection 2: Further, the willed moves the willer, as the appetible the
appetite, as stated in De Anima iii, 54. If, therefore, God wills
anything apart from Himself, His will must be moved by another;
which is impossible.
Objection 3: Further, if what is willed suffices the willer, he seeks
nothing beyond it. But His own goodness suffices God, and
completely satisfies His will. Therefore God does not will anything
apart from Himself.
Objection 4: Further, acts of will are multiplied in proportion to the
number of their objects. If, therefore, God wills Himself and things
apart from Himself, it follows that the act of His will is manifold, and
consequently His existence, which is His will. But this is impossible.
Therefore God does not will things apart from Himself.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (1 Thess. 4:3): "This is the will of
God, your sanctification."
I answer that, God wills not only Himself, but other things apart from
Himself. This is clear from the comparison which we made above
(Article 1). For natural things have a natural inclination not only
towards their own proper good, to acquire it if not possessed, and, if
possessed, to rest therein; but also to spread abroad their own good
amongst others, so far as possible. Hence we see that every agent,
in so far as it is perfect and in act, produces its like. It pertains,
therefore, to the nature of the will to communicate as far as possible
to others the good possessed; and especially does this pertain to
the divine will, from which all perfection is derived in some kind of
likeness. Hence, if natural things, in so far as they are perfect,
communicate their good to others, much more does it appertain to
the divine will to communicate by likeness its own good to others as
much as possible. Thus, then, He wills both Himself to be, and other
things to be; but Himself as the end, and other things as ordained to