them to taste for a short time the contemplation of eternal joy, so
that they might bear persecution bravely."
Reply to Objection 1: As Jerome says on Mt. 17:2: "Let no one
suppose that Christ," through being said to be transfigured, "laid
aside His natural shape and countenance, or substituted an
imaginary or aerial body for His real body. The Evangelist describes
the manner of His transfiguration when he says: 'His face did shine
as the sun, and His garments became white as snow.' Brightness of
face and whiteness of garments argue not a change of substance,
but a putting on of glory."
Reply to Objection 2: Figure is seen in the outline of a body, for it is
"that which is enclosed by one or more boundaries" [Euclid, bk i,
def. xiv]. Therefore whatever has to do with the outline of a body
seems to pertain to the figure. Now the clarity, just as the color, of a
non-transparent body is seen on its surface, and consequently the
assumption of clarity is called transfiguration.
Reply to Objection 3: Of those four gifts, clarity alone is a quality of
the very person in himself; whereas the other three are not
perceptible, save in some action or movement, or in some passion.
Christ, then, did show in Himself certain indications of those three
gifts---of agility, for instance, when He walked on the waves of the
sea; of subtlety, when He came forth from the closed womb of the
Virgin; of impassibility, when He escaped unhurt from the hands of
the Jews who wished to hurl Him down or to stone Him. And yet He
is not said, on account of this, to be transfigured, but only on
account of clarity, which pertains to the aspect of His Person.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.45, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether this clarity was the clarity of glory?

Objection 1: It would seem that this clarity was not the clarity of
glory. For a gloss of Bede on Mt. 17:2, "He was transfigured before
them," says: "In His mortal body He shows forth, not the state of
immortality, but clarity like to that of future immortality." But the
clarity of glory is the clarity of immortality. Therefore the clarity
which Christ showed to His disciples was not the clarity of glory.
Objection 2: Further, on Lk. 9:27 "(That) shall not taste death unless
they see the kingdom of God," Bede's gloss says: "That is, the
glorification of the body in an imaginary vision of future beatitude."
But the image of a thing is not the thing itself. Therefore this was not
the clarity of beatitude.
Objection 3: Further, the clarity of glory is only in a human body. But
this clarity of the transfiguration was seen not only in Christ's body,
but also in His garments, and in "the bright cloud" which
"overshaded" the disciples. Therefore it seems that this was not the
clarity of glory.
On the contrary, Jerome says on the words "He was transfigured
before them" (Mt. 17:2): "He appeared to the Apostles such as He will
appear on the day of judgment." And on Mt. 16:28, "Till they see the
Son of Man coming in His kingdom," Chrysostom says: "Wishing to
show with what kind of glory He is afterwards to come, so far as it
was possible for them to learn it, He showed it to them in their
present life, that they might not grieve even over the death of their
Lord."
I answer that, The clarity which Christ assumed in His transfiguration
was the clarity of glory as to its essence, but not as to its mode of
being. For the clarity of the glorified body is derived from that of the
soul, as Augustine says (Ep. ad Diosc. cxviii). And in like manner the
clarity of Christ's body in His transfiguration was derived from His
God. head, as Damascene says (Orat. de Transfig.) and from the
glory of His soul. That the glory of His soul did not overflow into His
body from the first moment of Christ's conception was due to a
certain Divine dispensation, that, as stated above (Question 14,
Article 1, ad 2), He might fulfil the mysteries of our redemption in a
passible body. This did not, however, deprive Christ of His power of