therefore exhort you to lay to heart the exceeding unseemliness hereof, and to
flee from idolatry:— for so does Paul name covetousness— and to flee not only
covetousness in money, but that in evil desire, and that in clothing, and that in
food, and that in everything else: since the punishment we shall have to suffer if
we obey not God's laws is much severer. For, He says, "the servant that knew his
Lord's will," and did it not, "shall be beaten with many stripes." [Luke 12:47]
With a view then to escaping from this punishment, and being useful both to
others and to ourselves, let us drive out all iniquity from our soul and choose
virtue. For so shall we attain to the blessings which are to come, whereto may it
be granted us all to attain by the grace and love toward man, etc.

## Homily 7 on Romans

Rom. III. 9-18
" What then have we more than they? For we have proved both Jews and
Gentiles, that they are all under sin. As it is written, There is none righteous, no,
not one: there is none that understands, there is none that seeks after God. They
are all gone out of the way, they are together become unprofitable; there is none
that does good, no not one. Their throat is an open sepulchre; with their tongues
have they used deceit; the poison of asps is under their lips; whose mouth is full
of cursing and bitterness: their feet are swift to shed blood: destruction and
misery are in their ways: and the way of peace have they not known: there is no
fear of God before their eyes."
He had accused the Gentiles, he had accused the Jews; it came next in order
to mention the righteousness which is by faith. For if the law of nature availed
not, and the written Law was of no advantage, but both weighed down those that
used them not aright, and made it plain that they were worthy of greater
punishment, then after this the salvation which is by grace was necessary. Speak
then of it, O Paul, and display it. But as yet he does not venture, as having an eye
to the violence of the Jews, and so turns afresh to his accusation of them; and
first he brings in as accuser, David speaking of the same things at length, which
Isaiah mentioned all in short compass, so furnishing a strong curb for them, so
that they might not bound off, nor any of his hearers, while the matters of faith
were laid open to them, might after this start away; being beforehand safely held
down by the accusations of the prophets. For there are three excesses which the
prophet lays down; he says that all of them together did evil, and that they did
not do good indifferently with evil, but that they followed after wickedness
alone, and followed it also with all earnestness. And next that they should not
say, "What then, if these things were said to others?" he goes on:

Ver. 19. "Now we know that what things soever the Law says, it says to
them who are under the Law."
This then is why, next to Isaiah, who confessedly aimed at them, he brought
in David; that he might show that these things also belonged to the same subject.
For what need was there, he means, that a prophet who was sent for your
correction should accuse other people. For neither was the Law given to any else
than you. And for what reason did he not say, we know that what things soever
the prophet says, but what things soever the Law says? It is because Paul uses to
call the whole Old Testament the Law. And in another place he says, "Do ye not
hear the Law, that Abraham had two sons?" [Galatians 4:21-22] And here he
calls the Psalm the Law when he says, "We know that what things soever the
Law says, it says to them who are under the Law." Next he shows that neither are
these things he said merely for accusation's sake, but that he may again be
paving the way for faith. So close is the relationship of the Old Testament with
the New, since even the accusations and reproofs were entirely with a view to
this, that the door of faith might open brightly upon them that hear it. For since it
was the principal bane of the Jews that they were so conceited with themselves
(which thing he mentioned as he went on, "how that being ignorant of the
righteousness of God, and going about to establish their own righteousness, they
submitted not themselves to the righteousness of God") [Romans 10:3], the Law
and the Prophet by being beforehand with them cast down their high thoughts,
and laid low their conceit, that being brought to a consideration of their own
sins, and having emptied out the whole of their unreasonableness, and seen
themselves in danger of the last extremity, they might with much earnestness run
unto Him Who offered them the remission of their sins, and accept grace through
faith. And this it is then which St. Paul hints even here, when he says,
"Now we know that what things soever the Law says, it says to them who
are under the Law, that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may
become guilty before God."
Here then he exhibits them as destitute of the boldness of speech which