sincerely, God in like manner also pardons you! If besides pardoning him you
account him a friend, God will also thus deal with you; so that the more he has
sinned, so much the more is it necessary that we should hasten to a
reconciliation; since it becomes a cause of greater offenses being forgiven us.
Are you willing to learn that there is no pardon for us, if we are mindful of
injuries, and that there is no one who can deliver us? I will make what I assert
plain by an example. Suppose that a neighbour has done you a certain injury, that
he has seized your goods; has confiscated or embezzled them; and not to confine
myself to such a case, let me add to it more things and worse beside, and
whatever you will; he has longed to destroy you; he has exposed you to a
thousand perils; he has manifested every sort of malice towards you; and left
nothing undone that human wickedness can do? For not to go over every thing
separately, suppose that he has injured you to such an extent as no one ever
injured any before—why, even in this case, if you are resentful, you will not be
worthy of pardon. And I will explain how it is so.
16. If one of your servants owed you an hundred pieces of gold; and some
one again was indebted to him in a few pieces of silver; and if the servants'
debtor were to come, and entreat and supplicate you that he might obtain
indulgence, and you were to call in your own servant, and charge him, saying,
"Forgive this man the debt, and from the sum you owe me I will deduct this
debt;" should that servant afterwards be wicked and shameless enough to seize
on his debtor, could any one then rescue him out of your hands? Would you not
most assuredly inflict a thousand stripes upon him, as having been insulted to the
last extremity? And very justly too. This also God will do: for He will say to you
on That Day, O wicked and villainous servant, yea, was it of your own you
forgave him? Out of what thou were indebted to Me, thou were ordered to
account to him. For "Remit," He says, "and I will remit unto you! Although, to
speak truly, if I had not added this condition, it would have been even then your
duty to have remitted at the instance of your Lord. But in this case, I did not
command you as a master, but I asked it as a favour from a friend; and I asked it

out of My own property; and I promised to give greater things in return; and yet
with all this, thou were not made a better man." Moreover men, when they act in
this manner, put down as much to their own servants' accounts, as the measure of
the debt is. Thus, for example, suppose the servant owes his master a hundred
pieces of gold; and the debtor of the servant owes ten pieces, should the latter
remit his debt, the master does not remit him his hundred pieces, but these ten
only; and all the rest he still demands. But it is not so with God; if you remit a
few things to your fellow-servant, He remits all your debt.
17. Whence does this appear? From the very Prayer itself. "For if," says He,
"ye forgive men their debts, your heavenly Father will forgive your debts."
[Matthew 6:14] And as much as the difference is between "a hundred pence"
and "ten thousand talents," so great is it between the debts on the one side, and
those on the other!
What punishment then must he not deserve, who when he would receive ten
thousand talents, in the room of a hundred pence, yet will not even so remit this
small sum, but offers up the Prayer against himself. For when you say, "Forgive
us, as we forgive," and afterwards dost not forgive, you are supplicating of God
nothing else than that He would entirely deprive you of all excuse or indulgence.
"But I do not presume to say," replies some one, "Forgive me as I forgive" but
only, "Forgive me." But what matters this? For if you say it not yourself, yet God
so does; as you forgive, He forgives. And this He has made quite evident from
what follows; for there it is said, "If you forgive not men, neither does your
heavenly Father forgive you." Think not, therefore, that it is a pious caution, not
to repeat the whole sentence; nor offer up the Prayer by halves, but as He bade
you so pray thou, in order that the very obligation of that expression, putting you
daily in fear, may compel you to the exercise of forgiveness towards your
neighbours.
18. Do not tell me, "I have besought him many times, I have intreated, I
have supplicated, but I have not effected a reconciliation." Never desist till you
have reconciled him. For He said not, "Leave your gift, and go your way."