species, nevertheless there is also in His human nature an invincible
power derived from His Godhead, whereby all things are subjected
under His feet (1 Cor. 15:25-28; Heb. 2:8,9). Hence He will judge in
His human nature indeed, but by the power of His Godhead.
Reply to Objection 3: Christ would not have sufficed for the
redemption of mankind, had He been a mere man. Wherefore from
the very fact that He was able as man to redeem mankind, and
thereby obtained judicial power, it is evident that He is God, and
consequently is to be honored equally with the Father, not as man
but as God.
Reply to Objection 4: In that vision of Daniel the whole order of the
judicial power is clearly expressed. This power is in God Himself as
its first origin, and more especially in the Father Who is the fount of
the entire Godhead; wherefore it is stated in the first place that the
"Ancient of days sat." But the judicial power was transmitted from
the Father to the Son, not only from eternity in respect of the Divine
nature, but also in time in respect of the human nature wherein He
merited it. Hence in the aforesaid vision it is further stated (Dan.
7:13,14): "Lo, one like the Son of man came with the clouds of
heaven, and He came even to the Ancient of days . . . And He gave
Him power and glory, and a kingdom."
Reply to Objection 5: Augustine is speaking by a kind of
appropriation, so as to trace the effects which Christ wrought in the
human nature to causes somewhat similar to them. And since we are
made to the image and likeness of God in respect of our soul, and
are of the same species as the man Christ in respect of our body, he
ascribes to the Godhead the effects wrought by Christ in our souls,
and those which He wrought or will work in our bodies he ascribes
to His flesh; although His flesh, as being the instrument of His
Godhead, has also its effect on our souls as Damascene asserts (De
Fide Orth. iii, 15), according to the saying of Heb. 9:14, that His
"blood" hath cleansed "our conscience from dead works." And thus
that "the Word was made flesh" is the cause of the resurrection of
souls; wherefore also according to His human nature He is
becomingly the Judge not only of bodily but also of spiritual goods
[TP, Question 56, Article 2, ad 1].

### ARTICLE 2. Whether at the judgment Christ will appear in His

glorified humanity?
Objection 1: It would seem that at the judgment Christ will not
appear in His glorified humanity. For a gloss [St. Augustine, Tract.
cxx in Joan.] on Jn. 19:37, "They shall look on him whom they
pierced," says: "Because He will come in the flesh wherein He was
crucified." Now He was crucified in the form of weakness. Therefore
He will appear in the form of weakness and not in the form of glory.
Objection 2: Further, it is stated (Mt. 24:30) that "the sign of the Son
of man shall appear in heaven," namely, "the sign of the cross," as
Chrysostom says (Hom. lxxvii in Matth.), for "Christ when coming to
the judgment will show not only the scars of His wounds but even
His most shameful death." Therefore it seems that He will not appear
in the form of glory.
Objection 3: Further, Christ will appear at the judgment under that
form which can be gazed upon by all. Now Christ will not be visible
to all, good and wicked, under the form of His glorified humanity:
because the eye that is not glorified is seemingly unproportionate to
see the clarity of a glorified body. Therefore He will not appear under
a glorified form.
Objection 4: Further, that which is promised as a reward to the
righteous is not granted to the unrighteous. Now it is promised as a
reward to the righteous that they shall see the glory of His humanity
(Jn. 10:9): "He shall go in, and go out, and shall find pastures, i.e.
refreshment in His Godhead and humanity," according to the
commentary of Augustine and Is. 33:17: "His eyes shall see the King
in his beauty." Therefore He will not appear to all in His glorified
form.
Objection 5: Further, Christ will judge in the form wherein He was
judged: wherefore a gloss [St. Augustine, Tract. xix, in Joan.] on Jn.
5:21, "So the Son also giveth life to whom He will," says: "He will
judge justly in the form wherein He was judged unjustly, that He may
be visible to the wicked." Now He was judged in the form of
weakness. Therefore He will appear in the same form at the
judgment.