another season, what I will say now is just this: Be it so, that luxury is luxury,
and pleasure, pleasure, and that they have nothing in them painful or disgraceful,
what shall we say to the punishment which is in store for us? And what shall we
do then if we have taken our pleasure now, as it were in a shadow and a figure,
but undergo everlasting torment there in reality, when we might in a short space
of time escape these tortures already mentioned, and enjoy the good things
which are stored up for us? For this also is the work of the loving-kindness of
God, that our struggles are not protracted to a great length, but that after
struggling for a brief, and tiny twinkling of an eye (for such is present life
compared with the other) we receive crowns of victory for endless ages. And it
will be no small affliction to the souls of those who are being punished at that
time, to reflect, that when they had it in their power in the few days of this life to
make all good, they neglected their opportunity and surrendered themselves to
everlasting evil. And lest we should suffer this let us rouse ourselves while it is
the accepted time, while it is the day of salvation, [2 Corinthians 6:2] while the
power of repentance is great. For not only the evils already mentioned, but
others also far worse than these await us if we are indolent. These indeed, and
some bitterer than these have their place in hell: but the loss of the good things
involves so much pain, so much affliction and straitness, that even if no other
kind of punishment were appointed for those who sin here, it would of itself be
sufficient to vex us more bitterly than the torments in hell, and to confound our
souls.
11. For consider I pray the condition of the other life, so far as it is possible
to consider it; for no words will suffice for an adequate description: but from the
things which are told us, as if by means of certain riddles, let us try and get some
indistinct vision of it. "Pain and sorrow and sighing," we read "have fled away."
[Isaiah 35:10] What then could be more blessed than this life? It is not possible
there to fear poverty and disease: it is not possible to see any one injuring, or
being injured, provoking, or being provoked, or angry, or envious, or burning
with any outrageous lust, or anxious concerning the supply of the necessaries of

life, or bemoaning himself over the loss of some dignity and power: for all the
tempest of passion in us is quelled and brought to nought, and all will be in a
condition of peace, and gladness and joy, all things serene and tranquil, all will
be daylight and brightness, and light, not this present light, but one excelling this
in splendour as much as this excels the brightness of a lamp. For things are not
concealed in that world by night, or by a gathering of clouds: bodies there are
not set on fire and burned: for there is neither night nor evening there, nor cold
nor heat, nor any other variation of seasons: but the condition is of a different
kind, such as they only will know who have been deemed worthy of it; there is
no old age there, nor any of the evils of old age, but all things relating to decay
are utterly removed, and incorruptible glory reigns in every part. But greater than
all these things is the perpetual enjoyment of intercourse with Christ in the
company of angels, and archangels, and the higher powers. Behold now the sky,
and pass through it in thought to the region beyond the sky, and consider the
transfiguration to take place in the whole creation; for it will not continue to be
such as it is now, but will be far more brilliant and beautiful, and just as gold
glistens more brightly than lead, so will the future constitution of the universe be
better than the present: even as the blessed Paul says "Because the creation also
itself shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption." [Romans 8:21] For
now indeed, seeing that it partakes of corruption, it is subject to many things
such as bodies of this kind naturally experience: but then, having divested itself
of all these things, we shall see it display its beauty in an incorruptible form: for
inasmuch as it is to receive incorruptible bodies, it will in future be itself also
transfigured into the nobler condition. Nowhere in that world will there be
sedition and strife: for great is the concord of the band of saints, all being ever in
harmony with one another. It is not possible there to fear the devil, and the plots
of demons, or the threatenings of hell, or death, either that death which now is,
or the other death which is far worse than this, but every terror of this kind will
have been done away. And just as some royal child, who has been brought up in
mean guise, and subject to fear and threats, lest he should deteriorate by