placed Christ instead of the Church, giving that name to His body. "As then,"
says he, "our body is one thing though it be composed of many: so also in the
Church we all are one thing. For though the Church be composed of many
members, yet these many form one body."
2. Thus having, you see, recovered and raised up by this common example
him who thought himself depreciated, again he leaves the topic of common
experience, and comes to another, a spiritual one, bringing greater consolation
and indicative of great equality of honor. What then is this?

1 Corinthians 12:13
"For in one Spirit, says he, were we all baptized into one body, whether
Jews or Greeks, whether bond or free."
Now his meaning is this: that which established us to become one body and
regenerated us, is one Spirit: for not in one Spirit was one baptized, and another
another. And not only is that which has baptized us one, but also that unto which
He baptized us, i.e., for which He baptized us, is one. For we were baptized not
that so many several bodies might be formed, but that we might all preserve one
with another the perfect nature of one body: i.e., that we might all be one body,
into the same were we baptized.
So that both He who formed it is one, and that into which He formed it is
one. And he said not, "that we might all come to be of the same body;" but, "that
we might all be one body." For he ever strives to use the more expressive
phrases. And well said he, "we all," adding also himself. "For not even I, the
Apostle, have any more than thou in this respect," says he. "For you are the body
even as I, and I even as thou, and we have all the same Head and have passed
through the same birth-pains. Wherefore we are also the same body." "And why
speak I," says he, "of the Jews? Since even the Gentiles who were so far off from
us, He has brought into the entireness of one body." Wherefore having said, "we
all," he stopped not here, but added, "whether Jews or Greeks, whether bond or
free." Now if, having before been so far off, we were united and have become
one, much more after that we have become one, we can have no right to grieve
and be dejected. Yea, the difference, in fact, has no place. For if to Greeks and
Jews, to bond and free, He has vouchsafed the same blessings, how can it be that
after so vouchsafing He divides them, now that He has bestowed a greater
perfection of unity by the supply of His gifts?
"And were all made to drink of one Spirit."

1 Corinthians 12:14
"For the body is not one member, but many."
i.e., We have come to the same initiation, we enjoy the same Table. And
why said he not, "we are nourished by the same body and drink the same
blood?" Because by saying "Spirit," he declared them both, as well the flesh as
the blood. For through both are we "made to drink of the Spirit."
But to me he appears now to speak of that visitation of the Spirit which
takes place in us after Baptism and before the Mysteries. And he said, "We were
made to drink," because this metaphorical speech suited him extremely well for
his proposed subject: as if he had said respecting plants and a garden, that by the
same fountain all the trees are watered, or by the same water; so also here, "we
all drank the same Spirit, we enjoyed the same grace," says he.
If now one Spirit both formed us and gathered us all together into one body;
for this is the meaning of, "we were baptized into one body:" and vouchsafed us
one table, and gave us all the same watering, (for this is the meaning of, "we
were made to drink into one Spirit ,") and united persons so widely separated;
and if many things then become a body when they are made one: why, I pray, are
you continually tossing to and from their difference? But if you say, "Because
there are many members and diverse," know that this very thing is the wonder
and the peculiar excellency of the body, when the things which are many and
diverse make one. But if they were not many, it were not so wonderful and
incredible that they should be one body; nay, rather they would not be a body at
all.
3. This however he states last; but for the present he goes to the members
themselves, saying thus: