act is either of an active power or of a passive power. Now, the
object is to the act of a passive power, as the principle and moving
cause: for color is the principle of vision, inasmuch as it moves the
sight. On the other hand, to the act of an active power the object is a
term and end; as the object of the power of growth is perfect
quantity, which is the end of growth. Now, from these two things an
act receives its species, namely, from its principle, or from its end or
term; for the act of heating differs from the act of cooling, in this, that
the former proceeds from something hot, which is the active
principle, to heat; the latter from something cold, which is the active
principle, to cold. Therefore the powers are of necessity
distinguished by their acts and objects.
Nevertheless, we must observe that things which are accidental do
not change the species. For since to be colored is accidental to an
animal, its species is not changed by a difference of color, but by a
difference in that which belongs to the nature of an animal, that is to
say, by a difference in the sensitive soul, which is sometimes
rational, and sometimes otherwise. Hence "rational" and "irrational"
are differences dividing animal, constituting its various species. In
like manner therefore, not any variety of objects diversifies the
powers of the soul, but a difference in that to which the power of its
very nature is directed. Thus the senses of their very nature are
directed to the passive quality which of itself is divided into color,
sound, and the like, and therefore there is one sensitive power with
regard to color, namely, the sight, and another with regard to sound,
namely, hearing. But it is accidental to a passive quality, for
instance, to something colored, to be a musician or a grammarian,
great or small, a man or a stone. Therefore by reason of such
differences the powers of the soul are not distinct.
Reply to Objection 1: Act, though subsequent in existence to power,
is, nevertheless, prior to it in intention and logically; as the end is
with regard to the agent. And the object, although extrinsic, is,
nevertheless, the principle or end of the action; and those conditions
which are intrinsic to a thing, are proportionate to its principle and
end.
Reply to Objection 2: If any power were to have one of two contraries
as such for its object, the other contrary would belong to another
power. But the power of the soul does not regard the nature of the
contrary as such, but rather the common aspect of both contraries;
as sight does not regard white as such, but as color. This is because

of two contraries one, in a manner, includes the idea of the other,
since they are to one another as perfect and imperfect.
Reply to Objection 3: Nothing prevents things which coincide in
subject, from being considered under different aspects; therefore
they can belong to various powers of the soul.
Reply to Objection 4: The higher power of itself regards a more
universal formality of the object than the lower power; because the
higher a power is, to a greater number of things does it extend.
Therefore many things are combined in the one formality of the
object, which the higher power considers of itself; while they differ in
the formalities regarded by the lower powers of themselves. Thus it
is that various objects belong to various lower powers; which
objects, however, are subject to one higher power.