will never wonder at you so much, as when they see you displaying a meek,
gentle, mild disposition. And this is no small achievement: since many will even
be entirely delivered from their evil way; there being nothing that has such
power to allure men as love. For in respect of the former they will rather be
jealous of you, I mean the signs and wonders; but for this they will both admire
and love you: and if they love, they will also lay hold of the truth in due course.
If however he become not all at once a believer, wonder not nor hurry on, neither
do thou require all things at once, but suffer him for the present to praise, and
love, and unto this in due course he will come.
7. And that you may clearly know how great a thing this is, hear how even
Paul, going before an unbelieving judge, made his defence. "I think myself
happy," says he, "That I am to make my defence before you." [Acts 26:2] And
these things he said, not to flatter him, far from it; but wishing to gain him by his
gentleness. And he did in part gain him, and he that was till then considered to
be condemned took captive his judge, and the victory is confessed by the person
himself who was made captive, with a loud voice in the presence of all, saying,
"With but little persuasion you would fain make me a Christian." [Acts 26:2829] What then says Paul? He spread his net the wider, and says, "I would to God,
that not only thou, but also all that hear me this day, might become such as I am,
except these bonds." What do you say, O Paul? "except these bonds?" And what
confidence remains for you, if you are ashamed of these things, and fliest from
them, and this before so great a multitude? Do you not every where in your
Epistles boast of this matter, and call yourself a prisoner? Do you not every
where carry about this chain in our sight as a diadem? What then has happened
now that you deprecate these bonds? "I myself deprecate them not," says he,
"nor am I ashamed of them, but I condescend to their weakness. For they are not
yet able to receive my glorying; and I have learned from my Lord not to put 'a
piece of undressed cloth upon an old garment:' [Matthew 9:16] therefore did I
thus speak. For, in fact, unto this time they have heard ill reports of our doctrine,
and abhor the cross. If therefore I should add also bonds, their hatred becomes

greater; I removed these, therefore, that the other might be made acceptable. So
it is, that to them it seems disgraceful to be bound, because they have not as yet
tasted of the Glory which is with us. One must therefore condescend: and when
they shall have learned of the true life, then will they know the beauty also of this
iron, and the lustre which comes of these bonds." Furthermore, discoursing with
others, he even calls the thing a free gift, saying, "It has been granted in the
behalf of Christ, not only to believe in Him, but also to suffer in His behalf."
[Philippians 1:29] But for the time then present, it was a great thing for the
hearers not to be ashamed of the cross: for which cause he goes on gradually.
Thus, neither does any one introducing a person to a palace, before that he
beholds the vestibule, compel him, yet standing without, to survey what is
within: since in that way it will not even seem admirable, unless one enter in and
so acquaint one's self with all.
So then let us also deal with the heathen sort: with condecension, with love.
For love is a great teacher, and able both to withdraw men from error, and to
reform the character, and to lead them by the hand unto self-denial, and out of
stones to make men.
8. And if you would learn her power, bring me a man timid and fearful of
every sound, and trembling at shadows; or passionate, and harsh, and a wild
beast rather than a man; or wanton and licentious; or wholly given to
wickedness; and deliver him into the hands of love, and introduce him into this
school; and you will speedily see that cowardly and timid creature made brave
and magnanimous, and venturing upon all things cheerfully. And what is
wonderful, not from any change in nature do these things result, but in the
coward soul itself love manifests her peculiar power; and it is much the same as
if one should cause a leaden sword, not turned into steel but continuing in the
nature of lead, to do the work of steel. As thus: Jacob was a plain man , [Genesis
25:27] dwelling in a house , and unpracticed in toils and dangers, living a kind of
remiss and easy life, and like a virgin in her chamber, so also he was compelled
for the most part to sit within doors and keep the house; withdrawn from the