require no more than was needful, of their own self-denial. "For the workman is
worthy of his hire." Their bestowing peace was of the gift of God, their inquiring
for the worthy, and not entering in without distinction unto all, of their own self
command. Again, to punish such as received them not was His, but to retire with
gentleness from them, without reviling or insulting them, was of the apostles'
meekness. To give the Spirit, and cause them not to take thought, was of Him
that sent them, but to become like sheep and doves, and to bear all things nobly,
was of their calmness and prudence. To be hated and not to despond, and to
endure, was their own; to save them that endured, was of Him who sent them.
Wherefore also He said, "He that endures to the end, the same shall be
saved." That is, because the more part are wont at the beginning indeed to be
vehement, but afterwards to faint, therefore says He, "I require the end." For
what is the use of seeds, flourishing indeed at first, but a little after fading away?
Therefore it is continued patience that He requires of them. I mean, lest any say,
He wrought the whole Himself, and it was no wonder that they should prove
such, suffering as they did nothing intolerable; therefore He says unto them,
"There is need also of patience on your part. For though I should rescue you
from the first dangers, I am reserving you for others more grievous, and after
these again others will succeed; and you shall not cease to have snares laid for
you, so long as you have breath." For this He intimated in saying, "But he that
endures to the end, the same shall be saved."
For this cause then, though He said, "Take no thought what you shall
speak;" yet elsewhere He says, "Be ready to give an answer to every man that
asks you a reason of the hope that is in you." [1 Peter 3:15] That is, as long as
the contest is among friends, He commands us also to take thought; but when
there is a terrible tribunal, and frantic assemblies, and terrors on all sides, He
bestows the influence from Himself, that they may take courage and speak out,
and not be discouraged, nor betray the righteous cause.
For in truth it was a very great thing, for a man occupied about lakes, and
skins, and receipt of custom, when tyrants were on their thrones, and satraps, and

guards standing by them, and the swords drawn, and all standing on their side; to
enter in alone, bound, hanging down his head, and yet be able to open his mouth.
For indeed they allowed them neither speech nor defense with respect to their
doctrines, but set about torturing them to death, as common pests of the world.
For "They," it is said, "that have turned the world upside down, have come hither
also;" and again, "They preach things contrary to the decrees of Cæsar, saying
that Jesus Christ is king." [Acts 17:6-7] And everywhere the courts of justice
were preoccupied by such suspicions, and much influence from above was
needed, for their showing both the truth of the doctrine they preached, and that
they are not violating the common laws; so that they should neither, while
earnest to speak of the doctrine, fall under suspicion of overturning the laws; nor
again, while earnest to show that they were not overturning the common
government, corrupt the perfection of their doctrines: all which you will see
accomplished with all due consideration, both in Peter and in Paul, and in all the
rest. Yea, and as rebels and innovators, and revolutionists, they were accused all
over the world; yet nevertheless they both repelled this impression, and invested
themselves with the contrary, all men celebrating them as saviors, and guardians,
and benefactors. And all this they achieved by their much patience. Wherefore
also Paul said, "I die daily;" and he continued to "stand in jeopardy" unto the
end.
6. What then must we deserve, having such high patterns, and in peace
giving way to effeminacy, and remissness? With none to make war (it is too
evident) we are slain; we faint when no man pursues, in peace we are required to
be saved, and even for this we are not sufficient. And they indeed, when the
world was on fire, and the pile was being kindled over the whole earth, entering,
snatched from within, out of the midst of the flame, such as were burning; but
you are not able so much as to preserve yourself.
What confidence then will there be for us? What favor? There are no
stripes, no prisons, no rulers, no synagogues, nor anything else of that kind to set
upon us; yea, quite on the contrary we rule and prevail. For both kings are godly,