140. This setting, both maternal and ecclesial, in which the dialogue between the Lord and his
people takes place, should be encouraged by the closeness of the preacher, the warmth of his
tone of voice, the unpretentiousness of his manner of speaking, the joy of his gestures. Even if the
homily at times may be somewhat tedious, if this maternal and ecclesial spirit is present, it will
always bear fruit, just as the tedious counsels of a mother bear fruit, in due time, in the hearts of
her children.

141. One cannot but admire the resources that the Lord used to dialogue with his people, to reveal
his mystery to all and to attract ordinary people by his lofty teachings and demands. I believe that
the secret lies in the way Jesus looked at people, seeing beyond their weaknesses and failings:
“Fear not little flock, for it is your Father’s good pleasure to give you the kingdom” (Lk 12:32);
Jesus preaches with that spirit. Full of joy in the Spirit, he blesses the Father who draws the little
ones to him: “I thank you Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that you have hidden these things

from the wise and understanding and revealed them to babes” (Lk 10:21). The Lord truly enjoys
talking with his people; the preacher should strive to communicate that same enjoyment to his
listeners.

Words which set hearts on fire

142. Dialogue is much more than the communication of a truth. It arises from the enjoyment of
speaking and it enriches those who express their love for one another through the medium of
words. This is an enrichment which does not consist in objects but in persons who share
themselves in dialogue. A preaching which would be purely moralistic or doctrinaire, or one which
turns into a lecture on biblical exegesis, detracts from this heart-to-heart communication which
takes place in the homily and possesses a quasi-sacramental character: “Faith comes from what
is heard, and what is heard comes by the preaching of Christ” (Rom 10:17). In the homily, truth
goes hand in hand with beauty and goodness. Far from dealing with abstract truths or cold
syllogisms, it communicates the beauty of the images used by the Lord to encourage the practise
of good. The memory of the faithful, like that of Mary, should overflow with the wondrous things
done by God. Their hearts, growing in hope from the joyful and practical exercise of the love which
they have received, will sense that each word of Scripture is a gift before it is a demand.

143. The challenge of an inculturated preaching consists in proclaiming a synthesis, not ideas or
detached values. Where your synthesis is, there lies your heart. The difference between
enlightening people with a synthesis and doing so with detached ideas is like the difference
between boredom and heartfelt fervour. The preacher has the wonderful but difficult task of joining
loving hearts, the hearts of the Lord and his people. The dialogue between God and his people
further strengthens the covenant between them and consolidates the bond of charity. In the course
of the homily, the hearts of believers keep silence and allow God to speak. The Lord and his
people speak to one another in a thousand ways directly, without intermediaries. But in the homily
they want someone to serve as an instrument and to express their feelings in such a way that
afterwards, each one may chose how he or she will continue the conversation. The word is
essentially a mediator and requires not just the two who dialogue but also an intermediary who
presents it for what it is, out of the conviction that “what we preach is not ourselves, but Jesus
Christ as Lord, with ourselves as your servants for Jesus’ sake” (2 Cor 4:5).