life, in order that he might supply your deficiency in your service towards me."
[Philippians 2:30] Do you see how they loved their teacher? How they regarded
his rest before their own life? On this account no one surpassed them then. Now
this I say, not that we may hear only, but that we may also imitate; and not to the
ruled only, but also to those who rule is what we say addressed; in order that
both scholars may display much solicitude about their teachers, and the teachers
may have the same loving affection as Paul about those placed under them; not
those present only, but also those who are far off. For also Paul, dwelling in the
whole world just as in one house, thus continually took thought for the salvation
of all; and having dismissed every thing of his own; bonds and troubles and
stripes and straits, watched over and inquired into each day, in what state the
affairs of the disciples were; and often for this very purpose alone sent, now
Timothy, and now Tychicus; and about him he says, "That he may know your
circumstances, and encourage your hearts:" [Ephesians 6:22] and about
Timothy; "I have sent him, being no longer able to contain myself; lest in some
way the tempter have tempted you." [1 Thessalonians 3:5] And Titus again
elsewhere, and another to another place. For since he himself, by the compulsion
of his bonds being often detained in one place, was unable to meet those who
were his vitals, he met them through the disciples.
7. And then therefore being in bonds he writes to the Philippians, saying,
"Now I desire that you should know, brethren," [Philippians 1:12] calling the
disciples brethren. For such a thing as this is love; it casts out all inequality, and
knows not superiority and dignity; but even if one be higher than all, he
descends to the lowlier position of all; just what Paul also used to do. But let us
hear what it is that he desires they should know. "That the things which
happened unto me," he says, "have fallen out rather to the furtherance of the
gospel." [Philippians 1:12] Tell me, how and in what way? Have you then been
released from your bonds? Have you then put off your chain? And do you with
free permission preach in the city? Have you then, having gone into an assembly,
drawn out many long discourses about the faith, and departed after gaining many

disciples? Have you then raised the dead and been made an object of wonder?
Have you then cleansed lepers, and all were astounded? Have you driven away
demons, and been exalted? No one of these things, he says. How then did the
furtherance of the gospel take place? Tell me. "So that my bonds," he says, "have
become openly known in the whole Court, and to all the rest." [Philippians 1:13]
What do you say? This then, this was the furtherance, this the advance, this the
increase of the proclamation— that all knew that you were bound. Yes, he says:
Hear at least what comes next, that you may learn that the bonds not only proved
no hindrance, but also a ground of greater freedom of speech. "So that several of
the brethren in the Lord, in reliance on my bonds, more abundantly dare
fearlessly to speak the word." [Philippians 1:14] What do you say, O Paul? Have
your bonds inspired not anxiety but confidence? Not fear but earnest longing?
The things mentioned have no consistency. I too know it. For neither did these
things take place according to the consistency of human affairs, he means, but
what came about was above nature, and the successes were of divine grace. On
this account what used to cause anxiety to all others, that to him afforded
confidence. For also if any one having taken the leader of an army and confined
him, have made this publicly known, he throws the whole camp into flight; and
if any one have carried a shepherd away from the flock, the security with which
he drives off the sheep is great. But not in Paul's case was it thus, but the
contrary entirely. For the leader of the army was bound, and the soldiers became
more forward in the spirit; and the confidence with which they sprung upon their
adversaries was greater: the shepherd was in confinement, and the sheep were
not consumed, nor even scattered.
8. Who ever saw, who ever heard of, the scholars taking greater
encouragement in the dangers of their teachers? How was it that they feared not?
How was it that they were not terrified? How was it that they did not say to Paul,
"Physician, heal yourself," [Luke 4:23] deliver yourself from your manifold
perils, and then thou will be able to procure for us those countless good things?
How was it they did not say these things? How! It was because they had been