SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.81, C.2.

moves both itself and whatever is directed to the end, as stated
above (FS, Question 9, Article 3). Wherefore, since devotion is an act
of the will whereby a man offers himself for the service of God Who
is the last end, it follows that devotion prescribes the mode to
human acts, whether they be acts of the will itself about things
directed to the end, or acts of the other powers that are moved by
the will.
Reply to Objection 2: Devotion is to be found in various genera of
acts, not as a species of those genera, but as the motion of the
mover is found virtually in the movements of the things moved.
Reply to Objection 3: Devotion is an act of the appetitive part of the
soul, and is a movement of the will, as stated above.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.81, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether devotion is an act of religion?

Objection 1: It would seem that devotion is not an act of religion.
Devotion, as stated above (Article 1), consists in giving oneself up to
God. But this is done chiefly by charity, since according to
Dionysius (Div. Nom. iv) "the Divine love produces ecstasy, for it
takes the lover away from himself and gives him to the beloved."
Therefore devotion is an act of charity rather than of religion.
Objection 2: Further, charity precedes religion; and devotion seems
to precede charity; since, in the Scriptures, charity is represented by
fire, while devotion is signified by fatness which is the material of
fire [Cant. 8:6; Ps. 52:6]. Therefore devotion is not an act of religion.
Objection 3: Further, by religion man is directed to God alone, as
stated above (Question 81, Article 1). But devotion is directed also to
men; for we speak of people being devout to certain holy men, and
subjects are said to be devoted to their masters; thus Pope Leo says
[Serm. viii, De Pass. Dom.] that the Jews "out of devotion to the
Roman laws," said: "We have no king but Caesar." Therefore
devotion is not an act of religion.
On the contrary, Devotion is derived from "devovere," as stated
(Article 1). But a vow is an act of religion. Therefore devotion is also
an act of religion.
I answer that, It belongs to the same virtue, to will to do something,
and to have the will ready to do it, because both acts have the same
object. For this reason the Philosopher says (Ethic. v, 1): "It is justice
whereby men both will end do just actions." Now it is evident that to
do what pertains to the worship or service of God, belongs properly
to religion, as stated above (Question 81). Wherefore it belongs to
that virtue to have the will ready to do such things, and this is to be
devout. Hence it is evident that devotion is an act of religion.
Reply to Objection 1: It belongs immediately to charity that man
should give himself to God, adhering to Him by a union of the spirit;
but it belongs immediately to religion, and, through the medium of
religion, to charity which is the principle of religion, that man should
give himself to God for certain works of Divine worship.