your own countrymen, even as they did of the Jews." There is something more in
his saying, "as they also did in Judæa"; it shows that everywhere they rejoiced,
as having nobly contended. He says therefore, "that you also suffered the same
things." And again, what wonder is it, if to you also, when even to the Lord they
dared do such things?
Do you see how he introduces this as containing great consolation? And
constantly he adverts to it; and upon a close examination one may find it in
nearly all his Epistles, how variously, upon all occasions of temptation, he brings
forward Christ. Observe accordingly, that here also, when accusing the Jews, he
puts them in mind of the Lord, and of the sufferings of the Lord; so well does he
know that this is a matter of the greatest consolation.
"Who both killed the Lord," he says— but, perhaps, they did not know Him
—assuredly they did know Him. What then? Did they not slay and stone their
own prophets, whose books even they carry about with them? And they did not
do this for the sake of truth. There is therefore not only a consolation under the
temptations, but they are reminded not to think that (the Jews) did it for the
truth's sake, and be troubled on that account. "And drove out us," he says. And
we also, he says, have suffered numberless evils. "And please not God, and are
contrary to all men; forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles, that they may be
saved." "Contrary to all men," he says. How? Because if we ought to speak to
the world, and they forbid us, they are the common enemies of the world. They
have slain Christ and the prophets, they insult God, they are the common
enemies of the world, they banish us, when coming for their salvation. What
wonder if they have done such things also to you, when they have done them
even in Judæa? "Forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles, that they might be
saved." It is a mark of envy therefore to hinder the salvation of all. "To fill up
their sins always. But the wrath has come upon them to the uttermost." What is
"to the uttermost"? These things are no longer like the former. There is here no
return back, no limit. But the wrath is near at hand. Whence is this manifest?
From that which Christ foretold. For not only is it a consolation to have

partakers in our afflictions, but to hear also that our persecutors are to be
punished. And if the delay is a grievance, let it be a consolation that they will
never lift up their heads again; or rather he has cut short the delay, by saying,
"THE wrath," showing that it was long ago due, and predetermined, and
predicted.
Ver. 17. "But we, being taken from you for a short time in presence, not in
heart, endeavored the more abundantly to see your face with great desire."
He has not said "separated," but what was much more. He had spoken
above of flattery, showing that he did not flatter, that he did not seek glory. He
speaks here concerning love. Because he had said above, "as a father his
children," "as a nurse," here he uses another expression, "being made orphans,"
which is said of children who have lost their fathers. And yet they were made
orphans. "No"— he says— "but we. For if any one should examine our longing,
even as little children without a protector, having sustained an untimely
bereavement, long for their parents, not only from the feelings of nature itself,
but also on account of their deserted state, so truly do we too feel." From this
also he shows his own despondency on account of their separation. And this we
cannot say, he says, that we have waited a long period, but "for a short time,"
and that "in presence, not in heart." For we always have you in our mind. See
how great is his love! Although having them always in his heart, he sought also
their presence face to face. Tell me not of your superlative philosophy! This is
truly fervent love; both to see, and to hear, and speak; and this may be of much
advantage. "We endeavored the more exceedingly." What is "more exceedingly"?
He either means to say, "we are vehemently attached to you," or, "as was likely,
being bereaved for a season, we endeavored to see your face." Observe the
blessed Paul. When of himself he cannot satisfy his longing, he does it through
others, as when he sends Timothy to the Philippians, and the same person again
to the Corinthians, holding intercourse with them through others, when he
cannot of himself. For in loving them, he was like some mad person, not to be
restrained, nor to command himself in his affection.