magnificent, it appears to them a pitiable spectacle, and deserving of many tears.
And truly there is a pitiable spectacle for us to behold; capitals of columns
crumbled to dust, and many columns themselves shattered to pieces, some
consumed by the fire, others thrown down often by the very hands which erected
them, that they may not add fuel to the flame. Statues again, which stood with so
much gracefulness, with the ceiling resting on them, these you may see all
exposed, with the roof torn off, and themselves standing hideously disfigured in
the open air. And why should one go on to describe the wealth stored up within?
The tissues of gold, and the vessels of silver? And where the lord of the house
and his consort scarcely entered, where was the treasurehouse of tissues and
perfumes, and the caskets of the costly jewels—all has become one blazing fire,
and within now, are bath-men and street-cleaners, and runaway slaves, and
everybody; and everything within is one mass of fire and water, of mud, and
dust, and half-burnt beams!
Now why have I drawn out so full a picture as this? Not simply because I
wish to represent to you the conflagration of a house, (for what concern is that of
mine?) but because I wish to set before your eyes, as vividly as I can, the
calamities of the Church. For like a conflagration indeed, or like a thunderbolt
hurled from on high, have they lighted upon the roof of the Church, and yet they
rouse up no one; but while our Father's house is burning, we are sleeping, as it
were, a deep and stupid sleep. And yet who is there whom this fire does not
touch? Which of the statues that stand in the Church? For the Church is nothing
else than a house built of the souls of us men. Now this house is not of equal
honor throughout, but of the stones which contribute to it, some are bright and
shining, while others are smaller and more dull than they, and yet superior again
to others. There we may see many who are in the place of gold also, the gold
which adorns the ceiling. Others again we may see, who give the beauty and
gracefulness produced by statues. Many we may see, standing like pillars. For he
is accustomed to call men also "pillars" [Galatians 2:9], not only on account of
their strength but also on account of their beauty, adding as they do, much grace,

and having their heads overlaid with gold. We may see a multitude, forming
generally the wide middle space and the whole extent of the circumference; for
the body at large occupies the place of those stones of which the outer walls are
built. Or rather we must go on to a more splendid picture yet. This Church, of
which I speak, is not built of these stones, such as we see around us, but of gold
and silver, and of precious stones, and there is abundance of gold dispersed
everywhere throughout it. But, oh the bitter tears this calls forth! For all these
things has the lawless rule of vainglory consumed; that all-devouring flame,
which no one has yet got under. And we stand gazing in amazement at the
flames, but no longer able to quench the evil: or if we do quench it for a short
time, yet after two or three days as a spark blown up from a heap of ashes
overturns all, and consumes no less than it did before, so it is here also: for this
is just what is wont to happen in such a conflagration. And as to the cause, it has
devoured the supports of the very pillars of the Church; those of us who
supported the roof, and who formerly held the whole building together it has
enveloped in the flame. Hence too was a ready communication to the rest of the
outer walls: for so also in the case of buildings, when the fire lays hold of the
timbers, it is better armed for its attack upon the stones; but when it has brought
down the pillars and leveled them with the ground, nothing more is wanted to
consume all the rest in the flames. For when the props and supports of the upper
parts fall down, those parts also themselves will speedily enough follow them.
Thus is it also at this moment with the Church: the fire has laid hold on every
part. We seek the honors that come from man, we burn for glory, and we hearken
not to Job when he says,
If like Adam (or after the manner of men) I covered my transgressions
By hiding mine iniquity in my bosom,
Because I feared the great multitude.
Behold ye a virtuous spirit? I was not ashamed, he says, to own before the