we also call three trees; but a laurel, and a myrtle, and an olive, we call
only three trees, or three substances, or three natures: and so three
stones we call also three bodies; but stone, and wood, and iron, we call
only three bodies, or by any other higher generic name by which they can
be called. Of the Father, therefore, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, seeing
that they are three, let us ask what three they are, and what they have in
common. For the being the Father is not common to them, so that they
should be interchangeably fathers to one another: as friends, since they
are so called relatively to each other, can be called three friends, because
they are so mutually to each other. But this is not the case in the Trinity,
since the Father only is there father; and not Father of two, but of the Son
only. Neither are they three Sons, since the Father there is not the Son,
nor is the Holy Spirit. Neither three Holy Spirits, because the Holy Spirit
also, in that proper meaning by which He is also called the gift of God, is
neither the Father nor the Son. What three therefore? For if three
persons, then that which is meant by person is common to them;
therefore this name is either specific or generic to them, according to the
manner of speaking. But where there is no difference of nature, there
things that are several in number are so expressed generically, that they
can also be expressed specifically. For the difference of nature causes,
that a laurel, and a myrtle, and an olive, or a horse, and an ox, and a dog,
are not called by the specific name, the former of three laurels, or the
latter of three oxen, but by the generic name, the former of three trees,
and the latter of three animals. But here, where there is no difference of
essence, it is necessary that these three should have a specific name,
which yet is not to be found. For person is a generic name, insomuch that
man also can be so called, although there is so great a difference between
man and God.
8. Further, in regard to that very generic (generalis) word, if on this
account we say three persons, because that which person means is
common to them (otherwise they can in no way be so called, just as they
are not called three sons, because that which son means is not common to
them); why do we not also say three Gods? For certainly, since the Father
is a person, and the Son a person, and the Holy Spirit a person, therefore
there are three persons: since then the Father is God, and the Son God,
and the Holy Spirit God, why not three Gods? Or else, since on account of

their ineffable union these three are together one God, why not also one
person; so that we could not say three persons, although we call each a
person singly, just as we cannot say three Gods, although we call each
singly God, whether the Father, or the Son, or the Holy Spirit? Is it
because Scripture does not say three Gods? But neither do we find that
Scripture anywhere mentions three persons. Or is it because Scripture
does not call these three, either three persons or one person (for we read
of the person of the Lord, but not of the Lord as a person), that therefore
it was lawful through the mere necessity of speaking and reasoning to say
three persons, not because Scripture says it, but because Scripture does
not contradict it: whereas, if we were to say three Gods, Scripture would
contradict it, which says, "Hear, O Israel; the Lord thy God is one God?"
Why then is it not also lawful to say three essences; which, in like
manner, as Scripture does not say, so neither does it contradict? For if
essence is a specific (specialis) name common to three, why are They not
to be called three essences, as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob are called three
men, because man is the specific name common to all men? But if
essence is not a specific name, but a generic one, since man, and cattle,
and tree, and constellation, and angel, are called essences; why are not
these called three essences, as three horses are called and three laurels
are called three trees, and three stones three bodies? Or if they are not
called three essences, but one essence, on account of the unity of the
Trinity, why is it not the case, that on account of the same unity of the
Trinity they are not to be called three substances or three persons, but
one substance and one person? For as the name of essence is common to
them, so that each singly is called essence, so the name of either
substance or person is common to them. For that which must be
understood of persons according to our usage, this is to be understood of
substances according to the Greek usage; for they say three substances,
one essence, in the same way as we say three persons, one essence or
substance.
9. What therefore remains, except that we confess that these terms
sprang from the necessity of speaking, when copious reasoning was
required against the devices or errors of the heretics? For when human
weakness endeavored to utter in speech to the senses of man what it
grasps in the secret places of the mind in proportion to its comprehension