such was Timothy, having often infirmities; for, says the apostle, "Use a little
wine for your stomach's sake, and your frequent infirmities." [1 Timothy 5:23]
Every one can profit his neighbor, if he will fulfil his part. See ye not the
unfruitful trees, how strong they are, how fair, how large also, and smooth, and
of great height? But if we had a garden; we should much rather have
pomegranates, or fruitful olive trees: for the others are for delight to the eye, not
for profit, which in them is but small. Such are those men who only consider
their own interest: nay, not such even since these persons are fit only for burning:
whereas those trees are useful both for building and for the safety of those
within. Such too were those Virgins, chaste indeed, and decent, and modest, but
profitable to none [Matthew 25:1] wherefore they are burned. Such are they who
have not nourished Christ. For observe that none of those are charged with
particular sins of their own, with fornication, for instance, or with perjury; in
short, with no sin but the having been of no use to another. Such was he who
buried his talent, showing indeed a blameless life, but not being useful to
another. [Matthew 25:25] How can such an one be a Christian? Say, if the leaven
being mixed up with the flour did not change the whole into its own nature,
would such a thing be leaven? Again, if a perfume shed no sweet odor on those
who approach it, could we call it a perfume? Say not, "It is impossible for me to
induce others (to become Christians)"— for if you are a Christian, it is
impossible but that it should be so. For as the natural properties of things cannot
be gainsaid, so it is here: the thing is part of the very nature of the Christian. Do
not insult God. To say, that the sun cannot shine, would be to insult Him: to say
that a Christian cannot do good, is to insult God, and call Him a liar. For it is
easier for the sun not to give heat, nor to shine, than for the Christian not to send
forth light: it is easier for the light to be darkness, than for this to be so. Tell me
not that it is impossible: the contrary is the impossible. Do not insult God. If we
once get our own affairs in a right state, the other will certainly follow as a
natural and necessary consequence. It is not possible for the light of a Christian
to be hid; not possible for a lamp so conspicuous as that to be concealed. Let us

not be careless. For, as the profit from virtue reaches both to ourselves, and to
those who are benefited by it: so from vice there is a two-fold loss, reaching both
to ourselves, and to those who are injured by it. Let there be (if you will) some
private man, who has suffered numberless ills from some one, and let no one
take his part, yet let that man still return good offices; what teaching so mighty
as this? What words, or what exhortations could equal it? What wrath were it not
enough to extinguish and soften? Knowing therefore these things, let us hold fast
to virtue, as knowing that it is not possible to be saved otherwise, than by
passing through this present life in doing these good works, that we may also
obtain the good things which are to come, through the grace and mercy of our
Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father together with the Holy Spirit be
glory, might, honor, now and ever, world without end. Amen.