FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.69, C.2.

habit, but as act from habit.
Reply to Objection 1: Augustine and Ambrose assign the beatitudes
to the gifts and virtues, as acts are ascribed to habits. But the gifts
are more excellent than the cardinal virtues, as stated above
(Question 68, Article 8). Wherefore Ambrose, in explaining the
beatitudes propounded to the throng, assigns them to the cardinal
virtues, whereas Augustine, who is explaining the beatitudes
delivered to the disciples on the mountain, and so to those who were
more perfect, ascribes them to the gifts of the Holy Ghost.
Reply to Objection 2: This argument proves that no other habits,
besides the virtues and gifts, rectify human conduct.
Reply to Objection 3: Meekness is to be taken as denoting the act of
meekness: and the same applies to justice and mercy. And though
these might seem to be virtues, they are nevertheless ascribed to
gifts, because the gifts perfect man in all matters wherein the virtues
perfect him, as stated above (Question 68, Article 2).

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.69, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the rewards assigned to the beatitudes

refer to this life?
Objection 1: It would seem that the rewards assigned to the
beatitudes do not refer to this life. Because some are said to be
happy because they hope for a reward, as stated above (Article 1).
Now the object of hope is future happiness. Therefore these rewards
refer to the life to come.
Objection 2: Further, certain punishments are set down in opposition
to the beatitudes, Lk. 6:25, where we read: "Woe to you that are
filled; for you shall hunger. Woe to you that now laugh, for you shall
mourn and weep." Now these punishments do not refer to this life,
because frequently men are not punished in this life, according to
Job 21:13: "They spend their days in wealth." Therefore neither do
the rewards of the beatitudes refer to this life.
Objection 3: Further, the kingdom of heaven which is set down as
the reward of poverty is the happiness of heaven, as Augustine says
(De Civ. Dei xix) [De Serm. Dom. in Monte i, 1]. Again, abundant
fullness is not to be had save in the life to come, according to Ps.
16:15: "I shall be filled when Thy glory shall appear." Again, it is only
in the future life that we shall see God, and that our Divine sonship
will be made manifest, according to 1 Jn. 3:2: "We are now the sons
of God; and it hath not yet appeared what we shall be. We know that,
when He shall appear, we shall be like to Him, because we shall see
Him as He is." Therefore these rewards refer to the future life.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Serm. Dom. in Monte i, 4):
"These promises can be fulfilled in this life, as we believe them to
have been fulfilled in the apostles. For no words can express that
complete change into the likeness even of an angel, which is
promised to us after this life."
I answer that, Expounders of Holy Writ are not agreed in speaking of
these rewards. For some, with Ambrose (Super Luc. v), hold that all
these rewards refer to the life to come; while Augustine (De Serm.
Dom. in Monte i, 4) holds them to refer to the present life; and
Chrysostom in his homilies (In Matth. xv) says that some refer to the
future, and some to the present life.