it be not ratified, the tie is dissolved, if the one party remain in
unbelief, and the other being converted to the faith has married
again. On the other hand the aforesaid tie is not dissolved by
adultery, else the unbeliever would be free to give a bill of divorce to
his adulterous wife, and having put her away, could take another
wife, which is false. In another way marriage is dissolved as to the
act, and thus it can be dissolved on account of either unbelief or
fornication. But marriage cannot be dissolved even as to the act on
account of other sins, unless perchance the husband wish to cease
from intercourse with his wife in order to punish her by depriving her
of the comfort of his presence.
Reply to Objection 1: Although adultery is opposed to marriage as
fulfilling an office of nature, more directly than unbelief, it is the
other way about if we consider marriage as a sacrament of the
Church, from which source it derives perfect stability, inasmuch as it
signifies the indissoluble union of Christ with the Church. Wherefore
the marriage that is not ratified can be dissolved as to the marriage
tie on account of unbelief rather than on account of adultery.
Reply to Objection 2: The primal union of the soul to God is by faith,
and consequently the soul is thereby espoused to God as it were,
according to Osee 2:20, "I will espouse thee to Me in faith." Hence in
Holy Writ idolatry and unbelief are specially designated by the name
of fornication: whereas other sins are called spiritual fornications by
a more remote signification.
Reply to Objection 3: This applies to the case when the wife proves a
notable occasion of sin to her husband, so that he has reason to fear
his being in danger: for then the husband can withdraw from living
with her, as stated above (Article 5).
Reply to Objection 4: Covetousness is said to be idolatry on account
of a certain likeness of bondage, because both the covetous and the
idolater serve the creature rather than the Creator; but not on
account of likeness of unbelief, since unbelief corrupts the intellect
whereas covetousness corrupts the affections.
Reply to Objection 5: The words of the Master refer to betrothal,
because a betrothal can be rescinded on account of a subsequent
crime. Or, if he is speaking of marriage, they must be referred to the
severing of mutual companionship for a time, as stated above, or to

the case when the wife is unwilling to cohabit except on the
condition of sinning, for instance, if she were to say: "I will not
remain your wife unless you amass wealth for me by theft," for then
he ought to leave her rather than thieve.

## QUESTION 60 — OF WIFE-MURDER

Prologue
We must now consider wife-murder, under which head there are two
points of inquiry:
(1) Whether in a certain case it is lawful to kill one's wife?
(2) Whether wife-murder is an impediment to marriage?