saw outwardly, but even worshipped, and brought gifts; gifts not only free from
Judaical grossness, in that they sacrificed not sheep and calves, but also coming
near to the self-devotion of the Church, for it was knowledge and obedience and
love that they offered unto Him.
"And being warned of God in a dream that they should not return unto
Herod, they departed into their own country another way." [Matthew 2:12]
See from this also their faith, how they were not offended, but are docile,
and considerate; neither are they troubled, nor reason with themselves, saying,
"And yet, if this Child be great, and has any might, what need of flight, and of a
clandestine retreat? And wherefore can it be, that when we have come openly
and with boldness, and have stood against so great a people, and against a
king's madness, the angel sends us out of the city as runaways and fugitives?"
But none of these things did they either say or think. For this most especially
belongs to faith, not to seek an account of what is enjoined, but merely to obey
the commandments laid upon us.
2. "And when they were departed, behold, an angel appears to Joseph in a
dream, saying, Arise, and take the young Child and His mother, and flee into
Egypt." [Matthew 2:13]
There is something here worth inquiring into, both touching the magi, and
touching the Child; for if even they were not troubled, but received all with faith,
it is worthy of examination on our part, why they and the young Child are not
preserved, continuing there, but they as fugitives go into Persia, He with His
mother into Egypt. But what? Should He have fallen into the hands of Herod,
and having fallen, not have been cut off? Nay, He would not have been thought
to have taken flesh upon Him; the greatness of the Economy would not have
been believed.
For if, while these things are taking place, and many circumstances are
being ordered mysteriously after the manner of men, some have dared to say that
His assumption of our flesh is a fable; in what degree of impiety would they not
have been wrecked had He done all in a manner becoming His Godhead, and

according to His own power?
As to the wise men, He sends them off quickly, at once both commissioning
them as teachers to the land of the Persians, and at the same time intercepting the
madness of the king, that he might learn that he was attempting things
impossible, and might quench his wrath, and desist from this his vain labor. For
not alone openly to subdue His enemies, but also to deceive them with ease, is
worthy of His power. Thus, for example, He deceived the Egyptians also in the
case of the Jews, and having power to transfer their wealth openly into the hands
of the Hebrews, He bids them do this secretly and with craft; and this surely, not
less than the other miracles, made Him an object of terror to His enemies. At
least, they of Ascalon, and all the rest, when they had taken the ark, and being
smitten, did after that devise their countrymen not to fight, nor to set themselves
against Him, with the other miracles brought this also forward, saying,
"Wherefore harden ye your hearts, as Egypt and Pharaoh hardened? When He
had mocked them, did He not after that send forth His people, and they
departed?" Now this they said, as accounting this fresh one not inferior to those
other signs that had been done openly, towards the demonstration of His power,
and of His greatness. And the like ensued on this occasion too; a thing sufficient
to astonish the tyrant. For consider what it was natural for Herod to feel, and
how his very breath would be stopped, deceived as he was by the wise men, and
thus laughed to scorn. For what, if he did not become better? It is not His fault,
who marvellously ordered all this, but it is the excess of Herod's madness, not
yielding even to those things which had virtue to have persuaded him, and
deterred him from his wickedness, but going on still further, to receive a yet
sharper punishment for folly so great.
3. But wherefore, it may be said, is the young Child sent into Egypt? In the
first place, the evangelist himself has mentioned the cause, saying, "That it might
be fulfilled, Out of Egypt have I called my Son." And at the same time
beginnings of fair hopes were thenceforth proclaimed before to the world. That
is, since Babylon and Egypt, most in the whole earth, were burnt up with the