FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.87, C.7.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.87, C.8.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether every punishment is inflicted for a sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that not every punishment is inflicted for
a sin. For it is written (Jn. 9:3,2) about the man born blind: "Neither
hath this man sinned, nor his parents . . . that he should be born
blind." In like manner we see that many children, those also who
have been baptized, suffer grievous punishments, fevers, for
instance, diabolical possession, and so forth, and yet there is no sin
in them after they have been baptized. Moreover before they are
baptized, there is no more sin in them than in the other children who
do not suffer such things. Therefore not every punishment is
inflicted for a sin.
Objection 2: Further, that sinners should thrive and that the innocent
should be punished seem to come under the same head. Now each
of these is frequently observed in human affairs, for it is written
about the wicked (Ps. 72:5): "They are not in the labor of men:
neither shall they be scourged like other men"; and (Job 21:7): "The
wicked live, are advanced, and strengthened with riches" (?); and
(Hab. 1:13): "Why lookest Thou upon the contemptuous, and holdest
Thy peace, when the wicked man oppresseth, the man that is more
just than himself?" Therefore not every punishment is inflicted for a
sin.
Objection 3: Further, it is written of Christ (1 Pt. 2:22) that "He did no
sin, nor was guile found in His mouth." And yet it is said (1 Pt. 2:21)
that "He suffered for us." Therefore punishment is not always
inflicted by God for sin.
On the contrary, It is written (Job 4:7, seqq.): "Who ever perished
innocent? Or when were the just destroyed? On the contrary, I have
seen those who work iniquity . . . perishing by the blast of God"; and
Augustine writes (Retract. i) that "all punishment is just, and is
inflicted for a sin."
I answer that, As already stated (Article 6), punishment can be
considered in two ways---simply, and as being satisfactory. A
satisfactory punishment is, in a way, voluntary. And since those who
differ as to the debt of punishment, may be one in will by the union
of love, it happens that one who has not sinned, bears willingly the
punishment for another: thus even in human affairs we see men take

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.87, C.8.

the debts of another upon themselves. If, however, we speak of
punishment simply, in respect of its being something penal, it has
always a relation to a sin in the one punished. Sometimes this is a
relation to actual sin, as when a man is punished by God or man for
a sin committed by him. Sometimes it is a relation to original sin:
and this, either principally or consequently---principally, the
punishment of original sin is that human nature is left to itself, and
deprived of original justice: and consequently, all the penalties
which result from this defect in human nature.
Nevertheless we must observe that sometimes a thing seems penal,
and yet is not so simply. Because punishment is a species of evil, as
stated in the FP, Question 48, Article 5. Now evil is privation of good.
And since man's good is manifold, viz. good of the soul, good of the
body, and external goods, it happens sometimes that man suffers
the loss of a lesser good, that he may profit in a greater good, as
when he suffers loss of money for the sake of bodily health, or loss
of both of these, for the sake of his soul's health and the glory of
God. In such cases the loss is an evil to man, not simply but
relatively; wherefore it does not answer to the name of punishment
simply, but of medicinal punishment, because a medical man
prescribes bitter potions to his patients, that he may restore them to
health. And since such like are not punishments properly speaking,
they are not referred to sin as their cause, except in a restricted
sense: because the very fact that human nature needs a treatment of
penal medicines, is due to the corruption of nature which is itself the
punishment of original sin. For there was no need, in the state of
innocence, for penal exercises in order to make progress in virtue;
so that whatever is penal in the exercise of virtue, is reduced to
original sin as its cause.
Reply to Objection 1: Such like defects of those who are born with
them, or which children suffer from, are the effects and the
punishments of original sin, as stated above (Question 85, Article 5);
and they remain even after baptism, for the cause stated above
(Question 85, Article 5, ad 2): and that they are not equally in all, is
due to the diversity of nature, which is left to itself, as stated above
(Question 85, Article 5, ad 1). Nevertheless, they are directed by
Divine providence, to the salvation of men, either of those who
suffer, or of others who are admonished by their means---and also to
the glory of God.
Reply to Objection 2: Temporal and bodily goods are indeed goods