6. In all causes that are ordered to one another essentially, and not accidentally, no effect
proceeds from a second cause unless through the operation of a first cause, as is established. in
the first proposition of De causis; but the human mind is ordained beneath the uncreated light
according to an order that is essential and not accidental; therefore the operation of the human
mind which is its proper effect, namely, the cognition of truth, cannot proceed from it unless by
reason of the operation of the first uncreated light: its operation, however, seems to indicate
nothing other than illumination; therefore, etc.

7. As the will is related to willing well, so the intellect is related to right understanding: but the
will cannot will well unless it is aided by divine grace, as Augustine says; therefore neither can
the intellect know the truth unless illuminated by divine light.

8. That for which our powers do not suffice is wrongly ascribed to our strength: but it is
reprehensible that anyone should ascribe knowledge of the truth to his own ability, since indeed
we are even commanded to ascribe it to God, according to this saying of Sirach 51:23: "To Him
that giveth me wisdom, will I give glory"; therefore our powers do not suffice for knowledge of
truth, and so the conclusion is as before.

Sed contra. The human mind is divinely illuminated by its natural light, according to the saying
of Psalm 4:7: "The light of Your countenance, O Lord, is signed upon us." Thus, therefore, if
this created light is not sufficient for the knowing of truth, but there is required a new
illumination, according to the same reasoning this superadded light would not suffice either, but
wiluld require still another light, and so on to infinity, which cannot be encompassed; and so it
would be impossible to know any truth. Therefore one must stand firm in reliance upon the first
light, namely, that the mind by its natural light, without the superaddition of any other, can see
the truth.

Again, as it suffices for what is actually visible that it should he proportionate to the sight in
order to move it, so it suffices for what is intelligible that it should be proportionate to the
intellect in order to move it: but our mind possesses within itself the power of making things
intelligible in act, namely, the active intellect, and what is intelligible is proportionate to it;

therefore it does not require another new illumination in order to know truth.

Moreover, as corporeal light is related to bodily vision, so is the intellect related to intelligible
vision. But any corporeal light at all, even though it is weak, renders something corporeally
visible, at least itself; therefore, the light of the intellect also, which is connatural to the mind,
suffices for the understanding of some truth.