then did He omit to mention the Holy Spirit? Is it because it follows, that
whenever we name One who cleaves to One by a harmony so great that
through this harmony both are one, this harmony itself must be
understood, although it is not mentioned? For in that place, too, the
apostle seems as it were to pass over the Holy Spirit; and yet there, too,
He is understood, where he says, "All are yours, and ye are Christ's, and
Christ is God's." And again, "The head of the woman is the man, the
head of the man is Christ, and the head of Christ is God." But again, if
God is only all three together, how can God be the head of Christ, that is,
the Trinity the head of Christ, since Christ is in the Trinity in order that it
may be the Trinity? Is that which is the Father with the Son, the head of
that which is the Son alone? For the Father with the Son is God, but the
Son alone is Christ: especially since it is the Word already made flesh that
speaks; and according to this His humiliation also, the Father is greater
than He, as He says, "for my Father is greater than I;" so that the very
being of God, which is one to Him with the Father, is itself the head of the
man who is mediator, which He is alone. For if we rightly call the mind
the chief thing of man, that is, as it were the head of the human
substance, although the man himself together with the mind is man; why
is not the Word with the Father, which together is God, much more
suitably and much more the head of Christ, although Christ as man
cannot be understood except with the Word which was made flesh? But
this, as we have already said, we shall consider somewhat more carefully
hereafter. At present the equality and one and the same substance of the
Trinity has been demonstrated as briefly as possible, that in whatever way
that other question be determined, the more rigorous discussion of which
we have deferred, nothing may hinder us from confessing the absolute
equality of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.

### CHAP. 10.—OF THE ATTRIBUTES ASSIGNED BY HILARY TO EACH PERSON. THE TRINITY IS REPRESENTED IN THINGS THAT ARE MADE.

11. A certain writer, when he would briefly intimate the special attributes
of each of the persons in the Trinity, tells us that "Eternity is in the
Father, form in the Image, use in the Gift." And since he was a man of no
mean authority in handling the Scriptures, and in the assertion of the

faith, for it is Hilary who put this in his book (On the Trinity, ii.); I have
searched into the hidden meaning of these words as far as I can, that is, of
the Father, and the Image, and the Gift, of eternity, and of form, and of
use. And I do not think that he intended more by the word eternity, than
that the Father has not a father from whom He is; but the Son is from the
Father, so as to be, and so as to be co-eternal with Him. For if an image
perfectly fills the measure of that of which it is the image, then the image
is made equal to that of which it is the image, not the latter to its own
image. And in respect to this image he has named form. I believe on
account of the quality of beauty, where there is at once such great fitness,
and prime equality, and prime likeness, differing in nothing, and unequal
in no respect, and in no part unlike, but answering exactly to Him whose
image it is: where there is prime and absolute life, to whom it is not one
thing to live, and another to be, but the same thing to be and to live; and
prime and absolute intellect, to whom it is not one thing to live, another
to understand, but to understand is to live, and is to be, and all things are
one: as though a perfect Word (John 1:1), to which nothing is wanting,
and a certain skill of the omnipotent and wise God, full of all living,
unchangeable sciences, and all one in it, as itself is one from one, with
whom it is one. Therein God knew all things which He made by it; and
therefore, while times pass away and succeed, nothing passes away or
succeeds to the knowledge of God. For things which are created are not
therefore known by God, because they have been made; and not rather
have been therefore made, even although changeable, because they are
known unchangeably by Him. Therefore that unspeakable conjunction of
the Father and His image is not without fruition, without love, without
joy. Therefore that love, delight, felicity, or blessedness, if indeed it can be
worthily expressed by any human word, is called by him, in short, Use;
and is the Holy Spirit in the Trinity, not begotten, but the sweetness of
the begetter and of the begotten, filling all creatures according to their
capacity with abundant bountifulness and copiousness, that they may
keep their proper order and rest satisfied in their proper place.
12. Therefore all these things which are made by divine skill, show in
themselves a certain unity, and form, and order; for each of them is both
some one thing, as are the several natures of bodies and dispositions of
souls; and is fashioned in some form, as are the figures or qualities of