THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.28, C.4.

since she alone in the narrow abode of her womb received Him
Whom the world cannot contain."
Others again refer this to knowledge by sight. For as, while Moses
was speaking with God, his face was so bright "that the children of
Israel could not steadfastly behold it"; so Mary, while being
"overshadowed" by the brightness of the "power of the Most High,"
could not be gazed on by Joseph, until she gave birth. But
afterwards she is acknowledged by Joseph, by looking on her face,
not by lustful contact.
Jerome, however, grants that this is to be understood of knowledge
by intercourse; but he observes that "before" or "until" has a twofold
sense in Scripture. For sometimes it indicates a fixed time, as Gal.
3:19: The law "was set because of transgressions, until the seed
should come, to whom He made the promise." On the other hand, it
sometimes indicates an indefinite time, as in Ps. 122:2: "Our eyes are
unto the Lord our God, until He have mercy on us"; from which it is
not to be gathered that our eyes are turned from God as soon as His
mercy has been obtained. In this sense those things are indicated
"of which we might doubt if they had not been written down: while
others are left out to be supplied by our understanding. Thus the
evangelist says that the Mother of God was not known by her
husband until she gave birth, that we may be given to understand
that still less did he know her afterwards" (Adversus Helvid. v).
Reply to Objection 4: The Scriptures are wont to designate as the
first-born, not only a child who is followed by others, but also the
one that is born first. "Otherwise, if a child were not first-born unless
followed by others, the first-fruits would not be due as long as there
was no further produce" [Jerome, Adversus Helvid. x]: which is
clearly false, since according to the law the first-fruits had to be
redeemed within a month (Num. 18:16).
Reply to Objection 5: Some, as Jerome says on Mt. 12:49,50,
"suppose that the brethren of the Lord were Joseph's sons by
another wife. But we understand the brethren of the Lord to be not
sons of Joseph, but cousins of the Saviour, the sons of Mary, His
Mother's sister." For "Scripture speaks of brethren in four senses;
namely, those who are united by being of the same parents, of the
same nation, of the same family, by common affection." Wherefore
the brethren of the Lord are so called, not by birth, as being born of
the same mother; but by relationship, as being blood-relations of

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.28, C.4.

His. But Joseph, as Jerome says (Contra Helvid. ix), is rather to be
believed to have remained a virgin, "since he is not said to have had
another wife," and "a holy man does not live otherwise than
chastely."
Reply to Objection 6: Mary who is called "the mother of James and
Joseph" is not to be taken for the Mother of our Lord, who is not
wont to be named in the Gospels save under this designation of her
dignity---"the Mother of Jesus." This Mary is to be taken for the wife
of Alphaeus, whose son was James the less, known as the "brother
of the Lord" (Gal. 1:19).