righteous man by a reference to his low birth—a miserable and despicable
thought: for certainly, even if he had some accusation to bring against the father
this could in no wise injure David. For each man is answerable for his own
deeds, and by these he can be praised and accused. But as it was, not having any
evil deed to mention, he brought forward his low birth, expecting by this means
to throw his glory into the shade, which in fact was the height of folly. For what
kind of offense is it to be the child of insignificant and humble men, "the son of
Jesse," but when David found him sleeping inside the cave, he did not call him
the "son of Kish," but by his title of honour: "for I will not lift up my hand," he
said, "against the Lord's anointed." [1 Samuel 26:11] So purely free was he from
wrath and resentment of injuries: he calls him the Lord's anointed who had done
him such great wrongs, who was thirsting for his blood, who after his countless
good services had many times attempted to destroy him. For he did not consider
how Saul deserved to be treated, but he considered what was becoming for
himself both to do and to say, which is the greatest stretch of moral wisdom.
How so? When you have got your enemy in a prison, made fast by a twofold, or
rather by a triple chain, confinement of space, dearth of assistance, and necessity
of sleep, do you not demand a penalty and punishment of him? "No," he says;
"for I am not now regarding what he deserves to suffer, but what it behooves me
to do." He did not look to the facility for slaying, but to the accurate observance
of the moral wisdom which was becoming to him. And yet which of the existing
circumstances was not sufficient to prompt him to the act of slaughter? Was not
the fact that his enemy was delivered bound into his hands a sufficient
inducement? For you are aware I suppose that we hasten more eagerly to deeds
for which facilities abound, and the hope of success increases our desire to act,
which was just what happened then in his case.
Well! Did the captain who then counselled and urged him to the deed, did
the memory of past events induce him to slay? No one of these things moved
him: in fact the very facility for slaughter averted him from it: for he bethought
him that God had put Saul in his hands for the purpose of furnishing ample

ground and opportunity for the exercise of moral wisdom. You then perhaps
admire him, because he did not cherish the memory of any of his past evils: but I
am much more astonished at him for another reason. And what is this? That the
fear of future events did not impel him to lay violent hands on his enemy. For he
knew clearly that if Saul escaped his hands, he would again be his adversary; yet
he preferred exposing himself to danger by letting go the man who had wronged
him, to providing for his own security by laying violent hands upon his foe.
What could equal then the great and generous spirit of this man, who, when the
law commanded eye to be plucked out for eye, and tooth for tooth, and
retaliation on equal terms, [Deuteronomy 19:21] not only abstained from doing
this, but exhibited a far greater measure of moral wisdom? At least if he had
slain Saul at that time he would have retained credit for moral wisdom
unimpaired, not merely because he had acted on the defensive, not being himself
the originator of violence, but also because by his great moderation he was
superior to the precept "an eye for an eye." For he would not have inflicted one
slaughter in return for one; but, in return for many deaths, which Saul
endeavoured to bring on him, having attempted to slay him not once or twice but
many times, he would have brought only one death on Saul; and not only this,
but if he had proceeded to avenge himself out of fear of the future, even this,
combined with the things already mentioned, would procure him the reward of
forbearance without any deduction. For he who is angry on account of the things
which have been done to him, and demands satisfaction would not be able to
obtain the praise of forbearance: but when a man dismisses the consideration of
all past evils, although they are many and painful, but is compelled to take steps
for self-defence from fear of the future, and by way of providing for his own
security, no one would deprive him of the rewards of moderation.
7. Nevertheless David did not act even thus, but found a novel and strange
form of moral wisdom: and neither the remembrance of things past, nor the fear
of things to come, nor the instigation of the captain, nor the solitude of the place,
nor the facility for slaying, nor anything else incited him to kill; but he spared