science superior to all other, much more this. For this rule is as much better than
that, as that than the rest; yea, rather, even much more. And, if you will, let us
examine this argument more accurately. There is an art of agriculture, of
weaving, of building; which are both very necessary and tend greatly to preserve
our life. For others surely are but ancillary to these; the coppersmith's, the
carpenter's, the shepherd's. But further, of arts themselves the most necessary of
all is the agricultural, which was even that which God first introduced when He
had formed man. For without shoes and clothes it is possible to live; but without
agriculture it is impossible. And such they say are the Hamaxobii, the Nomads
among the Scythians, and the Indian Gymnosophists. For these troubled not
themselves with the arts of housebuilding, and weaving, and shoemaking, but
need only that of agriculture. Blush ye that have need of those arts that be
superfluous, cooks, confectioners, embroiderers, and ten thousand other such
people, that you may live; blush ye that introduce vain refinements into life;
blush ye who are unbelievers, before those barbarians who have no need of art.
For God made nature exceedingly independent, needing only a few things.
However, I do not compel you nor lay it down for law that you should live thus;
but as Jacob asked. And what did he ask? "If the Lord will give me bread to eat
and raiment to put on." [Genesis 28:20] So also Paul commanded, saying, "And
having food and covering let us be therewith content." [1 Timothy 6:8] First then
comes agriculture; second, weaving; and third after it, building; and shoemaking
last of all; for among us at any rate there are many both servants and laborers
who live without shoes. These, therefore, are the useful and necessary arts.
Come, then, let us compare them with that of ruling. For I have therefore
brought forward these that are of all most important, that when it shall have been
seen to be superior to them, its victory over the rest may be unquestioned.
Whereby then shall we show that it is more necessary than all? Because without
it there is no advantage in these. And if you think good, let us leave mention of
the rest and bring on the stage that one which stands higher and is more
important than any, that of agriculture. Where then will be the advantage of the

many hands of your laborers, if they are at war with one another and plunder one
another's goods? For, as it is, the fear of the ruler restrains them and protects that
which is wrought by them; but if you take this away, in vain is their labor. But if
one examine accurately, he will find yet another rule which is the parent and
bond of this. What then may this be? That according to which it behooves each
man to control and rule himself, chastising his unworthy passions, but both
nourishing and promoting the growth of all the germs of virtue with all care.
For there are [these] species of rule; one, that whereby men rule peoples
and states, regulating this the political life; which Paul denoting said, "Let every
soul be subject to the higher powers; for there is no power but of God." [Romans
13:1-4] Afterwards to show the advantage of this, he went on to say, that the
ruler "is a minister of God for good;" and again, "he is a minister of God, and
avenger to execute wrath on him that does evil."
A second there is whereby every one that has understanding rules himself;
and this also the Apostle further denoted , saying, "Would you have no fear of the
power? Do that which is good;" [Romans 12:3] speaking of him that rules
himself.
5. Here, however, there is yet another rule, higher than the political rule.
And what is this? That in the Church. And this also itself Paul mentions, saying,
"Obey them that have the rule over you and submit to them; for they watch in
behalf of your souls as they that shall give account." [Hebrews 13:17] For this
rule is as much better than the political as heaven is than earth; yea rather, even
much more. For, in the first place, it considers principally not how it may punish
sins committed, but how, they may never be committed at all; next, when
committed, not how it may remove the deceased [member], but how they may be
blotted out. And of the things of this life indeed it makes not much account, but
all its transactions are about the things in heaven. "For our citizenship is in
heaven." [Philippians 3:20] And our life is here. "For our life," says he, "is hid
with Christ in God." [Colossians 3:3] And our prizes are there, and our race is
for the crowns that be there. For this life is not dissolved after the end, but then