what a flame of war it fanned.
For Protagoras, who was one of them, having dared to say, "I know of no
gods," not going round the world and proclaiming it, but in a single city, was in
the most imminent peril of his life. And Diagoras the Milesian , and Theodorus,
who was called Atheist, although they had friends, and that influence which
comes from eloquence, and were held in admiration because of their philosophy;
yet nevertheless none of these profited them. And the great Socrates, too, he who
surpassed in philosophy all among them, for this reason drank hemlock, because
in his discourses concerning the gods he was suspected of moving things a little
aside. Now if the suspicion alone of innovation brought so great danger on
philosophers and wise men, and on those who had attained boundless popularity;
and if they were not only unable to do what they wished, but were themselves
also driven from life and county; how can you choose but be in admiration and
astonishment, when you see that the fisherman has produced such an effect upon
the world, and accomplished his purposes; has overcome all both Barbarians and
Greeks.
10. But they did not, you will say, introduce strange gods as the others did.
Well, and in that you are naming the very point most to be wondered at; that the
innovation is twofold, both to pull down those which are, and to announce the
Crucified. For from whence came it into their minds to proclaim such things?
Whence, to be confident about their event? Whom of those before them could
they perceive to have prospered in any such attempt? Were not all men
worshipping demons? Were not all used to make gods of the elements? Was not
the difference [but] in the mode of impiety? But nevertheless they attacked all,
and overthrew all, and overran in a short time the whole world, like a sort of
winged beings; making no account of dangers, of deaths, of the difficulty of the
thing, of their own fewness, of the multitude of the opponents, of the authority,
the power, the wisdom of those at war with them. For they had an ally greater
than all these, the power of Him that had been crucified and was risen again. It
would not have been so wondrous, had they chosen to wage war with the world

in the literal sense, ([πόλεμον αἰσθητόν]) as this which in fact has taken place.
For according to the law of battle they might have stood over against the
enemies, and occupying some adverse ground, have arrayed themselves
accordingly to meet their foes, and have taken their time for attack and close
conflict. But in this case it is not so. For they had no camp of their own, but were
mingled with their enemies, and thus overcame them. Even in the midst of their
enemies as they went about, they eluded their grasp, ([λαβὰς] Reg. [βλαβὰς]
Bened.) and became superior, and achieved a splendid victory; a victory which
fulfils the prophecy that says, "Even in the midst of your enemies you shall have
dominion." [Psalm 110:2] For this it was, which was full of all astonishment, that
their enemies having them in their power, and casting them into prison and
chains not only did not vanquish them, but themselves also eventually had to
bow down to them: the scourgers to the scourged, the binders in chains to those
who were bound, the persecutors to the fugitives. All these things then we could
say unto the Greeks, yea much more than these; for the truth has enough and
greatly to spare. ([πολλή τῆς ἀληθείας ἡ περιουσία].) And if you will follow the
argument, we will teach you the whole method of fighting against them. In the
meanwhile let us here hold fast two heads; How did the weak overcome the
strong? And, From whence came it into their thoughts, being such as they were,
to form such plans, unless they enjoyed Divine aid?
11. So far then as to what we have to say. But let us show forth by our
actions all excellencies of conduct, and kindle abundantly the fire of virtue. For
"you are lights," says he, "shining in the midst of the world." [Philippians 2:15]
And unto each of us God has committed a greater function than He has to the
sun: greater than heaven, and earth, and sea; by so much greater, as spiritual
things be more excellent than things sensible. When then we look unto the solar
orb, and admire the beauty, and the body and the brightness of the luminary, let
us consider again that greater and better is the light which is in us, as indeed the
darkness also is more dreadful unless we take heed. And in fact a deep night
oppresses the whole world. This is what we have to dispel and dissolve. It is