that you love one another as I have loved you." Do you see that the love of God
is intertwined with our own, and connected like a sort of chain? Wherefore it
sometimes says that there are two commandments, sometimes only one. For it is
not possible that the man who has taken hold on the first should not possess the
second also. For at one time He said, "On this the Law and the Prophets hang"
[Matthew 22:40]; and at another, "Whatsoever ye would that men should do to
you, do ye even so to them, for this is the Law and the Prophets." [Matthew 7:12]
And, "Love is the fulfilling of the Law." [Romans 13:10] Which He says also
here; for if to abide proceeds from love, and love from the keeping of the
commandments, and the commandment is that we love one another, then the
abiding in God proceeds from love towards each other. And He does not simply
speak of love, but declares also the manner, "As I have loved you." Again He
shows, that His very departure was not of hatred but of love. "So that I ought
rather to be admired on this account, for I lay down My life for you." Yet
nowhere does He say this in these words, but in a former place, by sketching the
best shepherd, and here by exhorting them, and by showing the greatness of His
love, and Himself, who He is. But wherefore does He everywhere exalt love?
Because this is the mark of the disciples, this the bond of virtue. On this account
Paul says such great things of it, as being a genuine disciple of Christ, and
having had experience of it.

John 15:14-15
"You are My friends —henceforth I call you not servants, for the servant knows
not what his lord does. You are My friends, for all things which I have heard of
My Father I have made known unto you."
How then says He, "I have many things to tell you, but you cannot bear
them now"? [John 16:12] By the "all" and the "hearing" He shows nothing else,
but that He uttered nothing alien, but only what was of the Father. And since to
speak of secrets appears to be the strongest proof of friendship, "you have," He
says, "been deemed worthy even of this communion." When however He says
"all," He means, "whatever things it was fit that they should hear." Then He puts
also another sure proof of friendship, no common one. Of what sort was that?

John 15:16
"You have not chosen Me, but I have chosen you."
That is, I ran upon your friendship. And He stayed not here, but,
"I set you," He says, (that is, "I planted you,") "that you should go," (He
still uses the metaphor of the vine,) that is, "that you should extend yourselves";
"and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain."
"Now if your fruit remain, much more shall you. For I have not only loved
you," He says, "but have done you the greatest benefits, by extending your
branches through all the world." Do you see in how many ways He shows His
love? By telling them things secret, by having in the first instance run to meet
their friendship, by granting them the greatest blessings, by suffering for them
what then He suffered. After this, He shows that He also remains continually
with those who shall bring forth fruit; for it is needful to enjoy His aid, and so to
bear fruit.
"That whatsoever you shall ask of the Father in My Name, He may give it
you."
Yet it is the part of the person asked to do the thing asked; but if the Father
is asked, how is it that the Son does it? It is that you may learn that the Son is not
inferior to the Father.