is that where Peter was. Not, however, that any thing like this took place there.
No. He was delivered to four quaternions of soldiers to keep him and he sang
not, he watched not, but he slept; neither, again, had he been scourged. And yet
was the peril greater, for in the case before us indeed the end was accomplished,
and the prisoners Paul and Silas, had undergone their punishment; but in his case
it was yet to come. So that though there were no stripes to torture him, yet was
there the anticipation of the future to distress him. And mark too the miracle
there. "Behold, an angel of the Lord," it is related, "stood by him, and a light
shined in the cell; and he smote Peter on the side, and awoke him, saying, Rise
up quickly. And his chains fell off from his hands." [Acts 12:7] In order that he
might not imagine the transaction to be the work of the light alone, he also struck
Peter. Now no one saw the light, save himself only, and he thought it was a
vision. So insensible are they that are asleep to the mercies of God. "And the
angel," it proceeds, "said unto him, Gird yourself and bind on your sandals; and
he did so. And he says unto him, Cast your garment about you, and follow me.
And he went out and followed, and he knew not that it was true which was done
by the angel; but thought he saw a vision. And when they were past the first and
the second ward, they came unto the iron gate, that leads unto the city, which
opened to them of his own accord; and they went out, and passed on through one
street; and straightway the angel departed from him." [Acts 12:8-10] Why was
not the same thing done here as was done in the case of Paul and Silas? Because
in that case they were intending to release them. On that account God willed not
that they should be released in this manner. Whereas in blessed Peter's case, they
were intending to lead him forth to execution. But what then? Would it not have
been far more marvellous, some one may say, had he been led forth, and
delivered over into the king's hands, and then had been snatched away from the
very midst of his imminent peril, and sustained no harm? For thus moreover,
neither had the soldiers perished. Great is the question which has been raised
upon this matter. What! Did God, it is said, save His own servant with the
punishment of others, with the destruction of others? Now in the first place, it

was not with the destruction of others; for this did not arise from the ordering of
providence, but arose from the cruelty of the judge. How so? God had so
providentially ordered it, as that not only these men need not perish, but
moreover that even he, the judge, should have been saved, just as in this case of
the jailor. But he did not use the boon aright. "Now as soon as it was day," it
continues, "there was no small stir among the soldiers, what was become of
Peter." And what then? Herod makes strict inquiry into the matter, "and he
examined the guards," it is related, "and commanded that they should be put to
death." [Acts 12:18-19] Now, indeed, had he not examined them, there might
have been some excuse for executing them. Whereas, as it is, he had them
brought before him, he examined them, he found that Peter had been bound, that
the prison had been well secured, that the keepers were before the doors. No wall
had been broken through, no door had been opened, nor was there any other
evidence whatever of false dealing. He ought upon this to have been awed by the
power of God, which had snatched Peter from the very midst of perils, and to
have adored Him who was able to do such mighty works. But, on the contrary,
he ordered those men off to execution. How then in this case is God the cause?
Had He indeed caused the wall to be broken through, and thus had extricated
Peter, possibly the deed might have been put to the account of their negligence.
But if He so providentially ordered it, as that the matter should be shown to be
the work not of the evil agency of man, but of the miraculous agency of God,
why did Herod act thus? For had Peter intended to flee, he would have fled as he
was, with his chains on. Had he intended to fly, in his confusion he never would
have had so great forethought as to take even his sandals, but he would have left
them. Whereas, as it is, the object of the Angel's saying unto him, "Bind on your
sandals," was that they might know that he had done the thing not in the act of
flight, but with full leisure. For, bound as he was, and fixed between the two
soldiers, he never would have found sufficient time to unbind the chains also,
and especially as he too, like Paul, was in the inner ward. Thus then was the
punishment of the keepers owing to the unrighteousness of the judge. For why