brethren, for I speak to them that know the Law," that is, I am saying a thing that
is quite agreed upon, and clear, and to men too that know all these things
accurately,
"How that the Law has dominion over a man as long as he lives?"
He does not say, husband or wife, but "man," which name is common to
either creature; "For he that is dead," he says, "is freed (Gr. justified) from sin."
The Law then is given for the living, but to the dead it ceases to be ordained (or
to give commands). Do you observe how he sets forth a twofold freedom? Next,
after hinting this at the commencement, he carries on what he has to say by way
of proof, in the woman's case, in the following way.
Ver. 2, 3. "For the woman which has an husband is bound by the Law to her
husband, so long as he lives: but if the husband be dead, she is loosed from the
Law of her husband. So then, if while her husband lives, she be married to
another man, she is called an adulteress: but if her husband be dead, she is free
from that law; so that she is no adulteress, though she be married to another
man."
He keeps continually upon this point, and that with great exactness, since he
feels quite sure of the proof grounded on it: and in the husband's place he puts
the Law, but in the woman's, all believers. Then he adds the conclusion in such
way, that it does not tally with the premiss; for what the context would require
would be, "and so, my brethren, the Law does not rule over you, for it is dead."
But he does not say so, but only in the premiss hinted it, and in the inference,
afterwards, to prevent what he says being distasteful, he brings the woman in as
dead by saying,
"Wherefore, my brethren, you also have become dead to the Law."
As then the one or the other event gives rise to the same freedom, what is
there to prevent his showing favor to the Law without any harm being done to
the cause? "For the woman which has an husband is bound by the Law to her
husband as long as he lives." What has become now (3 manuscripts then) of
those that speak evil of the Law? Let them hear, how even when forced upon it,

he does not bereave it of its dignity, but speaks great things of its power; if while
it is alive the Jew is bound, and they are to be called adulterers who transgress it,
and leave it whiles it is alive. But if they let go of it after it has died, this is not to
be wondered at. For in human affairs no one is found fault with for doing this:
"but if the husband be dead, she is loosed from the law of her husband." You see
how in the example he points out the Law as dead, but in the inference he does
not do so. So then if it be while her husband lives, the woman is called an
adulteress. See how he dwells upon the accusations of those who transgress the
Law, while it is yet living. But since he had put an end to it, he afterwards favors
it with perfect security, without doing any harm hereby to the faith. "For if while
her husband lives, she be married to another man, she is called an adulteress."
Thus it would have been natural to say next, you also, my brethren, now the Law
is dead, will not be judged guilty of adultery, if you become married to another
husband. Yet he does not use these words, but what? "You have become dead to
the Law;" if you have been made dead, you are no longer under the Law. For if,
when the husband is dead, the woman is no longer liable to it, much more when
herself is dead also she is freed from the former. Do you note the wisdom of
Paul, how he points out that the Law itself designs that we should be divorced
from it, and married to another? For there is nothing, he means, against your
living with another husband, now the former is dead; for how should there be,
since when the husband was alive it allowed this to her who had a writing of
divorcement? But this he does not set down, as it was rather a charge against the
woman; for although this had been granted, still it was not cleared of blame.
[Matthew 19:7-8] For in cases where he has gained the victory by requisite and
accredited proofs, he does not go into questions beyond the purpose; not being
captious. The marvel then is this, that it is the Law itself that acquits us who are
divorced from it of any charge, and so the mind of it was that we should become
Christ's. For it is dead itself, and we are dead; and the grounds of its power over
us are removed in a twofold way. But he is not content with this alone, but also
adds the reason of it. For he has not set down death without special purpose, but