SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.168, C.3.

Reply to Objection 2: Cyprian is speaking of women painting
themselves: this is a kind of falsification, which cannot be devoid of
sin. Wherefore Augustine says (Ep. ccxlv ad Possid.): "To dye
oneself with paints in order to have a rosier or a paler complexion is
a lying counterfeit. I doubt whether even their husbands are willing
to be deceived by it, by whom alone" (i.e. the husbands) "are they to
be permitted, but not ordered, to adorn themselves." However, such
painting does not always involve a mortal sin, but only when it is
done for the sake of sensuous pleasure or in contempt of God, and it
is to like cases that Cyprian refers.
It must, however, be observed that it is one thing to counterfeit a
beauty one has not, and another to hide a disfigurement arising from
some cause such as sickness or the like. For this is lawful, since
according to the Apostle (1 Cor. 12:23), "such as we think to be the
less honorable members of the body, about these we put more
abundant honor."
Reply to Objection 3: As stated in the foregoing Article, outward
apparel should be consistent with the estate of the person,
according to the general custom. Hence it is in itself sinful for a
woman to wear man's clothes, or vice versa; especially since this
may be a cause of sensuous pleasure; and it is expressly forbidden
in the Law (Dt. 22) because the Gentiles used to practice this change
of attire for the purpose of idolatrous superstition. Nevertheless this
may be done sometimes without sin on account of some necessity,
either in order to hide oneself from enemies, or through lack of other
clothes, or for some similar motive.
Reply to Objection 4: In the case of an art directed to the production
of goods which men cannot use without sin, it follows that the
workmen sin in making such things, as directly affording others an
occasion of sin; for instance, if a man were to make idols or anything
pertaining to idolatrous worship. But in the case of an art the
products of which may be employed by man either for a good or for
an evil use, such as swords, arrows, and the like, the practice of
such an art is not sinful. These alone should be called arts;
wherefore Chrysostom says [Hom. xlix super Matth.]: "The name of
art should be applied to those only which contribute towards and
produce necessaries and mainstays of life." In the case of an art that
produces things which for the most part some people put to an evil
use, although such arts are not unlawful in themselves,

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.168, C.3.

nevertheless, according to the teaching of Plato, they should be
extirpated from the State by the governing authority. Accordingly,
since women may lawfully adorn themselves, whether to maintain
the fitness of their estate, or even by adding something thereto, in
order to please their husbands, it follows that those who make such
means of adornment do not sin in the practice of their art, except
perhaps by inventing means that are superfluous and fantastic.
Hence Chrysostom says (Super Matth.) that "even the shoemakers'
and clothiers' arts stand in need of restraint, for they have lent their
art to lust, by abusing its needs, and debasing art by art."