for virtue shines everywhere, is invincible, and nothing can put hindrances in its
way. But why make I mention of poverty, and captivity, and slavery; and hunger,
and sores, and grievous disease? For disease is more hard to endure than slavery.
Such was Lazarus, such was Job, such was also Timothy, straitened by "often
infirmities." [1 Timothy 5:23] You see that nothing can obtain the mastery over
virtue; neither wealth, nor poverty, nor dominion, nor subjection, nor the
preëminence in affairs, nor disease, nor contempt, nor abandonment. But having
left all these things below, and upon the earth, it hastens towards Heaven. Only
let the soul be noble, and nought can hinder it from being virtuous. For when he
who works is in vigor, nothing external can hinder him; for as in the arts, when
the artificer is experienced and persevering, and thoroughly acquainted with his
art, if disease overtakes him, he still has it; if he became poor, he still has it;
whether he has his tools in his hand or has them not, whether he works or works
not, he loses not at all his art: for the science of it is contained within him. Thus
too the virtuous man, who is devoted to God, manifests his art, if you cast him
into wealth, or if into poverty, if into disease, if into health, if into dishonor, if
into great honor. Did not the Apostles work in every state, "By glory and
dishonor, by good report and evil report"? [2 Corinthians 6:8] This is an athlete,
to be prepared for everything; for such is also the nature of virtue.
If you say, I am not able to preside over many, I ought to lead a solitary life;
you offer an insult to virtue, for it can make use of every state, and shine through
all: only let it be in the soul. Is there a famine? Or is there abundance? It shows
forth its own strength, as Paul says, "I know how to abound, and how to be in
want." [Philippians 4:12; Acts 28:30] Was he required to work? He was not
ashamed, but wrought two years. Was hunger to be undergone? He sank not
under it, nor wavered. Was death to be borne? He became not dejected, through
all he exhibited his noble mind and art. Him therefore let us imitate, and we shall
have no cause of grief: for tell me, what will have power to grieve such an one?
Nothing. As long as no one deprives us of this art, this will be the most blessed
of all men, even in this life as well as in that to come. For suppose the good man

has a wife and children, and riches, and great honor, with all these things he
remains alike virtuous. Take them away, and again in like sort he will be
virtuous, neither overwhelmed by his misfortunes, nor puffed up by prosperity,
but as a rock stands equally unmoved in the raging sea and in calm, neither
broken by the waves nor influenced at all by the calm, thus too the solid mind
stands firm both in calm and in storm. And as little children, when sailing in a
ship, are tossed about, while the pilot sits by, laughing and undisturbed, and
delighted to see their confusion; thus too the soul which is truly wise, when all
others are in confusion, or else are inopportunely smiling at any change of
circumstance, sits unmoved, as it were, at the tiller and helm of piety. For tell
me, what can disturb the pious soul? Can death? This is the beginning of a better
life. Can poverty? This helps her on toward virtue. Can disease? She regards not
its presence. She regards neither ease, nor affliction; for being beforehand with
it, she has afflicted herself. Can dishonor? The world has been crucified to her.
Can the loss of children? She fears it not, when she is fully persuaded of the
Resurrection. What then can surprise her? None of all these things. Does wealth
elevate her? By no means, she knows that money is nothing. Does glory? She
has been taught that "all the glory of man is as the flower of grass." [Isaiah 40:6]
Does luxury? She has heard Paul say, "She that gives herself to pleasure is dead
while she lives." [1 Timothy 5:6] Since then she is neither inflamed nor cramped,
what can equal such health as this?
Other souls, meanwhile, are not such, but change more frequently than the
sea, or the cameleon, so that you have great cause to smile, when you see the
same man at one time laughing, at another weeping, at one time full of care, at
another beyond measure relaxed and languid. For this cause Paul says, "Be not
fashioned according to this world." [Romans 12:2] For we are citizens of
heaven, where there is no turning. Prizes which change not are held out to us.
Let us make manifest this our citizenship, let us thence already receive our good
things. But why do we cast ourselves into the Euripus, into tempest, into storm,
into foam? Let us be in calm. It all depends not on wealth, nor on poverty, nor