advent of Christ, which He accomplished for the salvation of men, nor are willing to understand
that all the prophets announced His two advents: the one, indeed, in which He became a man subject
to stripes, and knowing what it is to bear infirmity, and sat upon the foal of an ass, and was
a stone rejected by the builders, and was led as a sheep to the slaughter, and by the stretching
forth of His hands destroyed Amalek; while He gathered from the ends of the earth into His
Father's fold the children who were scattered abroad, and remembered His own dead ones who
had formerly fallen asleep, and came down to them that He might deliver them: but the second
in which He will come on the clouds, bringing on the day which burns as a furnace, and
smiting the earth with the word of His mouth, and slaying the impious with the breath of His
lips, and having a fan in His hands, and cleansing His floor, and gathering the wheat indeed into
His barn, but burning the chaff with unquenchable fire.
2. Moreover, he shall also examine the doctrine of Marcion, [inquiring] how he holds that there
are two gods, separated from each other by an infinite distance. Or how can he be good who
draws away men that do not belong to him from him who made them, and calls them into his own
kingdom? And why is his goodness, which does not save all [thus], defective? Also, why does he,
indeed, seem to be good as respects men, but most unjust with regard to him who made men,
inasmuch as he deprives him of his possessions? Moreover, how could the Lord, with any justice,
if He belonged to another father, have acknowledged the bread to be His body, while He took it
from that creation to which we belong, and affirmed the mixed cup to be His blood?4267 And why
did He acknowledge Himself to be the Son of man, if He had not gone through that birth which
belongs to a human being? How, too, could He forgive us those sins for which we are answerable
to our Maker and God? And how, again, supposing that He was not flesh, but was a man merely

Isa. liii. 7.

Dan. vii. 13.

Isa. xi. 4.
significance, it harmonizes with the Paschal chalice, and with 1 John v. 6, and St. John's gospel John xix. 34, 35.]

in appearance, could He have been crucified, and could blood and water have issued from His
pierced side?4268 What body, moreover, was it that those who buried Him consigned to the tomb?
And what was that which rose again from the dead?
3. [This spiritual man] shall also judge all the followers of Valentinus, because they do indeed
confess with the tongue one God the Father, and that all things derive their existence from Him,
but do at the same time maintain that He who formed all things is the fruit of an apostasy or defect.
[He shall judge them, too, because] they do in like manner confess with the tongue one Lord Jesus
Christ, the Son of God, but assign in their [system of] doctrine a production of his own to the
Only-begotten, one of his own also to the Word, another to Christ, and yet another to the Saviour;
so that, according to them, all these beings are indeed said [in Scripture to be], as it were, one;
[while they maintain], notwithstanding, that each one of them should be understood [to exist]
separately [from the rest], and to have [had] his own special origin, according to his peculiar
conjunction. [It appears], then that their tongues alone, forsooth, have conceded the unity [of
God], while their [real] opinion and their understanding (by their habit of investigating profundities)
have fallen away from [this doctrine of] unity, and taken up the notion of manifold deities,—[this,
I say, must appear] when they shall be examined by Christ as to the points [of doctrine] which they
have invented. Him, too, they affirm to have been born at a later period than the Pleroma of the
Æons, and that His production took place after [the occurrence of] a degeneracy or apostasy; and
they maintain that, on account of the passion which was experienced by Sophia, they themselves
were brought to the birth. But their own special prophet Homer, listening to whom they have
invented such doctrines, shall himself reprove them, when he expresses himself as follows:—
"Hateful to me that man as Hades' gates,
Who one thing thinks, while he another states."
[This spiritual man] shall also judge the vain speeches of the perverse Gnostics, by showing
that they are the disciples of Simon Magus.
4. He will judge also the Ebionites; [for] how can they be saved unless it was God who wrought
out their salvation upon earth? Or how shall man pass into God, unless God has [first] passed into
man? And how shall he (man) escape from the generation subject to death, if not by means of
a new generation, given in a wonderful and unexpected manner (but as a sign of salvation) by
God—[I mean] that regeneration which flows from the virgin through faith?4272 Or how shall they
receive adoption from God if they remain in this [kind of] generation, which is naturally possessed