FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.18, C.4.

Reply to Objection 1: Circumstances are outside an action,
inasmuch as they are not part of its essence; but they are in an
action as accidents thereof. Thus, too, accidents in natural
substances are outside the essence.
Reply to Objection 2: Every accident is not accidentally in its
subject; for some are proper accidents; and of these every art takes
notice. And thus it is that the circumstances of actions are
considered in the doctrine of morals.
Reply to Objection 3: Since good and being are convertible;
according as being is predicated of substance and of accident, so is
good predicated of a thing both in respect of its essential being, and
in respect of its accidental being; and this, both in natural things and
in moral actions.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.18, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether a human action is good or evil from its

end?
Objection 1: It would seem that the good and evil in human actions
are not from the end. For Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iv) that "nothing
acts with a view to evil." If therefore an action were good or evil from
its end, no action would be evil. Which is clearly false.
Objection 2: Further, the goodness of an action is something in the
action. But the end is an extrinsic cause. Therefore an action is not
said to be good or bad according to its end.
Objection 3: Further, a good action may happen to be ordained to an
evil end, as when a man gives an alms from vainglory; and
conversely, an evil action may happen to be ordained to a good end,
as a theft committed in order to give something to the poor.
Therefore an action is not good or evil from its end.
On the contrary, Boethius says (De Differ. Topic. ii) that "if the end is
good, the thing is good, and if the end be evil, the thing also is evil."
I answer that, The disposition of things as to goodness is the same
as their disposition as to being. Now in some things the being does
not depend on another, and in these it suffices to consider their
being absolutely. But there are things the being of which depends on
something else, and hence in their regard we must consider their
being in its relation to the cause on which it depends. Now just as
the being of a thing depends on the agent, and the form, so the
goodness of a thing depends on its end. Hence in the Divine
Persons, Whose goodness does not depend on another, the
measure of goodness is not taken from the end. Whereas human
actions, and other things, the goodness of which depends on
something else, have a measure of goodness from the end on which
they depend, besides that goodness which is in them absolutely.
Accordingly a fourfold goodness may be considered in a human
action. First, that which, as an action, it derives from its genus;
because as much as it has of action and being so much has it of
goodness, as stated above (Article 1). Secondly, it has goodness
according to its species; which is derived from its suitable object.
Thirdly, it has goodness from its circumstances, in respect, as it