John 17:4
"I have glorified You on the earth." Well said He, "on the earth"; for in heaven
He had been already glorified, having His own natural glory, and being
worshipped by the Angels. Christ then speaks not of that glory which is bound
up with His Essence, (for that glory, though none glorify Him, He ever possesses
in its fullness,) but of that which comes from the service of men. And so the,
"Glorify Me," is of this kind; and that you may understand that He speaks of this
manner of glory, hear what follows.
"I have finished the work which You gave Me that I should do it."
And yet the action was still but beginning, or rather was not yet beginning.
How then said He, "I have finished"? Either He means, that "I have done all My
part"; or He speaks of the future, as having already come to pass; or, which one
may say most of all, that all was already effected, because the root of blessings
had been laid, which fruits would certainly and necessarily follow, and from His
being present at and assisting in those things which should take place after these.
On this account He says again in a condescending way, "Which You gave Me."
For had He indeed waited to hear and learn, this would have fallen far short of
His glory. For that He came to this of His own will, is clear from many passages.
As when Paul says, that "He so loved us, as to give Himself for us" [Ephesians
5:2]; and, "He emptied Himself, and took upon Him the form of a servant"
[Philippians 2:7]; and, "As the Father has loved Me, so have I loved you." [John
15:9]

John 17:5
"And now, O Father, glorify Me with Your Own Self, with the glory which I had
with You before the world was."
Where is that glory? For allowing that He was with reason unhonored
among men, because of the covering which was put around Him; how seeks He
to be glorified with the Father? What then says He here? The saying refers to
the Dispensation; since His fleshly nature had not yet been glorified, not having
as yet enjoyed incorruption, nor shared the kingly throne. Therefore He said not
"on earth," but "with You."
3. This glory we also shall enjoy according to our measure, if we be sober.
Wherefore Paul says, "If so be that we suffer with Him, that we may also be
glorified together." [Romans 8:17] Ten thousand tears then do they merit, who
through sluggishness and sleep plot against themselves when such glory is set
before them; and, were there no hell, they would be more wretched than any,
who, when it is in their power to reign and to be glorified with the Son of God,
deprive themselves of so great blessings. Since if it were necessary to be cut in
pieces, if to die ten thousand deaths, if to give up every day ten thousand lives
and as many bodies, ought we not to submit to such things for such glory? But
now we do not even despise money, which hereafter, though unwilling, we shall
leave: we do not despise money, which brings about us ten thousand mischiefs,
which remains here, which is not our own. For we are but stewards of that which
is not our own, although we receive it from our fathers. But when there is hell
besides, and the worm that dies not, and the fire that is not quenched, and the
gnashing of teeth, how, tell me, shall we bear these things? How long will we
refuse to see clearly, and spend our all on daily fightings, and contentions, and
unprofitable talk, feeding, cultivating earth, fattening the body and neglecting
the soul, making no account of necessary things, but much care about things
superfluous and unprofitable? And we build splendid tombs, and buy costly