[Genesis 6:2], and they rushed headlong into lust. And from hence again it went
on to money; for the wish to have more than one's neighbor of this world's
goods, arises from no other source, than from "love waxing cold." The wish to
have more than one's share arises from no other source than recklessness,
misanthropy, and arrogance toward others. Look at the earth, how wide is its
extent? How far greater than we can use the expanse of the sky and the heaven?
It is that He might put an end to your covetousness, that God has thus widely
extended the bounds of the creation. And are you then still grasping and even
thus? And do you hear that covetousness is idolatry, and not shudder even at
this? Do you wish to inherit the earth? Then have you no inheritance in heaven.
Are you eager to leave an inheritance to others, that you may rob yourself of it?
Tell me, if any one were to offer you power to possess all things, would you be
unwilling? It is in your power now, if you will. Some, however, say, that they are
grieved when they transmit the inheritance to others, and would fain have
consumed it themselves, rather than see others become its masters. Nor do I
acquit you of this weakness; for this too is characteristic of a weak soul.
However, at least let as much as this be done. In your will leave Christ your heir.
It were your duty indeed to do so in your lifetime, for this would show a right
disposition. Still, at all events, be a little generous, though it be but by necessity.
For Christ indeed charged us to give to the poor with this object, to make us wise
in our lifetime, to induce us to despise money, to teach us to look down upon
earthly things. It is no contempt of money, as you think, to bestow it upon this
man and upon that man when one dies, and is no longer master of it. You are
then no longer giving of your own, but of absolute necessity: thanks to death, not
to you. This is no act of affection, it is your loss. However, let it be done even
thus; at least then give up your passion.
Moral. Consider how many acts of plunder, how many acts of
covetousness, you have committed. Restore all fourfold. Thus plead your cause
to God. Some, however, there are who are arrived at such a pitch of madness and
blindness, as not even then to comprehend their duty; but who go on acting in all

cases, just as if they were taking pains to make the judgment of God yet heavier
to themselves. This is the reason why our blessed Apostle writes and says, "Walk
as children of light." Now the covetous man of all others lives in darkness, and
spreads great darkness over all things around.
"And have no fellowship," he adds, "with the unfruitful works of darkness,
but rather even reprove them; for the things which are done by them in secret, it
is a shame even to speak of; but all things when they are reproved are made
manifest by the light." Hearken, I entreat you, all, as many of you as like not to
be hated for nothing, but to be loved. "What need is there to be hated?" one says.
A man commits a robbery, and do you not reprove him, but art afraid of his
hatred? Though this, however, is not being hated for nothing. But do you justly
convict him, and yet fear the hatred? Convict your brother, incur enmity for the
love's sake which you owe to Christ, for the love's sake which you owe to your
brother. Arrest him as he is on his road to the pit of destruction. For to admit him
to our table, to treat him with civil speeches, with salutations, and with
entertainments, these are no signal proofs of friendship. No, those I have
mentioned are the boons which we must bestow upon our friends, that we may
rescue their souls from the wrath of God. When we see them lying prostrate in
the furnace of wickedness, let us raise them up. "But," they say, "it is of no use,
he is incorrigible." However, do thou your duty, and then you have excused
yourself to God. Hide not your talent. It is for this that you have speech, it is for
this you have a mouth and a tongue, that you may correct your neighbor. It is
dumb and reasonless creatures only that have no care for their neighbor, and take
no account of others. But do you while calling God, "Father," and your neighbor,
"brother," when you see him committing unnumbered wickednesses, do you
prefer his good-will to his welfare? No, do not so, I entreat you. There is no
evidence of friendship so true as never to overlook the sins of our brethren. Did
you see them at enmity? Reconcile them. Did you see them guilty of
covetousness? Check them. Did you see them wronged? Stand up in their
defense. It is not on them, it is on yourself you are conferring the chief benefit. It