shall overcome, I will give to sit with Me in My throne, as I also have
overcome, and am set down in My Father's throne." Therefore we
must say with others that although there is nothing of the nature of
an aureole in Christ, there is nevertheless something more excellent
than any aureole.
Reply to Objection 1: Christ was most truly virgin, martyr, and
doctor; yet the corresponding accidental reward in Christ is a
negligible quantity in comparison with the greatness of His essential
reward. Hence He has not an aureole in its proper sense.
Reply to Objection 2: Although the aureole is due to a most perfect
work, yet with regard to us, so far as it is a diminutive term, it
denotes the participation of a perfection derived from one in whom
that perfection is found in its fulness. Accordingly it implies a certain
inferiority, and thus it is not found in Christ in Whom is the fulness of
every perfection.
Reply to Objection 3: Although in some way virginity has its
exemplar in God, that exemplar is not homogeneous. For the
incorruption of God, which virginity imitates is not in God in the
same way as in a virgin.

### ARTICLE 9. Whether an aureole is due to the angels?

Objection 1: It would seem that an aureole is due to the angels. For
Jerome (Serm. de Assump. [Ep. ad Paul. et Eustoch. ix]) speaking of
virginity says: "To live without the flesh while living in the flesh is to
live as an angel rather than as a man": and a gloss on 1 Cor. 7:26,
"For the present necessity," says that "virginity is the portion of the
angels." Since then an aureole corresponds to virginity, it would
seem due to the angels.
Objection 2: Further, incorruption of the spirit is more excellent than
incorruption of the flesh. Now there is incorruption of spirit in the
angels, since they never sinned. Therefore an aureole is due to them
rather than to men incorrupt in the flesh and who have sinned at
some time.
Objection 3: Further, an aureole is due to teaching. Now angels teach
us by cleansing, enlightening, and perfecting [FP, Question 111,
Article 1] us, as Dionysius says (Hier. Eccles. vi). Therefore at least
the aureole of doctors is due to them.
On the contrary, It is written (2 Tim. 2:5): "He . . . shall not be
crowned, except he strive lawfully." But there is no conflict in the
angels. Therefore an aureole is not due to them.
Further, an aureole is not due to an act that is not performed through
the body: wherefore it is not due to lovers of virginity, martyrdom or
teaching, if they do not practice them outwardly. But angels are
incorporeal spirits. Therefore they have no aureole.
I answer that, An aureole is not due to the angels. The reason of this
is that an aureole, properly speaking, corresponds to some
perfection of surpassing merit. Now those things which make for
perfect merit in man are connatural to angels, or belong to their state
in general, or to their essential reward. Wherefore the angels have
not an aureole in the same sense as an aureole is due to men.
Reply to Objection 1: Virginity is said to be an angelic life, in so far
as virgins imitate by grace what angels have by nature. For it is not
owing to a virtue that angels abstain altogether from pleasures of the
flesh, since they are incapable of such pleasures.