become superior to all worldly show, instructed as they have been by the sacred
Scriptures, that "all is vanity, yea, vanity of vanities," [Ecclesiastes 1:2] and they
do not greedily long for any of those things which seem to be so splendid.
4. These too know how to philosophize concerning God, even as God has
determined; and if, taking one of them, you were now to bring forward some
pagan philosopher—or rather, now you could not find one! — But if you were to
take one of these, and then open the books of their ancient philosophers, and go
through them, and institute an enquiry by way of parallel as to what these now
answer, and the others in their day philosophically advanced; you would see how
much wisdom belonged to the former, and how much folly to the latter. For
while some of those would aver, that the things existing were destitute of a
providence, and that the creation had not its origin from God; that virtue was not
sufficient for itself, but stood in need of wealth, and nobility, and external
splendour, and other things still more ridiculous; and while these, on the other
hand, would discourse wisely respecting Providence, respecting the future
Tribunals of judgment, respecting the creative power of God, bringing forth all
things out of nothing, as well as respecting all other points, although at the same
time they were entirely destitute of worldly schooling; who could but learn from
hence the power of Christ, which has proved these unlearned and simple persons
to be as much wiser than those, who make so much boast of their wisdom, as
men of discretion are seen to be in comparison of little children? For what harm
can result to them from their simplicity in regard to learning, when their thoughts
are full of much wisdom? And what advantage have those philosophers from this
learning, when the understanding is devoid of right thoughts? It were just as if
one should have a sword that had its hilt of silver, while the blade was weaker
than the vilest lead. For truly these philosophers have their tongue decked out
with words and names, but their understanding is full of mere weakness and
good for nothing. Not so with these philosophers, but quite the reverse. Their
understanding is full of spiritual wisdom and their mode of life is a transcript of
their doctrines. Amongst these there are no luxurious women; there are no

ornaments of dress, nor colours, nor paints; but all such corruption of manners is
discountenanced. Hence the population under their charge are the more readily
trained to sobriety, and the law which Paul gave, when he directed that food and
covering should be had, and nothing more be sought after, they most rigidly
observe. [1 Timothy 6:8] Amongst them, there are no perfumed ointments to
fascinate the senses; but the earth bringing forth herbs, prepares for them a
varied fragrance of flowers, above all the skill of perfumers. For this reason,
their bodies as well as souls enjoy a sound state of health, inasmuch as they have
banished all luxury of diet, and driven off all the evil floods of drunkenness; and
they eat just as much as suffices for subsistence. Let us then not despise them
because of their outward appearance, but let us admire their mind. For of what
advantage is the external habit, when the soul is more wretchedly clad than any
beggar! The man ought to be praised and admired, not for dress, nay more, not
for his bodily form, but for his soul. Lay bare the soul of these men, and you will
see its beauty and the wealth it possesses, in their words, in their doctrines, and
in the whole system of their manners!
5. Let the Gentiles then be ashamed, let them hide their heads, and slink
away on account of their philosophers, and their wisdom, wretched as it is
beyond all folly! For the philosophers that have been among them in their
lifetime have hardly been able to teach their doctrines to a very few, who can
easily be numbered; and when any trifling peril overtook them, they lost even
these. But the disciples of Christ, the fishermen, the publicans, and the tentmakers, in a few years brought over the whole world to the truth; and when from
that time, ten thousand perils have been constantly arising, the preaching of the
Gospel was so far from being put down, that it still flourishes and increases; and
they taught simple people, tillers of the ground, and occupied with cattle, to be
lovers of wisdom. Such are the persons, who beside all the rest having deeply
rooted in them that love which is the source of all good things, [Ephesians 3:17]
have hastened to us, undertaking so long a journey, that they might come and
embrace their fellow-members.