that has been collected by honest labors, thou often makest to become unlawful
because of that wicked increase; as if one should compel a fair womb to give
birth to scorpions.
And why do I speak of God's law? Do not even ye call it "filth"? But if you,
the gainers, give your voice so, consider what suffrage God will pass upon you.
And if you will ask the Gentile lawgivers too, you will be told that even by
them this thing is deemed a proof of the most utter shamelessness. Those, for
example, who are in offices of honor, and belong to the great council, which they
call the senate, may not legally disgrace themselves with such gains; there being
a law among them which prohibits the same.
How then is it not a horrible thing, if you ascribe not even so much honor to
the polity of Heaven, as the legislators to the council of the Romans; but Heaven
is to obtain less than earth, and you are not ashamed even of the very folly of the
thing? For what could be more foolish than this, unless one without land, rain, or
plough, were to insist upon sowing? Tares therefore, to be committed to the fire,
do they reap, who have devised this evil husbandry.
Why, are there not many honest trades? In the fields, the flocks, the herds,
the breeding of cattle, in handicrafts, in care of property? Why rave and be
frantic, cultivating thorns for no good? What if the fruits of the earth are subject
to mischance; hail, and blight, and excessive rain? Yet not to such an extent as
are money dealings. For in whatsoever cases of that sort occur, the damage of
course concerns the produce, but the principal remains, I mean, the land. But
herein many often have suffered shipwreck in their principal; and before the loss
too they are in continual dejection. For never does the money-lender enjoy his
possessions, nor find pleasure in them; but when the interest is brought, he
rejoices not that he has received gain, but is grieved that the interest has not yet
come up to the principal. And before this evil offspring is brought forth
complete, he compels it also to bring forth, making the interest principal, and
forcing it to bring forth its untimely and abortive brood of vipers. For of this
nature are the gains of usury; more than those wild creatures do they devour and

tear the souls of the wretched. This "is the bond of iniquity:" this "the twisted
knot of oppressive bargains."
Yea, "I give," he seems to say, "not for you to receive, but that you may
repay more." And whereas God commands not even to receive what is given (for
"give," says He, "to them from whom you look not to receive"), you require even
more than is given, and what you gave not, this as a debt, you constrain the
receiver to pay.
And thou indeed supposest your substance to be increased hereby, but
instead of substance you are kindling the unquenchable fire.
That this therefore may not be, let us cut out the evil womb of usurious
gains, let us deaden these lawless travailings, let us dry up this place of
pernicious teeming, and let us pursue the true and great gains only. "But what are
these?" Hear Paul saying "Godliness with contentment is great gain."
[1 Timothy 6:6]
Therefore in this wealth alone let us be rich, that we may both here enjoy
security, and attain unto the good things to come, by the grace and love towards
man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and might with the Father and
the Holy Spirit, now and always, and world without end. Amen.