true human nature. Therefore the food is changed into the reality of
human nature.
I answer that, According to the Philosopher (Metaph. ii), "The relation
of a thing to truth is the same as its relation to being." Therefore that
belongs to the true nature of any thing which enters into the
constitution of that nature. But nature can be considered in two
ways: firstly, in general according to the species; secondly, as in the
individual. And whereas the form and the common matter belong to
a thing's true nature considered in general; individual signate matter,
and the form individualized by that matter belong to the true nature
considered in this particular individual. Thus a soul and body belong
to the true human nature in general, but to the true human nature of
Peter and Martin belong this soul and this body.
Now there are certain things whose form cannot exist but in one
individual matter: thus the form of the sun cannot exist save in the
matter in which it actually is. And in this sense some have said that
the human form cannot exist but in a certain individual matter,
which, they said, was given that form at the very beginning in the
first man. So that whatever may have been added to that which was
derived by posterity from the first parent, does not belong to the
truth of human nature, as not receiving in truth the form of human
nature.
But, said they, that matter which, in the first man, was the subject of
the human form, was multiplied in itself: and in this way the
multitude of human bodies is derived from the body of the first man.
According to these, the food is not changed into true human nature;
we take food, they stated, in order to help nature to resist the action
of natural heat, and prevent the consumption of the "radical humor";
just as lead or tin is mixed with silver to prevent its being consumed
by fire.
But this is unreasonable in many ways. Firstly, because it comes to
the same that a form can be produced in another matter, or that it
can cease to be in its proper matter; wherefore all things that can be
generated are corruptible, and conversely. Now it is manifest that the
human form can cease to exist in this (particular) matter which is its
subject: else the human body would not be corruptible.
Consequently it can begin to exist in another matter, so that
something else be changed into true human nature. Secondly,
because in all beings whose entire matter is contained in one

individual there is only one individual in the species: as is clearly the
case with the sun, moon and such like. Thus there would only be one
individual of the human species. Thirdly, because multiplication of
matter cannot be understood otherwise than either in respect of
quantity only, as in things which are rarefied, so that their matter
increases in dimensions; or in respect of the substance itself of the
matter. But as long as the substance alone of matter remains, it
cannot be said to be multiplied; for multitude cannot consist in the
addition of a thing to itself, since of necessity it can only result from
division. Therefore some other substance must be added to matter,
either by creation, or by something else being changed into it.
Consequently no matter can be multiplied save either by rarefaction
as when air is made from water; or by the change of some other
things, as fire is multiplied by the addition of wood; or lastly by
creation. Now it is manifest that the multiplication of matter in the
human body does not occur by rarefaction: for thus the body of a
man of perfect age would be more imperfect than the body of a child.
Nor does it occur by creation of flesh matter: for, according to
Gregory (Moral. xxxii): "All things were created together as to the
substance of matter, but not as to the specific form." Consequently
the multiplication of the human body can only be the result of the
food being changed into the true human nature. Fourthly, because,
since man does not differ from animals and plants in regard to the
vegetative soul, it would follow that the bodies of animals and plants
do not increase through a change of nourishment into the body so
nourished, but through some kind of multiplication. Which
multiplication cannot be natural: since the matter cannot naturally
extend beyond a certain fixed quantity; nor again does anything
increase naturally, save either by rarefaction or the change of
something else into it. Consequently the whole process of
generation and nourishment, which are called "natural forces,"
would be miraculous. Which is altogether inadmissible.
Wherefore others have said that the human form can indeed begin to
exist in some other matter, if we consider the human nature in
general: but not if we consider it as in this individual. For in the
individual the form remains confined to a certain determinate matter,
on which it is first imprinted at the generation of that individual, so
that it never leaves that matter until the ultimate dissolution of the
individual. And this matter, say they, principally belongs to the true
human nature. But since this matter does not suffice for the requisite
quantity, some other matter must be added, through the change of
food into the substance of the individual partaking thereof, in such a