Hebrews 9:12
"Neither by the blood," he says, "of goats and calves" (All things are
changed) "but by His own Blood" (he says) "He entered in once for all into the
Holy Place." See thus he called Heaven. "Once for all" (he says) "He entered
into the Holy Place, having obtained eternal redemption." And this [expression]
"having obtained," was [expressive] of things very difficult, and that are beyond
expectation, how by one entering in, He "obtained everlasting redemption."

Hebrews 9:13-14
5. Next [comes] that which is calculated to persuade.
"For if the blood of bulls and of goats, and the ashes of an heifer sprinkling
the unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh; how much more shall the
Blood of Christ, who through the Holy Spirit offered Himself without spot to
God, purge your conscience from dead works, to serve the living God."
For (he says) if "the blood of bulls" is able to purify the flesh, much rather
shall the Blood of Christ wipe away the defilement of the soul. For that you may
not suppose when you hear [the word] "sanctifies," that it is some great thing, he
marks out and shows the difference between each of these purifyings, and how
the one of them is high and the other low. And says it is [so] with good reason,
since that is "the blood of bulls," and this "the Blood of Christ."
Nor was he content with the name, but he sets forth also the manner of the
offering. "Who" (he says) "through the Holy Spirit offered Himself without spot
to God," that is, the victim was without blemish, pure from sins. For this is [the
meaning of] "through the Holy Spirit," not through fire, nor through any other
things.
"Shall purge your conscience" (he says) "from dead works." And well said
he "from dead works"; if any man touched a dead body, he was polluted; and
here, if any man touch a "dead work," he is defiled through his conscience. "To
serve" (he says) "the Living and true God." Here he declares that it is not
[possible] while one has "dead works to serve the Living and true God," for they
are both dead and false; and with good reason [he says this].
6. Let no man then enter in here with "dead works." For if it was not fit that
one should enter in who had touched a dead body, much more one that has "dead
works": for this is the most grievous pollution. And "dead works" are, all which
have not life, which breathe forth an ill odor. For as a dead body is useful to

none of the senses, but is even annoying to those who come near it, so sin also at
once strikes the reasoning faculty, and does not allow the understanding itself to
be calm, but disturbs and troubles it.
And it is said too that a plague at its very commencement corrupts the
living bodies; such also is sin. It differs in nothing from a plague, not [indeed]
corrupting the air first, and then the bodies, but darting at once into the soul. Do
you see not how persons affected with the plague, are inflamed: how they writhe
about, how they are full of an ill scent, how disfigured are their countenances:
how wholly unclean they are? Such are they also that sin, though they see it not.
For, tell me, is not he who is possessed by the desire of riches or carnal lust,
worse than any one that is in a fever? Is he not more unclean than all these, when
he does and submits to all shameless things?
7. For what is baser than a man who is in love with money? Whatever
things women that are harlots or on the stage refuse not to do neither does he
[refuse]. Rather it is likely that they would refuse [to do] a thing, rather than he.
He even submits to do things fit for slaves, flattering those whom he ought not;
again he is overbearing where he ought not to be, being inconsistent in every
respect. He will sit by flattering wicked people, and oftentimes depraved old
men, that are of much poorer and meaner condition than himself; and will be
insolent and overbearing to others that are good and in all respects virtuous. You
see in both respects the baseness, the shamelessness: he is both humble beyond
measure, and boastful.
Harlots however stand in front of their house, and the charge against them
is that they sell their body for money: yet, one may say, poverty and hunger
compel them (although at the most this is no sufficient excuse: for they might
gain a livelihood by work). But the covetous man stands, not before his house,
but before the midst of the city, making over to the devil not his body but his
soul; so that he [the devil] is in his company, and goes in unto him, as verily to a
harlot: and having satisfied all his lusts departs; and all the city sees it, not two
or three persons only.