secondly, that if it had become so, you have a remedy, seal it, give thanks, and
glorify God, and all the uncleanness passes away. Can we then so cleanse that
which is offered to an idol? If you know not that it was so offered. But if,
knowing this, you partake of it, you will be unclean; not because it was offered
to an idol, but because contrary to an express command, you thereby
communicate with devils. So that it is not unclean by nature, but becomes so
through your wilful disobedience. What then, is not swine's flesh unclean? By no
means, when it is received with thanksgiving, and with the seal; nor is anything
else. It is your unthankful disposition to God that is unclean.
Ver. 6. "If you put the brethren in remembrance of these things, you shall be
a good minister of Jesus Christ, nourished up in the words of faith and of good
doctrine, whereunto you have attained."
What are the things here meant? The same which he had before mentioned,
that "great is the mystery"; that to abstain from meats is the doctrine of devils,
that they are "cleansed by the word of God and prayer."
Ver. 7. "But refuse profane and old wives' fables, and exercise yourself
rather unto godliness."
"Putting them in remembrance," he says; here you observe no authority; but
all is condescension: he does not say "commanding" or "enjoining," but
reminding them: that is, suggest these things as matter of advice, and so enter
into discourses with them concerning the faith, "being nourished up," he says,
meaning to imply constancy in application to these things.
For as we set before us day by day this bodily nourishment, so he means, let
us be continually receiving discourses concerning the faith, and ever be
nourished with them. What is this, "being nourished up"? Ruminating upon
them; attending ever to the same things, and practicing ever the same, for it is no
common nourishment that they supply.
"But refuse profane and old wives' fables." By these are meant Jewish
traditions, and he calls them "fables," either because of their falsehood or their
unseasonableness. For what is seasonable is useful, but what is unseasonable is

not only useless but injurious. Suppose a man of adult age to be suckled by a
nurse, would he not be ridiculous, because it is unseasonable? "Profane and old
wives' fables," he calls them, partly because of their obsoleteness, and partly
because they are impediments to faith. For to bring souls under fear, that are
raised above these things, is an impious commandment. "Exercise yourself unto
godliness." That is, unto a pure faith and a moral life; for this is godliness. So
then we need "exercise."
Ver. 8. "For bodily exercise profits little." This has by some been referred to
fasting; but away with such a notion! For that is not a bodily but a spiritual
exercise. If it were bodily it would nourish the body, whereas it wastes and
makes it lean, so that it is not bodily. Hence he is not speaking of the discipline
of the body. What we need, therefore, is the exercise of the soul. For the exercise
of the body has no profit, but may benefit the body a little, but the exercise of
godliness yields fruit and advantage both here and hereafter.
"This is a faithful saying," that is, it is true that godliness is profitable both
here and hereafter. Observe how everywhere he brings in this, he needs no
demonstration, but simply declares it, for he was addressing Timothy.
So then even here, we have good hopes? For he who is conscious to himself
of no evil, and who has been fruitful in good, rejoices even here: as the wicked
man on the other hand is punished here as well as hereafter. He lives in perpetual
fear, he can look no one in the face with confidence, he is pale, trembling, and
full of anxiety. Is it not so with the fraudulent, and with thieves, who have no
satisfaction even in what they possess? Is not the life of murderers and adulterers
most wretched, who look upon the sun itself with suspicion? Is this to be called
life? No; rather a horrid death!
Ver. 10. "For therefore we both labor and suffer reproach, because we trust
in the living God, who is the Saviour of all men, specially of them that believe."
This in effect is to say, wherefore do we mortify ourselves, unless we
expect future blessings? Have we endured so many evils, submitted to so many
reproaches, suffered such insults and calumnies, and such numerous calamities