is a moral act, it must needs be voluntary, and dependent on the
intention of the will. Now the proper object of a manifestation or
statement is the true or the false. And the intention of a bad will may
bear on two things: one of which is that a falsehood may be told;
while the other is the proper effect of a false statement, namely, that
someone may be deceived.
Accordingly if these three things concur, namely, falsehood of what
is said, the will to tell a falsehood, and finally the intention to
deceive, then there is falsehood---materially, since what is said is
false, formally, on account of the will to tell an untruth, and
effectively, on account of the will to impart a falsehood.
However, the essential notion of a lie is taken from formal falsehood,
from the fact namely, that a person intends to say what is false;
wherefore also the word "mendacium" [lie] is derived from its being
in opposition to the "mind." Consequently if one says what is false,
thinking it to be true, it is false materially, but not formally, because
the falseness is beside the intention of the speaker so that it is not a
perfect lie, since what is beside the speaker's intention is accidental
for which reason it cannot be a specific difference. If, on the other
hand, one utters' falsehood formally, through having the will to
deceive, even if what one says be true, yet inasmuch as this is a
voluntary and moral act, it contains falseness essentially and truth
accidentally, and attains the specific nature of a lie.
That a person intends to cause another to have a false opinion, by
deceiving him, does not belong to the species of lying, but to
perfection thereof, even as in the physical order, a thing acquires its
species if it has its form, even though the form's effect be lacking;
for instance a heavy body which is held up aloft by force, lest it
come down in accordance with the exigency of its form. Therefore it
is evident that lying is directly an formally opposed to the virtue of
truth.
Reply to Objection 1: We judge of a thing according to what is in it
formally and essentially rather than according to what is in it
materially and accidentally. Hence it is more in opposition to truth,
considered as a moral virtue, to tell the truth with the intention of
telling a falsehood than to tell a falsehood with the intention of telling
the truth.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.109, C.2.

Reply to Objection 2: As Augustine says (De Doctr. Christ. ii), words
hold the chief place among other signs. And so when it is said that
"a lie is a false signification by words," the term "words" denotes
every kind of sign. Wherefore if a person intended to signify
something false by means of signs, he would not be excused from
lying.
Reply to Objection 3: The desire to deceive belongs to the perfection
of lying, but not to its species, as neither does any effect belong to
the species of its cause.