nature of every creature, as shown above (Question 12, Article 4).
The other end, however, is proportionate to created nature, to which
end created being can attain according to the power of its nature.
Now if a thing cannot attain to something by the power of its nature,
it must be directed thereto by another; thus, an arrow is directed by
the archer towards a mark. Hence, properly speaking, a rational
creature, capable of eternal life, is led towards it, directed, as it were,
by God. The reason of that direction pre-exists in God; as in Him is
the type of the order of all things towards an end, which we proved
above to be providence. Now the type in the mind of the doer of
something to be done, is a kind of pre-existence in him of the thing
to be done. Hence the type of the aforesaid direction of a rational
creature towards the end of life eternal is called predestination. For
to destine, is to direct or send. Thus it is clear that predestination, as
regards its objects, is a part of providence.
Reply to Objection 1: Damascene calls predestination an imposition
of necessity, after the manner of natural things which are
predetermined towards one end. This is clear from his adding: "He
does not will malice, nor does He compel virtue." Whence
predestination is not excluded by Him.
Reply to Objection 2: Irrational creatures are not capable of that end
which exceeds the faculty of human nature. Whence they cannot be
properly said to be predestined; although improperly the term is
used in respect of any other end.
Reply to Objection 3: Predestination applies to angels, just as it does
to men, although they have never been unhappy. For movement
does not take its species from the term "wherefrom" but from the
term "whereto." Because it matters nothing, in respect of the notion
of making white, whether he who is made white was before black,
yellow or red. Likewise it matters nothing in respect of the notion of
predestination whether one is predestined to life eternal from the
state of misery or not. Although it may be said that every conferring
of good above that which is due pertains to mercy; as was shown
previously (Question 21, Articles 3,4).
Reply to Objection 4: Even if by a special privilege their
predestination were revealed to some, it is not fitting that it should
be revealed to everyone; because, if so, those who were not
predestined would despair; and security would beget negligence in
the predestined.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether predestination places anything in the

predestined?
Objection 1: It seems that predestination does place something in
the predestined. For every action of itself causes passion. If
therefore predestination is action in God, predestination must be
passion in the predestined.
Objection 2: Further, Origen says on the text, "He who was
predestined," etc. (Rm. 1:4): "Predestination is of one who is not;
destination, of one who is." And Augustine says (De Praed. Sanct.):
"What is predestination but the destination of one who is?"
Therefore predestination is only of one who actually exists; and it
thus places something in the predestined.
Objection 3: Further, preparation is something in the thing prepared.
But predestination is the preparation of God's benefits, as Augustine
says (De Praed. Sanct. ii, 14). Therefore predestination is something
in the predestined.
Objection 4: Further, nothing temporal enters into the definition of
eternity. But grace, which is something temporal, is found in the
definition of predestination. For predestination is the preparation of
grace in the present; and of glory in the future. Therefore
predestination is not anything eternal. So it must needs be that it is
in the predestined, and not in God; for whatever is in Him is eternal.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Praed. Sanct. ii, 14) that
"predestination is the foreknowledge of God's benefits." But
foreknowledge is not in the things foreknown, but in the person who
foreknows them. Therefore, predestination is in the one who
predestines, and not in the predestined.
I answer that, Predestination is not anything in the predestined; but
only in the person who predestines. We have said above that
predestination is a part of providence. Now providence is not
anything in the things provided for; but is a type in the mind of the
provider, as was proved above (Question 22, Article 1). But the
execution of providence which is called government, is in a passive
way in the thing governed, and in an active way in the governor.
Whence it is clear that predestination is a kind of type of the ordering