FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.87, C.3.

punishment of a preceding sin. Secondly, by reason of the
substance of the act, which is such as to cause pain, whether it be
an interior act, as is clearly the case with anger or envy, or an
exterior act, as is the case with one who endures considerable
trouble and loss in order to achieve a sinful act, according to Wis.
5:7: "We wearied ourselves in the way of iniquity." Thirdly, on the
part of the effect, so that one sin is said to be a punishment by
reason of its effect. In the last two ways, a sin is a punishment not
only in respect of a preceding sin, but also with regard to itself.
Reply to Objection 1: Even when God punishes men by permitting
them to fall into sin, this is directed to the good of virtue. Sometimes
indeed it is for the good of those who are punished, when, to wit,
men arise from sin, more humble and more cautious. But it is always
for the amendment of others, who seeing some men fall from sin to
sin, are the more fearful of sinning. With regard to the other two
ways, it is evident that the punishment is intended for the sinner's
amendment, since the very fact that man endures toil and loss in
sinning, is of a nature to withdraw man from sin.
Reply to Objection 2: This objection considers sin essentially as
such: and the same answer applies to the Third Objection.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.87, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether any sin incurs a debt of eternal

punishment?
Objection 1: It would seem that no sin incurs a debt of eternal
punishment. For a just punishment is equal to the fault, since justice
is equality: wherefore it is written (Is. 27:8): "In measure against
measure, when it shall be cast off, thou shalt judge it." Now sin is
temporal. Therefore it does not incur a debt of eternal punishment.
Objection 2: Further, "punishments are a kind of medicine" (Ethic. ii,
3). But no medicine should be infinite, because it is directed to an
end, and "what is directed to an end, is not infinite," as the
Philosopher states (Polit. i, 6). Therefore no punishment should be
infinite.
Objection 3: Further, no one does a thing always unless he delights
in it for its own sake. But "God hath not pleasure in the destruction
of men". Therefore He will not inflict eternal punishment on man.
Objection 4: Further, nothing accidental is infinite. But punishment is
accidental, for it is not natural to the one who is punished. Therefore
it cannot be of infinite duration.
On the contrary, It is written (Mt. 25:46): "These shall go into
everlasting punishment"; and (Mk. 3:29): "He that shall blaspheme
against the Holy Ghost, shall never have forgiveness, but shall be
guilty of an everlasting sin."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), sin incurs a debt of
punishment through disturbing an order. But the effect remains so
long as the cause remains. Wherefore so long as the disturbance of
the order remains the debt of punishment must needs remain also.
Now disturbance of an order is sometimes reparable, sometimes
irreparable: because a defect which destroys the principle is
irreparable, whereas if the principle be saved, defects can be
repaired by virtue of that principle. For instance, if the principle of
sight be destroyed, sight cannot be restored except by Divine power;
whereas, if the principle of sight be preserved, while there arise
certain impediments to the use of sight, these can be remedied by
nature or by art. Now in every order there is a principle whereby one
takes part in that order. Consequently if a sin destroys the principle