77. As children of this age, though, all of us are in some way affected by the present globalized
culture which, while offering us values and new possibilities, can also limit, condition and ultimately
harm us. I am aware that we need to create spaces where pastoral workers can be helped and
healed, “places where faith itself in the crucified and risen Jesus is renewed, where the most
profound questions and daily concerns are shared, where deeper discernment about our
experiences and life itself is undertaken in the light of the Gospel, for the purpose of directing
individual and social decisions towards the good and beautiful”. At the same time, I would like
to call attention to certain particular temptations which affect pastoral workers.

Yes to the challenge of a missionary spirituality

78. Today we are seeing in many pastoral workers, including consecrated men and women, an
inordinate concern for their personal freedom and relaxation, which leads them to see their work
as a mere appendage to their life, as if it were not part of their very identity. At the same time, the
spiritual life comes to be identified with a few religious exercises which can offer a certain comfort
but which do not encourage encounter with others, engagement with the world or a passion for
evangelization. As a result, one can observe in many agents of evangelization, even though they
pray, a heightened individualism, a crisis of identity and a cooling of fervour. These are three evils
which fuel one another.

79. At times our media culture and some intellectual circles convey a marked scepticism with
regard to the Church’s message, along with a certain cynicism. As a consequence, many pastoral
workers, although they pray, develop a sort of inferiority complex which leads them to relativize or
conceal their Christian identity and convictions. This produces a vicious circle. They end up being
unhappy with who they are and what they do; they do not identify with their mission of
evangelization and this weakens their commitment. They end up stifling the joy of mission with a
kind of obsession about being like everyone else and possessing what everyone else possesses.
Their work of evangelization thus becomes forced, and they devote little energy and very limited
time to it.

80. Pastoral workers can thus fall into a relativism which, whatever their particular style of
spirituality or way of thinking, proves even more dangerous than doctrinal relativism. It has to do
with the deepest and inmost decisions that shape their way of life. This practical relativism
consists in acting as if God did not exist, making decisions as if the poor did not exist, setting goals
as if others did not exist, working as if people who have not received the Gospel did not exist. It is
striking that even some who clearly have solid doctrinal and spiritual convictions frequently fall into
a lifestyle which leads to an attachment to financial security, or to a desire for power or human
glory at all cost, rather than giving their lives to others in mission. Let us not allow ourselves to be
robbed of missionary enthusiasm!