operation, the workman never appearing to make anything by it, and making no use of it in any of
his labours; and then one should maintain that this useless, and idle, and unemployed tool was
superior in nature and value to that which the artisan employed in his work, and by means of which
he acquired his reputation. Such a man, if any such were found, would justly be regarded as imbecile,
and not in his right mind. And so should those be judged of who speak of themselves as being
spiritual and superior, and of the Creator as possessed of an animal nature, and maintain that for
this reason they will ascend on high, and penetrate within the Pleroma to their own husbands (for,
according to their own statements, they are themselves feminine), but that God [the Creator] is of
an inferior nature, and therefore remains in the intermediate place, while all the time they bring
forward no proofs of these assertions: for the better man is shown by his works, and all works have
been accomplished by the Creator; but they, having nothing worthy of reason to point to as having
been produced by themselves, are labouring under the greatest and most incurable madness.
6. If, however, they labour to maintain that, while all material things, such as the heaven, and
the whole world which exists below it, were indeed formed by the Demiurge, yet all things of a
more spiritual nature than these, —those, namely, which are above the heavens, such as Principalities,
Powers, Angels, Archangels, Dominations, Virtues,— were produced by a spiritual process of birth
(which they declare themselves to be), then, in the first place, we prove from the authoritative
Scriptures that all the things which have been mentioned, visible and invisible, have been made
by one God. For these men are not more to be depended on than the Scriptures; nor ought we to
give up the declarations of the Lord, Moses, and the rest of the prophets, who have proclaimed the
truth, and give credit to them, who do indeed utter nothing of a sensible nature, but rave about
untenable opinions. And, in the next place, if those things which are above the heavens were really
made through their instrumentality, then let them inform us what is the nature of things invisible,
recount the number of the Angels, and the ranks of the Archangels, reveal the mysteries of the
Thrones, and teach us the differences between the Dominations, Principalities, Powers, and Virtues.
But they can say nothing respecting them; therefore these beings were not made by them. If, on
the other hand, these were made by the Creator, as was really the case, and are of a spiritual and
holy character, then it follows that He who produced spiritual beings is not Himself of an animal
nature, and thus their fearful system of blasphemy is overthrown.
7. For that there are spiritual creatures in the heavens, all the Scriptures loudly proclaim; and
Paul expressly testifies that there are spiritual things when he declares that he was caught up into
the third heaven, and again, that he was carried away to paradise, and heard unspeakable words
which it is not lawful for a man to utter. But what did that profit him, either his entrance into paradise
or his assumption into the third heaven, since all these things are still but under the power of the
and are to be rendered as above.