received a thing, and then the owner came and demanded it back; would it avail
you in defence to say that you had not seized it? By no means. For what would
be your plea when accused! Tell me. That it was another who seized it? Well: but
you are keeping possession. That it was he who robbed? But you are enjoying it.
Why these rules even the laws of the heathen recognise, which acquitting those
who have seized and stolen, bid you demand satisfaction from those persons in
whose possession you happen to find your things all laid up.
If then you know who are the injured, restore and do what Zacchæus did,
with much increase. But if you know not, I offer you another way yet; I do not
preclude you from the remedy. Distribute all these things to the poor: and thus
you will mitigate the evil.
But if some have transmitted these things even to children and descendants,
still in retribution they have suffered other disasters.
12. And why speak I of things in this present life? In that day at any rate
will none of these things be said, when both appear naked, both the spoiled and
the spoilers. Or rather not alike naked. Of riches indeed both will be equally
stripped; but the one will be full of the charges to which they gave occasion.
What then shall we do on that day, when before the dread tribunal he that has
been evil entreated and lost his all is brought forward into the midst, and you
have no one to speak a word for you? What will you say to the Judge? Now
indeed you may be able even to corrupt the judgment, being but of men; but in
that court and at that time, it will be no longer so: no, nor yet now will you be
able. For even at this moment that tribunal is present: since God both sees our
doings and is near unto the injured, though not invoked: it being certain that
whoever suffers wrong, however in himself unworthy to obtain any redress, yet
nevertheless seeing that what is done pleases not God, he has most assuredly one
to avenge him.
"How then," you will say, "is such an one well off, who is wicked?" Nay, it
will not be so unto the end. Hear what says the Prophet; [Psalm 37:1-2] "Fret not
yourself because of the evil doers, because as grass they shall quickly wither

away." For where, tell me, where is he who wrought rapine, after his departure
hence? Where are his bright hopes! Where his august name? Are they not all
passed and gone? Is it not a dream and a shadow, all that was his? And this you
must expect in the case of every such person, both in his own person while
living, and in that of him who shall come after him. But not such is the state of
the saints, nor will it be possible for you to say the same things in their case also,
that it is shadow and a dream and a tale, what belongs to them.
13. And if you please, he who spoke these things, the tent-maker, the
Cilician, the man whose very parentage is unknown, let him be the example we
produce. You will say, "How is it possible to become such as he was?" Do you
then thoroughly desire it? Are you thoroughly anxious to become such? "Yes,"
you will say. Well then, go the same way as he went and they that were with
him. Now what way went he? One says, [2 Corinthians 11:27] "In hunger, and
thirst, and nakedness." Another, [Acts 3:6] "Silver and gold I have none." Thus
they "had nothing and yet possessed all things." [2 Corinthians 6:10] What can
be nobler than this saying? What more blessed or more abundant in riches?
Others indeed pride themselves on the contrary things, saying, "I have this or
that number of talents of gold, and acres of land without end, and houses, and
slaves;" but this man on his being naked of all things; and he shrinks not from
poverty, (which is the feeling of the unwise,) nor hides his face, but he even
wears it as an ornament.
Where now be the rich men, they who count up their interest simple and
compound, they who take from all men and are never satisfied? Have ye heard
the voice of Peter, that voice which sets forth poverty as the mother of wealth?
That voice which has nothing, yet is wealthier than those who wear diadems?
For this is that voice, which having nothing, raised the dead, and set upright the
lame, and drove away devils, and bestowed such gracious gifts, as those who are
clad in the purple robe and lead the mighty and terrible legions never were able
to bestow. This is the voice of those who are now removed into heaven, of those
who have attained unto that height.