Jer. i. 5.

clay, "Go to Siloam, and wash;" thus restoring to him both [his perfect] confirmation, and that
regeneration which takes place by means of the laver. And for this reason when he was washed he
came seeing, that he might both know Him who had fashioned him, and that man might learn [to
know] Him who has conferred upon him life.
4. All the followers of Valentinus, therefore, lose their case, when they say that man was not
fashioned out of this earth, but from a fluid and diffused substance. For, from the earth out of which
the Lord formed eyes for that man, from the same earth it is evident that man was also fashioned
at the beginning. For it were incompatible that the eyes should indeed be formed from one source
and the rest of the body from another; as neither would it be compatible that one [being] fashioned
the body, and another the eyes. But He, the very same who formed Adam at the beginning, with
whom also the Father spake, [saying], "Let Us make man after Our image and likeness," revealing
Himself in these last times to men, formed visual organs (visionem) for him who had been blind
[in that body which he had derived] from Adam. Wherefore also the Scripture, pointing out what
should come to pass, says, that when Adam had hid himself because of his disobedience, the Lord
came to him at eventide, called him forth, and said, "Where art thou?" That means that in the
last times the very same Word of God came to call man, reminding him of his doings, living in
which he had been hidden from the Lord. For just as at that time God spake to Adam at eventide,
searching him out; so in the last times, by means of the same voice, searching out his posterity, He
has visited them.

### Chapter XVI.—Since our bodies return to the earth, it follows that they have their substance
from it; also, by the advent of the Word, the image of God in us appeared in a clearer light.
1. And since Adam was moulded from this earth to which we belong, the Scripture tells us that
God said to him, "In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat thy bread, until thou turnest again to the
dust from whence thou wert taken." If then, after death, our bodies return to any other substance,
it follows that from it also they have their substance. But if it be into this very [earth], it is manifest
that it was also from it that man's frame was created; as also the Lord clearly showed, when from
this very substance He formed eyes for the man [to whom He gave sight]. And thus was the hand
of God plainly shown forth, by which Adam was fashioned, and we too have been formed; and
since there is one and the same Father, whose voice from the beginning even to the end is present
with His handiwork, and the substance from which we were formed is plainly declared through the
Gospel, we should therefore not seek after another Father besides Him, nor [look for] another