FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.42, C.3.

for, as the Philosopher says (Rhet. ii, 5), "we do not fear things that
are very far off; since all know that they shall die, but as death is not
near, they heed it not." Secondly, a future evil is considered as
though it were not to be, on account of its being inevitable,
wherefore we look upon it as already present. Hence the Philosopher
says (Rhet. ii, 5) that "those who are already on the scaffold, are not
afraid," seeing that they are on the very point of a death from which
there is no escape; "but in order that a man be afraid, there must be
some hope of escape for him."
Consequently evil of nature is not feared if it be not apprehended as
future: but if evil of nature, that is corruptive, be apprehended as
near at hand, and yet with some hope of escape, then it will be
feared.
Reply to Objection 1: The evil of nature sometimes is not an effect of
nature, as stated above. But in so far as it is an effect of nature,
although it may be impossible to avoid it entirely, yet it may be
possible to delay it. And with this hope one may take counsel about
avoiding it.
Reply to Objection 2: Although evil of nature ever threatens, yet it
does not always threaten from near at hand: and consequently it is
not always feared.
Reply to Objection 3: Death and other defects of nature are the
effects of the common nature; and yet the individual nature rebels
against them as far as it can. Accordingly, from the inclination of the
individual nature arise pain and sorrow for such like evils, when
present; fear when threatening in the future.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.42, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the evil of sin is an object of fear?

Objection 1: It would seem that the evil of sin can be an object of
fear. For Augustine says on the canonical Epistle of John (Tract. ix),
that "by chaste fear man fears to be severed from God." Now nothing
but sin severs us from God; according to Is. 59:2: "Your iniquities
have divided between you and your God." Therefore the evil of sin
can be an object of fear.
Objection 2: Further, Cicero says (Quaest. Tusc. iv, 4,6) that "we fear
when they are yet to come, those things which give us pain when
they are present." But it is possible for one to be pained or sorrowful
on account of the evil of sin. Therefore one can also fear the evil of
sin.
Objection 3: Further, hope is contrary to fear. But the good of virtue
can be the object of hope, as the Philosopher declares (Ethic. ix, 4):
and the Apostle says (Gal. 5:10): "I have confidence in you in the
Lord, that you will not be of another mind." Therefore fear can regard
evil of sin.
Objection 4: Further, shame is a kind of fear, as stated above
(Question 41, Article 4). But shame regards a disgraceful deed,
which is an evil of sin. Therefore fear does so likewise.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Rhet. ii, 5) that "not all evils
are feared, for instance that someone be unjust or slow."
I answer that, As stated above (Question 40, Article 1; Question 41,
Article 2), as the object of hope is a future good difficult but possible
to obtain, so the object of fear is a future evil, arduous and not to be
easily avoided. From this we may gather that whatever is entirely
subject to our power and will, is not an object of fear; and that
nothing gives rise to fear save what is due to an external cause. Now
human will is the proper cause of the evil of sin: and consequently
evil of sin, properly speaking, is not an object of fear.
But since the human will may be inclined to sin by an extrinsic
cause; if this cause have a strong power of inclination, in that
respect a man may fear the evil of sin, in so far as it arises from that
extrinsic cause: as when he fears to dwell in the company of wicked