Personal accompaniment in processes of growth

169. In a culture paradoxically suffering from anonymity and at the same time obsessed with the
details of other people’s lives, shamelessly given over to morbid curiosity, the Church must look
more closely and sympathetically at others whenever necessary. In our world, ordained ministers
and other pastoral workers can make present the fragrance of Christ’s closeness and his personal
gaze. The Church will have to initiate everyone – priests, religious and laity – into this “art of
accompaniment” which teaches us to remove our sandals before the sacred ground of the other
(cf. Ex 3:5). The pace of this accompaniment must be steady and reassuring, reflecting our
closeness and our compassionate gaze which also heals, liberates and encourages growth in the
Christian life.

170. Although it sounds obvious, spiritual accompaniment must lead others ever closer to God, in
whom we attain true freedom. Some people think they are free if they can avoid God; they fail to
see that they remain existentially orphaned, helpless, homeless. They cease being pilgrims and

become drifters, flitting around themselves and never getting anywhere. To accompany them
would be counterproductive if it became a sort of therapy supporting their self-absorption and
ceased to be a pilgrimage with Christ to the Father.

171. Today more than ever we need men and women who, on the basis of their experience of
accompanying others, are familiar with processes which call for prudence, understanding,
patience and docility to the Spirit, so that they can protect the sheep from wolves who would
scatter the flock. We need to practice the art of listening, which is more than simply hearing.
Listening, in communication, is an openness of heart which makes possible that closeness without
which genuine spiritual encounter cannot occur. Listening helps us to find the right gesture and
word which shows that we are more than simply bystanders. Only through such respectful and
compassionate listening can we enter on the paths of true growth and awaken a yearning for the
Christian ideal: the desire to respond fully to God’s love and to bring to fruition what he has sown
in our lives. But this always demands the patience of one who knows full well what Saint Thomas
Aquinas tells us: that anyone can have grace and charity, and yet falter in the exercise of the
virtues because of persistent “contrary inclinations”. In other words, the organic unity of the
virtues always and necessarily exists in habitu, even though forms of conditioning can hinder the
operations of those virtuous habits. Hence the need for “a pedagogy which will introduce people
step by step to the full appropriation of the mystery”. Reaching a level of maturity where
individuals can make truly free and responsible decisions calls for much time and patience. As
Blessed Peter Faber used to say: “Time is God’s messenger”.