season of access and communion, the purity of a man's conscience. Since if even
that kind of banquet which the senses take cognizance of cannot be partaken of
by us when feverish and full of bad humors, without risk of perishing: much
more is it unlawful for us to touch this Table with profane lusts, which are more
grievous than fevers. Now when I say profane lusts, I mean both those of the
body, and of money, and of anger, and of malice, and, in a word, all that are
profane. And it becomes him that approaches, first to empty himself of all these
things and so to touch that pure sacrifice. And neither if indolently disposed and
reluctantly ought he to be compelled to approach by reason of the festival; nor,
on the other hand, if penitent and prepared, should any one prevent him because
it is not a festival. For a festival is a showing forth of good works, and a
reverence of soul, and exactness of deportment. And if you have these things,
you may at all times keep festival and at all times approach. Wherefore he says,
"But let each man prove himself, and then let him approach." And he bids not
one examine another, but each himself, making the tribunal not a public one and
the conviction without a witness.

1 Corinthians 11:29
2. "For he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks judgment to
himself."
What do you say, tell me? Is this Table which is the cause of so many
blessings and teeming with life, become judgment? Not from its own nature,
says he, but from the will of him that approaches. For as His presence, which
conveyed to us those great and unutterable blessings, condemned the more them
that received it not: so also the Mysteries become provisions of greater
punishment to such as partake unworthily.
But why does he eat judgment to himself? "Not discerning the Lord's
body:" i.e., not searching, not bearing in mind, as he ought, the greatness of the
things set before him; not estimating the weight of the gift. For if you should
come to know accurately Who it is that lies before you, and Who He is that gives
Himself, and to whom, you will need no other argument, but this is enough for
you to use all vigilance; unless you should be altogether fallen.

1 Corinthians 11:30
"For this cause many among you are weak and sickly, and not a few sleep."
Here he no longer brings his examples from others as he did in the case of
the idol-sacrifices, relating the ancient histories and the chastisements in the
wilderness, but from the Corinthians themselves; which also made the discourse
apt to strike them more keenly. For whereas he was saying, "he eats judgment to
himself," and, "he is guilty;" that he might not seem to speak mere words, he
points to deeds also and calls themselves to witness; a kind of thing which comes
home to men more than threatening, by showing that the threat has issued in
some real fact. He was not however content with these things alone, but from
these he also introduced and confirmed the argument concerning hell-fire,
terrifying them in both ways; and solving an inquiry which is handled
everywhere. I mean, since many question one with another, "whence arise the
untimely deaths, whence the long diseases of men;" he tells them that these
unexpected events are many of them conditional upon certain sins. "What then?
They who are in continual health," say you, "and come to a green old age, do
they not sin?" Nay, who dared say this? "How then," say you, "do they not suffer
punishment?" Because there they shall suffer a severer one. But we, if we would,
neither here nor there need suffer it.