And to convince you that the Pharisees came with one mind, and the people
with another, hear how the evangelist has declared this too; saying of the people,
"that they came and were baptized of him, confessing their sins;" [Matthew 3:6]
but concerning the Pharisees, no longer like that, but that "when he saw many of
the Pharisees and Sadducees coming, he said, O generation of vipers, who has
warned you to flee from the wrath to come?" O greatness of mind! How does he
discourse unto men ever thirsting after the blood of the prophets, and in
disposition no better than serpents! How does he disparage both themselves and
their progenitors with all plainness!
2. "Yea," says one; "he speaks plainly enough, but the question is if there be
any reason in this plainness. For he did not see them sinning, but in the act of
change; wherefore they did not deserve blame, but rather praise and
approbation, for having left city and houses, and making haste to hear his
preaching."
What then shall we say? That he had not things present, and even now
doing, in his view, but he knew the secrets of their mind, God having revealed
this. Since then they were priding themselves on their forefathers, and this was
like to prove the cause of their destruction, and was casting them into a state of
carelessness, he cuts away the roots of their pride. For this cause Isaiah also calls
them, "rulers of Sodom," and "people of Gomorrha;" [Isaiah 1:10] and another
prophet says, "Are ye not as children of the Ethiopians;" [Amos 9:7] and all
withdraw them from this way of thinking, bringing down their pride, which had
caused them unnumbered evils.
"But the prophets," you will say, "naturally did so; for they saw them
sinning: but in this case, with what view and for what cause does he the same,
seeing them obey him." To make them yet more tender-hearted.
But if one accurately mark his words, he has also tempered his rebuke with
commendation. For he spoke these things, as marveling at them, that they had
become able, however late, to do what seemed almost an impossibility for them.
His rebuke, you see, is rather that of one bringing them over, and working upon

them to arouse themselves. For in that he appears amazed, he implies both their
former wickedness to be great, and their conversion marvellous and beyond
expectation. Thus, "what has come to pass," says he, "that being children of
those men, and brought up so badly, they have repented? Whence has come so
great a change? Who has softened down the harshness of their spirit? Who
corrected that which was incurable?"
And see how straightway from the beginning he alarmed them, by laying
first, for a foundation, his words concerning hell. For he spoke not of the usual
topics: "Who has warned you to flee from wars, from the inroads of the
barbarians, from captivities, from famines, from pestilences?" but concerning
another sort of punishment, never before made manifest to them, he was striking
the first preparatory note, saying thus, "Who has warned you to flee from the
wrath to come?"
And full well did he likewise call them, "generation of vipers." For that
animal too is said to destroy the mother that is in travail with her, and eating
through her belly, thus to come forth unto light; which kind of thing these men
also did being "murderers of fathers, and murderers of mothers,"
[1 Timothy 1:9] and destroying their instructors with their own hands.
3. However, he stops not at the rebuke, but introduces advice also. For,
"Bring forth," says he, "fruits meet for repentance."
For to flee from wickedness is not enough, but you must show forth also
great virtue. For let me not have that contradictory yet ordinary case, that
refraining yourselves for a little while, you return unto the same wickedness. For
we are not come for the same objects as the prophets before. Nay, the things that
are now are changed, and are more exalted, forasmuch as the Judge henceforth is
coming, His very self, the very Lord of the kingdom, leading unto greater selfrestraint, calling us to heaven, and drawing us upward to those abodes. For this
cause do I unfold the doctrine also touching hell, because both the good things
and the painful are for ever. Do not therefore abide as you are, neither bring
forward the accustomed pleas, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, the noble race of your