## Homily 65 on Matthew

Matt. XX. 17-19.
"And Jesus going up to Jerusalem took the twelve disciples apart in the
way, and said unto them, Behold, we go up to Jerusalem; and the Son of Man
shall be betrayed unto the chief priests and unto the Scribes, and they shall
condemn Him to death, and shall deliver Him to the Gentiles to mock, and to
scourge, and to crucify Him; and the third day He shall be raised."
He goes not up at once to Jerusalem when He has come out of Galilee, but
having first wrought miracles, and having stopped the mouths of Pharisees, and
having discoursed with His disciples of renouncing possessions: for, "if you will
be perfect," says He, "sell that you have:" [Matthew 19:21] and of virginity, "He
that is able to receive, let him receive it:" [Matthew 19:12] and of humility, "For
except ye be converted, and become as little children, you shall not enter into the
kingdom of Heaven:" [Matthew 18:3] and of a recompense of the things here,
"For whoso has forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, shall receive an
hundredfold in this world:" [Matthew 19:29] and of rewards there, "For he shall
also inherit," it is said, "eternal life:" then He assails the city next, and being on
the point of going up, discourses again of His passion. For since it was likely
that they, because they were not willing this should come to pass, would forget
it, He is continually putting them in remembrance, exercising their mind by the
frequency with which He reminded them, and diminishing their pain.
But He speaks with them "apart," necessarily; for it was not meet that His
discourse about these things should be published to the many; neither that it
should be spoken plainly, for no advantage arose from this. For if the disciples
were confounded at hearing these things, much more the multitude of the people.
What then? Was it not told to the people? You may say. It was indeed told
to the people also, but not so plainly. For, "Destroy," says He, "this Temple, and

in three days I will raise it up;" [John 2:19] and, "This generation seeks after a
sign, and there shall no sign be given it, but the sign of Jonas;" [Matthew 12:39]
and again, "Yet a little while am I with you, and you shall seek me, and shall not
find me." [John 7:33-34]
But to the disciples not so, but as the other things He spoke unto them more
plainly, so also spoke He this too. And for what purpose, if the multitude
understood not the force of His sayings, were they spoken at all? That they
might learn after these things, that fore-knowing it, He came to His passion, and
willing it; not in ignorance, nor by constraint. But to the disciples not for this
cause only did He foretell it; but, as I have said, in order that having been
exercised by the expectation, they might more easily endure the passion, and that
it might not confound them by coming upon them without preparation. So for
this cause, while at the beginning He spoke of His death only, when they were
practised and trained to hear of it, He adds the other circumstances also; as, for
instance, that they should deliver Him to the Gentiles, that they should mock and
scourge Him; as well on this account, as in order that when they saw the
mournful events come to pass, they might expect from this the resurrection also.
For He who had not cloaked from them what would give pain, and what seemed
to be matter of reproach, would reasonably be believed about good things too.
But mark, I pray you, how with regard to the time also He orders the thing
wisely. For neither at the beginning did He tell them, lest He should disquiet
them, neither at the time itself, lest by this again He should confound them; but
when they had received sufficient proof of His power, when He had given them
promises that were very great concerning life everlasting, then He introduces
also what He had to say concerning these things, once and twice and often
interweaving it with His miracles and His instructions.
But another evangelist says, that He brought in the prophets also as
witnesses; [Luke 18:31] and another again says, that even they themselves
understood not His words, but the saying was hid from them, and that they were
amazed as they followed Him.