Harvey remarks that "the author perhaps wrote 0,)" (Horos), which was read by the translator 102)" (totum)."

Spirit, or Horos, whom they also call Soter (Saviour), and not even the Saviour Himself, who
came to impart assistance and form to their Mother? Whether is this as if these latter were weaker
than the former, and therefore unworthy of the name of Æons, or of being numbered among them,
or as if they were superior and more excellent? But how could they be weaker, since they were
produced for the establishment and rectification of the others? And then, again, they cannot possibly
be superior to the first and principal Tetrad, by which they were also produced; for it, too, is reckoned
in the number above mentioned. These latter beings, then, ought also to have been numbered in
the Pleroma of the Æons, or that should be deprived of the honour of those Æons which bear this
appellation (the Tetrad).
8. Since, therefore, their Triacontad is thus brought to nought, as I have shown, both with respect
to defect and excess (for in dealing with such a number, either excess or defect [to any extent] will
render the number untenable, and how much more so great variations?), it follows that what they
maintain respecting their Ogdoad and Duodecad is a mere fable which cannot stand. Their whole
system, moreover, falls to the ground, when their very foundation is destroyed and dissolved into
Bythus, that is, into what has no existence. Let them, then, henceforth seek to set forth some
other reasons why the Lord came to be baptized at the age of thirty years, and [explain in some
other way] the Duodecad of the apostles; and [the fact stated regarding] her who suffered from an
issue of blood; and all the other points respecting which they so madly labour in vain.

### Chapter XIII.—The first order of production maintained by the heretics is altogether
indefensible.
1. I now proceed to show, as follows, that the first order of production, as conceived of by them,
must be rejected. For they maintain that Nous and Aletheia were produced from Bythus and his
EnnÏa, which is proved to be a contradiction. For Nous is that which is itself chief, and highest,
and, as it were, the principle and source of all understanding. EnnÏa, again, which arises from him,
is any sort of emotion concerning any subject. It cannot be, therefore, that Nous was produced by
Bythus and EnnÏa; it would be more like the truth for them to maintain that EnnÏa was produced
as the daughter of the Propator and this Nous. For EnnÏa is not the daughter of Nous, as they assert,
but Nous becomes the father of EnnÏa. For how can Nous have been produced by the Propator,
when he holds the chief and primary place of that hidden and invisible affection which is within
Him? By this affection sense is produced, and EnnÏa, and Enthymesis, and other things which are
read Stauros, and Massuet Lytrotes; but Harvey conceives that the difficulty is explained by the fact that Horos was a power of
Soter (i. 3, 3).
was a name of the Propator, but is in this passage used to denote an unfathomable abyss.