1 Corinthians 9:3
3. "My defence to them that examine me is this." What is, "My defence to
them that examine me is this?" "To those who seek to know whereby I am proved
to be an Apostle, or who accuse me as receiving money, or inquire the cause of
my not receiving, or would fain show that I am not an Apostle: to all such, my
instruction given to you and these things which I am about to say, may stand for
a full explanation and defence." What then are these?

1 Corinthians 9:4-5
"Have we no right to eat and to drink? Have we no right to lead about a
wife that is a believer?" Why, how are these sayings a defence? "Because, when
it appears that I abstain even from things which are allowed, it cannot be just to
look suspiciously on me as a deceiver or one acting for gain."
Wherefore, from what was before alleged and from my having instructed
you and from this which I have now said, I have matter sufficient to make my
defence to you: and all who examine me I meet upon this ground, alleging both
what has gone before and this which follows: Have we no right to eat and to
drink? Have we no right to lead about a wife that is a believer? "Yet for all this,
having it I abstain?"
What then? Did he not use to eat or to drink? It were most true to say that in
many places he really did not eat nor drink: for [1 Corinthians 4:11] "in hunger,"
says he, "and in thirst, and in nakedness" we were abiding. Here, however, this
is not his meaning; but what? "We eat not nor drink, receiving of those whom we
instruct, though we have a right so to receive."
"Have we no right to lead about a wife that is a believer, even as the rest of
the Apostles, and the brethren of the Lord, and Cephas?" Observe his
skilfulness. The leader of the choir stands last in his arrangement: since that is
the time for laying down the strongest of all one's topics. Nor was it so
wonderful for one to be able to point out examples of this conduct in the rest, as
in the foremost champion and in him who was entrusted with the keys of heaven.
But neither does he mention Peter alone, but all of them: as if he had said,
Whether you seek the inferior sort or the more eminent, in all you find patterns
of this sort.
For the brethren too of the Lord, being freed from their first unbelief [see
John 7:5], had come to be among those who were approved, although they

attained not to the Apostles. And accordingly the middle place is that which he
has assigned to them, setting down those who were in the extremes before and
after.

1 Corinthians 9:6
"Or I only and Barnabas, have we not a right to forbear working?"
(See his humility of mind and his soul pure from envy, how he takes care
not to conceal him whom he knew to be a partaker with himself in this
perfection.) For if the other things be common, how is not this common? Both
they and we are apostles and are free, and have seen Christ, and have exhibited
the works of Apostles. Therefore we likewise have a right both to live without
working and to be supported by our disciples.