nearly this, and he had said it before, that the unbelief is not universal, but only
"in part." As when he says, "But if any has caused grief, he has not grieved me,
but in part" [2 Corinthians 2:5]: And, so here too he says what he had said
above, "God has not cast off His people whom He foreknew" [Romans 11:2]: and
again, "What then? Have they stumbled that they should fall? God forbid"
[Romans 11:11]: This then he says here also; that it is not the whole people that
is pulled up, but many have already believed, and more are likely to believe.
Then as he had promised a great thing, he adduces the prophet in evidence,
speaking as follows. Now it is not for the fact of a blindness having happened
that he quotes the passage (for every one could see that), but that they shall
believe and be saved, he brings Isaiah to witness, who cries aloud and says,
Ver. 26. "There shall come out of Sion the Deliverer, and shall turn away
ungodliness from Jacob." [Isaiah 59:20]
Then to give the mark that fixes its sense to salvation, to prevent any one
from drawing it aside and attaching it to times gone by, he says,
Ver. 27. "For this is my covenant unto them, when I shall take away their
sins."
Not when they are circumcised, not when they sacrifice, not when they do
the other deeds of the Law, but when they attain to the forgiveness of sins. If
then this has been promised, but has never yet happened in their case, nor have
they ever enjoyed the remission of sins by baptism, certainly it will come to
pass. Hence he proceeds,
Ver. 29. "For the gifts and calling of God are without repentance."
And even this is not all he says to solace them, for he uses what had already
come about. And what came in of consequence, that he states as chiefly
intended, putting it in these words,
Ver. 28. "As concerning the Gospel, they are enemies for your sakes: but as
touching the election, they are beloved for the fathers' sakes."
That the Gentile then might not be puffed up, and say, "I am standing, do
not tell me of what would have been, but what has been," he uses this

consideration to bring him down, and says, "As concerning the Gospel, they are
enemies for your sakes." For when you were called they became more captious.
Nevertheless God has not even now cut short the calling of you, but He waits for
all the Gentiles that are to believe to come in, and then they also shall come.
Then he does them another kind favor, by saying, "As touching election, they are
beloved for the fathers sakes." And what is this? For wherein they are enemies,
punishment is theirs: but wherein they are beloved, the virtue of their ancestors
has no influence on them, if they do not believe. Nevertheless, as I said, he
ceases not to solace them with words, that he may bring them over. Wherefore
by way of fresh proof for his former assertion, he says,
Ver. 30-32. "For as you in times past have not believed God, yet have now
obtained mercy through their unbelief; even so have these also now not believed,
that through your mercy they may also obtain mercy. For God has concluded
them all in unbelief, that He might have mercy upon all."
He shows here that those of the Gentiles were called first. Then, as they
would not come, the Jews were elected, and the same result occurred again. For
when the Jews would not believe, again the Gentiles were brought over. And he
does not stop here, nor does he draw the whole to a conclusion at their rejection,
but at their having mercy shown them again. See how much he gives to those of
the Gentiles, as much as he did to the Jews before. For when you, he would say,
"in times past did not obey," being of the Gentiles, then the Jews came in. Again,
when these did not obey, you have come. However, they will not perish forever.
"For God has concluded them all in unbelief," that is, has convinced them, has
shown them disobedient; not that they may remain in disobedience, but that He
may save the one by the captiousness of the other, these by those and those by
these. Now consider; you were disobedient, and they were saved. Again, they
have been disobedient, and you have been saved. Yet you have not been so saved
as to be put away again, as the Jews were, but so as to draw them over through
jealousy while you abide.
Ver. 33. "Oh, the depth of the riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of