lesser. For thus had God willed: let us then not oppose ourselves. But if you are
still disturbed, consider that your work is oft-times such as your brother is unable
to perform. So that even if you are inferior, yet in this you have the advantage:
and though he be greater, he is worse off in this respect; and so equality takes
place. For in the body even the little members seem to contribute no little, but
the great ones themselves are often injured by them, I mean by their removal.
Thus what in the body is more insignificant than the hair? Yet if you should
remove this, insignificant as it is, from the eyebrows and the eyelids, you have
destroyed all the grace of the countenance, and the eye will no longer appear
equally beautiful. And yet the loss is of a trifle; but notwithstanding even thus all
the comeliness is destroyed. And not the comeliness only, but much also of the
use of the eyes. The reason is that every one of our members has both a working
of its own and one which is common; and likewise there is in us a beauty which
is peculiar and another which is common. And these kinds of beauty appear
indeed to be divided, but they are perfectly bound together, and when one is
destroyed, the other perishes also along with it. To explain myself: let there be
bright eyes, and a smiling cheek, and a red lip, and straight nose, and open brow;
nevertheless, if you mar but the slightest of these, you have marred the common
beauty of all; all is full of dejection; all will appear foul to look on, which before
was so beautiful: thus if you should crush only the tip of the nose you have
brought great deformity upon all: and yet it is the maiming of but a single
member. And likewise in the hand, if you should take away the nail from one
finger, you would see the same result. If now you would see the same taking
place in respect of their function also, take away one finger, and you will see the
rest less active and no longer performing their part equally.
Since then the loss of a member is a common deformity, and its safety
beauty to all, let us not be lifted up nor trample on our neighbors. For through
that small member even the great one is fair and beautiful, and by the eyelids,
slight as they are, is the eye adorned. So that he who wars with his brother wars
with himself: for the injury done reaches not only unto that one, but himself also

shall undergo no small loss.
7. That this then may not be, let us care for our neighbors as for ourselves,
and let us transfer this image of the body now also to the Church, and be careful
for all as for our own members. For in the Church there are members many and
diverse: and some are more honorable and some more deficient. For example,
there are choirs of virgins, there are assemblies of widows, there are fraternities
of those who shine in holy wedlock ; in short, many are the degrees of virtue.
And in almsgiving again in like manner. For some empty themselves of all their
goods: others care for a competency alone and seek nothing more than
necessaries; others give of their superfluity: nevertheless, all these adorn one
another; and if the greater should set at nought the less, he would in the greatest
degree injure himself. Thus, suppose a virgin to deal scornfully with a married
woman, she has cut off no small part of her reward; and he again that emptied
himself of all should he upbraid him that has not done so, has emptied himself of
much of the fruit of his labors. And why speak I of virgins, and widows, and
men without possessions? What is meaner than those who beg? And yet even
these fulfill a most important office in the Church, clinging to the doors of the
sanctuary and supplying one of its greatest ornaments: and without these there
could be no perfecting the fullness of the Church. Which thing, as it seems, the
Apostles also observing made a law from the beginning, as in regard to all other
things, so also that there should be widows: and so great care did they use about
the matter as also to set over them seven deacons. For as bishops and presbyters
and deacons and virgins and continent persons, enter into my enumeration,
where I am reckoning up the members of the Church, so also do widows. Yea,
and it is no mean office which they fill. For thou indeed comest here when you
will: but these both day and night sing psalms and attend: not for alms only
doing this; since if that were their object, they might walk in the market place
and beg in the alleys: but there is in them piety also in no small degree. At least,
behold in what a furnace of poverty they are; yet never shall you hear a
blasphemous word from them nor an impatient one, after the manner of many