11. Another danger is perceived which is all the more serious because it is more concealed beneath
the mask of virtue. There are many who, deploring disagreement among men and intellectual
confusion, through an imprudent zeal for souls, are urged by a great and ardent desire to do away
with the barrier that divides good and honest men; these advocate an "eirenism" according to which,
by setting aside the questions which divide men, they aim not only at joining forces to repel the
attacks of atheism, but also at reconciling things opposed to one another in the field of dogma. And
as in former times some questioned whether the traditional apologetics of the Church did not
constitute an obstacle rather than a help to the winning of souls for Christ, so today some are
presumptive enough to question seriously whether theology and theological methods, such as with
the approval of ecclesiastical authority are found in our schools, should not only be perfected, but also
completely reformed, in order to promote the more efficacious propagation of the kingdom of Christ
everywhere throughout the world among men of every culture and religious opinion.

12. Now if these only aimed at adapting ecclesiastical teaching and methods to modern conditions and
requirements, through the introduction of some new explanations, there would be scarcely any reason
for alarm. But some through enthusiasm for an imprudent "eirenism" seem to consider as an obstacle
to the restoration of fraternal union, things founded on the laws and principles given by Christ and
likewise on institutions founded by Him, or which are the defense and support of the integrity of the
faith, and the removal of which would bring about the union of all, but only to their destruction.

13. These new opinions, whether they originate from a reprehensible desire of novelty or from a
laudable motive, are not always advanced in the same degree, with equal clarity nor in the same
terms, nor always with unanimous agreement of their authors. Theories that today are put forward
rather covertly by some, not without cautions and distinctions, tomorrow are openly and without
moderation proclaimed by others more audacious, causing scandal to many, especially among the
young clergy and to the detriment of ecclesiastical authority. Though they are usually more cautious in
their published works, they express themselves more openly in their writings intended for private
circulation and in conferences and lectures. Moreover, these opinions are disseminated not only
among members of the clergy and in seminaries and religious institutions, but also among the laity,
and especially among those who are engaged in teaching youth.

14. In theology some want to reduce to a minimum the meaning of dogmas; and to free dogma itself
from terminology long established in the Church and from philosophical concepts held by Catholic
teachers, to bring about a return in the explanation of Catholic doctrine to the way of speaking used
in Holy Scripture and by the Fathers of the Church. They cherish the hope that when dogma is
stripped of the elements which they hold to be extrinsic to divine revelation, it will compare
advantageously with the dogmatic opinions of those who are separated from the unity of the Church
and that in this way they will gradually arrive at a mutual assimilation of Catholic dogma with the
tenets of the dissidents.