and lamentings, but hymns and psalmodies and an excellent life. The good man
when he departs, shall depart with angels, though no man be near his remains;
but the corrupt, though he have a city to attend his funeral, shall be nothing
profited. Will you honor him who is gone? Honor him in another way, by
almsdeeds, by acts of beneficence and public service. What avail the many
lamentations? And I have heard also another grievous thing, that many women
attract lovers by their sad cries, acquiring by the fervor of their wailings a
reputation for affection to their husbands. O devilish purpose! O Satanic
invention! How long are we but dust and ashes, how long but blood and flesh?
Look we up to heaven, take we thought of spiritual things. How shall we be able
to rebuke the heathen, how to exhort them, when we do such things? How shall
we dispute with them concerning the Resurrection? How about the rest of
heavenly wisdom? How shall we ourselves live without fear? Knowest not thou
that of grief comes death? For grief darkening the seeing part of the soul not
only hinders it from perceiving anything that it ought, but also works it great
mischief. In one way then we offend God, and advantage neither ourselves nor
him who is gone; in the other we please God, and gain honor among men. If we
sink not down ourselves, He will soon remove the remains of our despondency;
if we are discontented, He permits us to be given up to grief. If we are thankful,
we shall not despond. "But how," says some one, "is it possible not to be grieved,
when one has lost a son or daughter or wife?" I say not, "not to grieve," but "not
to do so immoderately." For if we consider that God has taken away, and that the
husband or son which we had was mortal, we shall soon receive comfort. To be
discontented is the act of those who seek for something higher than their nature.
You were born man, and mortal; why then do you grieve that what is natural has
come to pass? Grievest thou that you are nourished by eating? Seekest thou to
live without this? Act thus also in the case of death, and being mortal seek not as
yet for immortality. Once for all this thing has been appointed. Grieve not
therefore, nor play the mourner, but submit to laws laid on all alike. Grieve for
your sins; this is good mourning, this is highest wisdom. Let us then mourn for

this cause continually, that we may obtain the joy which is there, through the
grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever
and ever. Amen.

Homily 63 on the Gospel of John
John 11:30-31
"Now Jesus was not yet come into the town, but was in that place where
Martha met Him. The Jews then which were with her," and what follows.
1. A great good is philosophy; the philosophy, I mean, which is with us. For
what the heathen have is words and fables only; nor have these fables anything
truly wise in them; since everything among those men is done for the sake of
reputation. A great good then is true wisdom, and even here returns to us a
recompense. For he that despises wealth, from this at once reaps advantage,
being delivered from cares which are superfluous and unprofitable; and he that
tramples upon glory from this at once receives his reward, being the slave of
none, but free with the real freedom; and he that desires heavenly things hence
receives his recompense, regarding present things as nothing, and being easily
superior to every grief. Behold, for example, how this woman by practicing true
wisdom even here received her reward. For when all were sitting by her as she
mourned and lamented, she did not wait that the Master should come to her, nor
did she maintain what might have seemed her due, nor was she restrained by her
sorrow, (for, in addition to the other wretchedness, mourning women have this
malady, that they wish to be made much of on account of their case,) but she was
not at all so affected; as soon as she heard, she quickly came to Him. "Jesus was
not yet come into the town." He proceeded somewhat slowly, that He might not
seem to fling Himself upon the miracle, but rather to be entreated by them. At
least, it is either with an intention of implying this that the Evangelist has said
the, "rises up quickly," or else he shows that she ran so as to anticipate Christ's
arrival. She came not alone, but drawing after her the Jews that were in the
house. Very wisely did her sister call her secretly, so as not to disturb those who