at death, who have no faith in the resurrection.
'But I do not disbelieve the resurrection' (one says) 'but I long after his
society.' Why then, tell me, when he goes from home, and that for a long
absence, dost not thou do the same? 'Yea, but I do weep then also' (she says) 'and
mourn as I long after him.' But that is the conduct of those that really long after
their associates, this that of her who despairs of his return.
Think, what you sing on that occasion, "Return unto your rest, O my soul,
for the Lord has dealt bountifully with you." [Psalm 116:7] And again, "I will
fear no evil, for You are with me." [Psalm 23:4] And again, "You are my refuge
from the affliction which encompasses me." [Psalm 32:7] Think what these
Psalms mean. But thou dost not give heed, but art drunk from grief.
Consider carefully the funeral lamentations of others that you may have a
remedy in your own case. "Return, O my soul, to your rest, for the Lord has dealt
bountifully with you." Tell me, do you say that the Lord has dealt bountifully
with you, and weepest? Is not this mere acting, is it not hypocrisy? For if indeed
thou really believest the things you say, your sorrow is superfluous: but if you
are in sport and acting a part, and thinkest these things fables, why do you sing
psalms? Why do you even endure the attendants? Why do you not drive away
the singers? But this would be the act of madmen. And yet far more the other.
For the present, then, I advise you: but as time goes on, I shall treat the
matter more seriously: for indeed I am greatly afraid that by this practice some
grievous disease may make its way into the Church. The case of the wailings
then we will hereafter correct. And meanwhile I charge and testify, both to rich
and poor, both to women and men.
May God indeed grant that you all depart out of life unwailed, and
according to the fitting rule fathers now grown old may be attended to their
graves by sons, and mothers by daughters, and grand-children, and great grandchildren, in a green old age, and that untimely death may in no case occur. May
this then be, and this I pray, and I exhort the prelates and all of you to beseech
God for each other, and to make this prayer in common. But if (which God

forbid, and may it never happen) any bitter death should occur, bitter, I mean,
not in its nature (for henceforth there is no bitter death, for it differs not at all
from sleep), but bitter in regard of your disposition, if it should happen, and any
should hire these mourning women, believe me when I say (I speak not without
meaning but as I have resolved, let him who will, be angry), that person we will
exclude from the Church for a long time, as we do the idolater. For if Paul calls
"the covetous man an idolater" [Ephesians 5:5], much more him who brings in
the practices of the idolaters over a believer.
For, tell me, for what cause do you invite presbyters, and the singers? Is it
not to afford consolation? Is it not to honor the departed? Why then do you insult
him? And why do you make him a public show? And why do you make game as
on a stage? We come, discoursing of the things concerning the resurrection,
instructing all, even those who have not yet been smitten, by the honor shown to
him, to bear it nobly if any such thing should happen and do you bring those
who overthrow our [teachings] as much as in them lies? What can be worse than
this ridicule and mockery? What more grievous than this inconsistency?
8. Be ashamed and show reverence: but if you will not, we cannot endure
the bringing in upon the Church of practices so destructive. For, it is said, "them
that sin rebuke before all." [1 Timothy 5:20] And as to those miserable and
wretched women, we through you forbid them ever to introduce themselves into
the funerals of the faithful, lest we should oblige them in good earnest to wail
over their own evils, and teach them not to do these things in the ills of others,
but rather to weep for their own misfortunes. For an affectionate father too, when
he has a disorderly son, not only advises him not to draw near to the wicked, but
puts them in fear also. Behold then, I advise you, and those women through you,
that you do not invite such persons, and that they do not attend. And may God
grant that my words may produce some effect, and that my threat may avail. But
if (which God forbid) we should be disregarded, we have no choice
henceforward but to put our threat into execution, chastising you by the laws of
the Church, and those women as befits them.