This seems to be the meaning conveyed by the old Latin, "quemadmodum aspiratio plasmationi."

recognise holding communication with the human race, or as directing mundane matters: that is to
say, they find out the god of Epicurus, who does nothing either for himself or others; that is, he
exercises no providence at all.

### Chapter XXV.—This world is ruled by the providence of one God, who is both endowed with
infinite justice to punish the wicked, and with infinite goodness to bless the pious, and impart
to them salvation.
1. God does, however, exercise a providence over all things, and therefore He also gives counsel;
and when giving counsel, He is present with those who attend to moral discipline. It follows
then of course, that the things which are watched over and governed should be acquainted with
their ruler; which things are not irrational or vain, but they have understanding derived from the
providence of God. And, for this reason certain of the Gentiles, who were less addicted to [sensual]
allurements and voluptuousness, and were not led away to such a degree of superstition with regard
to idols, being moved, though but slightly, by His providence, were nevertheless convinced that
they should call the Maker of this universe the Father, who exercises a providence over all things,
and arranges the affairs of our world.
2. Again, that they might remove the rebuking and judicial power from the Father, reckoning
that as unworthy of God, and thinking that they had found out a God both without anger and [merely]
good, they have alleged that one [God] judges, but that another saves, unconsciously taking away
the intelligence and justice of both deities. For if the judicial one is not also good, to bestow favours
upon the deserving, and to direct reproofs against those requiring them, he will appear neither a
just nor a wise judge. On the other hand, the good God, if he is merely good, and not one who tests
those upon whom he shall send his goodness, will be out of the range of justice and goodness; and
his goodness will seem imperfect, as not saving all; [for it should do so,] if it be not accompanied
with judgment.
3. Marcion, therefore, himself, by dividing God into two, maintaining one to be good and the
other judicial, does in fact, on both sides, put an end to deity. For he that is the judicial one, if he
be not good, is not God, because he from whom goodness is absent is no God at all; and again, he
who is good, if he has no judicial power, suffers the same [loss] as the former, by being deprived
of his character of deity. And how can they call the Father of all wise, if they do not assign to Him
a judicial faculty? For if He is wise, He is also one who tests [others]; but the judicial power belongs
to him who tests, and justice follows the judicial faculty, that it may reach a just conclusion; justice
calls forth judgment, and judgment, when it is executed with justice, will pass on to wisdom.
Therefore the Father will excel in wisdom all human and angelic wisdom, because He is Lord, and
3, Prov. xxvii. 12.]