who lament and mourn, who hide their faces and are ashamed. This is the
sympathy of a teacher, this is the natural care of a father. For Moses too, when it
was in his power to have been delivered from the ingratitude of the Jews, and to
have laid the more glorious foundation of another and far greater people, ("Let
Me alone," said God, "that I may consume them, and make of you a nation
mightier than this" [Exodus 32:10]) because he was a holy man, the servant of
God, and a friend very true and generous, he did not endure even to hearken to
this word, but chose rather to perish with those who had been once allotted to
him, than without them to be saved and be in greater honor. Such ought he to be
who has the charge of souls. For it is a strange thing that any one who has weak
children, will not be called the father of any others than those who are sprung
from him, but that he who has had disciples placed in his hands should be
continually changing one flock for another, that we should be catching at the
charge now of these, then of those, then again of others, having no real affection
for any one. May we never have cause to suspect this of you. We trust that you
abound more in faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, and in love to one another and
towards all men. And this we say as desiring that your zeal may be increased,
and the excellence of your conversation farther advanced. For it is thus that you
will be able to bring your understandings down to the very depth of the words
set before us, if no film of wickedness darken the eyes of your intellect, and
disturb its clearsightedness and acuteness.
What then is it which is set before us today? "John bore witness of Him,
and cried, saying, This was He of whom I spoke, He that comes after me is
preferred before me, for He was before me." The Evangelist is very full in
making frequent mention of John, and often bearing about his testimony. And
this he does not without a reason, but very wisely; for all the Jews held the man
in great admiration, (even Josephus imputes the war to his death; and shows,
that, on his account, what once was the mother city, is now no city at all, and
continues the words of his encomium to great length,) and therefore desiring by
his means to make the Jews ashamed, he continually reminds them of the

testimony of the forerunner. The other Evangelists make mention of the older
prophets, and at each successive thing that took place respecting Him refer the
hearer to them. Thus when the Child is born, they say, "Now all this was done,
that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esias the prophet, saying, Behold,
a virgin shall be with Child, and shall bring forth a Son" [Matthew 1:22; Isaiah
7:14]; and when He is plotted against and sought for everywhere so diligently,
that even tender infancy is slaughtered by Herod, they bring in Jeremy, saying,
"In Ramah was there a voice heard, lamentation, and weeping, and great
mourning, Rachel weeping for her children" [Matthew 2:18; Jeremiah 31:15];
and again, when He comes up out of Egypt, they mention Hosea, saying, "Out of
Egypt have I called My Son" [Matthew 2:15; Hosea 11:1]; and this they do
everywhere. But John providing testimony more clear and fresh, and uttering a
voice more glorious than the other, brings continually forward not those only
who had departed and were dead, but one also who was alive and present, who
pointed Him out and baptized Him, him he continually introduces, not desiring
to gain credit for the master through the servant, but condescending to the
infirmity of his hearers. For as unless He had taken the form of a servant, He
would not have been easily received, so had He not by the voice of a servant
prepared the ears of his fellow-servants, the many (at any rate) of the Jews
would not have received the Word.
2. But besides this, there was another great and wonderful provision. For
because to speak any great words concerning himself, makes a man's witness to
be suspected, and is often an obstacle to many hearers, another comes to testify
of Him. And besides this the many are in a manner wont to run more readily to a
voice which is more familiar and natural to them, as recognizing it more than
other voices; and therefore the voice from heaven was uttered once or twice, but
that of John oftentimes and continually. For those of the people who had
surmounted the infirmity of their nature, and had been released from all the
things of sense, could hear the Voice from heaven, and had no great need of that
of man, but in all things obeyed that other, and were led by it; but they who yet