Yes, for the city is most kingly and glorious; not as the cities with us,
divided into a market-place, and the royal courts; for there all is the court of the
King. Let us open therefore the gates of our mind, let us open our ears, and with
great trembling, when on the point of setting foot on the threshold, let us worship
the King that is therein. For indeed the first approach has power straightway to
confound the beholder.
For the present we find the gates closed; but when we see them thrown
open (for this is the solution of the difficulties), then we shall perceive the
greatness of the splendor within. For there also, leading you with the eyes of the
Spirit, is one who offers to show you all, even this Publican; where the King sits,
and who of His host stand by Him; where are the angels, where the archangels;
and what place is set apart for the new citizens in this city, and what kind of way
it is that leads there, and what manner of portion they have received, who first
were citizens therein, and those next after them, and such as followed these. And
how many are the orders of these tribes, how many those of the senate, how
many the distinctions of dignity.
Let us not therefore with noise or tumult enter in, but with a mystical
silence.
For if in a theatre, when a great silence has been made, then the letters of
the king are read, much more in this city must all be composed, and stand with
soul and ear erect. For it is not the letters of any earthly master, but of the Lord
of angels, which are on the point of being read.
If we would order ourselves on this wise, the grace itself of the Spirit will
lead us in great perfection, and we shall arrive at the very royal throne, and attain
to all the good things, by the grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus
Christ, to whom be glory and might, together with the Father and the Holy
Ghost, now and always, even for ever and ever. Amen.

## Homily 2 on Matthew

Matt. I. 1.
"The book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the Son of David, the Son of
Abraham."
Do you indeed remember the charge, which we lately made you, entreating
you to hearken unto all the things that are said with all silence, and mystical
quietness? For we are today to set foot within the holy vestibule, wherefore I
have also put you in mind of the charge.
Since, if the Jews, when they were to approach "a mountain that burned,
and fire, and blackness, and darkness, and tempest;" — or rather when they
were not so much as to approach, but both to see and to hear these things from
afar—were commanded for three days before to abstain from their wives, and to
wash their garments, and were in trembling and fear, both themselves and Moses
with them; much more we, when we are to hearken to such words, and are not to
stand far from a smoking mountain, but to enter into Heaven itself, ought to
show forth a greater self-denial; not washing our garments, but wiping clean the
robe of our soul, and ridding ourselves of all mixture with worldly things. For it
is not blackness that you shall see, nor smoke, nor tempest, but the King Himself
sitting on the throne of that unspeakable glory, and angels, and archangels
standing by Him, and the tribes of the saints, with those interminable myriads.
For such is the city of God, having "the Church of the first-born, the spirits
of the just, the general assembly of the angels, the blood of sprinkling," whereby
all are knit into one, and Heaven has received the things of earth, and earth the
things of Heaven, and that peace has come which was of old longed for both by
angels and by saints.
Herein stands the trophy of the cross, glorious, and conspicuous, the spoils
won by Christ, the first-fruits of our nature, the booty of our King; all these, I