12. Scripture attributes suffering and death to the only-begotten Son of God: He spared
not his own Son, but gave him up for us all (Rom. viii, 32): God so loved the world as to
give his only begotten Son (John iii, 16: cf. verse 1 and Rom. v, 8).
17. The word was made flesh (John i, 14). But the Word was not flesh except of a
woman. The Word then was made of a woman (Gal. iv, 4), -- of a Virgin Mother, for a
Virgin is the Mother of the Word of God.
19. Phil. ii, 5-11. If with Nestorius we divide Christ into two -- into the Man, who is the
Son of God by adoption, and the Son of God by nature, who is the Word of God, -- this
passage cannot be understood of the Man. That Man, if he be mere man, was not, to
begin with, in the form of God so as afterwards to come to be in the likeness of men, but
rather the other way about, being man, He became partaker of the Deity, in which
participation He was not emptied, but exalted. It must then be understood of the Word of
God, that He was, to begin with, from eternity in the form of God, that is, in the nature of
God, and afterwards emptied himself by being made in the likeness of men. That
emptying cannot be understood to mean the mere in dwelling of the Word of God in the
man Christ Jesus. For from the beginning of the world the Word of God has dwelt by
grace in all holy men, yet not for that is it said to be emptied: for God's communication
of His goodness to creatures is no derogation from Himself but rather an exaltation,
inasmuch as His pre-eminence appears by the goodness of creatures, and all the more
the better the creatures are. Hence if the Word of God dwelt more fully in the Man Christ
than in other saints, there was less emptying of the Word in His case than in the case of
others. Evidently then the union of the Word with human nature is not to be understood
to mean the mere indwelling of the Word of God in that Man, but the Word of God truly
being made man. Thus only can that emptying be said to take place; the Word of God
being said to be emptied, that is made small, not by any loss of His own greatness, but
by the assumption of human littleness.
24. The man Christ, speaking of Himself, says many divine and supernatural things, as,
I will raise him up at the last day (John vi, 40): I give them life everlasting (John x, 28).
Such language would be the height of pride, if the speaker were not Himself God, but
only had God dwelling in him. And still Christ says of Himself: Learn of me, because I
am meek and humble of heart (Matt. xi, 29).
26. In him all things were made (Col. i, 16) is said of the Word of God; and first-born of
the dead (ib. 18) is said of Christ; in such context as to show that the Word of God and
Christ are one and the same person.
27. The same conclusion appears in 1 Cor. viii, 6: And one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom
are all things.
The opinion of Nestorius on the mystery of the Incarnation differs little from the opinion
of Photinus. Both asserted that the man Christ was God only through the indwelling of
grace. Photinus said that Christ merited the name and glory of Godhead by His passion
and good works. Nestorius avowed that He had this name and glory from the first