SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.87, C.12.

ecclesiastical prelate can make that which is sanctified to lose its
consecration, not even though it be something inanimate, for
instance a consecrated chalice to be not consecrated, so long as it
remains entire. Much less, therefore, can a prelate make a man that
is consecrated to God cease to be consecrated, so long as he lives.
Now the solemnity of a vow consists in a kind of consecration or
blessing of the person who takes the vow, as stated above (Article
7). Hence no prelate of the Church can make a man, who has
pronounced a solemn vow, to be quit of that to which he was
consecrated, e.g. one who is a priest, to be a priest no more,
although a prelate may, for some particular reason, inhibit him from
exercising his order. In like manner the Pope cannot make a man
who has made his religious profession cease to be a religious,
although certain jurists have ignorantly held the contrary.
We must therefore consider whether continency is essentially bound
up with the purpose for which the vow is solemnized. because if not,
the solemnity of the consecration can remain without the obligation
of continency, but not if continency is essentially bound up with that
for which the vow is solemnized. Now the obligation of observing
continency is connected with Holy orders, not essentially but by the
institution of the Church; wherefore it seems that the Church can
grant a dispensation from the vow of continency solemnized by the
reception of Holy Orders. on the other hand the obligation of
observing; continency is an essential condition of the religious state,
whereby a man renounces the world and binds himself wholly to
God's service, for this is incompatible with matrimony, in which state
a man is under the obligation of taking to himself a wife, of begetting
children, of looking after his household, and of procuring whatever
is necessary for these purposes. Wherefore the Apostle says (1 Cor.
7:33) that "he that is with a wife, is solicitous for the things of the
world, how he may please his wife; and he is divided." Hence the
"monk" takes his name from "unity" [monos] in contrast with this
division. For this reason the Church cannot dispense from a vow
solemnized by the religious profession; and the reason assigned by
the Decretal is because "chastity is bound up with the monastic
rule."
Reply to Objection 1: Perils occasioned by human affairs should be
obviated by human means, not by turning divine things to a human
use. Now a professed religious is dead to the world and lives to God,
and so he must not be called back to the human life on the pretext of
any human contingency.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.87, C.12.

Reply to Objection 2: A vow of temporal continency can be a matter
of dispensation, as also a vow of temporal prayer or of temporal
abstinence. But the fact that no dispensation can be granted from a
vow of continency solemnized by profession is due, not to its being
an act of chastity, but because through the religious profession it is
already an act of religion.
Reply to Objection 3: Food is directly ordered to the upkeep of the
person, therefore abstinence from food may be a direct source of
danger to the person: and so on this count a vow of abstinence is a
matter of dispensation. On the other hand sexual intercourse is
directly ordered to the upkeep not of the person but of the species,
wherefore to abstain from such intercourse by continency does not
endanger the person. And if indeed accidentally it prove a source of
danger to the person, this danger may be obviated by some other
means, for instance by abstinence, or other corporal remedies.
Reply to Objection 4: A religious who is made a bishop is no more
absolved from his vow of poverty than from his vow of continency,
since he must have nothing of his own and must hold himself as
being the dispenser of the common goods of the Church. In like
manner neither is he dispensed from his vow of obedience; it is an
accident that he is not bound to obey if he have no superior; just as
the abbot of a monastery, who nevertheless is not dispensed from
his vow of obedience.
The passage of Ecclesiasticus, which is put forward in the contrary
sense, should be taken as meaning that neither fruitfulness of the of
the flesh nor any bodily good is to be compared with continency,
which is reckoned one of the goods of the soul, as Augustine
declares (De Sanct. Virg. viii). Wherefore it is said pointedly "of a
continent soul," not "of a continent body."