you a lesson. Fear not the devices of a potentate, but fear the power of sin. No
man will do you harm, if you dost not deal a blow to yourself. If you have not
sin, ten thousand swords may threaten you, but God will snatch you away out of
their reach: but if you have sin, even should you be in paradise you will be cast
out. Adam was in paradise yet he fell; Job was on a dung hill, yet he was
crowned victorious. What profit was paradise to the one? Or what injury was the
dung hill to the other? No man laid snares for the one, yet was he overthrown:
the devil laid snares for the other, and yet he was crowned. Did not the devil take
his property? Yes, but he did not rob him of his godliness. Did he not lay violent
hands upon his sons? yes: but he did not shake his faith. Did he not tear his body
to pieces? yes but he did not find his treasure. Did he not arm his wife against
him? yes but he did not overthrow the soldier. Did he not hurl arrows and darts
at him? yes but he received no wounds. He advanced his engines but could not
shake the tower; he conducted his billows against him, but did not sink the ship.
Observe this law I beseech you, yea I clasp your knees, if not with the bodily
hand, yet in spirit, and pour forth tears of supplication. Observe this law I pray
you, and no one can do you harm. Never call the rich man happy; never call any
man miserable save him who is living in sin: and call him happy who lives in
righteousness. For it is not the nature of their circumstances, but the disposition
of the men which makes both the one and the other. Never be afraid of the sword
if your conscience does not accuse you: never be afraid in war if your conscience
is clear. Where are they who have departed? Tell me. Did not all men once bow
down to them? Did not those who were in authority tremble greatly before them?
Did they not pay court to them? But sin has come, and all things are manifested
in their true lights; they who were attendants have become judges, the flatterers
are turned into executioners; they who once kissed his hands, dragged him
themselves from the church, and he who yesterday kissed his hand is today his
enemy. Wherefore? Because neither did he yesterday love him with sincerity.
For the opportunity came and the actors were unmasked. Did you not yesterday
kiss his hands, and call him saviour, and guardian, and benefactor? Did you not

compose panegyrics without end? Wherefore today do you accuse him? Why
yesterday a praiser, and today an accuser? Why yesterday utter panegyrics, and
today reproaches? What means this change? What means this revolution?
5. But I am not like this: I was the subject of his plots, yet I became his
protector. I suffered countless troubles at his hands, yet I did not retaliate. For I
copy the example of my Master, who said on the cross, "Forgive them, for they
know not what they do." Now I say these things that you may not be perverted by
the suspicion of wicked men. Now many changes have taken place, since I had
the oversight of the city, and yet no one learns self-control? But when I say no
one, I do not condemn all, God forbid. For it is impossible that this rich soil
when it has received seed, should not produce one ear of grain: but I am
insatiable, I do not wish many to be saved but all. And if but one be left in a
perishing condition, I perish also, and deem that the Shepherd should be imitated
who had ninety-nine sheep, and yet hastened after the one which had gone
astray. [Luke 15:4] How long will money last? How long this silver and gold?
How long these draughts of wine? How long the flatteries of slaves? How long
these goblets wreathed with garlands? How long these satanic drinking feasts,
full of diabolical activity?
Do you not know that the present life is a sojourn in a far country? For are
you a citizen? Nay you are a wayfarer. Do you understand what I say? You are
not a citizen, but you are a wayfarer, and a traveller. Say not: I have this city and
that. No one has a city. The city is above. Present life is but a journey. We are
journeying on every day, while nature is running its course. Some there are who
store up goods on the way: some who bury jewellery on the road. Now when you
enter an inn do you beautify the inn? Not so, but you eat and drink and hasten to
depart. The present life is an inn: we have entered it, and we bring present life to
a close: let us be eager to depart with a good hope, let us leave nothing here, that
we may not lose it there. When you enter the inn, what do you say to the
servant? Take care where you put away our things, that you do not leave
anything behind here, that nothing may be lost, not even what is small and