From Rome, May 23, 1556.

1 De Bonis was born in Guastalla, in Lombardy, in 1531, and entered the Society in August 1550 in Rome. He was ordained in Rome in 1560 and served as rector of several colleges and gained a reputation for being an eloquent preacher. He died in Naples on April 10, 1595.

# 47. TO FATHER JUAN MARÍN

On Scruples

Rome, June 24, 1556

Juan Marín 1 was a young Spanish Jesuit teaching in the Jesuit college in Bivona, Sicily. He did wonderful work among the people and manifested a great zeal for souls but, unfortunately, he had a scrupulous conscience and continually suffered torment therefrom. Ignatius was especially interested in him since he too had suffered from scruples and, thus, he wanted to do whatever he could to free Marín of his affliction. Writing through Polanco, Ignatius offers him remedies to overcome his scrupulosity, insisting that he must submit himself to the judgment of his superior and confide in God. Marín did not live to enjoy a scruple-free conscience, for only weeks after receiving this letter he was suddenly taken ill and died on the following day, September 16. Polanco composed this letter in Spanish [ Ep . 12:30-31].

Jhs

From the letters of Father Master Jerónimoand 2 also of Father Eleuthère, 3 our Father has learned what God is pleased to accomplish through the ministry of Ours in your city. I am sure that He would make more use of them if your reverence's excessive scrupulosity, reinforced by the lack of humble resignation, had not proved an obstacle. Up to a certain point scruples are not harmful to the one suffering from them, when that person becomes, because of his scruples, more vigilant and careful about not offending God, and does not form a judgment that this or that is sinful, even though he has some doubt or fear that it is, and places his confidence in another person whom he should trust, setting aside his own judgment and accepting that of his adviser. If these two points to not help the scrupulous person, then he is in the gravest danger, not only of offending God by failing to avoid what he erroneously thinks is sin, but also of losing the opportunity and the ability to serve Him, and even his own natural judgment. So Master Marín, determine to keep these two points fixed in your memory: (1) not to make any judgment or to decide by yourself that something is sinful when it is not clearly evident that it is and others do not think so; (2) when you fear that there is sin, you should refer the matter to the judgment of your superior, Father Eleuthère, and believe what he says, not because he is Master Eleuthère (even though he is a man of fine spirit and entirely trustworthy), but because he is your superior who holds the place of Christ our Lord. You should do the same with any other superior you may have: humble yourself and trust that Divine Providence will rule and guide you by means of your superior. And believe me, if you have true humility and submissiveness, your scruples will not cause you so much trouble. Pride is the fuel they feed on, and it is pride that places more reliance on one's own judgment and less on the judgment of others whom we trust. Also beseech God in your prayers and Masses to free you from this suffering or infirmity, as far as is needful to avoid offending Him, or being an obstacle to His greater service, and ask the prayers of others for the same intention. Offering you mine, I commend myself to yours. May Christ our Lord give us all His grace always to know and fulfill His most holy will.