So therefore, no falsehood, error, or deception can exist of itself in
the mind of any angel; yet it does so happen accidentally; but very
differently from the way it befalls us. For we sometimes get at the
quiddity of a thing by a composing and dividing process, as when,
by division and demonstration, we seek out the truth of a definition.
Such is not the method of the angels; but through the (knowledge of
the) essence of a thing they know everything that can be said
regarding it. Now it is quite evident that the quiddity of a thing can be
a source of knowledge with regard to everything belonging to such
thing, or excluded from it; but not of what may be dependent on
God's supernatural ordinance. Consequently, owing to their upright
will, from their knowing the nature of every creature, the good angels
form no judgments as to the nature of the qualities therein, save
under the Divine ordinance; hence there can be no error or
falsehood in them. But since the minds of demons are utterly
perverted from the Divine wisdom, they at times form their opinions
of things simply according to the natural conditions of the same. Nor
are they ever deceived as to the natural properties of anything; but
they can be misled with regard to supernatural matters; for example,
on seeing a dead man, they may suppose that he will not rise again,
or, on beholding Christ, they may judge Him not to be God.
From all this the answers to the objections of both sides of the
question are evident. For the perversity of the demons comes of
their not being subject to the Divine wisdom; while nescience is in
the angels as regards things knowable, not naturally but
supernaturally. It is, furthermore, evident that their understanding of
what a thing is, is always true, save accidentally, according as it is,
in an undue manner, referred to some composition or division.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether there is a "morning" and an "evening"

knowledge in the angels?
Objection 1: It would seem that there is neither an evening nor a
morning knowledge in the angels; because evening and morning
have an admixture of darkness. But there is no darkness in the
knowledge of an angel; since there is no error nor falsehood.
Therefore the angelic knowledge ought not to be termed morning
and evening knowledge.
Objection 2: Further, between evening and morning the night
intervenes; while noonday falls between morning and evening.
Consequently, if there be a morning and an evening knowledge in
the angels, for the same reason it appears that there ought to be a
noonday and a night knowledge.
Objection 3: Further, knowledge is diversified according to the
difference of the objects known: hence the Philosopher says (De
Anima iii, text. 38), "The sciences are divided just as things are." But
there is a threefold existence of things: to wit, in the Word; in their
own natures; and in the angelic knowledge, as Augustine observes
(Gen. ad lit. ii, 8). If, therefore, a morning and an evening knowledge
be admitted in the angels, because of the existence of things in the
Word, and in their own nature, then there ought to be admitted a
third class of knowledge, on account of the existence of things in the
angelic mind.
On the contrary, Augustine (Gen. ad lit. iv, 22,31; De Civ. Dei xii, 7,20)
divides the knowledge of the angels into morning and evening
knowledge.
I answer that, The expression "morning" and "evening" knowledge
was devised by Augustine; who interprets the six days wherein God
made all things, not as ordinary days measured by the solar circuit,
since the sun was only made on the fourth day, but as one day,
namely, the day of angelic knowledge as directed to six classes of
things. As in the ordinary day, morning is the beginning, and
evening the close of day, so, their knowledge of the primordial being
of things is called morning knowledge; and this is according as
things exist in the Word. But their knowledge of the very being of the
thing created, as it stands in its own nature, is termed evening