the body a fulness of health, with the vigor of incorruption." Thirdly,
a thing may be incorruptible on the part of its efficient cause; in this
sense man was incorruptible and immortal in the state of innocence.
For, as Augustine says (Questions. Vet. et Nov. Test. qu. 19): "God
made man immortal as long as he did not sin; so that he might
achieve for himself life or death." For man's body was indissoluble
not by reason of any intrinsic vigor of immortality, but by reason of a
supernatural force given by God to the soul, whereby it was enabled
to preserve the body from all corruption so long as it remained itself
subject to God. This entirely agrees with reason; for since the
rational soul surpasses the capacity of corporeal matter, as above
explained (Question 76, Article 1), it was most properly endowed at
the beginning with the power of preserving the body in a manner
surpassing the capacity of corporeal matter.
Reply to Objection 1:and 2: These objections are founded on natural
incorruptibility and immortality.
Reply to Objection 3: This power of preserving the body was not
natural to the soul, but was the gift of grace. And though man
recovered grace as regards remission of guilt and the merit of glory;
yet he did not recover immortality, the loss of which was an effect of
sin; for this was reserved for Christ to accomplish, by Whom the
defect of nature was to be restored into something better, as we
shall explain further on (TP, Question 14, Article 4, ad 1).
Reply to Objection 4: The promised reward of the immortality of
glory differs from the immortality which was bestowed on man in the
state of innocence.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether in the state of innocence man would

have been passible?
Objection 1: It would seem that in the state of innocence man was
passible. For "sensation is a kind of passion." But in the state of
innocence man would have been sensitive. Therefore he would have
been passible.
Objection 2: Further, sleep is a kind of passion. Now, man slept in
the state of innocence, according to Gn. 2:21, "God cast a deep sleep
upon Adam." Therefore he would have been passible.
Objection 3: Further, the same passage goes on to say that "He took
a rib out of Adam." Therefore he was passible even to the degree of
the cutting out of part of his body.
Objection 4: Further, man's body was soft. But a soft body is
naturally passible as regards a hard body; therefore if a hard body
had come in contact with the soft body of the first man, the latter
would have suffered from the impact. Therefore the first man was
passible.
On the contrary, Had man been passible, he would have been also
corruptible, because, as the Philosopher says (Top. vi, 3):
"Excessive suffering wastes the very substance."
I answer that, "Passion" may be taken in two senses. First, in its
proper sense, and thus a thing is said to suffer when changed from
its natural disposition. For passion is the effect of action; and in
nature contraries are mutually active or passive, according as one
thing changes another from its natural disposition. Secondly,
"passion" can be taken in a general sense for any kind of change,
even if belonging to the perfecting process of nature. Thus
understanding and sensation are said to be passions. In this second
sense, man was passible in the state of innocence, and was passive
both in soul and body. In the first sense, man was impassible, both
in soul and body, as he was likewise immortal; for he could curb his
passion, as he could avoid death, so long as he refrained from sin.
Thus it is clear how to reply to the first two objections; since
sensation and sleep do not remove from man his natural disposition,