This perplexed sentence is pointed by Harvey interrogatively, but we prefer the above.

allege that [the Israelites] acted dishonestly, because, forsooth, they took away for the recompense
of their labours, as I have observed, unstamped gold and silver in a few vessels; while they say that
they themselves (for let truth be spoken, although to some it may seem ridiculous) do act honestly,
when they carry away in their girdles from the labours of others, coined gold, and silver, and brass,
with Cæsar's inscription and image upon it.
3. If, however, a comparison be instituted between us and them, [I would ask] which party shall
seem to have received [their worldly goods] in the fairer manner? Will it be the [Jewish] people,
[who took] from the Egyptians, who were at all points their debtors; or we, [who receive property]
from the Romans and other nations, who are under no similar obligation to us? Yea, moreover,
through their instrumentality the world is at peace, and we walk on the highways without fear, and
sail where we will. Therefore, against men of this kind (namely, the heretics) the word of the
Lord applies, which says: "Thou hypocrite, first cast the beam out of thine eye, and then shalt thou
see clearly to pull out the mote out of thy brother's eye." For if he who lays these things to thy
charge, and glories in his own wisdom, has been separated from the company of the Gentiles, and
possesses nothing [derived from] other people's goods, but is literally naked, and barefoot, and
dwells homeless among the mountains, as any of those animals do which feed on grass, he will
stand excused [in using such language], as being ignorant of the necessities of our mode of life.
But if he do partake of what, in the opinion of men, is the property of others, and if [at the same
time] he runs down their type, he proves himself most unjust, turning this kind of accusation
against himself. For he will be found carrying about property not belonging to him, and coveting
goods which are not his. And therefore has the Lord said: "Judge not, that ye be not judged: for
with what judgment ye shall judge, ye shall be judged." [The meaning is] not certainly that we
should not find fault with sinners, nor that we should consent to those who act wickedly; but that
we should not pronounce an unfair judgment on the dispensations of God, inasmuch as He has
Himself made provision that all things shall turn out for good, in a way consistent with justice. For,
because He knew that we would make a good use of our substance which we should possess by
receiving it from another, He says, "He that hath two coats, let him impart to him that hath none;
and he that hath meat, let him do likewise." And, "For I was an hungered, and ye gave Me meat;
I was thirsty, and ye gave Me drink; I was naked and ye clothed Me." And, "When thou doest
So powerfully worked the divine command, Luke vi. 29.]