doubting about her; to revive her He said these things. For in proof that for her
comfort He said it, He added, "Why trouble ye the woman?" [Matthew 26:10]
And with regard to our having Him really always with us, He says, "Lo, I am
with you always, even unto the end of the world." [Matthew 28:20] From all
which it is evident, that for no other object was this said, but that the rebuke of
the disciples might not wither the faith of the woman, just then budding.
Let us not then bring forward these things now, which were uttered because
of some economy, but let us read all the laws, those in the New and those in the
Old Testament, that are set down about almsgiving, and let us be very earnest
about this matter. For this cleanses from sin. For "give alms, and all things will
be clean unto you." [Luke 11:41] This is a greater thing than sacrifice. "For I
will have mercy, and not sacrifice." This opens the heavens. For "your prayers
and your alms have come up for a memorial before God." [Acts 10:4] This is
more indispensable than virginity: for thus were those virgins cast out of the
bridechamber; thus were the others brought in.
All which things let us consider, and sow liberally, that we may reap in
more ample abundance, and attain unto the good things to come, by the grace
and love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory forever.
Amen.

## Homily 51 on Matthew

Matt. XV. 1.
"Then came to Jesus Scribes and Pharisees, which were of Jerusalem,
saying, Why do Your disciples," etc.
Then; when? When He had wrought His countless miracles; when He had
healed the infirm by the touch of the hem of His garment. For even with this
intent does the evangelist mark the time, that He might signify their unspeakable
wickedness, by nothing repressed.
But what means, "The Scribes and Pharisees, which were of Jerusalem?" In
every one of the tribes were they scattered abroad, and divided into twelve parts;
but they who occupied the chief city were worse than the others, as both
enjoying more honor, and having contracted much haughtiness.
But mark, I pray you, how even by the question itself they are convicted; in
not saying, "Why do they transgress the law of Moses," but, "the tradition of the
elders." Whence it is evident that the priests were inventing many novelties,
although Moses, with much terror and with much threatening, had enjoined
neither to add nor take away. "For you shall not add," says he, "unto the word
which I command you this day, and you shall not take away from it."
[Deuteronomy 4:2]
But not the less were they innovating; as in this instance, that one ought not
to eat with unwashen hands, that we must wash cups and brazen vessels, that we
must wash also ourselves. Thus, when men were henceforth, as time advanced,
to be freed from their observances, at that very time they bound them with the
same in more and more instances, fearing lest any one should take away their
power, and wishing to strike more dread, as though they were themselves also
lawgivers. The thing in fact proceeded so far in enormity, that while their own
commandments were kept, those of God were transgressed; and they so far