THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.58, C.5.

Reply to Objection 1: Since Christ is our Head, then what was
bestowed on Christ is bestowed on us through Him. And on this
account, since He is already raised up, the Apostle says that God
has, so to speak, "raised us up together with Him," still we ourselves
are not raised up yet, but are to be raised up, according to Rm. 8:11:
"He who raised up Jesus from the dead, shall quicken also your
mortal bodies": and after the same manner of speech the Apostle
adds that "He has made us to sit together with Him, in the heavenly
places"; namely, for the very reason that Christ our Head sits there.
Reply to Objection 2: Since the right hand is the Divine beatitude,
then "to sit on the right hand" does not mean simply to be in
beatitude, but to possess beatitude with a kind of dominative power,
as a property and part of one's nature. This belongs to Christ alone,
and to no other creature. Yet it can be said that every saint in bliss is
placed on God's right hand; hence it is written (Mt. 25:33): "He shall
set the sheep on His right hand."
Reply to Objection 3: By the "throne" is meant the judiciary power
which Christ has from the Father: and in this sense He is said "to sit
in the Father's throne." But other saints have it from Christ; and in
this respect they are said "to sit on Christ's throne"; according to Mt.
19:28: "You also shall sit upon twelve seats, judging the twelve
tribes of Israel."
Reply to Objection 4: As Chrysostom says (Hom. lxv in Matth.), "that
place," to wit, sitting at the right hand, "is closed not only to all men,
but likewise to angels: for, Paul declares it to be the prerogative of
Christ, saying: 'To which of the angels said He at any time: Sit on My
right hand?'" Our Lord therefore "replied not as though some were
going to sit there one day, but condescending to the supplication of
the questioners; since more than others they sought this one thing
alone, to stand nigh to Him." Still it can be said that the sons of
Zebedee sought for higher excellence in sharing His judiciary power;
hence they did not ask to sit on the Father's right hand or left, but on
Christ's.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.59, C.1.

## QUESTION 59 — OF CHRIST'S JUDICIARY POWER

Prologue
We have now to consider Christ's judiciary power. Under this head
there are six points of inquiry:
(1) Whether judiciary power is to be attributed to Christ?
(2) Whether it belongs to Him as man?
(3) Whether He acquired it by merits?
(4) Whether His judiciary power is universal with regard to all men?
(5) Whether besides the judgment that takes place now in time, we
are to expect Him in the future general judgment?
(6) Whether His judiciary power extends likewise to the angels?
It will be more suitable to consider the execution of the Last
Judgment when we treat of things pertaining to the end of the world
[XP, Questions 88, seqq.]. For the present it will be enough to touch
on those points that concern Christ's dignity.