67. The individualism of our postmodern and globalized era favours a lifestyle which weakens the
development and stability of personal relationships and distorts family bonds. Pastoral activity
needs to bring out more clearly the fact that our relationship with the Father demands and
encourages a communion which heals, promotes and reinforces interpersonal bonds. In our world,
especially in some countries, different forms of war and conflict are re-emerging, yet we Christians
remain steadfast in our intention to respect others, to heal wounds, to build bridges, to strengthen
relationships and to “bear one another’s burdens” (Gal 6:2). Today too, various associations for
the defence of rights and the pursuit of noble goals are being founded. This is a sign of the desire
of many people to contribute to social and cultural progress.

Challenges to inculturating the faith

68. The Christian substratum of certain peoples – most of all in the West – is a living reality. Here
we find, especially among the most needy, a moral resource which preserves the values of an
authentic Christian humanism. Seeing reality with the eyes of faith, we cannot fail to acknowledge
what the Holy Spirit is sowing. It would show a lack of trust in his free and unstinting activity to
think that authentic Christian values are absent where great numbers of people have received
baptism and express their faith and solidarity with others in a variety of ways. This means more
than acknowledging occasional “seeds of the word”, since it has to do with an authentic Christian
faith which has its own expressions and means of showing its relationship to the Church. The
immense importance of a culture marked by faith cannot be overlooked; before the onslaught of
contemporary secularism an evangelized culture, for all its limits, has many more resources than
the mere sum total of believers. An evangelized popular culture contains values of faith and
solidarity capable of encouraging the development of a more just and believing society, and

possesses a particular wisdom which ought to be gratefully acknowledged.

69. It is imperative to evangelize cultures in order to inculturate the Gospel. In countries of Catholic
tradition, this means encouraging, fostering and reinforcing a richness which already exists. In
countries of other religious traditions, or profoundly secularized countries, it will mean sparking
new processes for evangelizing culture, even though these will demand long-term planning. We
must keep in mind, however, that we are constantly being called to grow. Each culture and social
group needs purification and growth. In the case of the popular cultures of Catholic peoples, we
can see deficiencies which need to be healed by the Gospel: machismo, alcoholism, domestic
violence, low Mass attendance, fatalistic or superstitious notions which lead to sorcery, and the
like. Popular piety itself can be the starting point for healing and liberation from these deficiencies.