think, by testimonies of the Holy Scriptures. And if I am asked how the
incarnation itself was brought to pass, I reply that the Word of God itself
was made flesh, that is, was made man, yet not turned and changed into
that which was made; but so made, that there should be there not only
the Word of God and the flesh of man, but also the rational soul of man,
and that this whole should both be called God on account of God, and
man on account of man. And if this is understood with difficulty, the
mind must be purged by faith, by more and more abstaining from sins,
and by doing good works, and by praying with the groaning of holy
desires; that by profiting through the divine help, it may both understand
and love. And if I am asked, how, after the incarnation of the Word, either
a voice of the Father was produced, or a corporeal appearance by which
the Holy Spirit was manifested: I do not doubt indeed that this was done
through the creature; but whether only corporeal and sensible, or
whether by the employment also of the spirit rational or intellectual (for
this is the term by which some choose to call what the Greeks name
νοερόν), not certainly so as to form one person (for who could possibly
say that whatever creature it was by which the voice of the Father
sounded, is in such sense God the Father; or whatever creature it was by
which the Holy Spirit was manifested in the form of a dove, or in fiery
tongues, is in such sense the Holy Spirit, as the Son of God is that man
who was made of a virgin?), but only to the ministry of bringing about
such intimations as God judged needful; or whether anything else is to be
understood: is difficult to discover, and not expedient rashly to affirm.
Yet I see not how those things could have been brought to pass without
the rational or intellectual creature. But it is not yet the proper place to
explain, as the Lord may give me strength, why I so think; for the
arguments of heretics must first be discussed and refuted, which they do
not produce from the divine books, but from their own reasons, and by
which, as they think, they forcibly compel us so to understand the
testimonies of the Scriptures which treat of the Father, and the Son, and
the Holy Spirit, as they themselves will.
32. But now, as I think, it has been sufficiently shown, that the Son is not
therefore less because He is sent by the Father, nor the Holy Spirit less
because both the Father sent Him and the Son. For these things are
perceived to be laid down in the Scriptures, either on account of the

visible creature; or rather on account of commending to our thoughts the
emanation ; but not on account of inequality, or
imparity, or unlikeness of substance; since, even if God the Father had
willed to appear visibly through the subject creature, yet it would be most
absurd to say that He was sent either by the Son, whom He begot, or by
the Holy Spirit, who proceeds from Him. Let this, therefore, be the limit
of the present book. Henceforth in the rest we shall see, the Lord helping,
of what sort are those crafty arguments of the heretics, and in what
manner they may be confuted.