Abraham, that so He may be seen to be very exceedingly greater than the
Prophets also. Indeed it was because they continually called Him a prophet that
He said, "My word has no place in you." [John 8:37] In that other place He
declared that He raises the dead, but here He says, "He that believes shall never
see death," which was a much greater thing than not to allow believers to be
holden, by death. Wherefore the Jews were the more enraged. What then say
they?
"Whom makest you yourself?"
And this too in an insulting manner. "You are taking somewhat upon
yourself," says one of them. To this then Christ replies;

John 8:54
"If I honor Myself, My honor is nothing."
2. What say the heretics here? That He heard the question, "Are you greater
than our father Abraham?" and dared not to say to them, "Yea, I am greater," but
did so in a covert manner. What then? Is His honor "nothing"? With respect to
them it is nothing. And as He said, "My witness is not true" [John 5:31], with
reference to the opinion they would form of it, so also does He speak here.
"There is One that honors Me."
And wherefore said He not, "The Father that sent Me," as He did before,
but,
"Of whom you say that He is your God."

John 8:55
"Yet you have not known Him."
Because He desired to show that they not only knew not His Father, but that
they knew not God.
"But I know Him."
"So that to say, 'I know Him,' is not a boast, while to say, 'I know Him not,'
would be a falsehood; but you when you say that you know Him, lie; as then ye,
when you say that you know Him, lie, so also should I, were I to say that I know
Him not."
"If I honor Myself." Since they said, "Whom makest you yourself?" He
replies, "If I make (Myself anything,) My honor is nothing. As then I know Him
exactly, so ye know Him not." And as in the case of Abraham, He did not take
away their whole assertion, but said, "I know that you are Abraham's seed," so as
to make the charge against them heavier; thus here He does not remove the
whole, but what? "Whom ye say." By granting to them their boast of words, He
increases the force of the accusation against them. How then do ye "not know
Him"? "Because ye insult One who says and does everything that He may be
glorified, even when that One is sent from Him." This assertion is unsupported
by testimony, but what follows serves to establish it.
"And I keep His saying."
Here they might, if at least they had anything to say, have refuted Him, for
it was the strongest proof of His having been sent by God.

John 8:56
"Your father Abraham rejoiced to see My day, and he saw it, and was glad."
Again, He shows that they were aliens from the race of Abraham, if they
grieved at what he rejoiced in. "My day," seems to me to mean the day of the
Crucifixion, which Abraham foreshowed typically by the offering of the ram and
of Isaac. What do they reply?