corporeal organ. Hence it is incorruptible.
Reply to Objection 3: The agent is nobler than the patient, if the
action and the passion are referred to the same thing: but not
always, if they refer to different things. Now the intellect is a passive
power in regard to the whole universal being: while the vegetative
power is active in regard to some particular thing, namely, the body
as united to the soul. Wherefore nothing prevents such a passive
force being nobler than such an active one.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether there is an active intellect?

Objection 1: It would seem that there is no active intellect. For as the
senses are to things sensible, so is our intellect to things intelligible.
But because sense is in potentiality to things sensible, the sense is
not said to be active, but only passive. Therefore, since our intellect
is in potentiality to things intelligible, it seems that we cannot say
that the intellect is active, but only that it is passive.
Objection 2: Further, if we say that also in the senses there is
something active, such as light: on the contrary, light is required for
sight, inasmuch as it makes the medium to be actually luminous; for
color of its own nature moves the luminous medium. But in the
operation of the intellect there is no appointed medium that has to be
brought into act. Therefore there is no necessity for an active
intellect.
Objection 3: Further, the likeness of the agent is received into the
patient according to the nature of the patient. But the passive
intellect is an immaterial power. Therefore its immaterial nature
suffices for forms to be received into it immaterially. Now a form is
intelligible in act from the very fact that it is immaterial. Therefore
there is no need for an active intellect to make the species actually
intelligible.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (De Anima iii, 5), "As in every
nature, so in the soul is there something by which it becomes all
things, and something by which it makes all things." Therefore we
must admit an active intellect.
I answer that, According to the opinion of Plato, there is no need for
an active intellect in order to make things actually intelligible; but
perhaps in order to provide intellectual light to the intellect, as will
be explained farther on (Article 4). For Plato supposed that the forms
of natural things subsisted apart from matter, and consequently that
they are intelligible: since a thing is actually intelligible from the very
fact that it is immaterial. And he called such forms "species or
ideas"; from a participation of which, he said that even corporeal
matter was formed, in order that individuals might be naturally
established in their proper genera and species: and that our intellect
was formed by such participation in order to have knowledge of the