John 17:17
"As You have sent Me into the world, even so have I also sent them into the
world."
As Paul also says, "Having put in us the word of reconciliation." [2
Corinthians 5:19] For the same end for which Christ came, for the same did
these take possession of the world. In this place again the "as" is not put to
signify resemblance in the case of Himself and the Apostles; for how was it
possible for men to be sent otherwise? But it was His custom to speak of the
future as having come to pass.

John 17:19
"And for their sakes I sanctify Myself, that they also might be sanctified in the
truth."
What is, "I sanctify Myself"? "I offer to You a sacrifice." Now all sacrifices
are called "holy," and those are specially called "holy things," which are laid up
for God. For whereas of old in type the sanctification was by the sheep, but now
it is not in type, but by the truth itself, He therefore says, "That they may be
sanctified in Your truth." "For I both dedicate them to You, and make them an
offering"; this He says, either because their Head was being made so, or because
they also were sacrificed; for, "Present," it says, "your bodies a living sacrifice,
holy" [Romans 12:1]; and, "We were counted as sheep for the slaughter." [Psalm
43:22] And He makes them; without death, a sacrifice and offering; for that He
alluded to His own sacrifice, when He said, "I sanctify," is clear from what
follows.

John 17:20
"Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also who shall believe."
2. For since He was dying for them, and said, that "For their sakes I
sanctify Myself," lest any one should think that He did this for the Apostles only,
He added, "Neither pray I for these only, but for them also who believe in Me
through their word." By this again He revived their souls, showing that the
disciples should be many. For because He made common what they possessed
peculiarly, He comforts them by showing that they were being made the cause of
the salvation of others.
After having thus spoken concerning their salvation, and their being
sanctified by faith and the Sacrifice, He afterwards speaks of concord, and
finally closes his discourse with this, having begun with it and ended in it. For at
the beginning He says, "A new commandment I give unto you" [John 13:34]; and
here,

John 17:21
"That they all may be one, as You, Father, are in Me and I in You."
Here again the "as" does not denote exact similarity in their case, (for it was
not possible for them in so great a degree,) but only as far as was possible for
men. Just as when He says "Be merciful, as your Father." [Luke 6:36]
But what is, "In Us"? In the faith which is on Us. Because nothing so
offends all men as divisions, He provides that they should be one. "What then,"
says some one, "did He effect this?" Certainly He effected it. For all who believe
through the Apostles are one, though some from among them were torn away.
Nor did this escape His knowledge, He even foretold it, and showed that it
proceeded from men's slack-mindedness.
"That the world may believe that You have sent Me."
As He said in the beginning, "By this shall all men know that you are My
disciples, if you love one another." And how should they hence believe?
"Because," He says, "You are a God of peace." If therefore they observe the
same as those of whom they have learned, their hearers shall know the teacher
by the disciples, but if they quarrel, men shall deny that they are the disciples of
a God of peace, and will not allow that I, not being peaceable, have been sent
from You. Do you see how, unto the end, He proves His unanimity with the
Father?