which is in the Holy of Holies: for there God is nowhere said to have appeared in
this manner, nor Moses to have thus trembled. And then the greatness of His
tender care. "I have seen, I have seen the affliction of My people which is in
Egypt, and I have heard their groaning, and have come down to deliver them.
And now come, I will send you into Egypt." [Acts 7:34] See, how he shows, that
both by kindnesses, and by chastisements, and by miracles, God was drawing
them to Him: but they were still the same. That God is everywhere present, they
learned.
Hearing these things, let us in our afflictions flee to Him. "And their
groaning," says He, "I have heard:" not simply, "because of their calamities."
But if any should ask, Why then did He suffer them to be evil entreated there?
Why, in the first place, to every just man his sufferings are the causes of his
rewards. And in the next place, as to why He afflicted them: it was to show His
power, that He can (do all), and not only so, but that He may also train them.
Observe in fact; when they were in the desert, then they "waxed fat, they grew
thick, they spread out in breadth, they kicked" [Deuteronomy 32:15]: and ever
and always ease was an evil. Therefore also from the beginning He said to
Adam: "In the sweat of your face you shall eat your bread." [Genesis 3:19] Also
(it was) in order that having come out of much suffering into rest, they might
give thanks to God. For affliction is a great good. For hear the Prophet saying,
"It is good for me, that You have humbled me." [Psalm 119:71] But if to great
and wonderful men affliction be a great (good), much more to us. And, if you
will, let us examine into the nature of affliction as it is in itself. Let there be
some person rejoicing exceedingly, and gay, and giving a loose to jollity: what
more unseemly, what more senseless than this? Let there be one sorrowing and
dejected: what more truly philosophic than this? For, "It is better," we read, "to
go into the house of mourning, than into the house of laughter." [Ecclesiastes
7:2] But, likely enough, you do not like the saying, and want to evade it. Let us
however see, what sort of man Adam was in Paradise, and what he was
afterwards: what sort of man Cain was before, and what he was afterwards. The

soul does not stand fast in its proper place, but, like as by a running tide, ([ῥ]
[εύματος], Edd. [πνεύματος], "wind") is raised and buoyed up by pleasure,
having no steadfastness; facile in making professions, prompt at promising; the
thoughts all in restless commotion: laughter ill-timed, causeless hilarity, idle
clatter of unmeaning talk. And why speak of others? Let us take in hand some
one of the saints, and let us see what he was while in pleasure, what again, when
in distress. Shall we look at David himself? When he was in pleasure and
rejoicing, from his many trophies, from his victory, from his crowns, from his
luxurious living, from his confidence, see what sort of things he said and did:
"But I said in my prosperity," says he, "I shall never be moved." [Psalm 30:6]
But when he has come to be in affliction, hear what he says: "And if He say to
me, I have no mind for you; lo! Here am I, let Him do that which is pleasing in
His sight." [2 Samuel 15:26] What can be more truly philosophic than these
words? "Whatsoever may be pleasing to God," says he, "so let it be." And again
he said to Saul: "If the Lord stirs you up against me, may your sacrifice be
acceptable." [1 Samuel 26:19] And then too, being in affliction, he spared even
his enemies: but afterwards, not friends even, nor those who had done him no
injury. Again, Jacob when he was in affliction, said: "If the Lord will give me
bread to eat, and raiment to put on." [Genesis 28:20] As also the son of Noah
did nothing of the kind erewhile; but when he was no longer afraid for his safety,
you hear how wanton he became. [Genesis 9:22] Hezekiah too, when he was in
affliction, see what things he did in order to his deliverance; he put on sackcloth,
and such like; but when he was in pleasure, he fell through the haughtiness of his
heart. [2 Kings 19:20] For, says the Scripture, "When you have eaten, and drunk,
and art filled, take heed to yourself." [Deuteronomy 6:11-12] For perilous, as on
a precipice's brink, is the post of affluence. "Take heed," says he, "to yourself."
When the Israelites were afflicted, they became all the more increased in
number: but when He left them to themselves, then they all went to ruin. And
why speak of examples from the ancients? In our own times, let us see, if you
please, is it not the case, that when the most are in good case, they become