SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.72, C.3.

not a sin and cannot be called backbiting. But if they be uttered out
of lightness of heart or for some unnecessary motive, it is not a
mortal sin, unless perchance the spoken word be of such a grave
nature, as to cause a notable injury to a man's good name, especially
in matters pertaining to his moral character, because from the very
nature of the words this would be a mortal sin. And one is bound to
restore a man his good name, no less than any other thing one has
taken from him, in the manner stated above (Question 62, Article 2)
when we were treating of restitution.
Reply to Objection 1: As stated above, it is not backbiting to reveal a
man's hidden sin in order that he may mend, whether one denounce
it, or accuse him for the good of public justice.
Reply to Objection 2: This gloss does not assert that backbiting is to
be found throughout the whole of mankind, but "almost," both
because "the number of fools is infinite," [Eccles. 1:15] and few are
they that walk in the way of salvation, [Mt. 7:14] and because there
are few or none at all who do not at times speak from lightness of
heart, so as to injure someone's good name at least slightly, for it is
written (James 3:2): "If any man offend not in word, the same is a
perfect man."
Reply to Objection 3: Augustine is referring to the case when a man
utters a slight evil about someone, not intending to injure him, but
through lightness of heart or a slip of the tongue.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.72, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether backbiting is the gravest of all sins

committed against one's neighbor?
Objection 1: It would seem that backbiting is the gravest of all sins
committed against one's neighbor. Because a gloss on Ps. 108:4,
"Instead of making me a return of love they detracted me," a gloss
says: "Those who detract Christ in His members and slay the souls
of future believers are more guilty than those who killed the flesh
that was soon to rise again." From this it seems to follow that
backbiting is by so much a graver sin than murder, as it is a graver
matter to kill the soul than to kill the body. Now murder is the gravest
of the other sins that are committed against one's neighbor.
Therefore backbiting is absolutely the gravest of all.
Objection 2: Further, backbiting is apparently a graver sin than
reviling, because a man can withstand reviling, but not a secret
backbiting. Now backbiting is seemingly a graver sin than adultery,
because adultery unites two persons in one flesh, whereas reviling
severs utterly those who were united. Therefore backbiting is more
grievous than adultery: and yet of all other sins a man commits
against his neighbor, adultery is most grave.
Objection 3: Further, reviling arises from anger, while backbiting
arises from envy, according to Gregory (Moral. xxxi, 45). But envy is
a graver sin than anger. Therefore backbiting is a graver sin than
reviling; and so the same conclusion follows as before.
Objection 4: Further, the gravity of a sin is measured by the gravity
of the defect that it causes. Now backbiting causes a most grievous
defect, viz. blindness of mind. For Gregory says (Regist. xi, Ep. 2):
"What else do backbiters but blow on the dust and stir up the dirt
into their eyes, so that the more they breathe of detraction, the less
they see of the truth?" Therefore backbiting is the most grievous sin
committed against one's neighbor.
On the contrary, It is more grievous to sin by deed than by word. But
backbiting is a sin of word, while adultery, murder, and theft are sins
of deed. Therefore backbiting is not graver than the other sins
committed against one's neighbor.
I answer that, The essential gravity of sins committed against one's