mischief together with him? For you have obtained the reputation of a slanderer.
For there is not any, no not any evil, which stops at him that suffers it, but it
includes the doer also. As for instance, the envious person seems indeed to plot
against another, but himself first reaps the fruit of his sin, wasting and wearing
himself away, and being hated of all men. The cheat deprives another of his
money; yea and himself too of men's good will: and causes himself to be evil
spoken of by all men. Now reputation is much better than money, for the one it is
not easy to wash out, whereas it is easy to gain possession of the other. Or rather,
the absence of the one does no hurt to him that wants it; but the absence of the
other makes you reproached and ridiculed, and an object of enmity and warfare
to all.
The passionate man again first punishes and tears himself in pieces, and
then him with whom he is angry.
Just so the evil speaker disgraces first himself and then him who is evilspoken of: or, it may be, even this has proved beyond his power, and while he
departs with the credit of a foul and detestable kind of person, he causes the
other to be loved the more. For when a man hearing a bad name given him, does
not requite the giver in the same kind, but praises and admires, he does not
praise the other, but himself. For I before observed that, as calumnies against our
neighbors first touch those who de vise the mischief, so also good works done
towards our neighbors, gladden first those who do them. The parent either of
good, or evil, justly reaps the fruit of it first himself. And just as water, whether
it be brackish or sweet, fills the vessels of those who resort to it, but lessens not
the fountain which sends it forth; so surely also, both wickedness and virtue,
from whatever person they proceed, prove either his joy or his ruin.
So far as to the things of this world; but what speech may recount the things
of that world, either the goods or the evils? There is none. For as to the
blessings, they surpass all thought, not speech only; for their opposites are
expressed indeed in terms familiar to us. For fire, it is said, is there, and
darkness, and bonds, and a worm that never dies. But this represents not only the

things which are spoken of, but others more intolerable. And to convince you,
consider at once this first: if it be fire, how is it also darkness? Do you see how
that fire is more intolerable than this? For it has no light. If it be fire, how is it
forever burning? Do you see how something more intolerable than this happens?
For it is not quenched. Yea, therefore it is called unquenchable. Let us then
consider how great a misery it must be, to be forever burning, and to be in
darkness, and to utter unnumbered groanings, and to gnash the teeth, and not
even to be heard. For if here any one of those ingeniously brought up, should he
be cast into prison, speaks of the mere ill savor, and the being laid in darkness,
and the being bound with murderers, as more intolerable than any death: think
what it is when we are burning with the murderers of the whole world, neither
seeing nor being seen, but in so vast a multitude thinking that we are alone. For
the darkness and gloom does not allow our distinguishing those who are near to
us, but each will burn as if he were thus suffering alone. Moreover, if darkness of
itself afflicts and terrifies our souls, how then will it be when together with the
darkness there are likewise so great pains and burnings?
Wherefore I entreat you to be ever revolving these things with yourselves,
and to submit to the pain of the words, that we may not undergo the punishment
of the things. For assuredly, all these things shall be, and those whose doings
have deserved those chambers of torture no man shall rescue, not father, nor
mother, nor brother. "For a brother redeems not," He says; "shall a man
redeem?" [Psalm 49:7, Septuagint], though he have much confidence, though he
have great power with God. For it is He Himself who rewards every one
according to his works, and upon these depends our salvation or punishment.
Let us make then to ourselves "friends of the mammon of unrighteousness"
[Luke 16:9], that is: Let us give alms; let us exhaust our possessions upon them,
that so we may exhaust that fire: that we may quench it, that we may have
boldness there. For there also it is not they who receive us, but our own work:
for that it is not simply their being our friends which can save us, learn from
what is added. For why did He not say, "Make to yourselves friends, that they