FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.23, C.3.

and belongs properly to movements: thus whitening, which is
movement from black to white, is contrary to blackening, which is
movement from white to black.
Accordingly there is a twofold contrariety in the passions of the
soul: one, according to contrariety of objects, i.e. of good and evil;
the other, according to approach and withdrawal in respect of the
same term. In the concupiscible passions the former contrariety
alone is to be found; viz. that which is based on the objects: whereas
in the irascible passions, we find both forms of contrariety. The
reason of this is that the object of the concupiscible faculty, as
stated above (Article 1), is sensible good or evil considered
absolutely. Now good, as such, cannot be a term wherefrom, but
only a term whereto, since nothing shuns good as such; on the
contrary, all things desire it. In like manner, nothing desires evil, as
such; but all things shun it: wherefore evil cannot have the aspect of
a term whereto, but only of a term wherefrom. Accordingly every
concupiscible passion in respect of good, tends to it, as love, desire
and joy; while every concupiscible passion in respect of evil, tends
from it, as hatred, avoidance or dislike, and sorrow. Wherefore, in the
concupiscible passions, there can be no contrariety of approach and
withdrawal in respect of the same object.
On the other hand, the object of the irascible faculty is sensible good
or evil, considered not absolutely, but under the aspect of difficulty
or arduousness. Now the good which is difficult or arduous,
considered as good, is of such a nature as to produce in us a
tendency to it, which tendency pertains to the passion of "hope";
whereas, considered as arduous or difficult, it makes us turn from it;
and this pertains to the passion of "despair." In like manner the
arduous evil, considered as an evil, has the aspect of something to
be shunned; and this belongs to the passion of "fear": but it also
contains a reason for tending to it, as attempting something
arduous, whereby to escape being subject to evil; and this tendency
is called "daring." Consequently, in the irascible passions we find
contrariety in respect of good and evil (as between hope and fear):
and also contrariety according to approach and withdrawal in
respect of the same term (as between daring and fear).
From what has been said the replies to the objections are evident.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.23, C.3.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.23, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether any passion of the soul has no

contrariety?
Objection 1: It would seem that every passion of the soul has a
contrary. For every passion of the soul is either in the irascible or in
the concupiscible faculty, as stated above (Article 1). But both kinds
of passion have their respective modes of contrariety. Therefore
every passion of the soul has its contrary.
Objection 2: Further, every passion of the soul has either good or
evil for its object; for these are the common objects of the appetitive
part. But a passion having good for its object, is contrary to a
passion having evil for its object. Therefore every passion has a
contrary.
Objection 3: Further, every passion of the soul is in respect of
approach or withdrawal, as stated above (Article 2). But every
approach has a corresponding contrary withdrawal, and vice versa.
Therefore every passion of the soul has a contrary.
On the contrary, Anger is a passion of the soul. But no passion is set
down as being contrary to anger, as stated in Ethic. iv, 5. Therefore
not every passion has a contrary.
I answer that, The passion of anger is peculiar in this, that it cannot
have a contrary, either according to approach and withdrawal, or
according to the contrariety of good and evil. For anger is caused by
a difficult evil already present: and when such an evil is present, the
appetite must needs either succumb, so that it does not go beyond
the limits of "sadness," which is a concupiscible passion; or else it
has a movement of attack on the hurtful evil, which movement is that
of "anger." But it cannot have a movement of withdrawal: because
the evil is supposed to be already present or past. Thus no passion
is contrary to anger according to contrariety of approach and
withdrawal.
In like manner neither can there be according to contrariety of good
and evil. Because the opposite of present evil is good obtained,
which can be no longer have the aspect of arduousness or difficulty.
Nor, when once good is obtained, does there remain any other
movement, except the appetite's repose in the good obtained; which