this discourse seem to you to have? What eyes? [Ezekiel 10:12] It was owing to
this that he said, "for we are not ignorant of his devices." [2 Corinthians 2:11]
Owing to this did the devils flee not only at hearing him speak, but even at
seeing his garments. This is the mouth, the dust whereof I would fain see,
through which Christ spoke the great and secret things, and greater than in His
own person, (for as He wrought, so He also spoke greater things by the disciples,
) through which the Spirit gave those wondrous oracles to the world! For what
good thing did not that mouth effect? Devils it drove out, sins it loosed, tyrants it
muzzled, philosophers' mouths it stopped, the world it brought over to God,
savages it persuaded to learn wisdom, all the whole order of the earth it altered.
Things in Heaven too it disposed what way it listed [1 Corinthians 5:3-4],
binding whom it would, and loosing in the other world, "according unto the
power given unto it." [2 Corinthians 13:10] Nor is it that mouth only, but the
heart too would fain see the dust of, which a man would not do wrong to call the
heart of the world, and a fountain of countless blessings, and a beginning, and
element of our life. For the spirit of life was furnished out of it all, and was
distributed through the members of Christ, not as being sent forth by arteries, but
by a free choice of good deeds. This heart was so large, as to take in entire cities,
and peoples, and nations. "For my heart" he says, "is enlarged." [2 Corinthians
6:11] Yet even a heart thus large, did this very charity that enlarged it many a
time straiten and oppress. For he says, "Out of much affliction ([θλίψεως]) and
anguish ([συνοχἥς]) of heart I wrote unto you." [2 Corinthians 2:4] I were
desirous to see that heart even after its dissolution, which burned at each one that
was lost, which travailed a second time with the children that had proved
abortions [Galatians 4:19], which saw God, ("for the pure in heart," He says,
"shall see God,") [Matthew 5:8] which became a Sacrifice, ("for a sacrifice to
God is a contrite heart,") [Psalm 51:17] which was loftier than the heavens,
which was wider than the world, which was brighter than the sun's beam, which
was warmer than fire, which was stronger than adamant, which sent forth rivers,
("for rivers," it says, "of living water shall flow out of his belly,") [John 7:38]

wherein was a fountain springing up, and watering, not the face of the earth, but
the souls of men, whence not rivers only, but even fountains of tears, issued day
and night, which lived the new life, not this of ours, (for "I live," he says, "yet
not I, but Christ lives in me," [Galatians 2:20] so Paul's heart was His heart, and
a tablet of the Holy Spirit, and a book of grace); which trembled for the sins of
others, (for I fear, he says, lest by any means "I have bestowed labor upon you in
vain; [Galatians 4:11] lest as the serpent beguiled Eve; [2 Corinthians 11:3] lest
when I come I should find you not such as I would;") [2 Corinthians 12:20]
which both feared for itself, and was confiding too, (for I fear, he says, "lest by
any means after having preached to others I myself should be a castaway," [1
Corinthians 9:27] And, "I am persuaded that neither angels nor powers shall be
able to separate us;") [alluding to Romans 9:3] which was counted worthy to
love Christ as no other man loved Him: which despised death and hell, yet was
broken down by brothers' tears, (for he says, "what mean ye to weep and to
break mine heart?") [Acts 21:13] which was most enduring, and yet could not
bear to be absent from the Thessalonians by the space of an hour! [1
Thessalonians 2:17; 3:10] Fain would I see the dust of hands that were in a
chain, through the imposition of which the Spirit was furnished, through which
the divine writings were written, (for "behold how large a letter I have written
unto you with my own hand:" [ and again, "The salutation of me Paul with my
own hand,") 1 Corinthians 16:21] of those hands at the sight of which the serpent
"fell off into the fire." [Acts 28:5] Fain would I see the dust of those eyes which
were blinded gloriously, which recovered their sight again for the salvation of
the world; which even in the body were counted worthy to see Christ, which saw
earthly things, yet saw them not, which saw the things which are not seen, which
saw not sleep, which were watchful at midnight, which were not effected as eyes
are. I would also see the dust of those feet, which ran through the world and
were not weary; which were bound in the stocks when the prison shook, which
went through parts habitable or uninhabited, which walked on so many journeys.
And why need I speak of single parts? Fain would I see the tomb, where the