Homily 25 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts XI. 19
"Now they which were scattered abroad upon the persecution that rose
about Stephen travelled as far as Phenice, and Cyprus, and Antioch, preaching
the word to none but unto the Jews only."
The persecution turned out to be no slight benefit as "to them that love God
all things work together for good." [Romans 8:28] If they had made it their
express study how best to establish the Church, they would have done no other
thing than this— they dispersed the teachers. Mark in what quarters the
preaching was extended. "They travelled," it says, "as far as Phenice and Cyprus
and Antioch; to none however did they preach the word but to Jews only." Do
you mark with what wise purposes of Providence so much was done in the case
of Cornelius? This serves both to justify Christ, and to impeach the Jews. When
Stephen was slain, when Paul was twice in danger, when the Apostles were
scourged, then the Gentiles received the word, then the Samaritans. Which Paul
also declares: "To you it was necessary that the Word of God should first be
spoken; but since you thrust it from you, and judge yourselves unworthy, lo, we
turn unto the Gentiles." [Acts 13:46] Accordingly they went about, preaching to
Gentiles also. "But some of them were men of Cyprus and Cyrene, who, when
they had come to Antioch, spoke unto the Greeks, preaching the Lord Jesus:"
[Acts 11:20] for it is likely both that they could now speak Greek, and that there
were such men in Antioch. "And the hand of the Lord," it says, "was with them,"
that is, they wrought miracles; "and a great number believed, and turned unto
the Lord." [Acts 11:21] Do you mark why now also there was heed of miracles
(namely) that they might believe? "Then tidings of these things came unto the
ears of the church which was in Jerusalem: and they sent forth Barnabas, that he
should go as far as Antioch." [Acts 11:22] What may be the reason that, when

such a city received the word, they did not come themselves? Because of the
Jews. But they send Barnabas. However, it is no small part of the providential
management even so that Paul comes to be there. It is both natural, and it is
wisely ordered, that they are averse to him, and (so) that Voice of the Gospel,
that Trumpet of heaven, is not shut up in Jerusalem. Do you mark how on all
occasions, Christ turns their ill dispositions to needful account and for the
benefit of the Church? Of their hatred to the man, He availed Himself for the
building up of the Church. But observe this holy man— Barnabas, I mean—
how he looked not to his own interests, but hasted to Tarsus. "Who, when he
came, and had seen the grace of God, was glad, and exhorted them all, that with
purpose of heart, they would cleave unto the Lord. For he was a good man, and
full of the Holy Ghost, and of faith: and much people was added unto the Lord."
(v. 23, 24.) He was a very kind man, and single-hearted, and considerate
([συγγνωμονικός]). "Then departed Barnabas to Tarsus, for to seek Saul." [Acts
11:25] He came to the athletic wrestler, the general (fit to lead armies), the
champion of single combat, the lion— I am at a loss for words, say what I will—
the hunting-dog, killer of lions, bull of strength, lamp of brightness, mouth
sufficing for a world. "And when he had found him, he brought him to Antioch."
[Acts 11:26] Verily this is the reason why it was there they were appointed to be
called Christians, because Paul there spent so long time! "And it came to pass,
that a whole year they assembled themselves with the Church, and taught much
people. And the disciples were first called Christians at Antioch." No small
matter of praise to that city! This is enough to make it a match for all, that for so
long a time it had the benefit of that mouth, it first, and before all others:
wherefore also it was there in the first place that men were accounted worthy of
that name. Do you observe the benefit resulting (to that city) from Paul, to what
a height that name, like a standard ([σημεἵον]), exalted it? Where three thousand,
where five thousand, believed, where so great a multitude, nothing of the sort
took place, but they were called "they of the way:" here they were called
Christians. "And in these days came prophets from Jerusalem unto Antioch."