brethren. What? Has He commanded you to pray for your enemies, and do you
pray against your brother? But your prayer is not against him, but against
yourself. For you provoke God by uttering those impious words, "Show him the
same!" "So do to him!" "Smite him!" "Recompense him!" Far be such words
from the disciple of Christ, who should be meek and mild. From the mouth that
has been vouchsafed such holy Mysteries, let nothing bitter proceed. Let not the
tongue that has touched the Lord's Body utter anything offensive, let it be kept
pure, let not curses be borne upon it. For if "revilers shall not inherit the
kingdom of God" [1 Corinthians 6:10], much less those who curse. For he that
curses must be injurious; and injuriousness and prayer are at variance with each
other, cursing and praying are far apart, accusation and prayer are wide asunder.
Do you propitiate God with prayer, and then utter imprecations? If you forgive
not, you will not be forgiven. [Matthew 6:15] But instead of forgiving, you
beseech God not to forgive; what excessive wickedness in this! If the
unforgiving is not forgiven, he that prays his Lord not to forgive, how shall he be
forgiven? The harm is to yourself, not him. For though your prayers were on the
point of being heard for yourself, they would never be accepted in such a case,
as offered with a polluted mouth. For surely the mouth that curses is polluted
with all that is offensive and unclean.
When you ought to tremble for your own sins, to wrestle earnestly for the
pardon of them, you come to move God against your brother— do you not fear,
nor think of what concerns yourself? Do you not see what you are doing? Imitate
even the conduct of children at school. If they see their own class within giving
account of their lessons, and all beaten for their idleness, and one by one
severely examined and chastised with blows, they are frightened to death, and if
one of their companions strikes them, and that severely, they cannot have while
to be angry, nor complain to their master; so is their soul possessed with fear.
They only look to one thing, that they may go in and come out without stripes,
and their thoughts are on that time. And when they come out, whether beaten or
not, the blows they have received from their playmates never enter their minds

for the delight. And you, when you stand anxiously concerned for your own sins,
how can you but shudder at making mention of others' faults? How can you
implore pardon of God? For your own case is made worse on the terms of your
imprecations against another, and you forbid Him to make allowance for your
own faults. Might He not say, "If you would have Me so severe in exacting
offenses against you, how can you expect Me to pardon your offenses against
Me?" Let us learn at last to be Christians! If we know not how to pray, which is a
very simple and easy thing, what else shall we know? Let us learn to pray like
Christians. Those are the prayers of Gentiles, the supplications of Jews. The
Christian's are the reverse, for the forgiveness and forgetting of offenses against
us. "Being reviled," it is said, "we bless; being persecuted, we suffer it; being
defamed, we entreat." [1 Corinthians 4:12-13] Hear Stephen saying, "Lord, lay
not this sin to their charge." [Acts 6:60] Instead of praying against them, he
prayed for them. You, instead of praying for them, utter imprecations against
them. You then are wicked in the degree that he was excellent. Whom do we
admire, tell me; those for whom he prayed, or him who prayed for them? Him
certainly! And if we, much more then God. Would you have your enemy
stricken? pray for him: yet not with such intention, not to strike him. That will
indeed be the effect, but let it not be your object. That blessed martyr suffered all
unjustly, yet he prayed for them: we suffer many things justly from our enemies.
And if he who suffered unjustly dared not forbear to pray for his enemies, what
punishment do we deserve, who suffer justly, and yet do not pray for them, nay,
pray against them? You think indeed that you are inflicting a blow upon another,
but in truth you are thrusting the sword against yourself. You allow not the Judge
to be lenient to your own offenses, by this way of urging Him to anger against
others. For, "with what measure you mete," He says, "it shall be measured to you
again; and with what judgment you judge, you shall be judged." [Matthew 7:2]
Let us therefore be disposed to pardon, that God may be so disposed towards us.
These things I wish you not only to hear, but to observe. For now the
memory retains only the words, and perhaps hardly those. And after we are