FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.88, C.2.

we speak of the smiling meadows when they are decked with flowers
and fresh with green hues this is opposed to drought. In like manner
if mortal be taken literally as referring to the death of the body, it
does not imply opposition to venial, nor belong to the same genus.
But if mortal be taken metaphorically, as applied to sin, it is opposed
to that which is venial.
For sin, being a sickness of the soul, as stated above (Question 71,
Article 1, ad 3; Question 72, Article 5; Question 74, Article 9, ad 2), is
said to be mortal by comparison with a disease, which is said to be
mortal, through causing an irreparable defect consisting in the
corruption of a principle, as stated above (Question 72, Article 5).
Now the principle of the spiritual life, which is a life in accord with
virtue, is the order to the last end, as stated above (Question 72,
Article 5; Question 87, Article 3): and if this order be corrupted, it
cannot be repaired by any intrinsic principle, but by the power of
God alone, as stated above (Question 87, Article 3), because
disorders in things referred to the end, are repaired through the end,
even as an error about conclusions can be repaired through the truth
of the principles. Hence the defect of order to the last end cannot be
repaired through something else as a higher principle, as neither can
an error about principles. Wherefore such sins are called mortal, as
being irreparable. On the other hand, sins which imply a disorder in
things referred to the end, the order to the end itself being
preserved, are reparable. These sins are called venial: because a sin
receives its acquittal [veniam] when the debt of punishment is taken
away, and this ceases when the sin ceases, as explained above
(Question 87, Article 6).
Accordingly, mortal and venial are mutually opposed as reparable
and irreparable: and I say this with reference to the intrinsic
principle, but not to the Divine power, which can repair all diseases,
whether of the body or of the soul. Therefore venial sin is fittingly
condivided with mortal sin.
Reply to Objection 1: The division of sin into venial and mortal is not
a division of a genus into its species which have an equal share of
the generic nature: but it is the division of an analogous term into its
parts, of which it is predicated, of the one first, and of the other
afterwards. Consequently the perfect notion of sin, which Augustine
gives, applies to mortal sin. On the other hand, venial sin is called a
sin, in reference to an imperfect notion of sin, and in relation to
mortal sin: even as an accident is called a being, in relation to

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.88, C.2.

substance, in reference to the imperfect notion of being. For it is not
"against" the law, since he who sins venially neither does what the
law forbids, nor omits what the law prescribes to be done; but he
acts "beside" the law, through not observing the mode of reason,
which the law intends.
Reply to Objection 2: This precept of the Apostle is affirmative, and
so it does not bind for all times. Consequently everyone who does
not actually refer all his actions to the glory of God, does not
therefore act against this precept. In order, therefore, to avoid mortal
sin each time that one fails actually to refer an action to God's glory,
it is enough to refer oneself and all that one has to God habitually.
Now venial sin excludes only actual reference of the human act to
God's glory, and not habitual reference: because it does not exclude
charity, which refers man to God habitually. Therefore it does not
follow that he who sins venially, sins mortally.
Reply to Objection 3: He that sins venially, cleaves to temporal good,
not as enjoying it, because he does not fix his end in it, but as using
it, by referring it to God, not actually but habitually.
Reply to Objection 4: Mutable good is not considered to be a term in
contraposition to the immutable good, unless one's end is fixed
therein: because what is referred to the end has not the character of
finality.