Homily 61 on the Gospel of John
John 10:22-24
"And it was at Jerusalem, the Feast of the dedication, and it was winter. And
Jesus walked in the temple in Solomon's porch. Then came the Jews round about
Him, and said unto Him, How long do you make us to doubt?"
1. Every virtue is a good thing, but most of all gentleness and meekness.
This shows us men; this makes us to differ from wild beasts; this fits us to vie
with Angels. Wherefore Christ continually expends many words about this
virtue, bidding us be meek and gentle. Nor does He merely expend words about
it, but also teaches it by His actions; at one time buffeted and bearing it, at
another reproached and plotted against; yet again coming to those who plotted
against Him. For those men who had called Him a demoniac, and a Samaritan
and who had often desired to kill Him, and had cast stones at Him, the same
surrounded and asked Him, "Are you the Christ?" Yet not even in this case did
He reject them after so many and so great plots against Him, but answered them
with great gentleness.
But it is necessary rather to enquire into the whole passage from the
beginning.
"It was," It says, "at Jerusalem, the Feast of the dedication, and it was
winter." This feast was a great and national one. For they celebrated with great
zeal the day on which the Temple was rebuilt, on their return from their long
captivity in Persia. At this feast Christ also was present, for henceforth He
continually abode in Judæa, because the Passion was near. "Then came the Jews
round about Him, and said, How long do you make us to doubt?"
"If you be the Christ, tell us plainly."
He did not reply, "What enquire ye of Me? Often have ye called Me
demoniac, madman, and Samaritan, and have deemed me an enemy of God, and

a deceiver, and you said but now, You bear witness of yourself, your witness is
not true; how is it then that you seek and desire to learn from Me, whose witness
ye reject?" But He said nothing of the kind, although He knew that the intention
with which they made the enquiry was evil. For their surrounding Him and
saying, "How long do you make us to doubt?" seemed to proceed from a certain
longing and desire of learning, but the intention with which they asked the
question was corrupt and deceitful. For since His works admitted not of their
slander and insolence, while they might attack His sayings by finding out in
them a sense other than that in which they were spoken, they continually
proposed questions, desiring to silence Him by means of His sayings; and when
they could find no fault with His works, they wished to find a handle in His
words. Therefore they said, "Tell us"; yet He had often told them. For He said to
the woman of Samaria, "I Am that speak unto you" [John 4:26]; and to the blind
man, "You have both seen Him, and it is He that talks with you." [John 9:37] And
He had told them also, if not in the same, at least in other words. And indeed,
had they been wise, and had they desired to enquire aright, it remained for them
to confess Him by words, since by works He had often proved the point in
question. But now observe their perverse and disputations temper. When He
addresses them, and instructs them by His words, they say, "What sign do you
show us?" [John 6:30] But when He gives them proofs by His works, they say to
Him, "Are you the Christ? Tell us plainly"; when the works cry aloud, they seek
words, and when the words teach, then they betake themselves to works, ever
setting themselves to the contrary. But that they enquired not for the sake of
learning, the end showed. For Him whom they deemed to be so worthy of credit,
as to receive His witness of Himself, when He had spoken a few words they
straightway stoned; so that their very surrounding and pressing upon Him was
done with ill intent.
And the mode of questioning was full of much hatred. "Tell us plainly, Are
you the Christ?" Yet He spoke all things openly, being ever present at their
feasts, and in secret He said nothing; but they brought forward words of deceit,