FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.6, C.6.

involuntariness.
Reply to Objection 2: As that is said to be natural, which is according
to the inclination of nature; so that is said to be voluntary, which is
according to the inclination of the will. Now a thing is said to be
natural in two ways. First, because it is from nature as from an active
principle: thus it is natural for fire to produce heat. Secondly,
according to a passive principle; because, to wit, there is in nature
an inclination to receive an action from an extrinsic principle: thus
the movement of the heavens is said to be natural, by reason of the
natural aptitude in a heavenly body to receive such movement;
although the cause of that movement is a voluntary agent. In like
manner an act is said to be voluntary in two ways. First, in regard to
action, for instance, when one wishes to be passive to another.
Hence when action is brought to bear on something, by an extrinsic
agent, as long as the will to suffer that action remains in the passive
subject, there is not violence simply: for although the patient does
nothing by way of action, he does something by being willing to
suffer. Consequently this cannot be called involuntary.
Reply to Objection 3: As the Philosopher says (Phys. viii, 4) the
movement of an animal, whereby at times an animal is moved
against the natural inclination of the body, although it is not natural
to the body, is nevertheless somewhat natural to the animal, to
which it is natural to be moved according to its appetite. Accordingly
this is violent, not simply but in a certain respect. The same remark
applies in the case of one who contorts his limbs in a way that is
contrary to their natural disposition. For this is violent in a certain
respect, i.e. as to that particular limb; but not simply, i.e. as to the
man himself.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.6, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether fear causes involuntariness simply?

Objection 1: It would seem that fear causes involuntariness simply.
For just as violence regards that which is contrary to the will at the
time, so fear regards a future evil which is repugnant to the will. But
violence causes involuntariness simply. Therefore fear too causes
involuntariness simply.
Objection 2: Further, that which is such of itself, remains such,
whatever be added to it: thus what is hot of itself, as long as it
remains, is still hot, whatever be added to it. But that which is done
through fear, is involuntary in itself. Therefore, even with the
addition of fear, it is involuntary.
Objection 3: Further, that which is such, subject to a condition, is
such in a certain respect; whereas what is such, without any
condition, is such simply: thus what is necessary, subject to a
condition, is necessary in some respect: but what is necessary
absolutely, is necessary simply. But that which is done through fear,
is absolutely involuntary; and is not voluntary, save under a
condition, namely, in order that the evil feared may be avoided.
Therefore that which is done through fear, is involuntary simply.
On the contrary, Gregory of Nyssa [Nemesius, De Nat. Hom. xxx.]
and the Philosopher (Ethic. iii, 1) say that such things as are done
through fear are "voluntary rather than involuntary."
I answer that, As the Philosopher says (Ethic. iii) and likewise
Gregory of Nyssa in his book on Man (Nemesius, De Nat. Hom. xxx),
such things are done through fear "are of a mixed character," being
partly voluntary and partly involuntary. For that which is done
through fear, considered in itself, is not voluntary; but it becomes
voluntary in this particular case, in order, namely, to avoid the evil
feared.
But if the matter be considered aright, such things are voluntary
rather than involuntary; for they are voluntary simply, but
involuntary in a certain respect. For a thing is said to be simply,
according as it is in act; but according as it is only in apprehension,
it is not simply, but in a certain respect. Now that which is done
through fear, is in act in so far as it is done. For, since acts are