I answer that, Those things, the reason of which comes from the
nature of a species, must needs be found likewise in all the members
of that same species. Now such is the resurrection: because the
reason thereof, as stated above (Article 1), is that the soul cannot
have the final perfection of the human species, so long as it is
separated from the body. Hence no soul will remain for ever
separated from the body. Therefore it is necessary for all, as well as
for one, to rise again.
Reply to Objection 1: As a gloss expounds these words, they refer to
the spiritual resurrection whereby the wicked shall not rise again in
the particular judgment. or else they refer to the wicked who are
altogether unbelievers, who will not rise again to be judged, since
they are already judged [Jn. 3:18].
Reply to Objection 2: Augustine (De Civ. Dei xx, 23) explains "many"
as meaning "all": in fact, this way of speaking is often met with in
Holy Writ. Or else the restriction may refer to the children consigned
to limbo who, although they shall rise again, are not properly said to
awake, since they will have no sense either of pain or of glory, and
waking is the unchaining of the senses.
Reply to Objection 3: All, both good and wicked, are conformed to
Christ, while living in this life, as regards things pertaining to the
nature of the species, but not as regards matters pertaining to grace.
Hence all will be conformed to Him in the restoration of natural life,
but not in the likeness of glory, except the good alone.
Reply to Objection 4: Those who have died in original sin have, by
dying, discharged the obligation of death which is the punishment of
original sin. Hence, notwithstanding original sin, they can rise again
from death: for the punishment of original sin is to die, rather than to
be detained by death.
Reply to Objection 5: We are born again by the grace of Christ that is
given to us, but we rise again by the grace of Christ whereby it came
about that He took our nature, since it is by this that we are
conformed to Him in natural things. Hence those who die in their
mother's womb, although they are not born again by receiving grace,
will nevertheless rise again on account of the conformity of their
nature with Him, which conformity they acquired by attaining to the

perfection of the human species.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the resurrection is natural?

Objection 1: It would seem that the resurrection is natural. For, as
the Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii, 14), "that which is commonly
observed in all, marks the nature of the individuals contained under
it." Now resurrection applies commonly to all. Therefore it is natural.
Objection 2: Further, Gregory says (Moral. xiv, 55): "Those who do
not hold the resurrection on the principle of obedience ought
certainly to hold it on the principle of reason. For what does the
world every day but imitate, in its elements, our resurrection?" And
he offers as examples the light which "as it were dies . . . and is
withdrawn from our sight . . . and again rises anew, as it were, and is
recalled---the shrubs which lose their greenery, and again by a kind
of resurrection are renewed---and the seeds which rot and die and
then sprout and rise again as it were": which same example is
adduced by the Apostle (1 Cor. 15:36). Now from the works of nature
nothing can be known save what is natural. Therefore the
resurrection is natural.
Objection 3: Further, things that are against nature abide not for
long, because they are violent, so to speak. But the life that is
restored by the resurrection will last for ever. Therefore the
resurrection will be natural.
Objection 4: Further, that to which the entire expectation of nature
looks forward would seem to be natural. Now such a thing is the
resurrection and the glorification of the saints according to Rm. 8:19.
Therefore the resurrection will be natural.
Objection 5: Further, the resurrection is a kind of movement towards
the everlasting union of soul and body. Now movement is natural if it
terminate in a natural rest (Phys. v, 6): and the everlasting union of
soul and body will be natural, for since the soul is the body's proper
mover, it has a body proportionate to it: so that the body is likewise
for ever capable of being quickened by it, even as the soul lives for
ever. Therefore the resurrection will be natural.
On the contrary, There is no natural return from privation to habit.
But death is privation of life. Therefore the resurrection whereby one
returns from death to life is not natural.