could not possibly be marked out by a star. For by reason of its immense height,
it could not sufficiently distinguish so confined a spot, and discover it to them
that were desiring to see it. And this any one may see by the moon, which being
so far superior to the stars, seems to all that dwell in the world, and are scattered
over so great an extent of earth—seems, I say, near to them every one. How then,
tell me, did the star point out a spot so confined, just the space of a manger and
shed, unless it left that height and came down, and stood over the very head of
the young child? And at this the evangelist was hinting when he said, "Lo, the
star went before them, till it came and stood over where the young Child was."
4. Do you see, by what store of proofs this star is shown not to be one of the
many, nor to have shown itself according to the order of the outward creation?
And for what intent did it appear? To reprove the Jews for their insensibility, and
to cut off from them all occasion of excuse for their willful ignorance. For, since
He who came was to put an end to the ancient polity, and to call the world to the
worship of Himself, and to be worshipped in all land and sea, straightway, from
the beginning, He opens the door to the Gentiles, willing through strangers to
admonish His own people. Thus, because the prophets were continually heard
speaking of His advent, and they gave no great heed, He made even barbarians
come from a far country, to seek after the king that was among them. And they
learn from a Persian tongue first of all, what they would not submit to learn from
the prophets; that, if on the one hand they were disposed to be candid, they
might have the strongest motive for obedience; if, on the other hand, they were
contentious, they might henceforth be deprived of all excuse. For what could
they have to say, who did not receive Christ after so many prophets, when they
saw that wise men, at the sight of a single star, had received this same, and had
worshipped Him who was made manifest. Much in the same way then as He
acted in the case of the Ninevites, when He sent Jonas, and as in the case of the
Samaritan and the Canaanitish women; so He did likewise in the instance of the
magi. For this cause He also said, "The men of Nineveh shall rise up, and shall
condemn:" and, "the Queen of the South shall rise up, and shall condemn this

generation:" [Matthew 12:41-42] because these believed the lesser things, but
the Jews not even the greater.
"And wherefore," one may say, "did He attract them by such a vision?"
Why, how should He have done? Sent prophets? But the magi would not have
submitted to prophets. Uttered a voice from above? Nay, they would not have
attended. Sent an angel? But even him they would have hurried by. And so for
this cause dismissing all those means, God calls them by the things that are
familiar, in exceeding condescension; and He shows a large and extraordinary
star, so as to astonish them, both at the greatness and beauty of its appearance,
and the manner of its course.
In imitation of this, Paul also reasons with the Greeks from an heathen altar,
and brings forward testimonies from the poets. And not without circumcision
does he harangue the Jews. Sacrifices he makes the beginning of his instruction
to them that are living under the law. For, since to every one what is familiar is
dear, both God, and the men that are sent by Him, manage things on this
principle with a view to the salvation of the world. Think it not therefore
unworthy of Him to have called them by a star; since by the same rule you will
find fault with all the Jewish rites also, the sacrifices, and the purifications, and
the new moons, and the ark, and the temple too itself. For even these derived
their origin from Gentile grossness. Yet for all that, God, for the salvation of
them that were in error, endured to be served by these things, whereby those
without were used to serve devils; only He slightly altered them; that He might
draw them off by degrees from their customs, and lead them towards the highest
wisdom. Just so He did in the case of the wise men also, not disdaining to call
them by sight of a star, that He might lift them higher ever after. Therefore after
He has brought them, leading them by the hand, and has set them by the manger;
it is no longer by a star, but by an angel that He now discourses unto them. Thus
did they little by little become better men.
This did He also with respect to them of Ascalon, and of Gaza. For those
five cities too (when at the coming of the ark they had been smitten with a