THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.80, C.5.

merely the just, can eat Christ's body.
Reply to Objection 1: Such words and similar expressions are to be
understood of spiritual eating, which does not belong to sinners.
Consequently, it is from such expressions being misunderstood that
the above error seems to have arisen, through ignorance of the
distinction between corporeal and spiritual eating.
Reply to Objection 2: Should even an unbeliever receive the
sacramental species, he would receive Christ's body under the
sacrament: hence he would eat Christ sacramentally, if the word
"sacramentally" qualify the verb on the part of the thing eaten. But if
it qualify the verb on the part of the one eating, then, properly
speaking, he does not eat sacramentally, because he uses what he
takes, not as a sacrament, but as simple food. Unless perchance the
unbeliever were to intend to receive what the Church bestows;
without having proper faith regarding the other articles, or regarding
this sacrament.
Reply to Objection 3: Even though a mouse or a dog were to eat the
consecrated host, the substance of Christ's body would not cease to
be under the species, so long as those species remain, and that is,
so long as the substance of bread would have remained; just as if it
were to be cast into the mire. Nor does this turn to any indignity
regarding Christ's body, since He willed to be crucified by sinners
without detracting from His dignity; especially since the mouse or
dog does not touch Christ's body in its proper species, but only as
to its sacramental species. Some, however, have said that Christ's
body would cease to be there, directly it were touched by a mouse or
a dog; but this again detracts from the truth of the sacrament, as
stated above. None the less it must not be said that the irrational
animal eats the body of Christ sacramentally; since it is incapable of
using it as a sacrament. Hence it eats Christ's body "accidentally,"
and not sacramentally, just as if anyone not knowing a host to be
consecrated were to consume it. And since no genus is divided by
an accidental difference, therefore this manner of eating Christ's
body is not set down as a third way besides sacramental and
spiritual eating.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.80, C.5.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.80, C.6.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the sinner sins in receiving Christ's body

sacramentally?
Objection 1: It seems that the sinner does not sin in receiving
Christ's body sacramentally, because Christ has no greater dignity
under the sacramental species than under His own. But sinners did
not sin when they touched Christ's body under its proper species;
nay, rather they obtained forgiveness of their sins, as we read in Lk.
7 of the woman who was a sinner; while it is written (Mt. 14:36) that
"as many as touched the hem of His garment were healed."
Therefore, they do not sin, but rather obtain salvation, by receiving
the body of Christ.
Objection 2: Further, this sacrament, like the others, is a spiritual
medicine. But medicine is given to the sick for their recovery,
according to Mt. 9:12: "They that are in health need not a physician."
Now they that are spiritually sick or infirm are sinners. Therefore this
sacrament can be received by them without sin.
Objection 3: Further, this sacrament is one of our greatest gifts,
since it contains Christ. But according to Augustine (De Lib. Arb. ii),
the greatest gifts are those "which no one can abuse." Now no one
sins except by abusing something. Therefore no sinner sins by
receiving this sacrament.
Objection 4: Further, as this sacrament is perceived by taste and
touch, so also is it by sight. Consequently, if the sinner sins by
receiving the sacrament, it seems that he would sin by beholding it,
which is manifestly untrue, since the Church exposes this sacrament
to be seen and adored by all. Therefore the sinner does not sin by
eating this sacrament.
Objection 5: Further, it happens sometimes that the sinner is
unconscious of his sin. Yet such a one does not seem to sin by
receiving the body of Christ, for according to this all who receive it
would sin, as exposing themselves to danger, since the Apostle says
(1 Cor. 4:4): "I am not conscious to myself of anything, yet I am not
hereby justified." Therefore, the sinner, if he receive this sacrament,
does not appear to be guilty of sin.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (1 Cor. 11:29): "He that eateth and