it with long-suffering; but rather for this very reason be full of remorse. For
among men too, when one that has been smitten on the right cheek offers the left
also, he more avenges himself than if he gave ten thousand blows; and when one
that has been reviled, not only reviles not again but even blesses, he has stricken
[his adversary] more heavily, than if he rained upon him ten thousand
reproaches. Now if in the case of men we feel ashamed when offering insults we
meet with long-suffering; much rather, in respect to God, ought they to be afraid
who go on continually sinning yet suffer no calamity. For, even for evil unto
their own heads is the unspeakable punishment treasured up for them. These
things then bearing in mind, let us above all things be afraid of sin; for this is
punishment, this is hell, this is ten thousand ills. And let us not only be afraid of,
but also flee from it, and strive to please God continually; for this is the
kingdom, this is life, this is ten thousand goods. So shall we also even here
obtain already the kingdom and the good things to come; whereunto may we all
attain, through the grace and love towards men of our Lord Jesus Christ; with
Whom to the Father, with the Holy Spirit, be glory, might, honor, now and for
ever, and world without end. Amen.

## Homily 12 on Second Corinthians

2 Corinthians 6:1-2
And working together with Him we intreat also that you receive not the
grace of God in vain. For he says, At an acceptable time I hearkened unto you.
And in a day of salvation did I succor you.
For since he said, God beseeches, and we are ambassadors and suppliants
unto you, that you be "reconciled unto God:" lest they should become supine, he
hereby again alarms and arouses them, saying: "We intreat that you receive not
the grace of God in vain." 'For let us not,' he says, 'therefore be at ease, because
He beseeches and has sent some to be ambassadors; nay, but for this very reason
let us make haste to please God and to collect spiritual merchandise;' as also he
said above, "The love of God constrains us," [2 Corinthians 5:14] that is presses,
drives, urges us, 'that you may not after so much affectionate care, by being
supine and exhibiting no nobleness, miss of such great blessings. Do not
therefore because He has sent some to exhort you, deem that this will always be
so. It will be so until His second coming; until then He beseeches, so long as we
are here; but after that is judgment and punishment.' Therefore, he says, "we are
constrained."
For not only from the greatness of the blessings and His loving kindness,
but also from the shortness of the time he urges them continually. Wherefore he
says also elsewhere, "For now is our salvation nearer." [Romans 13:11] And
again; "The Lord is at hand." [Philippians 4:5] But here he does something yet
more. For not from the fact that the remainder of the time is short and little, but
also from its being the only season available, for salvation, he incited them.
For, "Behold," he says, "now is the acceptable time; behold, now is the day
of salvation." Let us therefore not let slip the favorable opportunity but display a