forbear demanding an account of sins, and to forgive transgressions and
offenses. And how does He act? He takes the sinner and espouses her to himself.
And what does He give her? A signet ring. Of what nature? The Holy Spirit.
Paul says "now He who establishes us with you is God who has also sealed us,
and given the earnest of the Spirit." [2 Corinthians 1:21-22] The Spirit then He
gives her. Next He says "Did not I plant you in a garden?" She says "yea." And
how did you fall from thence? "The devil came and cast me out of the garden."
You were planted in the garden and he cast you out: behold I plant you in
myself, I uphold you. How? The devil dares not approach me. Neither do I take
you up into Heaven; but something greater than Heaven is here: I carry you in
myself who am the Lord of Heaven. The shepherd carries you and the wolf no
longer comes: or rather I permit him to approach. And so the Lord carries our
nature: and the devil approaches and is worsted. "I have planted you in myself:"
therefore He says "I am the root, you are the branches:" so He planted her in
Himself. "But," she says, "I am a sinner and unclean." "Let not this trouble you,
I am a physician. I know my vessel, I know how it was perverted. It was formerly
a vessel of clay, and it was perverted. I remodel it by means of the laver of
regeneration and I submit it to the action of fire." For observe: He took dust
from the earth and made the man; He formed him. The devil came, and perverted
him. Then the Lord came, took him again, and remoulded, and recast him in
baptism, and He suffered not his body to be of clay, but made it of a harder ware.
He subjected the soft clay to the fire of the Holy Spirit. "He shall baptize you
with the Holy Ghost and with fire:" [Matthew 3:11] He was baptized with water
that he might be remodelled, with fire that he might be hardened. Therefore the
Prophet speaking beforehand under divine guidance declared "You shall dash
them in pieces like vessels of the potter." He did not say like vessels of
earthenware which every one possesses: for by a potter's vessels are meant those
which the potter is fashioning on the wheel: now the potter's vessels are of clay,
but ours are of harder ware. Speaking beforehand therefore of the remoulding
which is wrought by means of baptism he says, "you shall dash them in pieces

like vessels of a potter"— He means that He remodels and recasts them. I
descend into the water of baptism, and the fashion of my nature is remoulded,
and the fire of the Spirit recasts it, and it is turned into a harder ware. And that
my words are no empty vaunt hear what Job says, "He has made us as clay,"
[Job 10:9] and Paul, "but we have this treasure in earthen vessels."
[2 Corinthians 4:7] But consider the strength of the earthen vessel: for it has
been hardened not by fire, but by the Spirit. How was it proved to be an earthen
vessel? "Five times received I forty stripes save one, thrice was I beaten with
rods, once was I stoned," and yet the earthen vessel was not shattered. "A day
and a night have I been in the deep." He has been in the deep, and the earthen
vessel was not dissolved: he suffered shipwreck and the treasure was not lost; the
ship was submerged and yet the freight floated. "But we have this treasure" he
says. What kind of treasure? A supply of the Spirit, righteousness, sanctification,
redemption. Of what nature, tell me? "in the name of Jesus Christ rise up and
walk." [Acts 3:6] "Æneas, Jesus Christ makes you whole," [Acts 9:34] I say unto
you thou evil spirit, go out of him. [Acts 16:18]
12. Have you seen a treasure more brilliant than royal treasures? For what
can the pearl of a king do like that which the words of an Apostle effected? Set
crowns innumerable upon dead men, and they will not be raised: but one word
went forth from an Apostle, and it brought back revoked nature, and restored it
to its ancient condition. "But we have this treasure." O treasure which not only is
preserved, but also preserves the house where it is stored up. Do you understand
what I have said? The kings of the earth, and rulers when they have treasures,
prepare large houses, having strong walls, bars, doors, guards, and bolts in order
that the treasure may be preserved: but Christ did the contrary: He placed the
treasure not in a stone vessel but in an earthen one. If the treasure is great
wherefore is the vessel weak? But the reason why the vessel is weak is not
because the treasure is great; for this is not preserved by the vessel, but itself
preserves the vessel. I deposit the treasure: who is able henceforth to steal it?
The devil has come, the world has come, multitudes have come, and yet they