having made us friends unto Himself. But when I say that Christ is the cause of
our reconciliation, I say the Father is so also: when I say that the Father gave, I
say the Son gave also. "For all things were made by Him;" [John 1:3] and of this
too He is the Author. For we ran not unto Him, but He Himself called us. How
called He us? By the sacrifice of Christ.
"And gave unto us the ministry of reconciliation."
Here again he sets forth the dignity of the Apostles; showing how great a
thing was committed to their hands, and the surpassing greatness of the love of
God. For even when they would not hear the Ambassador that came, He was not
exasperated nor left them to themselves, but continues to exhort them both in His
own person and by others. Who can be fittingly amazed at this solicitude? The
Son Who came to reconcile, His True and Only-Begotten, was slain, yet not even
so did the Father turn away from His murderers; nor say, "I sent My Son as an
Ambassador, but they not only would not hear Him, but even slew and crucified
Him, it is meet henceforth to leave them to themselves:" but quite the contrary,
when the Son departed, He entrusted the business to us; for he says, gave unto us
the ministry of reconciliation.

2 Corinthians 5:19
5. "To wit, that God was in Christ reconciling the world unto Himself, not
reckoning unto them their tresspasses."
Do you see love surpassing all expression, all conception? Who was the
aggrieved one? Himself. Who first sought the reconciliation? Himself. 'And yet,'
says one, 'He sent the Son, He did not come Himself.' The Son indeed it was He
sent; still not He alone besought, but both with Him and by Him the Father;
wherefore he said, that, "God was reconciling the world unto Himself in Christ:"
that is, by Christ. For seeing he had said, "Who gave unto us the ministry of
reconciliation;" he here used a corrective, saying, "Think not that we act of our
own authority in the business: we are ministers; and He that does the whole is
God, Who reconciled the world by the Only-Begotten." And how did He
reconcile it unto Himself? For this is the marvel, not that it was made a friend
only, but also by this way a friend. This way? What way? Forgiving them their
sins; for in no other way was it possible. Wherefore also he added, "Not
reckoning unto them their tresspasses." For had it been His pleasure to require an
account of the things we had transgressed in, we should all have perished; for
"all died." But nevertheless though our sins were so great, He not only did not
require satisfaction, but even became reconciled; He not only forgave, but He
did not even "reckon." So ought we also to forgive our enemies, that ourselves
too may obtain the like forgiveness.
"And having committed unto us the word of reconciliation."
For neither have we come now on any odious office; but to make all men
friends with God. For He says, 'Since they were not persuaded by Me, do ye
continue beseeching until you have persuaded them.' Wherefore also he added,