Gal. iv. 28.

given thanks while holding the cup, and had drunk of it, and given it to the disciples, said to them:
"Drink ye all of it: this is My blood of the new covenant, which shall be shed for many for the
remission of sins. But I say unto you, I will not drink henceforth of the fruit of this vine, until that
day when I will drink it new with you in my Father's kingdom." Thus, then, He will Himself
renew the inheritance of the earth, and will re-organize the mystery of the glory of [His] sons; as
David says, "He who hath renewed the face of the earth." He promised to drink of the fruit of
the vine with His disciples, thus indicating both these points: the inheritance of the earth in which
the new fruit of the vine is drunk, and the resurrection of His disciples in the flesh. For the new
flesh which rises again is the same which also received the new cup. And He cannot by any means
be understood as drinking of the fruit of the vine when settled down with his [disciples] above in
a super-celestial place; nor, again, are they who drink it devoid of flesh, for to drink of that which
flows from the vine pertains to flesh, and not spirit.
2. And for this reason the Lord declared, "When thou makest a dinner or a supper, do not call
thy friends, nor thy neighbours, nor thy kinsfolk, lest they ask thee in return, and so repay thee. But
call the lame, the blind, and the poor, and thou shall be blessed, since they cannot recompense thee,
but a recompense shall be made thee at the resurrection of the just." And again He says,
"Whosoever shall have left lands, or houses, or parents, or brethren, or children because of Me, he
shall receive in this world an hundred-fold, and in that to come he shall inherit eternal life." For
what are the hundred-fold [rewards] in this word, the entertainments given to the poor, and the
suppers for which a return is made? These are [to take place] in the times of the kingdom, that is,
upon the seventh day, which has been sanctified, in which God rested from all the works which He
created, which is the true Sabbath of the righteous, which they shall not be engaged in any earthly
occupation; but shall have a table at hand prepared for them by God, supplying them with all sorts
of dishes.
3. The blessing of Isaac with which he blessed his younger son Jacob has the same meaning,
when he says, "Behold, the smell of my son is as the smell of a full field which the Lord has
blessed." But "the field is the world." And therefore he added, "God give to thee of the dew
of heaven, and of the fatness of the earth, plenty of corn and wine. And let the nations serve thee,
and kings bow down to thee; and be thou lord over thy brother, and thy father's sons shall bow
down to thee: cursed shall be he who shall curse thee, and blessed shall be he who shall bless
thee." If any one, then, does not accept these things as referring to the appointed kingdom, he