that were passed, he quickly throwes a shadow over this, and teaches them
constantly and always to remain in well doing. "Because at length," says he. The
words, "at length," show long time to have elapsed. "You have revived," as fruits
which have shot forth, dried up, and afterwards shot forth. Here he shows, that
being at first blooming, then having faded, they again budded forth. So that the
word "flourished again," has both rebuke and praise. For it is no small thing, that
he who has withered should flourish again. He shows also, that it was from
indolence all this had happened to them. But here he signifies, that even in
former time they were wont to be zealous in these things. Wherefore he adds,
"your thought for me, wherein ye did indeed take thought." And lest you should
think, that in other things too they had been more zealous, and had then
withered, but in this thing alone, behold how he has added, "your thought for
me." I apply the words, "now at length," only to this; for in other things it is not
so.
Here some one may enquire, how when he had said, "It is more blessed to
give than to receive" [Acts 20:25-34]; and, "These hands ministered to my
necessities, and to them that were with me"; and again when writing to the
Corinthians, "For it were good for me rather to die, than that any man should
make my glorying void" [1 Corinthians 9:15]; he suffers his glorying to be made
void? And how? By receiving. For if his glorying was, that he received not, how
does he now endure so to do? What is it then? Probably, he then did not receive
on account of the false Apostles, "that wherein they glory" [2 Corinthians 11:12],
says he, "they may be found even as we." And he said not "are," but "glory"; for
they received but secretly. Wherefore he said, "wherein they glory." Wherefore
he also said, "No man shall stop me of this glorying." [2 Corinthians 11:10] And
he said not simply, shall not stop me, but what? "in the regions of Achaia." And
again, "I robbed other Churches, taking wages of them that I might minister unto
you." [2 Corinthians 11:8] Here he showed that he did receive. But Paul indeed
received rightly, having so great a work; if in truth he did receive. But they who
work not, how can they receive? "Yet I pray," says one. But there is no work. For

this may be done together with work. "But I fast." Neither is this work. For see
this blessed one, preaching in many places, and working too. "But ye lacked
opportunity." What means lacked opportunity? It came not; says he, of
indolence, but of necessity. You had it not in your hands, nor were in abundance.
This is the meaning of, "You lacked opportunity." Thus most men speak, when
the things of this life do not flow in to them abundantly, and are in short supply.
"Not that I speak in respect of want." I said, says he, "now at length," and I
rebuked you, not seeking my own, nor censuring you on this account, as if I
were in want: for I sought it not on this account. Whence is this, O Paul, that you
make no vain boasting? To the Corinthians he says, "For we write none other
things unto you, than what ye read or even acknowledge." [2 Corinthians 1:13]
And in this case he would not have spoken to them so as to be convicted, he
would not, had he been making boasts, have spoken thus. He was speaking to
those who knew the facts, with whom detection would have been a greater
disgrace. "For I have learned," says he, "in whatsoever state I am, therein to be
content." Wherefore, this is an object of discipline, and exercise, and care, for it
is not easy of attainment, but very difficult, and a new thing. "In whatsoever
state I am," says he, "therein to be content. I know how to be abased, and I know
also how to abound. In everything and in all things have I learned the secret."
That is, I know how to use little, to bear hunger and want. "Both to abound, and
to suffer need." "But, says one, there is no need of wisdom or of virtue in order to
abound." There is great need of virtue, not less than in the other case. For as
want inclines us to do many evil things, so too does plenty. For many ofttimes,
coming into plenty, have become indolent, and have not known how to bear their
good fortune. Many men have taken it as an occasion of no longer working. But
Paul did not so, for what he received he consumed on others, and emptied
himself for them. This is to know. He was in nowise relaxed, nor did he exult at
his abundance; but was the same in want and in plenty, he was neither oppressed
on the one hand, nor rendered a boaster on the other. "Both to be filled," says he,
"and to be hungry, both to abound, and to be in want." Many know not how to