offered"? Attend to the expression, "He delivered me," he says, "from the lion's
mouth"; and again, "He will deliver me," not from the lion's mouth, but "from
every evil work." For then He delivered me from the danger; but now that
enough has been done for the Gospel, He will yet again deliver me from every
sin, that is, He will not suffer me to depart with condemnation. For that he
should be able to "resist unto blood striving against sin" [Hebrews 12:4], and not
yield, is a deliverance from another lion, even the devil, so that this preservation
is greater than the former when he seems to be given up.
"And will preserve me unto His heavenly kingdom; to Whom be glory for
ever and ever. Amen."
This then is salvation, when we shine forth there. But what means, "He will
preserve me unto His kingdom"? He will deliver me from all blame, and preserve
me there. For this is to be preserved unto His kingdom, to die here on account of
it. For "He that hates his life in this world shall keep it unto life eternal." [John
12:25]
"To whom be glory." Lo, here is a doxology to the Son.
Ver. 19. "Salute Priscilla and Aquila, and the household of Onesiphorus."
For he was then in Rome, of whom he said "The Lord grant unto him that
he may find mercy of the Lord in that day." [2 Timothy 1:18] By this naming of
him, he makes those of his household also more zealous in such good actions.
"Salute Priscilla and Aquila." These are they of whom he makes continual
mention, with whom too he had lodged, and who had taken Apollos to them. He
names the woman first, as being I suppose more zealous, and more faithful, for
she had then received Apollos; or it might be done indifferently. And it was to
them no slight consolation to be thus saluted. It conveyed a demonstration of
esteem and love, and a participation in much grace. For the bare salutation of
that holy and blessed man was sufficient to fill with grace him who received it.
Ver. 20. "Erastus abode at Corinth: but Trophimus have I left at Miletum
sick."
This Trophimus and Tychicus, we know from the book of the Acts, sailed

away with him from Judea, and were everywhere his companions, perhaps as
being more zealous than the rest.
"Trophimus I have left at Miletum sick." Why then did you not heal him,
instead of leaving him? The Apostles could not do everything, or they did not
dispense miraculous gifts upon all occasions, lest more should be ascribed to
them than was right. The same thing is observable of those blessed and righteous
men, who were before them, as in the case of Moses, whose voice was weak.
Why was not this defect removed? Nay, he was often afflicted with grief and
dejection, and he was not admitted into the Land of Promise.
For many things were permitted by God, that the weakness of human nature
might be manifested. And if with these defects the insensible Jews could ask,
Where is Moses who brought us out of the land of Egypt [Exodus 32:1]? How
would they not have been affected towards him if he had brought them also into
the Land of Promise? If he had not been suffered to be overpowered by the fear
of Pharaoh, would they not have thought him a God? We see that the people of
Lystra were thus affected in the case of Paul and Barnabas, thinking them to be
Gods, when they rent their clothes, and ran in among the people, crying out and
saying, "Sirs, why do you do these things? We also are men of like passions with
you." [Acts 14:14-15] Peter, again, when he had healed the man lame from his
birth, when all were amazed at the miracle, answered and said, "You men of
Israel, why do you marvel at this, or why do you sook so earnestly on us, as
though by our own power or holiness we had made this man to walk"? [Acts
3:12] Hear also the blessed Paul, saying, "There was given to me a thorn in the
flesh, lest I should be exalted above measure." [2 Corinthians 12:7] But this, you
say, was an expression of humility. Far from it. The thorn was not sent him that
he might be humble, nor does he say this only out of humility. There are other
causes besides to be assigned for it. Observe therefore how God, accounting for
it, says, "My grace is sufficient for you"; not "that you may not be exalted above
measure," but what? "For my strength is made perfect in weakness." Two ends
therefore were answered at once: what was doing was made clearly manifest,