90. Genuine forms of popular religiosity are incarnate, since they are born of the incarnation of
Christian faith in popular culture. For this reason they entail a personal relationship, not with vague
spiritual energies or powers, but with God, with Christ, with Mary, with the saints. These devotions
are fleshy, they have a face. They are capable of fostering relationships and not just enabling
escapism. In other parts of our society, we see the growing attraction to various forms of a
“spirituality of well-being” divorced from any community life, or to a “theology of prosperity”
detached from responsibility for our brothers and sisters, or to depersonalized experiences which
are nothing more than a form of self-centredness.

91. One important challenge is to show that the solution will never be found in fleeing from a
personal and committed relationship with God which at the same time commits us to serving
others. This happens frequently nowadays, as believers seek to hide or keep apart from others, or
quietly flit from one place to another or from one task to another, without creating deep and stable
bonds. “Imaginatio locorum et mutatio multos fefellit”. This is a false remedy which cripples the
heart and at times the body as well. We need to help others to realize that the only way is to learn
how to encounter others with the right attitude, which is to accept and esteem them as
companions along the way, without interior resistance. Better yet, it means learning to find Jesus
in the faces of others, in their voices, in their pleas. And learning to suffer in the embrace of the
crucified Jesus whenever we are unjustly attacked or meet with ingratitude, never tiring of our
decision to live in fraternity.

92. There indeed we find true healing, since the way to relate to others which truly heals instead of
debilitating us, is a mystical fraternity, a contemplative fraternity. It is a fraternal love capable of
seeing the sacred grandeur of our neighbour, of finding God in every human being, of tolerating

the nuisances of life in common by clinging to the love of God, of opening the heart to divine love
and seeking the happiness of others just as their heavenly Father does. Here and now, especially
where we are a “little flock” (Lk 12:32), the Lord’s disciples are called to live as a community which
is the salt of the earth and the light of the world (cf. Mt 5:13-16). We are called to bear witness to a
constantly new way of living together in fidelity to the Gospel. Let us not allow ourselves to be
robbed of community!

No to spiritual worldliness

93. Spiritual worldliness, which hides behind the appearance of piety and even love for the
Church, consists in seeking not the Lord’s glory but human glory and personal well-being. It is
what the Lord reprimanded the Pharisees for: “How can you believe, who receive glory from one
another and do not seek the glory that comes from the only God?” (Jn 5:44). It is a subtle way of
seeking one’s “own interests, not those of Jesus Christ” (Phil 2:21). It takes on many forms,
depending on the kinds of persons and groups into which it seeps. Since it is based on carefully
cultivated appearances, it is not always linked to outward sin; from without, everything appears as
it should be. But if it were to seep into the Church, “it would be infinitely more disastrous than any
other worldliness which is simply moral”.