THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.59, C.3.

beyond all creatures Christ's soul was more closely united with
truth, and more full of truth; according to Jn. 1:14: "We saw Him . . .
full of grace and truth." And according to this it belongs principally
to the soul of Christ to judge all things.
Reply to Objection 2: It belongs to God alone to bestow beatitude
upon souls by a participation with Himself; but it is Christ's
prerogative to bring them to such beatitude, inasmuch as He is their
Head and the author of their salvation, according to Heb. 2:10: "Who
had brought many children into glory, to perfect the author of their
salvation by His Passion."
Reply to Objection 3: To know and judge the secrets of hearts, of
itself belongs to God alone; but from the overflow of the Godhead
into Christ's soul it belongs to Him also to know and to judge the
secrets of hearts, as we stated above (Question 10, Article 2), when
dealing with the knowledge of Christ. Hence it is written (Rm. 2:16):
"In the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus
Christ."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.59, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether Christ acquired His judiciary power by

His merits?
Objection 1: It would seem that Christ did not acquire His judiciary
power by His merits. For judiciary power flows from the royal
dignity: according to Prov. 20:8: "The king that sitteth on the throne
of judgment, scattereth away all evil with his look." But it was
without merits that Christ acquired royal power, for it is His due as
God's Only-begotten Son: thus it is written (Lk. 1:32): "The Lord God
shall give unto Him the throne of David His father, and He shall reign
in the house of Jacob for ever." Therefore Christ did not obtain
judiciary power by His merits.
Objection 2: Further, as stated above (Article 2), judiciary power is
Christ's due inasmuch as He is our Head. But the grace of headship
does not belong to Christ by reason of merit, but follows the
personal union of the Divine and human natures: according to Jn.
1:14,16: "We saw His glory . . . as of the Only-Begotten of the Father,
full of grace and truth . . . and of His fulness we all have received":
and this pertains to the notion of headship. Consequently, it seems
that Christ did not have judiciary power from merits.
Objection 3: Further, the Apostle says (1 Cor. 2:15): "The spiritual
man judgeth all things." But a man becomes spiritual through grace,
which is not from merits; otherwise it is "no more grace," as is said
in Rm. 11:6. Therefore it seems that judiciary power belongs neither
to Christ nor to others from any merits, but from grace alone.
On the contrary, It is written (Job 36:17): "Thy cause hath been
judged as that of the wicked, cause and judgment thou shalt
recover." And Augustine says (Serm. cxxvii): "The Judge shall sit,
who stood before a judge; He shall condemn the truly wicked, who
Himself was falsely reputed wicked."
I answer that, There is nothing to hinder one and the same thing
from being due to some one from various causes: as the glory of the
body in rising was due to Christ not only as befitting His Godhead
and His soul's glory, but likewise "from the merit of the lowliness of
His Passion" [Augustine, Tract. civ in Joan.]. And in the same way it
must be said that judiciary power belongs to the Man Christ on
account of both His Divine personality, and the dignity of His