THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.74, C.3.

the matter of this sacrament to be determined in reference to the
number of the faithful absolutely. But the number of the faithful is
not a determinate one. Hence it cannot be said that the quantity of
the matter of this sacrament is restricted.
Reply to Objection 1: The matter of every natural object has its
determinate quantity by comparison with its determinate form. But
the number of the faithful, for whose use this sacrament is ordained,
is not a determinate one. Consequently there is no comparison.
Reply to Objection 2: The power of the Church's ministers is
ordained for two purposes: first for the proper effect, and secondly
for the end of the effect. But the second does not take away the first.
Hence, if the priest intends to consecrate the body of Christ for an
evil purpose, for instance, to make mockery of it, or to administer
poison through it, he commits sin by his evil intention, nevertheless,
on account of the power committed to him, he accomplishes the
sacrament.
Reply to Objection 3: The sacrament of Baptism is perfected in the
use of the matter: and therefore no more of the water is hallowed
than what is used. But this sacrament is wrought in the consecration
of the matter. Consequently there is no parallel.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.74, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether wheaten bread is required for the matter

of this sacrament?
Objection 1: It seems that wheaten bread is not requisite for the
matter of this sacrament, because this sacrament is a reminder of
our Lord's Passion. But barley bread seems to be more in keeping
with the Passion than wheaten bread, as being more bitter, and
because Christ used it to feed the multitudes upon the mountain, as
narrated in Jn. 6. Therefore wheaten bread is not the proper matter of
this sacrament.
Objection 2: Further, in natural things the shape is a sign of species.
But some cereals resemble wheat, such as spelt and maize, from
which in some localities bread is made for the use of this sacrament.
Therefore wheaten bread is not the proper matter of this sacrament.
Objection 3: Further, mixing dissolves species. But wheaten flour is
hardly to be found unmixed with some other species of grain, except
in the instance of specially selected grain. Therefore it does not
seem that wheaten bread is the proper matter for this sacrament.
Objection 4: Further, what is corrupted appears to be of another
species. But some make the sacrament from bread which is
corrupted, and which no longer seems to be wheaten bread.
Therefore, it seems that such bread is not the proper matter of this
sacrament.
On the contrary, Christ is contained in this sacrament, and He
compares Himself to a grain of wheat, saying (Jn. 12:24): "Unless the
grain of wheat falling into the ground die, itself remaineth alone."
Therefore bread from corn, i.e. wheaten bread, is the matter of this
sacrament.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), for the use of the
sacraments such matter is adopted as is commonly made use of
among men. Now among other breads wheaten bread is more
commonly used by men; since other breads seem to be employed
when this fails. And consequently Christ is believed to have
instituted this sacrament under this species of bread. Moreover this
bread strengthens man, and so it denotes more suitably the effect of
this sacrament. Consequently, the proper matter for this sacrament