consecration, as the ordained are. Yet a bishop alone can consecrate
a virgin. Therefore much more can he alone ordain.
I answer that, The episcopal power stands in the same relation to the
power of the lower Orders, as political science, which seeks the
common good, to the lower acts and virtues which seek some
special good, as appears from what was said above (Question 37,
Article 1). Now political science, as stated in Ethic. i, 2, lays down the
law to lower sciences, namely what science each one ought to
cultivate, and how far he should pursue it and in what way.
Wherefore it belongs to a bishop to assign others to places in all the
Divine services. Hence he alone confirms, because those who are
confirmed receive the office, as it were, of confessing the faith; again
he alone blesses virgins who are images of the Church, Christ's
spouse, the care of which is entrusted chiefly to him; and he it is
who consecrates the candidates for ordination to the ministry of
Orders, and, by his consecration, appoints the vessels that they are
to use; even as secular offices in various cities are allotted by him
who holds the highest power, for instance by the king.
Reply to Objection 1: As stated above (Question 37, Article 5), at the
imposition of hands there is given, not the character of the priestly
Order, but grace which makes a man fit to exercise his Order. And
since those who are raised to the priesthood need most copious
grace, the priests together with the bishop lay hands on them, but
the bishop alone lays hands on deacons.
Reply to Objection 2: Since the archdeacon is as it were minister-inchief, all things pertaining to the ministry are handed by him, for
instance the candle with which the acolyte serves the deacon by
carrying it before him at the Gospel, and the cruet with which he
serves the subdeacon; and in like manner he gives the subdeacon
the things with which the latter serves the higher Orders. And yet the
principal act of the subdeacon does not consist in these things, but
in his co-operation as regards the matter of the sacrament;
wherefore he receives the character through the chalice being
handed to him by the bishop. On the other hand, the acolyte receives
the character by virtue of the words of the bishop when the aforesaid
things---the cruet rather than the candlestick---are handed to him by
the archdeacon. Hence it does not follow that the archdeacon
ordains.
Reply to Objection 3: The Pope, who has the fulness of episcopal

power, can entrust one who is not a bishop with things pertaining to
the episcopal dignity, provided they bear no immediate relation to
the true body of Christ. Hence by virtue of his commission a simple
priest can confer the minor Orders and confirm; but not one who is
not a priest. Nor can a priest confer the higher Orders which bear an
immediate relation to Christ's body, over the consecration of which
the Pope's power is no greater than that of a simple priest.
Reply to Objection 4: Although the Eucharist is in itself the greatest
of the sacraments, it does not place a man in an office as does the
sacrament of Order. Hence the comparison fails.
Reply to Objection 5: In order to bestow what one has on another, it
is necessary not only to be near him but also to have fulness of
power. And since a priest has not fulness of power in the
hierarchical offices, as a bishop has, it does not follow that he can
raise others to the diaconate, although the latter Order is near to his.