form to another thing, wherein consists this other thing's good; as it
is naturally inclined to seek its own good, namely, to be borne
upwards.
So then, it must be said that one angel loves another with natural
affection, in so far as he is one with him in nature. But so far as an
angel has something else in common with another angel, or differs
from him in other respects, he does not love him with natural love.
Reply to Objection 1: The expression 'as himself' can in one way
qualify the knowledge and the love on the part of the one known and
loved: and thus one angel knows another as himself, because he
knows the other to be even as he knows himself to be. In another
way the expression can qualify the knowledge and the love on the
part of the knower and lover. And thus one angel does not know
another as himself, because he knows himself by his essence, and
the other not by the other's essence. In like manner he does not love
another as he loves himself, because he loves himself by his own
will; but he does not love another by the other's will.
Reply to Objection 2: The expression "as" does not denote equality,
but likeness. For since natural affection rests upon natural unity, the
angel naturally loves less what is less one with him. Consequently
he loves more what is numerically one with himself, than what is one
only generically or specifically. But it is natural for him to have a like
love for another as for himself, in this respect, that as he loves self in
wishing well to self, so he loves another in wishing well to him.
Reply to Objection 3: Natural love is said to be of the end, not as of
that end to which good is willed, but rather as of that good which one
wills for oneself, and in consequence for another, as united to
oneself. Nor can such natural love be stripped from the wicked
angels, without their still retaining a natural affection towards the
good angels, in so far as they share the same nature with them. But
they hate them, in so far as they are unlike them according to
righteousness and unrighteousness.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether an angel by natural love loves God more

than he loves himself?
Objection 1: It would seem that the angel does not love God by
natural love more than he loves himself. For, as was stated (Article
4), natural love rests upon natural union. Now the Divine nature is far
above the angelic nature. Therefore, according to natural love, the
angel loves God less than self, or even than another angel.
Objection 2: Further, "That on account of which a thing is such, is
yet more so." But every one loves another with natural love for his
own sake: because one thing loves another as good for itself.
Therefore the angel does not love God more than self with natural
love.
Objection 3: Further, nature is self-centered in its operation; for we
behold every agent acting naturally for its own preservation. But
nature's operation would not be self-centered were it to tend towards
anything else more than to nature itself. Therefore the angel does
not love God more than himself from natural love.
Objection 4: Further, it is proper to charity to love God more than
self. But to love from charity is not natural to the angels; for "it is
poured out upon their hearts by the Holy Spirit Who is given to
them," as Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xii, 9). Therefore the angels do
not love God more than themselves by natural love.
Objection 5: Further, natural love lasts while nature endures. But the
love of God more than self does not remain in the angel or man who
sins; for Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xiv), "Two loves have made two
cities; namely love of self unto the contempt of God has made the
earthly city; while love of God unto the contempt of self has made
the heavenly city." Therefore it is not natural to love God more than
self.
On the contrary, All the moral precepts of the law come of the law of
nature. But the precept of loving God more than self is a moral
precept of the law. Therefore, it is of the law of nature. Consequently
from natural love the angel loves God more than himself.
I answer that, There have been some who maintained that an angel