FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.32, C.4.

Reply to Objection 2: Nothing prevents the same thing, in different
ways, being the cause of contraries. And so hope, inasmuch as it
implies a present appraising of a future good, causes pleasure;
whereas, inasmuch as it implies absence of that good, it causes
affliction.
Reply to Objection 3: Love and concupiscence also cause pleasure.
For everything that is loved becomes pleasing to the lover, since
love is a kind of union or connaturalness of lover and beloved. In like
manner every object of desire is pleasing to the one that desires,
since desire is chiefly a craving for pleasure. However hope, as
implying a certainty of the real presence of the pleasing good, that is
not implied either by love or by concupiscence, is reckoned in
preference to them as causing pleasure; and also in preference to
memory, which is of that which has already passed away.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.32, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether sadness causes pleasure?

Objection 1: It would seem that sadness does not cause pleasure.
For nothing causes its own contrary. But sadness is contrary to
pleasure. Therefore it does not cause it.
Objection 2: Further, contraries have contrary effects. But pleasures,
when called to mind, cause pleasure. Therefore sad things, when
remembered, cause sorrow and not pleasure.
Objection 3: Further, as sadness is to pleasure, so is hatred to love.
But hatred does not cause love, but rather the other way about, as
stated above (Question 29, Article 2). Therefore sadness does not
cause pleasure.
On the contrary, It is written (Ps. 41:4): "My tears have been my
bread day and night": where bread denotes the refreshment of
pleasure. Therefore tears, which arise from sadness, can give
pleasure.
I answer that, Sadness may be considered in two ways: as existing
actually, and as existing in the memory: and in both ways sadness
can cause pleasure. Because sadness, as actually existing, causes
pleasure, inasmuch as it brings to mind that which is loved, the
absence of which causes sadness; and yet the mere thought of it
gives pleasure. The recollection of sadness becomes a cause of
pleasure, on account of the deliverance which ensued: because
absence of evil is looked upon as something good; wherefore so far
as a man thinks that he has been delivered from that which caused
him sorrow and pain, so much reason has he to rejoice. Hence
Augustine says in De Civ. Dei xxii, 31 [Gregory, Moral. iv.] that
"oftentimes in joy we call to mind sad things . . . and in the season of
health we recall past pains without feeling pain . . . and in proportion
are the more filled with joy and gladness": and again (Confess. viii,
3) he says that "the more peril there was in the battle, so much the
more joy will there be in the triumph."
Reply to Objection 1: Sometimes accidentally a thing is the cause of
its contrary: thus "that which is cold sometimes causes heat," as
stated in Phys. viii, 1. In like manner sadness is the accidental cause
of pleasure, in so far as it gives rise to the apprehension of