FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.73, C.10.

daughter riseth up against her mother." Furthermore sins committed
against persons of rank are expressly condemned: thus it is written
(Job 34:18): "Who saith to the king: 'Thou art an apostate'; who
calleth rulers ungodly." Therefore the condition of the person sinned
against aggravates the sin.
I answer that, The person sinned against is, in a manner, the object
of the sin. Now it has been stated above (Article 3) that the primary
gravity of a sin is derived from its object; so that a sin is deemed to
be so much the more grave, as its object is a more principal end. But
the principal ends of human acts are God, man himself, and his
neighbor: for whatever we do, it is on account of one of these that
we do it; although one of them is subordinate to the other. Therefore
the greater or lesser gravity of a sin, in respect of the person sinned
against, may be considered on the part of these three.
First, on the part of God, to Whom man is the more closely united, as
he is more virtuous or more sacred to God: so that an injury inflicted
on such a person redounds on to God according to Zach. 2:8: "He
that toucheth you, toucheth the apple of My eye." Wherefore a sin is
the more grievous, according as it is committed against a person
more closely united to God by reason of personal sanctity, or official
station. On the part of man himself, it is evident that he sins all the
more grievously, according as the person against whom he sins, is
more united to him, either through natural affinity or kindness
received or any other bond; because he seems to sin against himself
rather than the other, and, for this very reason, sins all the more
grievously, according to Ecclus. 14:5: "He that is evil to himself, to
whom will he be good?" On the part of his neighbor, a man sins the
more grievously, according as his sin affects more persons: so that
a sin committed against a public personage, e.g. a sovereign prince
who stands in the place of the whole people, is more grievous than a
sin committed against a private person; hence it is expressly
prohibited (Ex. 22:28): "The prince of thy people thou shalt not
curse." In like manner it would seem that an injury done to a person
of prominence, is all the more grave, on account of the scandal and
the disturbance it would cause among many people.
Reply to Objection 1: He who inflicts an injury on a virtuous person,
so far as he is concerned, disturbs him internally and externally; but
that the latter is not disturbed internally is due to his goodness,
which does not extenuate the sin of the injurer.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.73, C.10.

Reply to Objection 2: The injury which a man inflicts on himself in
those things which are subject to the dominion of his will, for
instance his possessions, is less sinful than if it were inflicted on
another, because he does it of his own will; but in those things that
are not subject to the dominion of his will, such as natural and
spiritual goods, it is a graver sin to inflict an injury on oneself: for it
is more grievous for a man to kill himself than another. Since,
however, things belonging to our neighbor are not subject to the
dominion of our will, the argument fails to prove, in respect of
injuries done to such like things, that it is less grievous to sin in their
regard, unless indeed our neighbor be willing, or give his approval.
Reply to Objection 3: There is no respect for persons if God
punishes more severely those who sin against a person of higher
rank; for this is done because such an injury redounds to the harm
of many.