wont (in play)? For you are in very deed children, even as they. But Peter never
thought of saying any of these things: he uttered a voice, like a great light
shining out in the dark, a voice which scattered the mist and darkness of the
whole world. Again, his deportment, how gentle it was, how considerate ([ἐ]
[πιεικὲς]); how far above all vainglory; how he looked towards heaven without
all self-elation, and this, even when raising up the dead! But if it had come to be
in the power of any one of those senseless people (in mere fantasy of course) to
do anything like it, would he not straightway have looked for an altar and a
temple to be reared to him, and have wanted to be equal with the gods? Since in
fact when no such sign is forthcoming, they are forever indulging such fantastic
conceits. And what, pray you, is that Minerva of theirs, and Apollo, and Juno?
They are different kinds of demons among them. And there is a king of theirs,
who thinks fit to die for the mere purpose of being accounted equal with the
gods. But not so the men here: no, just the contrary. Hear how they speak on the
occasion of the lame man's cure. You men of Israel, why look ye so earnestly on
us, as though by our own power or holiness we had made him to walk? [Acts
3:12] We also are men of like passions with you. [Acts 14:14] But with those,
great is the self-elation, great the bragging; all for the sake of men's honors,
nothing for the pure love of truth and virtue. ([φιλοσοφίας ἔνεκεν].) For where
an action is done for glory, all is worthless. For though a man possess all, yet if
he have not the mastery over this (lust), he forfeits all claim to true philosophy,
he is in bondage to the more tyrannical and shameful passion. Contempt of
glory; this it is that is sufficient to teach all that is good, and to banish from the
soul every pernicious passion. I exhort you therefore to use the most strenuous
endeavors to pluck out this passion by the very roots; by no other means can you
have good esteem with God, and draw down upon you the benevolent regard of
that Eye which never sleeps. Wherefore, let us use all earnestness to obtain the
enjoyment of that heavenly influence, and thus both escape the trial of present
evils, and attain unto the future blessings, through the grace and loving-kindness
of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father and the Holy Ghost be glory,

power, honor, now and ever, and to all ages. Amen.

Homily 5 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts II. 14
"You men of Judea, and all you that dwell at Jerusalem, be this known unto
you, and hearken to my words."
["He men of Judea, and all you that dwell at Jerusalem,"] whom the writer
above described as strangers. Here he directs his discourse to those others, the
mockers, and while he seems to reason with those, he sets these right. For indeed
it was divinely ordered that "some mocked," that he might have a starting-point
for his defence, and by means of that defence, might teach. ["And all you that
dwell in Jerusalem."] It seems they accounted it a high encomium to dwell in
Jerusalem too. "Be this," says he, "known unto you, and hearken unto my
words." In the first instance he made them more disposed to attend to him. "For
not as you suppose," says he, "are these drunken." Do you observe the mildness
of his defence? [Acts 2:15] Although having the greater part of the people on his
side, he reasons with those others gently; first he removes the evil surmise, and
then he establishes his apology. On this account, therefore, he does not say, "as
you mock," or, "as you deride," but, "as you suppose;" wishing to make it appear
that they had not said this in earnest, and for the present taxing them with
ignorance rather than with malice. "For these are not drunken, as you suppose,
seeing it is but the third hour of the day." And why this? Is it not possible at the
third hour to be drunken? But he did not insist upon this to the letter; for there
was nothing of the kind about them; the others said it only in mockery. Hence we
learn that on unessential points one must not spend many words. And besides,
the sequel is enough to bear him out on this point: so now the discourse is for all
in common. But this is that which was spoken by the prophet Joel, And it shall
come to pass in the last days, says the Lord God. (v. 16, 17. Joel 2:28.) Nowhere
as yet the name of Christ, nor His promises but the promise is that of the Father.