THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.70, C.2.

carnal pellicule, so Baptism despoils man of carnal behavior.
Reply to Objection 2: The protecting pillar of cloud and the crossing
of the Red Sea were indeed figures of our Baptism, whereby we are
born again of water, signified by the Red Sea; and of the Holy Ghost,
signified by the pillar of cloud: yet man did not make, by means of
these, a profession of faith, as by circumcision; so that these two
things were figures but not sacraments. But circumcision was a
sacrament, and a preparation for Baptism; although less clearly
figurative of Baptism, as to externals, than the aforesaid. And for this
reason the Apostle mentions them rather than circumcision.
Reply to Objection 3: John's baptism was a preparation for Christ's
as to the act done: but circumcision, as to the profession of faith,
which is required in Baptism, as stated above.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.70, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether circumcision was instituted in a fitting

manner?
Objection 1: It seems that circumcision was instituted in an unfitting
manner. For as stated above (Article 1) a profession of faith was
made in circumcision. But none could ever be delivered from the
first man's sin, except by faith in Christ's Passion, according to Rm.
3:25: "Whom God hath proposed to be a propitiation, through faith in
His blood." Therefore circumcision should have been instituted
forthwith after the first man's sin, and not at the time of Abraham.
Objection 2: Further, in circumcision man made profession of
keeping the Old Law, just as in Baptism he makes profession of
keeping the New Law; wherefore the Apostle says (Gal. 5:3): "I
testify . . . to every man circumcising himself, that he is a debtor to
do the whole Law." But the observance of the Law was not
promulgated at the time of Abraham, but rather at the time of Moses.
Therefore it was unfitting for circumcision to be instituted at the time
of Abraham
Objection 3: Further, circumcision was a figure of, and a preparation
for, Baptism. But Baptism is offered to all nations, according to Mt.
28:19: "Going . . . teach ye all nations, baptizing them." Therefore
circumcision should have been instituted as binding, not the Jews
only, but also all nations.
Objection 4: Further, carnal circumcision should correspond to
spiritual circumcision, as the shadow to the reality. But spiritual
circumcision which is of Christ, regards indifferently both sexes,
since "in Christ Jesus there is neither male nor female," as is written
Col. 3 [Gal. 3:28]. Therefore the institution of circumcision which
concerns only males, was unfitting.
On the contrary, We read (Gn. 17) that circumcision was instituted by
God, Whose "works are perfect" (Dt. 32:4).
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1) circumcision was a
preparation for Baptism, inasmuch as it was a profession of faith in
Christ, which we also profess in Baptism. Now among the Fathers of
old, Abraham was the first to receive the promise of the future birth
of Christ, when it was said to him: "In thy seed shall all the nations of