It is not of your glory then that you leave a memorial, but of your covetousness.
And your body indeed is concealed in the earth, but thou dost not permit the
memorial of your covetousness to be concealed, as it might have been by length
of time, but causest it to be turned up and disinterred through your house. For as
long as this stands, bearing your name, and called such an one's, certainly the
mouths of all too must needs be opened against you. Do you see that it is better
to have nothing than to sustain such an accusation?
And these things indeed here. But what shall we do There? Tell me, having
so much at our disposal here, if we have imparted to no one of our possessions,
or at least very little; how shall we put off our dishonest gains? For he that
wishes to put off covetous gain, does not give a little out of a great deal, but
many times more than he has robbed, and he ceases from robbing. Hear what
Zacchæus says, "And for as many things as I have taken wrongfully, I restore
fourfold." [Luke 19:8] But you, taking wrongfully ten thousand talents, if you
give a few drachmas, thinkest you have restored the whole, and art affected as if
you had given more. And even this grudgingly. Why? Because you ought both to
have restored these, and to have added other out of your own private
possessions. For as the thief is not excused when he gives back only what he has
stolen, but often he has added even his life; and often he compounds upon
restoring many times as much: so also should the covetous man. For the
covetous man also is a thief and a robber, far worse than the other, by how much
he is also more tyrannical. He indeed by being concealed, and by making his
attack in the night, cuts off much of the audacity of the attempt, as if he were
ashamed, and feared to sin. But the other having no sense of shame, with open
face in the middle of the market-place steals the property of all, being at once a
thief and a tyrant. He does not break through walls, nor extinguish the lamp, nor
open a chest, nor tear off seals. But what? He does things more insolent than
these, in the sight of those who are injured he carries things out by the door, he
with confidence opens everything, he compels them to expose all their
possessions themselves. Such is the excess of his violence. This man is more

wicked than those, inasmuch as he is more shameless and tyrannical. For he that
has suffered by fraud is indeed grieved, but he has no small consolation, that he
who injured him was afraid of him. But he who together with the injury he
suffers is also despised, will not be able to endure the violence. For the ridicule
is greater. Tell me, if one committed adultery with a woman in secret, and
another committed it in the sight of her husband, who grieved him the most, and
was most apt to wound him. For he indeed, together with the wrong he has done,
treated him also with contempt. But the former, if he did nothing else, showed at
least that he feared him whom he injured. So also in the case of money. He that
takes it secretly, does him honor in this respect, that he does it secretly; but he
who robs publicly and openly, together with the loss adds also the shame.
Let us therefore, both poor and rich, cease from taking the property of
others. For my present discourse is not only to the rich, but to the poor also. For
they too rob those who are poorer than themselves. And artisans who are better
off, and more powerful, outsell the poorer and more distressed, tradesmen outsell
tradesmen, and so all who are engaged in the market-place. So that I wish from
every side to take away injustice. For the injury consists not in the measure of
the things plundered and stolen, but in the purpose of him that steals. And that
these are more thieves and defrauders, who do not despise little gains, I know
and remember that I have before told you, if you also remember it. But let us not
be over exact. Let them be equally bad with the rich. Let us instruct our mind not
to covet greater things, not to aim at more than we have. And in heavenly things
let our desire of more never be satiated, but let each be ever coveting more. But
upon earth let every one be for what is needful and sufficient, and seek nothing
more, that so he may be able to obtain the real goods, by the grace and
lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom to the Father, together with
the Holy Spirit, be glory, strength, honor, now and always, and world without
end. Amen.