arrogance did the first man sin, looking for an equality with God. Therefore, not
even what things he had, did he continue to possess, but lost even these.
For arrogance is like this, so far from adding to us any improvement of our
life, it subtracts even what we have; as, on the contrary, humility, so far from
subtracting from what we have, adds to us also what we have not.
This virtue then let us emulate, this let us pursue, that we may both enjoy
present honor, and attain unto the glory to come, by the grace and love towards
man of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom be unto the Father glory and might,
together with the Holy Ghost, now and always, and world without end. Amen.

## Homily 66 on Matthew

Matthew 20:29-30.
"And as they departed from Jericho, great multitudes followed Him. And,
behold, two blind men sitting by the wayside, when they heard that Jesus passed
by, cried out, saying, Have mercy on us, O Lord, Thou Son of David."
See whence He passed unto Jerusalem, and where He abode before this,
with regard to which it seems to me especially worthy of inquiry, wherefore He
went not away even long before this from thence unto Galilee, but through
Samaria. But this we will leave to them that are fond of learning. For if any one
were disposed to search the matter out carefully, he will find that John intimates
it well, and has expressed the cause.
But let us keep to the things set before us, and let us listen to these blind
men, who were better than many that see. For neither having a guide, nor being
able to see Him when come near to them, nevertheless they strove to come unto
Him, and began to cry with a loud voice, and when rebuked for speaking, they
cried the more. For such is the nature of an enduring soul, by the very things that
hinder, it is borne up.
But Christ suffered them to be rebuked, that their earnestness might the
more appear, and that you might learn that worthily they enjoy the benefits of
their cure. Therefore He does not so much as ask, "Do ye believe?" as He does
with many; for their cry, and their coming unto Him, sufficed to make their faith
manifest.
Hence learn, O beloved, that though we be very vile and outcast, but yet
approach God with earnestness, even by ourselves we shall be able to effect
whatsoever we ask. See, for instance, these men, how, having none of the
apostles to plead with them, but rather many to stop their mouths, they were able
to pass over the hindrances, and to come unto Jesus Himself. And yet the

evangelist bears witness to no confidence of life in them, but earnestness
sufficed them instead of all.
These then let us also emulate. Though God defer the gift, though there be
many withdrawing us, let us not desist from asking. For in this way most of all
shall we win God to us. See at least even here, how not poverty, not blindness,
not their being unheard, not their being rebuked by the multitude, not anything
else, impeded their exceeding earnestness. Such is the nature of a fervent and
toiling soul.
What then says Christ? "He called them, and said, What will you that I
should do unto you? They say unto Him, Lord, that our eyes may be opened."
[Matthew 20:32-33] Wherefore does He ask them? Lest any one should think
that when they wish to receive one thing, He gives them another thing. For
indeed it is usual with Him on every occasion, first to make manifest and
discover to all the virtue of those He is healing, and then to apply the cure, for
one reason, that He might lead on the others likewise to emulation; and for
another, that He might show that they were enjoying the gift worthily. This, for
instance, He did with respect to the Canaanitish woman also, this too in the case
of the centurion, this again as to her that had the issue of blood, or rather that
marvellous woman even anticipated the Lord's inquiry; but not so did He pass
her by, but even after the cure makes her manifest. Such earnest care had He on
every occasion to proclaim the good deeds of them that come to Him, and to
show them to be much greater than they are, which He does here also.
Then, when they said what they wished, He had compassion on them, and
touched them. For this alone is the cause of their cure, for which also He came
into the world. But nevertheless, although it be mercy and grace, it seeks for the
worthy.
But that they were worthy is manifest, both from what they cried out, and
from the fact that, when they had received, they did not hasten away, as many
do, being ungrateful after the benefits. Nay, they were not like this, but were
both persevering before the gift, and after the gift grateful, for "they followed