instead of being mature, will be but a fool.

1 Corinthians 14:21
"In the law it is written, By men of strange tongues and by the lips of
strangers will I speak unto this people; and not even thus will they hear me, says
the Lord."
Yet surely it is no where written in the Law, but as I said before, he calls
always the whole of the Old Testament, the Law: both the prophets and the
historical books. And he brings forward his testimony from Esaias the prophet,
again covertly detracting from the glory of the gift, for their profit; nevertheless,
even thus he states it with praise. For the expression, "not even thus," has force
to point out that the miracle was enough to astonish them; and if they did not
believe, the fault was theirs. And wherefore did God work it, if they were not to
believe? That He might in every case appear to do His part.
2. Having shown then even from the prophecy, that the sign in question is
not of great use, he adds,

1 Corinthians 14:22
"Wherefore tongues are for a sign, not to them that believe, but to the
unbelieving: but prophesying is for a sign not to the unbelieving, but to them that
believe."

1 Corinthians 14:23
"If therefore the whole Church be assembled together, and all speak with
tongues, and there come in men unlearned or unbelieving, will they not say that
you are mad?"

1 Corinthians 14:24
"But if all prophesy, and there come in one unbelieving or unlearned, he is
reproved by all, he is judged by all:"

1 Corinthians 14:25
"And thus the secrets of his heart are made manifest; and so he will fall
down on his face and worship God, declaring that God is among you indeed."
Great in this place is the difficulty which one seems to find arising from
what is said. For if tongues are for a sign to them that believe not, how says he,
if they that believe not should see you speaking with tongues, they will say that
"you are mad?" And if prophecy be "not for the unbelieving, but for them that
believe," how shall also the unbelievers gain thereby?
"For if there come in," says he, "when you are prophesying, one that
believes not, he is reproved by all, and judged."
And not only this, but also after this another question hence springs up:
since the tongue will appear on the contrary greater than the prophecy. For if the
tongues are for a sign to the unbelieving, but prophecy to them that believe, that
which draws in aliens and makes of the household, is greater than that which
regulates those of the household. What then is the meaning of that expression?
Nothing difficult nor obscure, nor contrary to what went before, but rather very
agreeable to it, if we give heed: viz., that prophecy is suitable to both, but then
tongue not so. Wherefore having said of the tongue, "it is for a sign," he adds,
"not to them that believe, but to the unbelievers," and to them "for a sign," i.e.,
for astonishment, not so much for instruction.
"But in the case of prophecy too," says some one, "he did the very same
thing, saying, 'but prophesying serves not for the unbelieving, but for them which
believe.' For the believer has no need to see a sign, but requires only teaching
and catechizing. How then do you say," says he, "that prophecy is of use to both,
when Paul says 'not to the unbelieving, but to them which believe?'" If you will
accurately examine, you will understand what is said. For he said not, "prophecy
is not useful to them unbelieving," but, "is not for a sign," as the tongue, i.e., a