among us there are seven kinds; down, up, in, out, right, left, circular, or, if not
this, increase, decrease, generation, destruction, alteration. But is His motion
none of these, but such as the mind is moved with? No, nor this either. Far be it!
For in many things the mind is even absurdly moved. Is to will, to operate, or
not? If to will is to operate, and He wills all men to be good, and to be saved [1
Timothy 2:4], how comes it not to pass? But to will is one thing, to operate,
another. To will then is not sufficient for operation. How then says the Scripture,
"He has done whatsoever He willed"? [Psalm 115:3] And again, the leper says
unto Christ, "If You will, You can make me clean." [Matthew 8:2] For if this
follows in company with the will, what is to be said? Will ye that I mention yet
another thing? How were the things that are, made out of things that are not?
How will they be resolved into nothing? What is above the heaven? And again,
what above that? And what above that? And beyond that? And so on to infinity.
What is below the earth? Sea, and beyond this, what? And beyond that again?
Nay; to the right, and to the left, is there not the same difficulty?
But these indeed are things unseen. Will ye that I lead the discourse to those
which are seen; those which have already happened? Tell me, how did the beast
contain Jonah in its belly, without his perishing? Is it not void of reason, and its
motions without control? How spared it the righteous man? How was it that the
heat did not suffocate him? How was it that it putrefied him not? For if to be in
the deep only, is past contriving, to be both in the creature's bowels, and in that
heat, is very far more unaccountable. If from within we breathe the air, how did
the respiration suffice for two animals? And how did it also vomit him forth
unharmed? And how too did he speak? And how too was he self-possessed, and
prayed? Are not these things incredible? If we test them by reasonings, they are
incredible, if by faith, they are exceeding credible.
Shall I say something more than this? The wheat in the earth's bosom
decays, and rises again. Behold marvels, opposite, and each surpassing the other;
marvelous is the not becoming corrupted, marvelous, after becoming so, is the
rising again. Where are they that make sport of such things, and disbelieve the

Resurrection and say, This bone how shall it be cemented to that? And introduce
such like silly tales. Tell me, how did Elias ascend in a chariot of fire? Fire is
wont to burn, not to carry aloft. How lives he so long a time? In what place is
he? Why was this done? Whither was Enoch translated? Lives he on like food
with us? And what is it hinders him from being here? Nay, but does he not eat?
And wherefore was he translated? Behold how God schools us little by little. He
translated Enoch; no very great thing that. This instructed us for the taking up of
Elias. He shut in Noe into the ark [Genesis 7:7]; nor is this either any very great
thing. This instructed us for the shutting up of the prophet within the whale.
Thus even the things of old stood in need of forerunners and types. For as in a
ladder the first step sends on to the second, and from the first it is not possible to
step to the fourth, and this sends one on to that, that that may be the way to the
next; and as it is not possible either to get to the second before the first; so also is
it here.
And observe the signs of signs, and you will discern this in the ladder
which Jacob saw. "Above," it is said, "the Lord stood fast, and underneath
Angels were ascending and descending." [Genesis 28:13] It was prophesied that
the Father has a Son; it was necessary this should be believed. Whence would
you that I show you the signs of this? From above, downward? From beneath,
upward? Because He begets without passion, for this reason did she that was
barren first bear. Let us rather go higher. It was necessary to be believed, that He
begot of Himself. What then? The thing happens obscurely indeed, as in type
and shadow, but still it does happen, and as it goes on it becomes somehow
clearer. A woman is formed out of man alone, and he remains whole and entire.
Again, it was necessary there should be some sure sign of the Conception of a
Virgin. So the barren bears, not once only, but a second time and a third, and
many times. Of His birth then of a Virgin, the barren is a type, and she sends the
mind forward to faith. Again, this was a type of God being able to beget alone.
For if man is the chief agent, and birth takes place without him, in a more
excellent way, much rather, is One begotten of the Chiefest Agent. There is still