when we bring an accusation against them, they allege the case of others who do
the very same thing; and they say, "such and such persons swear." Let us then
say to these, Nevertheless; such a man does not swear: and God will give His
judgment concerning you, from those who do good works; for sinners do not
profit sinners by fellowship in transgressions; but they who perform what is right
condemn sinners. For they who gave not Christ food, or drink, were many; but
they rendered no aid to each other. [Matthew 25:35] Similar also was the case of
the five virgins, who found no pardon from companionship, [Matthew 25:10] but
being condemned by a comparison with those who had acted wisely, both these
and the former were alike punished.
16. Dismissing then this argument of frigid self-deception, let us not look at
the case of those who fall, but at those who fashion their conduct rightly; and let
us endeavour to carry along with us a memento of the present fast when it is
over. And as it often happens when we have purchased a vestment, or a slave, or
a precious vase, we recall again the time when we did so, and say to each other,
"That slave I purchased at such a festival; that garment I bought at such a time;"
so, in like manner, if we now reduce to practice this law, we shall say, I reformed
the practice of swearing during that Lent; for till then I was a swearer; but from
barely hearing an admonition, I have abstained from the sin.
But "the custom," it may be objected, "is a hard thing to be reformed." I
know it is; and therefore am urgent to throw you into another custom, which is
good and profitable. For when you say, it is difficult for me to abstain from what
is habitual; for that very reason, I say, you should make haste to abstain,
knowing for certain, that if you once make another custom for yourself of not
swearing, you will want no labour afterwards. Which is the more difficult thing;
not to swear, or to remain the whole day without food; and to shrivel up on
water-drinking, and meagre diet? It is evident that the latter surpasses the former;
yet, notwithstanding, custom has made this matter so possible and easy of
execution, that when the fast comes round, although any one should exhort a
thousand times, or as frequently constrain and compel one to partake of wine, or

taste of any other of those things which are forbidden during fasts, yet a man
would prefer to suffer anything, rather than touch the prohibited article of food;
and that not for want of relish for the table, nevertheless, we bear it all with
fortitude, from the habit of our conscience. And the case will be the same in
regard to oaths; and just as if now, any one were to impose ever so great
necessity, you would remain immovable, holding fast the habit; so also in that
case, if any one should urge you ten thousand times, you would not depart from
your custom.
18. When you go home, therefore, discourse of all these things with those
who are in your house; and as many persons often do, when they come back
from a meadow, having plucked there a rose, or a violet, or some flower of that
kind, they return twisting it about with their fingers; and as some, again, when
they quit the gardens to go home, take with them branches of trees, with their
fruit upon them; and as others, moreover, from sumptuous feasts, carry away
leavings of the entertainment for their dependents; so indeed do thou, departing
from hence, take an exhortation home to your wife, your children, and all your
household. For this admonition is more profitable than the meadow, the garden,
or the banquetting table. These roses never wither; these fruits never drop off;
these dainties never corrupt. The former yield a temporary delight; but the latter
a lasting advantage, not only after this reformation has taken place, but in the
very act of reforming. For think what a good practice this would be, having
dismissed all other matters public or private, to discourse [Deuteronomy 6:7]
only of the divine laws continually, at the table, in the forum, and in your other
meetings. Would we give our attention to these things, we should say nothing of
a dangerous or injurious nature, nor should we sin unwittingly. Giving our
leisure to discourse respecting these things, we should be able to withdraw our
soul even from this despondency that hangs over us, instead of looking with so
much anxiety as we do, while we say one to another, "Hath the Emperor heard
what has happened? Is he incensed? What sentence has he pronounced? Hath
any one petitioned him? What? Will he himself endure to destroy utterly a city so