2 Corinthians 3:15
"But even unto this day, whenever Moses is read, a veil lies upon their
heart."
For since he said that in the reading of the Old Testament the veil remains,
lest any should think that this that is said is from the obscurity of the Law, he
both by other things showed even before what his meaning was, (for by saying,
"their minds were hardened," he shows that the fault was their own,) and, in this
place too, again. For he said not, 'The veil remains on the writing,' but "in the
reading;" (now the reading is the act of those that read;) and again, "When
Moses is read." He showed this however with greater clearness in the expression
which follows next, saying unreservedly, "The veil lies upon their heart." For
even upon the face of Moses it lay, not because of Moses, but because of the
grossness and carnal mind of these.
4. Having then suitably accused them, he points out also the manner of their
correction. And what is this?

2 Corinthians 3:16
"Nevertheless when [one] shall turn to the Lord," which is, to forsake the
Law, "the veil is taken away. "
Do you see that not over the face of Moses was there that veil, but over the
eyesight of the Jews? For it was done, not that the glory of Moses might be
hidden, but that the Jews might not see. For they were not capable. So that in
them was the deficiency, for it caused not him to be ignorant of any thing, but
them. And he did not say indeed, "when you shall let go the Law," but he implied
it, for "when you shall turn to the Lord, the veil is taken away." To the very last
he kept to the history. For when Moses talked with the Jews he kept his face
covered; but when he turned to God it was uncovered. Now this was a type of
that which was to come to pass, that when we have turned to the Lord, then we
shall see the glory of the Law, and the face of the Lawgiver bare; yea rather, not
this alone, but we shall then be even in the same rank with Moses. Do you see
how he invites the Jew unto the faith, by showing, that by coming unto Grace he
is able not only to see Moses, but also to stand in the very same rank with the
Lawgiver. 'For not only,' he says, 'shall you look on the glory which then you
saw not, but you shall yourself also be included in the same glory; yea rather, in
a greater glory, even so great that that other shall not seem glory at all when
compared with this.' How and in what manner? 'Because that when you have
turned to the Lord and art included in the grace, you will enjoy that glory, unto
which the glory of Moses, if compared, is so much less as to be no glory at all.
But still, small though it be and exceedingly below that other, while you are a
Jew, even this will not be vouchsafed you ; but having become a believer, it will
then be vouchsafed you to behold even that which is far greater than it.' And
when he was addressing himself to the believers, he said, that "that which was
made glorious had no glory;" but here he speaks not so; but how? "When one