increasing their disgust. For as above He set forth publicans and heathens, by the
quality of the person shaming their imitators, so also in this place the hypocrites.
"Therefore when you do your alms," says He, "do not sound a trumpet
before you, as the hypocrites do." [Matthew 6:2]
Not that they had trumpets, but He means to display the greatness of their
frenzy, by the use of this figure of speech, deriding and making a show of them
hereby.
And well has He called them "hypocrites" for the mask was of mercy, but
the spirit of cruelty and inhumanity. For they do it, not because they pity their
neighbors, but that they themselves may enjoy credit; and this came of the
utmost cruelty; while another was perishing with hunger, to be seeking
vainglory, and not putting an end to his suffering.
It is not then the giving alms which is required, but the giving as one ought,
the giving for such and such an end.
Having then amply derided those men, and having handled them so, that the
hearer should be even ashamed of them, He again corrects thoroughly the mind
which is so distempered: and having said how we ought not to act, He signifies
on the other hand how we ought to act. How then ought we to do our alms?
"Let not your left hand know," says He, "what your right hand does."
[Matthew 6:3]
Here again His enigmatical meaning is not of the hands, but He has put the
thing hyperbolically. As thus: "If it can be," says He, "for yourself not to know it,
let this be the object of your endeavor; that, if it were possible, it may be
concealed from the very hands that minister." It is not, as some say, that we
should hide it from wrong-headed men, for He has here commanded that it
should be concealed from all.
And then the reward too; consider how great it is. For after He had spoken
of the punishment from the one, He points out also the honor derived from the
other; from either side urging them, and leading them on to high lessons. Yea,
for He is persuading them to know that God is everywhere present, and that not

by our present life are our interests limited, but a yet more awful tribunal will
receive us when we go hence, and the account of all our doings, and honors, and
punishments: and that no one will be hid in doing anything either great or small,
though he seem to be hid from men. For all this did He darkly signify, when He
said,
"Your Father which sees in secret shall reward you openly."
Setting for him a great and august assemblage of spectators, and what He
desires, that very thing bestowing on him in great abundance. "For what," says
He, "do you wish? Is it not to have some to be spectators of what is going on?
Behold then, you have some; not angels, nor archangels, but the God of all."
And if you desire to have men also as spectators, neither of this desire does He
deprive you at the fitting season, but rather in greater abundance affords it unto
you. For, if you should now make a display, you will be able to make it to ten
only, or twenty, or (we will say) a hundred persons: but if you take pains to lie
hidden now, God Himself will then proclaim you in the presence of the whole
universe. Wherefore above all, if you will have men see your good deeds, hide
them now, that then all may look on them with the more honor, God making
them manifest, and extolling them, and proclaiming them before all. Again,
whereas now they that behold will rather condemn you as vainglorious; when
they see you crowned, so far from condemning, they will even admire you, all of
them. When therefore by waiting a little, you may both receive a reward, and
reap greater admiration; consider what folly it is to cast yourself out of both
these; and while you are seeking your reward from God, and while God is
beholding, to summon men for the display of what is going on. Why, if display
must be made of our love, to our Father above all should we make it; and this
most especially, when our Father has the power both to crown and to punish.
And let me add, even were there no penalty, it were not meet for him who
desires glory, to let go this our theatre, and take in exchange that of men. For
who is there so wretched, as that when the king was hastening to come and see
his achievements, he would let him go, and make up his assembly of spectators