And, if you will, let us first bring forward glory, so lovely and desirable
with all of them. And I speak not of its being short-lived, and soon put out, but
when it is in its bloom, then show it me. Take not away the daubings and colored
lines of the harlot, but bring her forward decked out, and exhibit her to us, for
me thereupon to expose her deformity. Well then, of course you will tell of her
array, and her many lictors, and the heralds' voice, and the listening of all
classes, and the silence kept by the populace, and the blows given to all that
come in one's way, and the universal gazing. Are not these her splendors? Come
then, let us examine whether these things be not vain, and a mere unprofitable
imagination. For wherein is the person we speak of the better for these things,
either in body, or in soul? For this constitutes the man. Will he then be taller
hereby, or stronger, or healthier, or swifter, or will he have his senses keener, and
more piercing? Nay, no one could say this. Let us go then to the soul, if haply we
may find there any advantage occurring herefrom. What then? Will such a one
be more temperate, more gentle, more prudent, through that kind of attendance?
By no means, but rather quite the contrary. For not as in the body, so also is the
result here. For there the body indeed gains nothing in respect of its proper
excellence; but here the mischief is not only the soul's reaping no good fruit, but
also its actually receiving much evil therefrom: hurried as it is by such means
into haughtiness, and vainglory, and folly, and wrath, and ten thousand faults like
them.
"But he rejoices," you will say, "and exults in these things, and they
brighten him up." The crowning point of his evils lies in that word of yours, and
the incurable part of the disease. For he that rejoices in these things, would be
unwilling however easily to be released from that which is the ground of his
evils; yea, he has blocked up against himself the way of healing by this delight.
So that here most of all is the mischief, that he is not even pained, but rather
rejoices, when the diseases are growing upon him.
For neither is rejoicing always a good thing; since even thieves rejoice in
stealing, and an adulterer in defiling his neighbor's marriage bed, and the

covetous in spoiling by violence, and the manslayer in murdering. Let us not
then look whether he rejoice, but whether it be for something profitable, lest
perchance we find his joy to be such as that of the adulterer and the thief.
For wherefore, tell me, does he rejoice? For his credit with the multitude,
because he can puff himself up, and be gazed upon? Nay, what can be worse
than this desire, and this ill-placed fondness? Or if it be no bad thing, you must
leave off deriding the vainglorious and aspersing them with continual mockeries:
ye must leave off uttering imprecations on the haughty and contemptuous. But
ye would not endure it. Well then, they too deserve plenty of censure, though
they have plenty of lictors. And all this I have said of the more tolerable sort of
rulers; since the greater part of them we shall find transgressing more grievously
than either robbers, or murderers, or adulterers, or spoilers of tombs, from not
making a good use of their power. For indeed both their thefts are more
shameless, and their butcheries more hardened, and their impurities far more
enormous than the others; and they dig through, not one wall, but estates and
houses without end, their prerogative making it very easy to them.
And they serve a most grievous servitude, both stooping basely under their
passions, and trembling at all their accomplices. For he only is free, and he only
a ruler, and more kingly than all kings, who is delivered from his passions.
Knowing then these things, let us follow after the true freedom, and deliver
ourselves from the evil slavery, and let us account neither pomp of power nor
dominion of wealth, nor any other such thing, to be blessed; but virtue only. For
thus shall we both enjoy security here, and attain unto the good things to come,
by the grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory
and might, with the Father and the Holy Spirit, world without end. Amen.