THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.73, C.3.

My blood is drink indeed." Therefore, this sacrament is materially
many, but formally and perfectively one.
Reply to Objection 1: The same Collect at first employs the plural:
"May the sacraments which we have received purify us"; and
afterwards the singular number: "May this sacrament of Thine not
make us worthy of punishment": so as to show that this sacrament
is in a measure several, yet simply one.
Reply to Objection 2: The bread and wine are materially several
signs, yet formally and perfectively one, inasmuch as one
refreshment is prepared therefrom.
Reply to Objection 3: From the double consecration of the matter no
more can be gathered than that the sacrament is several materially,
as stated above.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.73, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the Eucharist is necessary for salvation?

Objection 1: It seems that this sacrament is necessary for salvation.
For our Lord said (Jn. 6:54): "Except you eat the flesh of the Son of
Man, and drink His blood, you shall not have life in you." But Christ's
flesh is eaten and His blood drunk in this sacrament. Therefore,
without this sacrament man cannot have the health of spiritual life.
Objection 2: Further, this sacrament is a kind of spiritual food. But
bodily food is requisite for bodily health. Therefore, also is this
sacrament, for spiritual health.
Objection 3: Further, as Baptism is the sacrament of our Lord's
Passion, without which there is no salvation, so also is the
Eucharist. For the Apostle says (1 Cor. 11:26): "For as often as you
shall eat this bread, and drink the chalice, you shall show the death
of the Lord, until He come." Consequently, as Baptism is necessary
for salvation, so also is this sacrament.
On the contrary, Augustine writes (Ad Bonifac. contra Pelag. I): "Nor
are you to suppose that children cannot possess life, who are
deprived of the body and blood of Christ."
I answer that, Two things have to be considered in this sacrament,
namely, the sacrament itself, and what is contained in it. Now it was
stated above (Article 1, Objection 2) that the reality of the sacrament
is the unity of the mystical body, without which there can be no
salvation; for there is no entering into salvation outside the Church,
just as in the time of the deluge there was none outside the Ark,
which denotes the Church, according to 1 Pt. 3:20,21. And it has
been said above (Question 68, Article 2), that before receiving a
sacrament, the reality of the sacrament can be had through the very
desire of receiving the sacrament. Accordingly, before actual
reception of this sacrament, a man can obtain salvation through the
desire of receiving it, just as he can before Baptism through the
desire of Baptism, as stated above (Question 68, Article 2). Yet there
is a difference in two respects. First of all, because Baptism is the
beginning of the spiritual life, and the door of the sacraments;
whereas the Eucharist is, as it were, the consummation of the
spiritual life, and the end of all the sacraments, as was observed
above (Question 63, Article 6): for by the hallowings of all the