(Recapitulation) "And at midnight," etc. [Acts 16:25] Let us compare,
beloved, with that night these nights of ours, with their revellings, their
drunkenness, and wanton excesses, with their sleep which might as well be
death, their watchings which are worse than sleep. For while some sleep without
sense or feeling, others lie awake to pitiable and wretched purpose, plotting
deceits, anxiously thinking about money, studying how they may be revenged
upon those who do them wrong, meditating enmity, reckoning up the abusive
words spoken during the day: thus do they rake up the smouldering embers of
wrath, doing things intolerable. Mark how Peter slept. [Acts 12:6] Both there, it
was wisely ordered (that he should be asleep); for the Angel came to him, and it
behooved that none should see what happened; and on the other hand it was well
ordered here (that Paul should be awake), in order that the keeper of the prison
might be prevented from killing himself. "And suddenly there was a great
earthquake." [Acts 16:26] And why did no other miracle take place? Because
this was, of all others, the thing sufficient for his conversion, seeing he was
personally in danger: for it is not so much miracles that overpower us, as the
things which issue in our own deliverance. That the earthquake should not seem
to have come of itself, there was this concurrent circumstance, bearing witness to
it: "the doors were opened, and all their bonds were loosed." And it appears in
the night-time; for the Apostles did not work for display, but for men's salvation.
"And the keeper of the prison," etc. [Acts 16:27] The keeper was not an evildisposed man that he "thrust them into the inner prison," [Acts 16:24] was
because of his "having received such a command," not of himself. The man was
all in a tumult of perturbation. "What shall I do to be saved?" he asks. Why not
before this? Paul shouted, until he saw, and is beforehand with him saying, "We
are all here. And having called for lights," it says, "he sprang in, and fell down
at the feet" of the prisoner; he, the prison keeper, saying, "Sirs, what must I do to
be saved?" [Acts 16:28-30] Why, what had they said? Observe, he does not, on
finding himself safe, think all is well; he is overcome with awe at the miraculous
power.

Do you mark what happened in the former case, and what here? There a girl
was released from a spirit, and they cast them into prison, because they had
liberated her from the spirit. Here, they did but show the doors standing open,
and it opened the doors of his heart, it loosed two sorts of chains; that (prisoner)
kindled the (true) light; for the light in his heart was shining. "And he sprang in,
and fell before them;" and he does not ask, How is this? What is this? But
straightway he says, "What must I do to be saved?" What then answers Paul?
"Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and you shall be saved, you and your house."
[Acts 16:31] For this above all, wins men: that one's house also should be saved.
"And they spoke the word to him, and to all that were in his house. And he took
them the same hour of the night, and washed their stripes," etc. (v. 32, 33),
washed them and was washed: those he washed from their stripes, himself was
washed from his sins: he fed and was fed. "And rejoiced," it says: although there
was nothing but words only and good hopes: having believed in God with all his
house [Acts 16:34]: this was the token of his having believed— that he was
released of all. What worse than a jailer, what more ruthless, more savage? He
entertained them with great honor. Not, because he was safe, he made merry, but,
having believed God. (a) "Believe in the Lord," said the Apostle: therefore it is
that the writer here says, "Having believed. — (d) Now therefore," it says,
"depart, and go in peace" [Acts 16:36]: that is, in safety, fearing no man. (b)
"But Paul said unto them" [Acts 16:37]: that he may not seem to be receiving his
liberty as one condemned, and as one that has done wrong: therefore it is that he
says, "Having openly beaten us uncondemned," etc.— that it may not be matter
of grace on their part. (e) And besides, they wish the jailer himself to be out of
danger, that he may not be called to account for this afterwards. And they do not
say, "Having beaten us," who have wrought miracles: for they (the magistrates)
did not even heed these: but, that which was most effectual to shake their minds,
"uncondemned, and being Romans." (c) Observe how diversely grace manages
things: how Peter went out, how Paul, though both were Apostles. "They
feared," [Acts 16:38] it says: because the men were Romans, not because they