## CHAPTER LVIX--Of the Opinion of those who withdraw from Natural Things their
Proper Actions
SOME have taken an occasion of going wrong by thinking that no creature has any
action in the production of natural effects, -- thus that fire does not warm, but God
causes heat where fire is present. So Avicebron in his book, The Fountain of Life,
lays it down that no body is active, but the power of a subsistent spirit permeating
bodies does the actions which seem to be done by bodies. But on such theories many
awkward consequences follow.
1. If no inferior cause, and especially no corporeal cause, does any work, but God
works alone in all agencies, and God does not change by working in different agencies;
no difference of effect will follow from the difference of agencies in which God works:
but that is false by the testimony of sense.
2. It is contrary to the notion of wisdom for anything to be to no purpose in the works of
the wise. But if created things in no way work to the production of effects, but God alone
works all effects immediately, to no purpose are other things employed by Him.
3. To grant the main thing is to grant the accessories. But actually to do follows upon
actually to be: thus God is at once pure actuality and the first cause. If then God has
communicated to other beings His likeness in respect of being, it follows that He has
communicated to them His likeness in respect of action.
4. To detract from the perfection of creatures is to detract from the perfection of the
divine power. But if no creature has any action in the production of any effect, much is
detracted from the perfection of the creature: for it marks abundance of perfection to be
able to communicate to another the perfection which one has oneself.
5. God is the sovereign good (B. I, Chap.XLI). Therefore it belongs to Him to do
the best. But it is better for good conferred on one to be common to many than for it to
be confined to that one: for common good always proves to be more godlike than the
good of the individual. But the good of one comes to be common to many when it is
derived from one to many, which cannot be except in so far as the agent diffuses it to
others by a proper action of its own. God then has communicated His goodness in such
a way that one creature can transmit to others the good which it has received.
6. To take away order from creation is to take away the best thing that there is in
creation: for while individual things in themselves are good, the conjunction of them all
is best by reason of the order in the universe: for the whole is ever better than the parts
and is the end of the parts. But if actions are denied to things, the order of things to one
another is taken away: for things differing in their natures are not tied up in the unity of
one system otherwise than by this, that some act and some are acted upon.
7. If effects are not produced by the action of creatures, but only by the action of God, it
is impossible for the power of any creature to be manifested by its effect: for an effect