himself, but even in his Epistles inserts his prayer This argues a fervent soul, and
one truly not to be restrained. This is a proof of the prayers made there also, and
at the same time also an excuse, as showing that it was not voluntarily, nor from
indolence, that they did not go to them. As if he had said, May God Himself cut
short the temptations that everywhere distract us, so that we may come directly
to you. "And the Lord make you to increase and abound." Do you see the
unrestrainable madness of love that is shown by his words? "Make you to
increase and abound," instead of cause you to grow. As if one should say, that
with a kind of superabundance he desires to be loved by them. "Even as we do
also toward you," he says. Our part is already done, we pray that yours may be
done. Do you see how he wishes love to be extended, not only toward one
another, but everywhere? For this truly is the nature of godly love, that it
embraces all. If you love indeed such an one, but do not love such an one, it is
human love. But such is not ours. "Even as we do also toward you."
Ver. 13. "To the end He may establish your hearts unblamable in holiness
before our God and Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all His
saints."
He shows that love produces advantage to themselves, not to those who are
loved. I wish, he says, that this love may abound, that there may be no blemish.
He does not say to establish you, but your hearts. "For out of the heart come
forth evil thoughts." [Matthew 15:19] For it is possible, without doing anything,
to be a bad man; as for example, to have envy, unbelief, deceit, to rejoice at
evils, not to be loving, to hold perverted doctrines, all these things are of the
heart; and to be pure of these things is holiness. For indeed chastity is properly
by preëminence called holiness, since fornication and adultery is also
uncleanness. But universally all sin is uncleanness, and every virtue is purity.
For, "Blessed," it is said, "are the pure in heart." [Matthew 5:8] By "the pure"
He means those who are in every way pure.
For other things also know how to pollute the soul, and no less. For that
wickedness defiles the soul, hear the prophet, saying, "O Jerusalem, wash your

heart from wickedness." [Jeremiah 4:14] And again, "Wash you, make you clean,
put away the wickednesses from your souls." [Isaiah 1:16, Septuagint] He did not
say "fornications," so that not only fornication, but other things also defile the
soul.
"To establish your hearts," he says, "unblamable in holiness before our God
and Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all His saints."
Therefore Christ will then be a Judge, but not before Him (only), but also before
the Father we shall stand to be judged. Or does he mean this, to be unblamable
before God, as he always says, "in the sight of God," for this is sincere virtue—
not in the sight of men?
It is love then that makes them unblamable. For it does make men really
unblamable. And once when I was discoursing of this to a certain one, and
saying, that love makes men unblamable, and that love to our neighbor does not
suffer any entrance of transgression, and in my discourse going over, and
pursuing all the rest— some one of my acquaintance interposing himself said,
What then of fornication, is it not possible both to love, and to commit
fornication? And it is indeed from love that this springs. Covetousness indeed,
and adultery, and envy, and hostile designs, and everything of this sort can, from
love of one's neighbor, be stopped; but how fornication? He said. I therefore told
him, that even this can love stop. For if a man should love a woman that
commits fornication, he will endeavor both to draw her off from other men, and
not himself also to add to her sin. So that to commit fornication with a woman is
the part of one exceedingly hating her with whom he commits the fornication,
but one who truly loved her would withdraw her from that abominable practice.
And there is not, there is not any sin, which the power of love, like fire, cannot
consume. For it is easier for a vile faggot to resist a great pile of fire, than for the
nature of sin to resist the power of love.
This then let us plant in our own souls, that we may stand with all the
Saints. For they all pleased God by their love to their neighbor. Whence was
Abel slain, and did not slay? From his vehement love to his brother, he could not