you. Still if you do not make a disturbance, I will presently endeavor to make it
clear. For what he has said he has not said nakedly; but since all were talking and
accusing God, that after being counted worthy of the name of sons, and
receiving the Law, and knowing Him beyond all men, and enjoying such great
glory, and serving him beyond the whole world, and receiving the promises, and
being from fathers who were His friends, and what was the greatest thing of all,
having been forefathers of Christ Himself (for this is the meaning of the words,
"of whom, as concerning the flesh, Christ came"), they are now cast out and
disgraced; and in their place are introduced men who had never known Him, of
the Gentiles. Now since they said all this, and blasphemed God, Paul hearing it,
and being cut to the heart, and vexed for God's glory's sake, wished that he were
accursed, had it been possible, so that they might be saved, and this blasphemy
be put a stop to, and God might not seem to have deceived the offspring of those
to whom He promised the gifts. And that you may see that it was in sorrow for
this, that the promise of God might not seem to fall to the ground, which said to
Abraham, "I will give this land to you and to your seed," that he uttered this
wish, he proceeds,
Ver. 6. "Not as though the word of God had taken none effect."
To show that he had courage (Mar. and 4 manuscripts wished) to bear all
these things for the word of God, that is, the promise made to Abraham. For as
Moses seemed to be pleading for the Jews, yet was doing everything for God's
glory (for he says, "Lest they say, Because He was not able to save them, He led
them forth to destroy them in the wilderness" [Deuteronomy 9:28]; stay Your
wrath), so also does Paul, That they may not say (he means) that the promise of
God has fallen to the ground, and He has disappointed us of that He vouched to
us, and this word has not issued in deed, I could wish to be accursed. This then
was why he did not speak of the Gentiles (for to them no promises had been
made by Him, nor had they worshipped Him, wherefore neither did any
blaspheme Him on their account), but it was for the Jews who had both received
the promise, and had also been brought into closer connection with Him than

others, that he expressed this wish. Do you see, that if he had expressed it for the
Gentiles, he would not have been shown to be doing this so purely for Christ's
glory? But since he was willing to become accursed in the Jews' behalf, then it
was most evidenced that it was for Christ's sake only that he desired this. And
for this cause he says,
"To whom pertains the adoption, and the glory, and the service of God, and
the promises."
For the Law, he means, which speaks of Christ, comes from thence, and all
the covenants made with them, and Himself came from them, and the Fathers
who received the promises were all from them. Yet still the opposite has
resulted, and they have fallen from all their good things. Hence, he means, I am
vexed, and if it were possible to be separated from the company about Christ,
and to be made an alien, not from the love of Him (that be far from him; for even
all this he was doing through love), but from all that enjoyment and glory, I
would accept that lot, provided my Master were not to be blasphemed, that He
might not have to hear some saying, that it has been all for stage-effect; He
promises to one, and gives to another. He was sprung from one race, He saved
another. It was to the forefathers of the Jews that He made the promises, and yet
He has deserted their descendants, and put men, who never at any time knew
Him, into their good things. They labored in the practice of the Law, and reading
the Prophets, while men who have come but yesterday from heathen altars and
images have been set up above them. What foresight is there in all this? Now
that these things may not be said of my Master, he means, even if they are said
unjustly, I would willingly lose even the kingdom and that glory unutterable, and
any sufferings would I undergo, as considering it the greatest consolation
possible no longer to hear Him Whom I so long for, so blasphemed. But if you
be still against allowing this explanation, just reflect that many fathers have at
many times taken up with thus much for their children, and have chosen to be
separated from them, and rather to see them in honor, considering their honor
dearer to them than their company. But since we are so short of love like this