in motion; and in like manner when it is wholly in B, because then
the movement is past. Therefore if it is at any time in motion it must
needs be neither wholly in A nor wholly in B. Therefore while it is in
motion, it is either nowhere, or partly in A, and partly in B, or wholly
in some other intervening place, say C, or partly in A and C and
partly in C and B. But it is impossible for it to be nowhere, for then
there would be a dimensive quantity without a place, which is
impossible. Nor again is it possible for it to be partly in A and partly
in B without being in some way in the intervening space. for since B
is a place distant from A, it would follow that in the intervening space
the part of Z which is in B is not continuous with the part which is in
A. Therefore it follows that it is either wholly in C, or partly in C, and
partly in some other place that intervenes between C and A, say D,
and so forth. Therefore it follows that Z does not pass form A to B
unless first of all it be in all the intervening places: unless we
suppose that it passes from A to B without ever being moved, which
implies a contradiction, because the very succession of places is
local movement. The same applies to any change whatever having
two opposite terms, each of which is a positive entity, but not to
those changes which have only one positive term, the other being a
pure privation, since between affirmation and negation or privation
there is no fixed distance: wherefore that which is in the negation
may be nearer to or more remote from affirmation, and conversely,
by reason of something that causes either of them or disposes
thereto: so that while that which is moved is wholly under a negation
it is changed into affirmation, and "vice versa"; wherefore in such
things "to be changing precedes to be changed," as is proved in
Phys. vi, 5. Nor is there any comparison with the movement of an
angel, because being in a place is predicated equivocally of a body
and an angel. Hence it is clear that it is altogether impossible for a
body to pass from one place to another, unless it pass through every
interval.
Wherefore others grant this, and yet they maintain that the glorified
body is moved instantaneously. But it follows from this that a
glorified body is at the same instant in two or more places together,
namely in the ultimate term, and in all the intervening places, which
is impossible.
To this, however, they reply that, although it is the same instant
really, it is not the same logically, like a point at which different lines
terminate. But this is not enough, because an instant measures the
instantaneous, according to its reality and not according to our way

of considering it. Wherefore an instant through being considered in a
different way is not rendered capable of measuring things that are
not simultaneous in time, just as a point through being considered in
a different way does not make it possible for one point of place to
contain things that are locally distant from one another.
Hence others with greater probability hold that a glorified body
moves in time, but that this time is so short as to be imperceptible;
and that nevertheless one glorified body can pass through the same
space in less time than another, because there is no limit to the
divisibility of time, no matter how short a space we may take.
Reply to Objection 1: That which is little lacking is as it were not
lacking at all (Phys. ii, 5); wherefore we say: "I do so and so at once,"
when it is to be done after a short time. It is in this sense that
Augustine speaks when he says that "wheresoever the will shall be,
there shall the body be forthwith." Or we may say that in the blessed
there will never be an inordinate will: so that they never will wish
their body to be instantaneously where it cannot be, and
consequently whatever instant the will shall choose, at that same
instant the body will be in whatever place the will shall determine.
Reply to Objection 2: Some have demurred to this proposition of the
Philosopher's, as the Commentator thereon observes. They say that
the ratio of one whole movement to another whole movement is not
necessarily as the ratio of one resisting medium to another resisting
medium, but that the ratio of the intervening mediums gives us the
ratio of retardations attending the movements on account of the
resistance of the medium. For every movement has a certain fixed
speed, either fast or slow, through the mover overcoming the
movable, although there be no resistance on the part of the medium;
as evidenced in heavenly bodies, which have nothing to hinder their
movement; and yet they do not move instantaneously, but in a fixed
time proportionate to the power of the mover in comparison with the
movable. Consequently it is clear that even if we suppose something
to move in a vacuum, it does not follow that it moves
instantaneously, but that nothing is added to the time which that
movement requires in the aforesaid proportion of the mover to the
movable, because the movement is not retarded.
But this reply, as the Commentator observes, proceeds from an error
in the imagination; for it is imagined that the retardation resulting
from the resistance of the medium is a part of movement added to