SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.179, C.7.

variety of composite objects; secondly, because it understands the
truth of intelligible objects not discursively, but by simple intuition.
On the other hand, the intellect of the soul acquires intelligible truth
from sensible objects, and understands it by a certain discoursing of
the reason.
Wherefore Dionysius assigns the "circular" movement of the angels
to the fact that their intuition of God is uniform and unceasing,
having neither beginning nor end: even as a circular movement
having neither beginning nor end is uniformly around the one same
center. But on the part of the soul, ere it arrive at this uniformity, its
twofold lack of uniformity needs to be removed. First, that which
arises from the variety of external things: this is removed by the soul
withdrawing from externals, and so the first thing he mentions
regarding the circular movement of the soul is "the soul's withdrawal
into itself from external objects." Secondly, another lack of
uniformity requires to be removed from the soul, and this is owing to
the discoursing of reason. This is done by directing all the soul's
operations to the simple contemplation of the intelligible truth, and
this is indicated by his saying in the second place that "the soul's
intellectual powers must be uniformly concentrated," in other words
that discoursing must be laid aside and the soul's gaze fixed on the
contemplation of the one simple truth. In this operation of the soul
there is no error, even as there is clearly no error in the
understanding of first principles which we know by simple intuition.
Afterwards these two things being done, he mentions thirdly the
uniformity which is like that of the angels, for then all things being
laid aside, the soul continues in the contemplation of God alone.
This he expresses by saying: "Then being thus made uniform
unitedly," i.e. conformably, "by the union of its powers, it is
conducted to the good and the beautiful." The "straight" movement
of the angel cannot apply to his proceeding from one thing to
another by considering them, but only to the order of his providence,
namely to the fact that the higher angel enlightens the lower angels
through the angels that are intermediate. He indicates this when he
says: "The angel's movement takes a straight line when he proceeds
to the care of things subject to him, taking in his course whatever
things are direct," i.e. in keeping with the dispositions of the direct
order. Whereas he ascribes the "straight" movement in the soul to
the soul's proceeding from exterior sensibles to the knowledge of
intelligible objects. The "oblique" movement in the angels he
describes as being composed of the straight and circular
movements, inasmuch as their care for those beneath them is in