thing, "I robbed other Churches, taking wages of them that I might minister unto
you." [2 Corinthians 11:8] And yet even there he worked, but of this he made no
mention, but urged what was more striking, as if he had said, I was maintained
by others when ministering to you. But here it is not so. But what? "Working
night and day." And there indeed he says, "And when I was present with you,
and was in want, I was not a burden on any man," and, "I took wages that I
might minister unto you." [2 Corinthians 11:8-9] And here he shows that the men
were in poverty, but there it was not so.
On this account he frequently addresses them as witnesses. For "you are
witnesses," he says, "and God also"; God was worthy to be believed, but this
other was that which most fully assured them. For that indeed was uncertain to
those who were ignorant of it; but this was without doubt to all. For do not
enquire whether it was Paul who said these things. Much beyond what was
necessary he gives them assurance. Wherefore he says, "You are witnesses, and
God also, how holily and righteously and unblamably we behaved ourselves
toward you that believe." It was proper to praise them again. On this account he
sets these things before them, which were sufficient to persuade them. For he
that stood there in want, and did not receive anything, would much more not
receive anything now. "How holily," says he, "and righteously and unblamably
we behaved ourselves toward you that believe."
"As ye know how we exhorted and comforted each one of you, as a father
does his own children." Above having spoken of his behavior here he speaks of
his love, which was more than what belonged to his rule over them. And what is
said marks his freedom from pride. "As a father his own children, exhorting you,
and encouraging you, and testifying, to the end that you should walk worthily of
God, who calls you into His own kingdom and glory." When he says, "and
testifying," then he makes mention of "fathers"; although we testified, it was not
violently, but like fathers. "Each one of you." Strange! In so great a multitude to
omit no one, neither small nor great, neither rich nor poor. "Exhorting" you, he
says; to bear. "And comforting and testifying." "Exhorting," therefore they did

not seek glory; and "testifying," therefore they did not flatter. "That ye should
walk worthily of God, who calls you into His own kingdom and glory." Observe
again, how, in relating, he both teaches and comforts. For if He has called them
unto His kingdom, if He called them unto glory, they ought to endure all things.
We "entreat" you, not that you should grant us any favor, but that you should
gain the kingdom of heaven.
Ver. 13. "And for this cause we also thank God without ceasing, that when
you received from us the word of the message, even the word of God, you
accepted it not as the word of men, but as it is in truth, the word of God, which
also works in you that believe."
It cannot be said, he says, that we indeed do all things unblamably, but you
on the other hand have done things unworthy of our course of life. For in hearing
us, you gave such heed as if not hearing men, but as if God Himself were
exhorting you. Whence is this manifest? Because as he shows from his own
temptations and their testimony, and the way in which he acted, that he did not
preach with flattery or vainglory; so from their trials, he shows also that they
rightly received the word. For whence, he says, unless ye had heard as if God
were speaking, did ye endure such perils? And observe his dignity.
Ver. 14, 15, 16. "For you, brethren, became imitators of the Churches of
God, which are in Judæa in Christ Jesus: for you also suffered the same things
of your own countrymen, even as they did of the Jews; who both killed the Lord
Jesus and their own prophets, and drove out us, and please not God, and are
contrary to all men; forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles that they may be
saved; to fill up their sins always: but the wrath has come upon them to the
uttermost."
"For you," he says, "became imitators of the Churches of God which are in
Judæa." This is a great consolation. It is no wonder, he says, that they should do
these things to you, inasmuch as they have done it also to their own countrymen.
And this too is no little proof that the Preaching is true, that even Jews were able
to endure all things. "For you also," he says, "have suffered the same things of