this day, In the mount the Lord was seen." Here you see the same angel is
called Lord: wherefore, unless because the Lord spake by the angel? But if
we pass on to that which follows, the angel altogether speaks as a
prophet, and reveals expressly that God is speaking by the angel. "And
the angel of the Lord," he says, "called unto Abraham out of heaven the
second time, and said, By myself I have sworn, saith the Lord; for because
thou hast done this thing, and hast not withheld thy son, thine only son,
on account of me," etc. Certainly these words, viz. that he by whom the
Lord speaks should say, "Thus saith the Lord," are commonly used by the
prophets also. Does the Son of God say of the Father, "The Lord saith,"
while He Himself is that Angel of the Father? What then? Do they not see
how hard pressed they are about these three men who appeared to
Abraham, when it had been said before, "The Lord appeared to him?"
Were they not angels because they are called men? Let them read Daniel,
saying, "Behold the man Gabriel.". But why do we delay any longer to stop their mouths by another most
clear and most weighty proof, where not an angel in the singular nor men
in the plural are spoken of, but simply angels; by whom not any particular
word was wrought, but the Law itself is most distinctly declared to be
given; which certainly none of the faithful doubts that God gave to Moses
for the control of the children of Israel, or yet, that it was given by angels.
So Stephen speaks: "Ye stiff-necked," he says, "and uncircumcised in
heart and ears, ye do always resist the Holy Ghost: as your fathers did, so
do ye. Which of the prophets have not your fathers persecuted? and they
have slain them which showed before of the coming of the Just One; of
whom ye have been now the betrayers and murderers: who have received
the Law by the disposition of angels, and have not kept it." What is more
evident than this? What more strong than such an authority? The Law,
indeed, was given to that people by the disposition of angels; but the
advent of our Lord Jesus Christ was by it prepared and pre-announced;
and He Himself, as the Word of God, was in some wonderful and
unspeakable manner in the angels, by whose disposition the Law itself
was given. And hence He said in the Gospel, "For had ye believed Moses,
ye would have believed me; for he wrote of me." Therefore then the Lord
was speaking by the angels; and the son of God, who was to be the
Mediator of God and men, from the seed of Abraham, was preparing His

own advent by the angels, that He might find some by whom He would be
received, confessing themselves guilty, whom the Law unfulfilled had
made transgressors. And hence the apostle also says to the Galatians,
"Wherefore then serveth the Law? It was added because of
transgressions, till the seed should come to whom the promise was made,
which  was ordered6 through angels in the hand of a mediator;"
that is, ordered through angels in His own hand. For He was not born in
limitation, but in power. But you learn in another place that he does not
mean any one of the angels as a mediator, but the Lord Jesus Christ
Himself, in so far as He deigned to be made man: "For there is one God,"
he says, "and one Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus."
Hence that passover in the killing of the lamb:9 hence all those things
which are figuratively spoken in the Law, of Christ to come in the flesh,
and to suffer, but also to rise again, which Law was given by the
disposition of angels; in which angels, were certainly the Father, and the
Son, and the Holy Spirit; and in which, sometimes the Father, sometimes
the Son, sometimes the Holy Spirit, and sometimes God, without any
distinction of person, was figuratively signified by them, although
appearing in visible and sensible forms, yet by His own creature, not by
His substance, in order to the seeing of which, hearts are cleansed
through all those things which are seen by the eyes and heard by the ears.
27. But now, as I think, that which we had undertaken to show in this
book has been sufficiently discussed and demonstrated, according to our
capacity; and it has been established, both by probable reason, so far as a
man, or rather, so far as I am able, and by strength of authority, so far as
the divine declarations from the Holy Scriptures have been made clear,
that those words and bodily appearances which were given to these
ancient fathers of ours before the incarnation of the Saviour, when God
was said to appear, were wrought by angels: whether themselves speaking
or doing something in the person of God, as we have shown that the
prophets also were wont to do, or assuming from the creature that which
they themselves were not, wherein God might be shown in a figure to
men; which manner of showing also, Scripture teaches by many
examples, that the prophets, too, did not omit. It remains, therefore, now
for us to consider,—since both in the Lord as born of a virgin, and in the
Holy Spirit descending in a corporeal form like a dove. and in the tongues