His resurrection. Therefore they say these things publicly, and crucified thieves
with Him, and wishing to prove Him a deceiver, they say, "Thou that destroyest
the temple, and buildest it in three days come down from the cross."
[Matthew 27:40] For since on telling Pilate to remove the accusation (this was
the writing, "The king of the Jews"), they prevailed not, but he persevered in
saying, "What I have written, I have written," [John 19:22] they then endeavor
by their derision of Him to show that He is not a king.
Wherefore they said those things, and also these. If "He is the king of Israel,
let Him come down now from the cross. He saved others, Himself He cannot
save," [Matthew 27:42] aiming hereby to bring discredit even on His former
miracles. And again, "If He be Son of God, and He will have Him, let Him save
Him."
O execrable; most execrable! What, were not the prophets prophets, nor the
righteous men righteous, because God rescued them not out of their dangers.
Nay surely they were, though suffering these things. What then could be equal to
your folly? For if the coming of the dangers upon them did not injure their honor
with you, how much more in the case of this man, was it wrong for you to be
offended, when both by what He did, by what He said, He was ever correcting
beforehand this suspicion of yours.
Yet nevertheless, even when these things were said and done, they prevailed
nothing, not even at the very time. At any rate, he, who was depraved in such
great wickedness, and who had spent his whole life in murders and housebreakings, when these things were being said, then confessed Him, and made
mention of a kingdom, and the people bewailed Him. And yet the things that
were done seemed to testify the contrary in the eyes of those who knew not the
mysterious dispensations, that He was weak and of no power, nevertheless truth
prevailed even by the contrary things.
Hearing then these things, let us arm ourselves against all rage, against all
anger. Should thou perceive your heart swelling, seal your breast setting upon it
the cross. Call to mind some one of the things that then took place, and you will

cast out as dust all rage by the recollection of the things that were done. Consider
the words, the actions; consider that He is Lord, and thou servant. He is suffering
for you, thou for yourself; He in behalf of them who had been benefited by Him
and had crucified Him, thou in behalf of yourself; He in behalf of them who had
used Him despitefully, thou oftentimes at the hands of them who have been
injured. He in the sight of the whole city, or rather of the whole people of the
Jews, both strangers, and those of the country, before whom He spoke those
merciful words, but thou in the presence of few; and what was more insulting to
Him, that even His disciples forsook Him. For those, who before paid Him
attention, had deserted Him, but His enemies and foes, having got Him in the
midst of themselves on the cross, insulted, reviled, mocked, derided, scoffed at
Him, Jews and soldiers from below, from above thieves on either side: for indeed
the thieves insulted, and upbraided Him both of them. How then says Luke that
one "rebuked?" [Luke 23:40] Both things were done, for at first both upbraided
Him, but afterwards one did so no more. For that you might not think the thing
had been done by any agreement, or that the thief was not a thief, by his
insolence he shows you, that up on the cross he was a thief and an enemy, and at
once was changed.
Considering then all these things, control yourself. For what do you suffer
like what your Lord suffered? Were you publicly insulted? But not like these
things. Are you mocked? Yet not your whole body, not being thus scourged, and
stripped. And even if you were buffeted, yet not like this.
3. And add to this, I pray you, by whom, and wherefore, and when, and
who it was; and (the most grievous matter) that these things being done, no one
found fault, no one blamed what was done, but on the contrary all rather
approved, and joined in mocking Him and in jeering at Him; and as a boaster,
impostor, and deceiver, and not able to prove in His works the things that He
said, so did they revile Him. But He held His peace to all, preparing for us the
most powerful incentives to long suffering.
But we, though hearing such things, are not patient so much as to servants,