after the prophecy, and after the interpretation of the chief priests and scribes,
they still had their minds turned towards it.
5. Shame upon Marcion, shame upon Paul of Samosata, for refusing to see
what those wise men saw—the forefathers of the Church; for I am not ashamed
so to call them. Let Marcion be ashamed, beholding God worshipped in the
flesh. Let Paul be ashamed, beholding Him worshipped as not being merely a
man. As to His being in the flesh, that first is signified by the swaddling clothes
and the manger; as to their not worshipping Him as a mere man, they declare it,
by offering Him, at that unripe age, such gifts as were meet to be offered to God.
And together with them let the Jews also be ashamed, seeing themselves
anticipated by barbarians and magi, while they submit not so much as to come
after them. For indeed what happened then was a type of the things to come, and
from the very beginning it was shown that the Gentiles would anticipate their
nation.
"But how was it," one may ask, "that not at the beginning, but afterwards,
He said, 'Go, and make disciples of all nations'"? Because the occurrence was a
type, as I said, of the future, and a sort of declaration of it beforehand. For the
natural order was that Jews should come unto Him first; but forasmuch as they
of their own choice gave up their proper benefit, the order of things was
inverted. Since not even in this instance should the wise men have come before
the Jews, nor should persons from so great a distance have anticipated those who
were settled about the very city, nor should those who had heard nothing have
prevented them that were nurtured in so many prophecies. But because they
were exceedingly ignorant of their own blessings, those from Persia anticipate
those at Jerusalem. And this indeed is what Paul also says: "It was necessary that
the word of the Lord should first have been spoken to you, but seeing you have
judged yourselves unworthy, lo, we turn to the Gentiles." [Acts 13:46] For even
though before they did not obey, at any rate when they heard it from the wise
men, they ought to have made all haste; but they would not. Therefore, while
those are slumbering, these run before.

6. Let us then also follow the magi, let us separate ourselves from our
barbarian customs, and make our distance therefrom great, that we may see
Christ, since they too, had they not been far from their own country, would have
missed seeing Him. Let us depart from the things of earth. For so the wise men,
while they were in Persia, saw but the star, but after they had departed from
Persia, they beheld the Sun of Righteousness. Or rather, they would not have
seen so much as the star, unless they had readily risen up from thence. Let us
then also rise up; though all men be troubled, let us run to the house of the young
Child; though kings, though nations, though tyrants interrupt this our path, let
not our desire pass away. For so shall we thoroughly repel all the dangers that
beset us. Since these too, except they had seen the young Child, would not have
escaped their danger from the king. Before seeing the young Child, fears and
dangers and troubles pressed upon them from every side; but after the adoration,
it is calm and security; and no longer a star but an angel receives them, having
become priests from the act of adoration; for we see that they offered gifts also.
Therefore likewise leave the Jewish people, the troubled city, the bloodthirsty tyrant, the pomp of the world, and hasten to Bethlehem, where is the
[Acts 13:46] house of the spiritual Bread. For though you be a shepherd, and
come hither, you will behold the young Child in an inn: though you be a king,
and approach not here, your purple robe will profit you nothing; though you be
one of the wise men, this will be no hindrance to you; only let your coming be to
honor and adore, not to spurn the Son of God; only do this with trembling and
joy: for it is possible for both of these to concur in one.
But take heed that you be not like Herod, and say, "that I may come and
worship Him," and when you have come, be minded to slay Him. For him do
they resemble, who partake of the mysteries unworthily: it being said, that such a
one "shall be guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord." [1 Corinthians 11:27]
Yes; for they have in themselves the tyrant who is grieved at Christ's kingdom,
him that is more wicked than Herod of old, even Mammon. For he would fain
have the dominion, and sends them that are his own to worship in appearance,