THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.45, C.3.

outpouring the glory of His soul into His body. And this He did, as to
clarity, in His transfiguration, but otherwise than in a glorified body.
For the clarity of the soul overflows into a glorified body, by way of a
permanent quality affecting the body. Hence bodily refulgence is not
miraculous in a glorified body. But in Christ's transfiguration clarity
overflowed from His Godhead and from His soul into His body, not
as an immanent quality affecting His very body, but rather after the
manner of a transient passion, as when the air is lit up by the sun.
Consequently the refulgence, which appeared in Christ's body then,
was miraculous: just as was the fact of His walking on the waves of
the sea. Hence Dionysius says (Ep. ad Cai. iv): "Christ excelled man
in doing that which is proper to man: this is shown in His
supernatural conception of a virgin and in the unstable waters
bearing the weight of material and earthly feet."
Wherefore we must not say, as Hugh of St. Victor [Innocent III, De
Myst. Miss. iv] said, that Christ assumed the gift of clarity in the
transfiguration, of agility in walking on the sea, and of subtlety in
coming forth from the Virgin's closed womb: because the gifts are
immanent qualities of a glorified body. On the contrary, whatever
pertained to the gifts, that He had miraculously. The same is to be
said, as to the soul, of the vision in which Paul saw God in a rapture,
as we have stated in the SS, Question 175, Article 3, ad 2.
Reply to Objection 1: The words quoted prove, not that the clarity of
Christ was not that of glory, but that it was not the clarity of a
glorified body, since Christ's body was not as yet immortal. And just
as it was by dispensation that in Christ the glory of the soul should
not overflow into the body so was it possible that by dispensation it
might overflow as to the gift of clarity and not as to that of
impassibility.
Reply to Objection 2: This clarity is said to have been imaginary, not
as though it were not really the clarity of glory, but because it was a
kind of image representing that perfection of glory, in virtue of which
the body will be glorious.
Reply to Objection 3: Just as the clarity which was in Christ's body
was a representation of His body's future clarity, so the clarity which
was in His garments signified the future clarity of the saints, which
will be surpassed by that of Christ, just as the brightness of the
snow is surpassed by that of the sun. Hence Gregory says (Moral.
xxxii) that Christ's garments became resplendent, "because in the

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.45, C.3.

height of heavenly clarity all the saints will cling to Him in the
refulgence of righteousness. For His garments signify the righteous,
because He will unite them to Himself," according to Is. 49:18: "Thou
shalt be clothed with all these as with an ornament."
The bright cloud signifies the glory of the Holy Ghost or the "power
of the Father," as Origen says (Tract. iii in Matth.), by which in the
glory to come the saints will be covered. Or, again, it may be said
fittingly that it signifies the clarity of the world redeemed, which
clarity will cover the saints as a tent. Hence when Peter proposed to
make tents, "a bright cloud overshaded" the disciples.