SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.117, C.8.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether covetousness is a capital vice?

Objection 1: It seems that covetousness is not a capital vice. For
covetousness is opposed to liberality as the mean, and to prodigality
as extreme. But neither is liberality a principal virtue, nor prodigality
a capital vice. Therefore covetousness also should not be reckoned
a capital vice.
Objection 2: Further, as stated above (FS, Question 84, Articles 3,4),
those vices are called capital which have principal ends, to which the
ends of other vices are directed. But this does not apply to
covetousness: since riches have the aspect, not of an end, but rather
of something directed to an end, as stated in Ethic. i, 5. Therefore
covetousness is not a capital vice.
Objection 3: Further, Gregory says (Moral. xv), that "covetousness
arises sometimes from pride, sometimes from fear. For there are
those who, when they think that they lack the needful for their
expenses, allow the mind to give way to covetousness. And there are
others who, wishing to be thought more of, are incited to greed for
other people's property." Therefore covetousness arises from other
vices instead of being a capital vice in respect of other vices.
On the contrary, Gregory (Moral. xxxi) reckons covetousness among
the capital vices.
I answer that, As stated in the Second Objection, a capital vice is one
which under the aspect of end gives rise to other vices: because
when an end is very desirable, the result is that through desire
thereof man sets about doing many things either good or evil. Now
the most desirable end is happiness or felicity, which is the last end
of human life, as stated above (FS, Question 1, Articles 4,7,8):
wherefore the more a thing is furnished with the conditions of
happiness, the more desirable it is. Also one of the conditions of
happiness is that it be self-sufficing, else it would not set man's
appetite at rest, as the last end does. Now riches give great promise
of self-sufficiency, as Boethius says (De Consol. iii): the reason of
which, according to the Philosopher (Ethic. v, 5), is that we "use
money in token of taking possession of something," and again it is
written (Eccles. 10:19): "All things obey money." Therefore
covetousness, which is desire for money, is a capital vice.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.117, C.8.

Reply to Objection 1: Virtue is perfected in accordance with reason,
but vice is perfected in accordance with the inclination of the
sensitive appetite. Now reason and sensitive appetite do not belong
chiefly to the same genus, and consequently it does not follow that
principal vice is opposed to principal virtue. Wherefore, although
liberality is not a principal virtue, since it does not regard the
principal good of the reason, yet covetousness is a principal vice,
because it regards money, which occupies a principal place among
sensible goods, for the reason given in the Article.
On the other hand, prodigality is not directed to an end that is
desirable principally, indeed it seems rather to result from a lack of
reason. Hence the Philosopher says (Ethic. iv, 1) that "a prodigal
man is a fool rather than a knave."
Reply to Objection 2: It is true that money is directed to something
else as its end: yet in so far as it is useful for obtaining all sensible
things, it contains, in a way, all things virtually. Hence it has a certain
likeness to happiness, as stated in the Article.
Reply to Objection 3: Nothing prevents a capital vice from arising
sometimes out of other vices, as stated above (Question 36, Article
4, ad 1; FS, Question 84, Article 4), provided that itself be frequently
the source of others.