Massuet deletes quem, and reads n n as a genitive.

that some of them were produced naturally good, while some were naturally evil, so that the
supposition of the likeness of those things might harmonize with the Æons. Moreover, since there
are in the world some creatures that are gentle, and others that are fierce, some that are innocuous,
while others are hurtful and destroy the rest; some have their abode on the earth, others in the water,
others in the air, and others in the heaven; in like manner, they are bound to show that the Æons
possess such properties, if indeed the one are the images of the others. And besides; "the eternal
fire which the Father has prepared for the devil and his angels,"— they ought to show of which
of those Æons that are above it is the image; for it, too, is reckoned part of the creation.
4. If, however, they say that these things are the images of the Enthymesis of that Æon who
fell into passion, then, first of all, they will act impiously against their Mother, by declaring her to
be the first cause of evil and corruptible images. And then, again, how can those things which are
manifold, and dissimilar, and contrary in their nature, be the images of one and the same Being?
And if they say that the angels of the Pleroma are numerous, and that those things which are many
are the images of these—not in this way either will the account they give be satisfactory. For, in
the first place, they are then bound to point out differences among the angels of the Pleroma, which
are mutually opposed to each other, even as the images existing below are of a contrary nature
among themselves. And then, again, since there are many, yea, innumerable angels who surround
the Creator, as all the prophets acknowledge,—[saying, for instance,] "Ten thousand times ten
thousand stood beside Him, and many thousands of thousands ministered unto Him,"—then,
according to them, the angels of the Pleroma will have as images the angels of the Creator, and
the entire creation remains in the image of the Pleroma, but so that the thirty Æons no longer
correspond to the manifold variety of the creation.
5. Still further, if these things [below] were made after the similitude of those [above], after the
likeness of which again will those then be made? For if the Creator of the world did not form these
things directly from His own conception, but, like an architect of no ability, or a boy receiving
his first lesson, copied them from archetypes furnished by others, then whence did their Bythus
obtain the forms of that creation which He at first produced? It clearly follows that He must have
received the model from some other one who is above Him, and that one, in turn, from another.
And none the less [for these suppositions], the talk about images, as about gods, will extend to
infinity, if we do not at once fix our mind on one Artificer, and on one God, who of Himself formed
those things which have been created. Or is it really the case that, in regard to mere men, one will
things created. But things created are heterogeneous: therefore either these Æons are heterogeneous, which is contrary to theory;
or things created are homogeneous, which is contrary to fact."