Christ. In like manner the tree of the knowledge of good and evil was
a material tree, so called in view of future events; because, after
eating of it, man was to learn, by experience of the consequent
punishment, the difference between the good of obedience and the
evil of rebellion. It may also be said to signify spiritually the free-will
as some say.
Reply to Objection 5: According to Augustine (Gen. ad lit. v, 5, viii,
3), the plants were not actually produced on the third day, but in their
seminal virtues; whereas, after the work of the six days, the plants,
both of paradise and others, were actually produced. According to
other holy writers, we ought to say that all the plants were actually
produced on the third day, including the trees of paradise; and what
is said of the trees of paradise being planted after the work of the six
days is to be understood, they say, by way of recapitulation. Whence
our text reads: "The Lord God had planted a paradise of pleasure
from the beginning" (Gn. 2:8).

### ARTICLE 2. Whether paradise was a place adapted to be the

abode of man?
Objection 1: It would seem that paradise was not a place adapted to
be the abode of man. For man and angels are similarly ordered to
beatitude. But the angels from the very beginning of their existence
were made to dwell in the abode of the blessed---that is, the
empyrean heaven. Therefore the place of man's habitation should
have been there also.
Objection 2: Further, if some definite place were required for man's
abode, this would be required on the part either of the soul or of the
body. If on the part of the soul, the place would be in heaven, which
is adapted to the nature of the soul; since the desire of heaven is
implanted in all. On the part of the body, there was no need for any
other place than the one provided for other animals. Therefore
paradise was not at all adapted to be the abode of man.
Objection 3: Further, a place which contains nothing is useless. But
after sin, paradise was not occupied by man. Therefore if it were
adapted as a dwelling-place for man, it seems that God made
paradise to no purpose.
Objection 4: Further, since man is of an even temperament, a fitting
place for him should be of even temperature. But paradise was not of
an even temperature; for it is said to have been on the equator---a
situation of extreme heat, since twice in the year the sun passes
vertically over the heads of its inhabitants. Therefore paradise was
not a fit dwelling-place for man.
On the contrary, Damascene says (De Fide Orth. ii, 11): "Paradise
was a divinely ordered region, and worthy of him who was made to
God's image."
I answer that, As above stated (Question 97, Article 1), Man was
incorruptible and immortal, not because his body had a disposition
to incorruptibility, but because in his soul there was a power
preserving the body from corruption. Now the human body may be
corrupted from within or from without. From within, the body is
corrupted by the consumption of the humors, and by old age, as
above explained (Question 97, Article 4), and man was able to ward