thence, though many, perhaps, besought him; but when he learned it, then he
permitted his disciples: for he had disciples immediately.
"Then the disciples," etc. [Acts 9:25] Of this occurrence he says: "The
ethnarch of Aretas the king kept the city of the Damascenes with a garrison,
desiring to apprehend me." [2 Corinthians 11:32] But observe the Writer here,
that he does not tell the story ambitiously, and so as to show what an important
person Paul was, saying, "For they stirred up the king," and so forth: but only,
"Then the disciples took him by night, and let him down by the wall— in a
basket:" for they sent him out alone, and none with him. And it was well they
did this: the consequence being, that he showed himself to the Apostles in
Jerusalem. Now they sent him out, as bound to provide for his safety by flight:
but he did just the contrary— he leaped into the midst of those who were mad
against him. This it is to be on fire, this to be fervent indeed! From that day forth
he knew all the commands which the Apostles had heard: "Except a man take up
his cross, and follow Me." [Matthew 10:38] The very fact that he had been
slower to come than the rest made him more zealous: for "to whom much is
forgiven" [Luke 7:47] the same will love more, so that the later he came, the
more he loved: * * * and having done ten thousand wrongs, he thought he could
never do enough to cast the former deeds into the shade. "Proving" [Acts 9:22],
it says: i.e. with mildness teaching. And observe, they did not say to him, You
are he that destroyed: why are you changed? For they were ashamed: but they
said it to themselves. For he would have said to them, This very thing ought to
teach you, as in fact he does thus plead in his speech before Agrippa. Let us
imitate this, man: let us bear our souls in our hands ready to confront all dangers.
— (That he fled from Damascus) this was no cowardice: he preserved himself
for the preaching. Had he been a coward, he would not have gone to Jerusalem,
would not immediately have commenced teaching: he would have abated
somewhat of his vehemence: for he had been taught by the fate of Stephen. He
was no coward, but he was also prudent ([οἰκονομικός]) (in husbanding himself).
Wherefore he thought it no great thing to die for the Gospel's sake, unless he

should do this to great advantage: willing not even to see Christ, Whom most of
all he longed to see, while the work of his stewardship among men was not yet
complete. [Philippians 1:23-24]. Such ought to be the soul of a Christian. From
his first appearance from the very outset, the character of Paul declared itself:
nay even before this, even in the things which he did "not according to
knowledge" [Romans 10:2], it was not by man's reasoning that he was moved to
act as he did. For if, so long afterwards, he was content not to depart, much more
at the beginning of his trading voyage, when he had but just left the harbor!
Many things Christ leaves to be done by (ordinary) human wisdom, that we may
learn that (his disciples) were men, that it was not all everywhere to be done by
grace: for otherwise they would have been mere motionless logs: but in many
things they managed matters themselves.— This is not less than martyrdom—to
shrink from no suffering for the sake of the salvation of the many. Nothing so
delights God. Again will I repeat what I have often said: and I repeat it, because
I do exceedingly desire it: as Christ also did the same, when discoursing
concerning forgiveness: "When ye pray, forgive if you have anything against any
man:" [Mark 11:25] and again to Peter He said, "I say not unto you, Forgive
until seven times, but until seventy-times seven." [Matthew 18:22] And Himself
in fact forgives the transgressions against Him. So do we also, because we know
that this is the very goal of Christianity, continually discourse thereof. Nothing is
more frigid than a Christian, who cares not for the salvation of others. You can
not here plead poverty: for she that cast down the two mites, shall be your
accuser. [Luke 21:1] And Peter said, "Silver and gold have I none." [Acts 3:6]
And Paul was so poor, that he was often hungered, and wanted necessary food.
You can not plead lowness of birth: for they too were ignoble men, and of
ignoble parents. You can not allege want of education: for they too were
"unlearned men." [Acts 4:13] Even if you be a slave therefore and a runaway
slave, you can perform your part: for such was Onesimus: yet see to what Paul
calls him, and to how great honor he advances him: "that he may communicate
with me," he says, "in my bonds." [Philemon 13] You can not plead infirmity: for