"which is perishable"; and that "we remember nothing" after death of the things that we
knew in life. Thus then it is clear that no activity of the soul can continue after
death, and therefore neither can its substance continue.
Reply. The assertion that no activity can remain in the soul after its separation from the
body, we say, is incorrect: for those activities remain which are not exercised through
organs, and such are understanding and will. As for activities exercised through bodily
organs, as are the activities of the vegetative and sentient soul, they do not remain. But
we must observe that the soul separated from the body does not understand in the
same way as when united with the body: for everything acts according as it is. Now
though the being of the human soul, while united with the body, is perfect (absolutum),
not depending on the body, still the body is a sort of housing (stramentum ) to it
and subject receptive of it. Hence the proper activity of the soul, which is understanding,
while independent of the body in this that it is not exercised through any bodily organ,
nevertheless finds in the body its object, which is the phantasm. Hence, so long as
the soul is in the body, it cannot understand without a phantasm, nor remember
except by the cogitative and reminiscent faculty whereby phantasms are shaped and
made available (Chap.LXXIII); and therefore this method of understanding and
remembering has to be laid aside when the body is laid aside. But the being of the
departed soul belongs to it alone without the body: hence its intellectual activity
will not be accomplished by regard to such objects as phantasms existing in bodily
organs, but it will understand by itself after the manner of those intelligences that subsist
totally apart from bodies (Chapp. XCI-CI), from which superior beings it will be able to
receive more abundant influence in order to more perfect understanding.
We may see some indication of this even in living men. When the soul is hampered by
preoccupations about its body, it is less disposed to understand higher things. Hence
the virtue of temperance, withdrawing the soul from bodily delights, helps especially to
make men apt to understand. In sleep again, when men are not using their bodily
senses, they have some perception of things to come, impressed upon them by
superior beings, and attain to facts that transcend the measure of human reasonings.

are indelibly received in the potential intellect (Chap.LXXIV). As regards other
activities of the soul, such as love, joy, and the like, we must beware of a double
meaning of the terms: sometimes they mean passions, or emotions, which are activities
of the sensitive appetite, concupiscible or irascible, and as such they cannot
remain in the soul after death, as Aristotle shows: sometimes they mean a simple
act of will without passion, as Aristotle says that "The joy of God is one, everlasting, and
absolute," and that "In the contemplation of wisdom there is admirable delight"; and
again he distinguishes the love of friendship from the love of passion. But as the
will is a power that uses no bodily organ, as neither does the understanding, it is evident
that such acts, inasmuch as they are acts of will, may remain in the departed soul.