they may glory in your flesh," as if they had disciples, and were teachers. And
what is the proof of this? "For not even they themselves," he says, "keep the
Law;" even if they did keep it, they would incur grave censure, but now their
very purpose is corrupt.
Ver. 14. "But far be it from me to glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus
Christ."
Truly this symbol is thought despicable; but it is so in the world's
reckoning, and among men; in Heaven and among the faithful it is the highest
glory. Poverty too is despicable, but it is our boast; and to be cheaply thought of
by the public is a matter of laughter to them, but we are elated by it. So too is the
Cross our boast. He does not say, "I boast not," nor, "I will not boast," but, "Far
be it from me that I should," as if he abominated it as absurd, and invoked the aid
of God in order to his success therein. And what is the boast of the Cross? That
Christ for my sake took on Him the form of a slave, and bore His sufferings for
me the slave, the enemy, the unfeeling one; yea He so loved me as to give
Himself up to a curse for me. What can be comparable to this! If servants who
only receive praise from their masters, to whom they are akin by nature, are
elated thereby, how must we not boast when the Master who is very God is not
ashamed of the Cross which was endured for us. Let us then not be ashamed of
His unspeakable tenderness; He was not ashamed of being crucified for your
sake, and will you be ashamed to confess His infinite solicitude? It is as if a
prisoner who had not been ashamed of his King, should, after that King had
come to the prison and himself loosed the chains, become ashamed of him on
that account. Yet this would be the height of madness, for this very fact would be
a special ground for boasting.
Ver. 14. "Through which the world has been crucified unto me, and I unto
the world."
What he here calls the world is not the heaven nor the earth, but the affairs
of life, the praise of men, retinues, glory, wealth, and all such things as have a
show of splendor. To me these things are dead. Such an one it behooves a

Christian to be, and always to use this language. Nor was he content with the
former putting to death, but added another, saying, "and I unto the world," thus
implying a double putting to death, and saying, They are dead to me, and I to
them, neither can they captivate and overcome me, for they are dead once for all,
nor can I desire them, for I too am dead to them. Nothing can be more blessed
than this putting to death, for it is the foundation of the blessed life.
Ver. 15, 16. "For neither is circumcision any thing, nor uncircumcision, but
a new creature. And as many as shall walk by this rule, peace be upon them, and
mercy, and upon the Israel of God."
Observe the power of the Cross, to what a pitch it has raised him! not only
has it put to death for him all mundane affairs, but has set him far above the Old
Dispensation. What can be comparable to this power? For the Cross has
persuaded him, who was willing to be slain and to slay others for the sake of
circumcision, to leave it on a level with uncircumcision, and to seek for things
strange and marvellous and above the heavens. This our rule of life he calls "a
new creature," both on account of what is past, and of what is to come; of what
is past, because our soul, which had grown old with the oldness of sin, has been
all at once renewed by baptism, as if it had been created again. Wherefore we
require a new and heavenly rule of life. And of things to come, because both the
heaven and the earth, and all the creation, shall with our bodies be translated into
incorruption. Tell me not then, he says, of circumcision, which now avails
nothing; (for how shall it appear, when all things have undergone such a
change?) but seek the new things of grace. For they who pursue these things
shall enjoy peace and amity, and may properly be called by the name of "Israel."
While they who hold contrary sentiments, although they be descended from him
(Israel) and bear his appellation, have yet fallen away from all these things, both
the relationship and the name itself. But it is in their power to be true Israelites,
who keep this rule, who desist from the old ways, and follow after grace.
Ver. 17. "From henceforth let no man trouble me."
This he says not as though he were wearied or overpowered; he who chose