ignorant of them Himself? What reasonable man would say that? Do you see
that we must not attend merely to the words? For this is not the only perplexing
passage, but what follows is more perplexing. For what does He say? "Father if
it be possible let this cup pass from me." Here he will be found to speak not only
as if ignorant, but as if deprecating the cross: For this is what He says. "If it be
permissible let me not be subjected to crucifixion and death." And yet when
Peter, the leader of the apostles, said this to Him, "Be it far from you Lord, this
shall not happen unto You," He rebuked him so severely as to say; "get you
behind me Satan, you are an offense unto me, for you savour not the things
which be of God, but those which be of men:" [Matthew 16:22-23] although a
short time before he had pronounced him blessed. But to escape crucifixion
seemed to Him so monstrous a thing, that him who had received the revelation
from the Father, him whom He had pronounced blessed, him who had received
the keys of Heaven, He called Satan, and an offense, and accused him of not
savouring the things which be of God because he said to Him, "Be it far from
you Lord, this shall never be unto You"— namely crucifixion. He then who thus
vituperated the disciple, and poured such an invective upon him as actually to
call him Satan (after having bestowed such great praise on him), because he said
"avoid crucifixion," how could He desire not to be crucified? And how after
these things when drawing the picture of the good shepherd could He declare
this to be the special proof of his virtue, that he should be sacrificed for the sake
of the sheep, thus saying, "I am the good shepherd; the good shepherd lays down
his life for the sheep?" [John 10:11] Nor did He even stop there, but also added,
"but he that is an hireling and not the shepherd sees the wolf coming and leaves
the sheep, and flees." [John 10:12] If then it is the sign of the good shepherd to
sacrifice himself, and of the hireling to be unwilling to undergo this, how can He
who calls Himself the good shepherd beseech that he may not be sacrificed? And
how could He say "I lay down my life of myself"? For if you lay down your life
of yourself, how can you beseech another that you may not lay it down? And
how is it that Paul marvels at Him on account of this declaration, saying "Who

being in the form of God counted it not a prize to be on an equality with God,
but emptied Himself taking the form of a servant, being made in the likeness of
men, and being found in fashion as a man he humbled himself, becoming
obedient even unto death, yea, the death of the cross." [Philippians 2:6-8] And
He Himself again speaks in this wise, "For this cause does my Father love me,
because I lay down my life that I may take it again." [John 10:17] For if He does
not desire to lay it down, but deprecates the act, and beseeches the Father, how is
it that He is loved on this account? For love is of those who are like minded. And
how does Paul say again "Love one another even as Christ also loved us and
gave Himself for us?" [Ephesians 5:2] And Christ Himself when He was about to
be crucified said "Father, the hour has come: glorify your Son," [John 17:1]
speaking of the cross as glory: and how then does He deprecate it here when He
urges it there? For that the cross is glory listen to what the evangelist says "the
Holy Ghost was not yet given, because Jesus was not yet glorified." [John 7:39]
Now the hearing of this expression is "grace was not yet given because the
enmity towards men was not yet destroyed by reason that the cross had not yet
done its work." For the cross destroyed the enmity of God towards man, brought
about the reconciliation, made the earth Heaven, associated men with angels,
pulled down the citadel of death, unstrung the force of the devil, extinguished
the power of sin, delivered the world from error, brought back the truth, expelled
the Demons, destroyed temples, overturned altars, suppressed the sacrificial
offering, implanted virtue, founded the Churches. The cross is the will of the
Father, the glory of the Son, the rejoicing of the Spirit, the boast of Paul, "for,"
he says, "God forbid that I should boast save in the cross of our Lord Jesus
Christ." [Galatians 6:14] The cross is that which is brighter than the sun, more
brilliant than the sunbeam: for when the sun is darkened then the cross shines
brightly: and the sun is darkened not because it is extinguished, but because it is
overpowered by the brilliancy of the cross. The cross has broken our bond, it has
made the prison of death ineffectual, it is the demonstration of the love of God.
"For God so loved the world that He gave His only-begotten Son, that every one