February 20: Later I felt strengthened in what I had done by the knowledge that the earlier spirit had been evil, the one that had wanted to make me have doubts and feel anger with the blessed Trinity... It is ironical that Ignatius, of all people, should have been accused of rigidity in his spirituality. The words of the Exercises on the differentiation of spirits (also those on the control of scruples) only begin to make sense if

## The framework of the Exercises

Once the Exercises have been discovered as a key to the understanding of the Diary, they continue to furnish innumerable clarifications. It is remarkable how often in these pages Ignatius seems to be thinking in terms of himself placed before the whole celestial court. This is the grandiose 'composition of place' (the prelude before meditation when the exercitant composes himself by thinking of some scene related to the topic he is about to consider) provided by the saint for two of the key meditations in the Exercises, the 'Couples' and the 'Contemplation to obtain love'. It seems to have been the way Ignatius imagined an offering or oblation to be most fittingly made. It is perhaps a relic of his knightly training in a spanish nobleman's household. Also provided for solemn occasions in the Exercises is the technique of the 'triple colloquy', which also appears in the Diary. Instead of addressing himself immediately to God the Father, Ignatius intercedes first with our Lady, and sometimes with other saints even before he approaches her; then, with her assistance, he speaks to God the Son, in whose company he finally approaches the Creator himself. A typical example is the entry for February 18: A little later I wondered where I should begin, and it occurred to me that it might be with all the saints, putting my cause in their hands, so that they might pray to our Lady and her Son to be intercessors on my behalf before the blessed Trinity... I set about repeating the past offerings,.., beseeching and nominating as intercessors on my behalf the angels, the saints of the Old Law, the apostles and disciples, and all the saints.., that they might plead to our Lady and her Son. It is often a problem for him to decide how he should begin: again, evidence that these techniques of prayer were not mechanical rules of thumb, but general indications suggesting possible paths for the soul in its life of prayer and contact with God. The 'petition' prelude, which also appears at the head of each meditation in the Exercises, gains full life and vigour when it is seen in action in the Diary: a dominant note of supplication, sometimes strident in its intensity, begging light on a specific problem, yet full of a strength which expands naturally without artificial pressure. In the same way, many of the brief notes scattered through the Exercises find full expression in the pages of the 1~ Cf P. Leturia, El gentilhombre Inigo L6pez de Loyola, and F. Gonz~lez Olmedo, Introduccidn a la Vida de San Ignacio de Loyola, for the courtly ideals in Ignatius' development. Diary. The curious third annotation, which recommends a different mental attitude when the 'will' is brought into play from that required when only the 'understanding' is active, is typical. Here, special reverence is required: the reason lies in the object, the holy, towards which the will is turned in all spiritual exercises. And in the Diary, whereas Ignatius is prepared to adopt a practical, business-like attitude in his considerations of pros and cons, any turning of attention to God is accompanied by that insistent repetition of the word devocidn. In the Exercises, great care is taken in the explanation of the various 'examinations of conscience'. There is also a perplexing readiness for the 'repetition' of exercises; no sooner has a meditation been finished before one is examining one's conduct and progress in the course of that meditation, and then repeating it! Unless the director is alive to the type of self-awareness required, and unless he has some experience of the tempo at which Ignatius was accustomed to conduct his meditations, he can easily drive an exercitant to the verge of break-down. In the Diary, it is clear that the amount of intellectual cogitation involved in the saint's meditation is minimal: it is rare, and worthy of note, to be struck by a new idea. When an idea does come, as for example on February I i, I received a new insight, viz that the Son first sent his apostles to preach in poverty, and later the holy Spirit... confirmed them, and thus, since both Father and Son sent the holy Spirit, all three persons approved that manner of sending, the reaction is one of intense joy, and the digestion of the new thought, that sentire ac gustare res interne of the second annotation, is fills many hours. As he remarks elsewhere: I shall settle down at the point where I have found what I want, without any anxiety about moving on, urttil I am satisfied? 9 Within the Exercises it is necessary to distinguish the practical - one might say 'technical' - instructions, from the indications one finds of basic ideals and principles. The former, because of their complexity and originality, tend to attract more attention and require more protracted explanation. But the second group is the animating element within the body of the Exercises; and it is instructive to see how in the Diary they burst forth in full vigour. The ideas themselves are of marvellous simplicity and closely inter-connected: the primary importance of the glory of God, to the fulfilment of whose will all personal inclinations and preferences must be logically, but still more affectively, subordinated: I realized that it was not I who should stipulate the time for finishing and expect to receive a visitation then, but that I should continue until His Divine Majesty thought fit, and chose to grant such a visitation. March 2. is Exx 2.