4. It must be said: Although anything equivocal is reducible to what is univocal, it is not
necessary that equivocal generation should be reduced to univocal generation, but that it should
be reduced to a generator which is univocal in itself. Now, in natural things we see that equivocal
generations are prior to univocal because equivocal causes have an influx extending to the total
species, whereas univocal causes have not, their influence extending only to one individual; and
thus they are quasi-instruments of equivocal causes, just as inferior bodies are of superior.

5. It is answered: It is not possible for man to have a joyous life without companionship because
he has not within himself that which makes him all-sufficient; whereas, for the same reason,
animals that are self-sufficient require no association with others for preservation of life, but are
solitaries. God, however, is supremely self-sufficient; wherefore, even though there were no
distinction of persons, infinite joy would still be His.

6. It may be said: In God, intellect and object of intellect are the same; and therefore, from the fact
that He is intelligent, it need not be supposed that in Him there is any concept really distinct from
Himself, as is the case with us: Trinity of persons, however, requires real distinction.

7. It may be answered: Understanding of this passage is clarified by that which follows:
"Although they (these truths) are of such kind as to escape all our endeavors." All things that are
necessary in themselves, therefore, are either known in themselves or are knowable through
other things: yet not in such a way that they are necessarily apparent to us. Therefore we cannot,
even as a result of all our industry, discover necessary arguments of reason sufficient to prove all
necessary truths.

8. It may be said: The position of the Platonists affords no argument as regards the truth of this
matter, even though it appears to do so according to words. For they did not hold that this Mind
was of the same essence with God the Father, but that it was another substance proceeding from
the first, and separate; and they also supposed that there was a third substance, the Soul-of-the-
World, as is evidenced by Macrobius. And because all these separate substances they called
"gods," it came about that they called upon or spoke of three gods, as Augustine says in De

civitate Dei (chap. 10); because they did not hold that there was anything like to the Holy Ghost,
as there was to the Father and the Son. For the Soulof-the-World is not the nexus of the other
two, according to their doctrine, as is the Holy Spirit between the Father and the Son; therefore
they are said to have lacked the third sign, that is, knowledge of the Third Person. Or it may be
said, as the more common explanation has it, that they knew two persons according to the things
appropriated to power and wisdom, but not according to the things proper to them. But
goodness, which is appropriated to the Holy Spirit especially, has as its effects things which they
did not know.