this argument as a reason why all the wicked are not chastened here, but another
also not less than this. Of what kind then is this? That if God brought upon all,
the chastenings which their sins deserved, our race would have been carried off,
and would have failed to come down to posterity. And in order that you may
learn that this is true, hear the prophet saying "If Thou observedst iniquity O
Lord, who shall stand?" And if it seems good to you to investigate this saying,
leaving the accurate enquiry into the life of each, alone: (For it is not possible
even to know all that has been accomplished by each man) let us bring forward
those sins which all, without contradiction, commit: and from these it will be
plain and manifest to us, that if we were chastened for each of our sins, we
should long ago have perished. He who has called his brother fool, "is liable to
the hell of fire" saith He. Is there then any one of us who has never sinned this
sin? What then? Ought he to be straightway carried off? Therefore we should
have been all carried off and would have disappeared, long ago, indeed very long
ago. Again he who swears, says he, even if he fulfil his oath, does the works of
the wicked one. Who is there then, who has not sworn? Yea rather who is there
who has never sworn falsely? He who looks on a woman, says he, with unchaste
eyes, is wholly an adulterer, and of this sin any one would find many guilty.
When then these acknowledged sins are such and so insufferable, and each of
these of itself brings upon us inevitable chastisement, if we were to reckon up
the secret sins committed by us, then we shall see especially that the providence
of God does not bring upon us punishment for each sin. So that when you see
anyone rapacious, covetous, and not chastened, then do you unfold your own
conscience; reckon up your own life, go over the sins which have been
committed and you shall learn rightly that in your own case first, it is not
expedient to be chastened for each of your sins: for on this account the majority
make reckless utterances, since they do not look on their own case before that of
others, but we all leaving our own alone, examine that of the rest. But let us no
longer do this, but the reverse, and if you see any righteous man chastened,
remember Job: for if any one be righteous, he will not be more righteous than

that man, nor within a small distance of approaching him. And if he suffer
countless ills, he has not yet suffered so much, as that man.
8. Taking this then into your mind, cease charging the master; learning that
it is not by way of deserting him does God let such an one suffer ill, but through
desire to crown him, and make him more distinguished. And if you see a sinner
punished, remember the paralytic who passed thirty eight years on his bed. For
that that man was delivered over then to that disease through sin, hear Christ
saying "Behold you are made whole; sin no more lest a worse thing happen to
you." For either when we are chastened, we pay the penalty of our sins, or else
we receive the occasion of crowning if, when we live in rectitude, we suffer ill.
So that whether we live in righteousness, or in sins, chastening is a useful thing
for us, sometimes making us more distinguished, sometimes rendering us more
self-controlled, and lightening our punishment to come for us. For that it is
possible that one chastened here, and bearing it thankfully should experience
milder punishment there hear St. Paul saying "For this reason many are weak
and sickly, and some sleep. For if we judged ourselves, we should not be judged.
But when we are judged we are corrected by the Lord, that we should not be
condemned with the world." Knowing all these things therefore, Let us both
moralize in this way on the providence of God, and stop the mouths of the
gainsayers. And if any of the events which happen pass our understanding, let us
not from this consider that our affairs are not governed by providence, but
perceiving His providence in part, in things incomprehensible let us yield to the
unsearchableness of His wisdom. For if it is not possible for one not conversant
with it to understand a man's art, much rather is it impossible for the human
understanding to comprehend the infinity of the providence of God. "For his
judgments are unsearchable and his ways past finding out." But nevertheless
from small portions we gain a clear and manifest faith about the whole, we give
thanks to him for all that happens. For there is even another consideration that
cannot be contradicted, for those who wish to moralize about the providence of
God. For we would ask the gainsayers, is there then a God? And if they should