1 Corinthians 4:10
"We are fools for Christ's sake, but you are wise in Christ."
Again, this also he spoke in a way to abash them; implying that it is
impossible for these contraries to agree, neither can things so distant from one
another concur. "For how can it be," says he, "that you should be wise, but we
fools in the things relating to Christ?" That is: the one sort beaten and despised
and dishonored and esteemed as nothing; the others enjoying honor and looked
up to by many as a wise and prudent kind of people; it gives him occasion to
speak thus: as if he had said, "How can it be that they who preach such things
should be looked upon as practically engaged in their contraries?"
"We are weak, but you are strong." That is, we are driven about and
persecuted; but you enjoy security and are much waited upon; howbeit the nature
of the Gospel endures it not.
"We are despised, but you are honorable." Here he sets himself against the
noble and those who plumed themselves upon external advantages.
"Even unto this present hour we both hunger, and thirst, and are naked, and
are buffeted, and have no certain dwelling place; and we toil, working with our
own hands." That is, "It is not an old story that I am telling but just what the very
time present bears me witness of: that of human things we take no account nor
yet of any outward pomp; but we look unto God only." Which thing we too have
need to practice in every place. For not only are angels looking on, but even
more than they He that presides over the spectacle.
7. Let us not then desire any others to applaud us. For this is to insult Him;
hastening by Him, as if insufficient to admire us, we make the best of our way to
our fellow servants. For just as they who contend in a small theatre seek a large
one, as if this were insufficient for their display; so also do they, who contending
in the sight of God afterwards seek the applause of men; giving up the greater

praise and eager for the less, they draw upon themselves severe punishment.
What but this has turned every thing upside down? This puts the whole world
into confusion, that we do all things with an eye to men, and even for our good
things, we esteem it nothing to have God as an admirer, but seek the approbation
which comes from our fellow-servants: and for the contrary things again,
despising Him we fear men. And yet surely they shall stand with us before that
tribunal, doing us no good. But God whom we despise now shall Himself pass
the sentence upon us.
But yet, though we know these things, we still gape after men, which is the
first of sins. Thus were a man looking on no one would choose to commit
fornication; but even though he be ten thousand times on fire with that plague,
the tyranny of the passion is conquered by his reverence for men. But in God's
sight men not only commit adultery and fornication; but other things also much
more dreadful many have dared and still dare to do. This then alone, is it not
enough to bring down from above ten thousand thunderbolts? Adulteries, did I
say, and fornications? Nay, things even far less than these we fear to do before
men: but in God's sight we fear no longer. From hence, in fact, all the world's
evils have originated; because in things really bad we reverence not God but
men.
On this account, you see, both things which are truly good, not accounted
such by the generality, become objects of our aversion, we not investigating the
nature of the things, but having respect unto the opinion of the many: and again,
in the case of evil things, acting on this same principle. Certain things therefore
not really good, but seeming fair unto the many, we pursue, as goods, through
the same habit. So that on either side we go to destruction.
8. Perhaps many may find this remark somewhat obscure. Wherefore we
must express it more clearly. When we commit uncleanness, (for we must begin
from the instances alleged,) we fear men more than God. When therefore we
have thus subjected ourselves unto them and made them lords over us; there are
many other things also which seem unto these our lords to be evil, not being