SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.13, C.2.

from the blasphemy against the Son of Man (Mt. 12:32), for Christ did
certain things in respect of His human nature, by eating, drinking,
and such like actions, while He did others in respect of His Godhead,
by casting out devils, raising the dead, and the like: which things He
did both by the power of His own Godhead and by the operation of
the Holy Ghost, of Whom He was full, according to his human nature.
Now the Jews began by speaking blasphemy against the Son of Man,
when they said (Mt. 11:19) that He was "a glutton . . . a wine drinker,"
and a "friend of publicans": but afterwards they blasphemed against
the Holy Ghost, when they ascribed to the prince of devils those
works which Christ did by the power of His own Divine Nature and
by the operation of the Holy Ghost.
Augustine, however (De Verb. Dom., Serm. lxxi), says that
blasphemy or the sin against the Holy Ghost, is final impenitence
when, namely, a man perseveres in mortal sin until death, and that it
is not confined to utterance by word of mouth, but extends to words
in thought and deed, not to one word only, but to many. Now this
word, in this sense, is said to be uttered against the Holy Ghost,
because it is contrary to the remission of sins, which is the work of
the Holy Ghost, Who is the charity both of the Father and of the Son.
Nor did Our Lord say this to the Jews, as though they had sinned
against the Holy Ghost, since they were not yet guilty of final
impenitence, but He warned them, lest by similar utterances they
should come to sin against the Holy Ghost: and it is in this sense
that we are to understand Mark 3:29,30, where after Our Lord had
said: "But he that shall blaspheme against the Holy Ghost," etc. the
Evangelist adds, "because they said: He hath an unclean spirit."
But others understand it differently, and say that the sin of
blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, is a sin committed against that
good which is appropriated to the Holy Ghost: because goodness is
appropriated to the Holy Ghost, just a power is appropriated to the
Father, and wisdom to the Son. Hence they say that when a man sins
through weakness, it is a sin "against the Father"; that when he sins
through ignorance, it is a sin "against the Son"; and that when he
sins through certain malice, i.e. through the very choosing of evil, as
explained above (FS, Question 78, Articles 1,3), it is a sin "against
the Holy Ghost."
Now this may happen in two ways. First by reason of the very
inclination of a vicious habit which we call malice, and, in this way,
to sin through malice is not the same as to sin against the Holy

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.13, C.2.

Ghost. In another way it happens that by reason of contempt, that
which might have prevented the choosing of evil, is rejected or
removed; thus hope is removed by despair, and fear by presumption,
and so on, as we shall explain further on (Questions 20,21). Now all
these things which prevent the choosing of sin are effects of the
Holy Ghost in us; so that, in this sense, to sin through malice is to
sin against the Holy Ghost.
Reply to Objection 1: Just as the confession of faith consists in a
protestation not only of words but also of deeds, so blasphemy
against the Holy Ghost can be uttered in word, thought and deed.
Reply to Objection 2: According to the third interpretation,
blasphemy against the Holy Ghost is condivided with blasphemy
against the Son of Man, forasmuch as He is also the Son of God, i.e.
the "power of God and the wisdom of God" (1 Cor. 1:24). Wherefore,
in this sense, the sin against the Son of Man will be that which is
committed through ignorance, or through weakness.
Reply to Objection 3: Sin committed through certain malice, in so far
as it results from the inclination of a habit, is not a special sin, but a
general condition of sin: whereas, in so far as it results from a
special contempt of an effect of the Holy Ghost in us, it has the
character of a special sin. According to this interpretation the sin
against the Holy Ghost is a special kind of sin, as also according to
the first interpretation: whereas according to the second, it is not a
species of sin, because final impenitence may be a circumstance of
any kind of sin.