## Homily 14 on Second Corinthians

2 Corinthians 7:2-4
Open your hearts to us: we wronged no man, we corrupted no man, we took
advantage of no man. I say it not to condemn you; for l have said before, [as I
have also declared above] , that you are in our hearts to die together and live
together.
Again he raises the discourse about love, mitigating the harshness of his
rebuke. For since he had convicted and reproached them as being beloved
indeed, yet not loving in an equal degree, but breaking away from his love and
mixing up with other pestilent fellows; again he softens the vehemence of his
rebuke, saying, "Make room for us," that is, "love us;" and prays to receive a
favor involving no burden, and advantaging them that confer above them that
receive it. And he said not, 'love,' but with a stronger appeal to their pity , "make
room for." 'Who expelled us?' says he: 'Who cast us out of your hearts? How
come we to be straitened in you?' for since he said above, "You are straitened in
your affections;" here declaring it more clearly, he said, "make room for us:" in
this way also again winning them to himself. For nothing does so produce love
as for the beloved to know that he that loves him exceedingly desires his love.
"We wronged no man." See how again he does not mention the benefits
[done by him], but frames his speech in another way, so as to be both less
offensive and more cutting. And at the same time he also alludes to the false
apostles, saying, "We wronged no man, we corrupted no man, we defrauded no
man."
What is "we corrupted?" That is, we beguiled no man; as he says elsewhere
also. "Lest by any means, as the serpent beguiled Eve, so your minds should be
corrupted." [2 Corinthians 11:3]

"We defrauded no man;" we plundered, plotted against no man. And he for
the present forbears to say, 'we benefited you in such and such ways;' but
framing his language so as more to shame them, "We wronged no man," he says;
as much as saying, 'Even had we in no wise benefited you, not even so ought ye
to turn away from us; for you have nothing to lay to our charge, either small or
great.' Then, for he felt the heaviness of his rebuke, he tempers it again. And he
was neither silent altogether, for so he would not have aroused them; nor yet did
he let the harshness of his language go unmodified, for so he would have
wounded them too much. And what says he?
2 Corinthians 7:3. "I say it not to condemn you."
How is this evident? "For I have said before," he adds, "that you are in our
hearts to die and live with you." This is the greatest affection, when even though
treated with contempt, he chooses both to die and live with them. 'For neither are
you merely in our hearts,' he says, 'but in such sort as I said. For it is possible
both to love and to shun dangers, but we do not thus.' And behold here also
wisdom unspeakable. For he spoke not of what had been done for them, that he
might not seem to be again reproaching them, but he promises for the future. 'For
should it chance,' says he, 'that danger should invade, for your sakes I am ready
to suffer every thing; and neither death nor life seems anything to me in itself,
but in whichever ye be, that is to me more desirable, both death than life and life
than death.' Howbeit, dying indeed is manifestly a proof of love; but living, who
is there that would not choose, even of those who are not friends? Why then does
the Apostle mention it as something great? Because it is even exceeding great.
For numbers indeed sympathize with their friends when they are in misfortune,
but when they are in honor rejoice not with, but envy, them. 'But not so we; but
whether ye be in calamity, we are not afraid to share your ill fortune; or whether
ye be prosperous, we are not wounded with envy.'
2. Then after he had continually repeated these things, saying, "You are not
straitened in us;" and, "You are straitened in your own affections;" and, "make
room for us;" and, "Be also enlarged;" and, "We wronged no man;" and all these