22. God’s word is unpredictable in its power. The Gospel speaks of a seed which, once sown,
grows by itself, even as the farmer sleeps (Mk 4:26-29). The Church has to accept this unruly
freedom of the word, which accomplishes what it wills in ways that surpass our calculations and
ways of thinking.

23. The Church’s closeness to Jesus is part of a common journey; “communion and mission are
profoundly interconnected”. In fidelity to the example of the Master, it is vitally important for the
Church today to go forth and preach the Gospel to all: to all places, on all occasions, without
hesitation, reluctance or fear. The joy of the Gospel is for all people: no one can be excluded. That
is what the angel proclaimed to the shepherds in Bethlehem: “Be not afraid; for behold, I bring you
good news of a great joy which will come to all the people (Lk 2:10). The Book of Revelation
speaks of “an eternal Gospel to proclaim to those who dwell on earth, to every nation and tongue

and tribe and people” (Rev 14:6).

Taking the first step, being involved and supportive, bearing fruit and rejoicing

24. The Church which “goes forth” is a community of missionary disciples who take the first step,
who are involved and supportive, who bear fruit and rejoice. An evangelizing community knows
that the Lord has taken the initiative, he has loved us first (cf. 1 Jn 4:19), and therefore we can
move forward, boldly take the initiative, go out to others, seek those who have fallen away, stand
at the crossroads and welcome the outcast. Such a community has an endless desire to show
mercy, the fruit of its own experience of the power of the Father’s infinite mercy. Let us try a little
harder to take the first step and to become involved. Jesus washed the feet of his disciples. The
Lord gets involved and he involves his own, as he kneels to wash their feet. He tells his disciples:
“You will be blessed if you do this” (Jn 13:17). An evangelizing community gets involved by word
and deed in people’s daily lives; it bridges distances, it is willing to abase itself if necessary, and it
embraces human life, touching the suffering flesh of Christ in others. Evangelizers thus take on the
“smell of the sheep” and the sheep are willing to hear their voice. An evangelizing community is
also supportive, standing by people at every step of the way, no matter how difficult or lengthy this
may prove to be. It is familiar with patient expectation and apostolic endurance. Evangelization
consists mostly of patience and disregard for constraints of time. Faithful to the Lord’s gift, it also
bears fruit. An evangelizing community is always concerned with fruit, because the Lord wants her
to be fruitful. It cares for the grain and does not grow impatient at the weeds. The sower, when he
sees weeds sprouting among the grain does not grumble or overreact. He or she finds a way to let
the word take flesh in a particular situation and bear fruits of new life, however imperfect or
incomplete these may appear. The disciple is ready to put his or her whole life on the line, even to
accepting martyrdom, in bearing witness to Jesus Christ, yet the goal is not to make enemies but
to see God’s word accepted and its capacity for liberation and renewal revealed. Finally an
evangelizing community is filled with joy; it knows how to rejoice always. It celebrates every small
victory, every step forward in the work of evangelization. Evangelization with joy becomes beauty
in the liturgy, as part of our daily concern to spread goodness. The Church evangelizes and is
herself evangelized through the beauty of the liturgy, which is both a celebration of the task of
evangelization and the source of her renewed self-giving.