by one understands many things, and that not only according to
what they are in themselves, but also according as they are
understood, and this is to understand the several types of things. In
the same way, an architect is said to understand a house, when he
understands the form of the house in matter. But if he understands
the form of a house, as devised by himself, from the fact that he
understands that he understands it, he thereby understands the type
or idea of the house. Now not only does God understand many
things by His essence, but He also understands that He understands
many things by His essence. And this means that He understands
the several types of things; or that many ideas are in His intellect as
understood by Him.
Reply to Objection 3: Such relations, whereby ideas are multiplied,
are caused not by the things themselves, but by the divine intellect
comparing its own essence with these things.
Reply to Objection 4: Relations multiplying ideas do not exist in
created things, but in God. Yet they are not real relations, such as
those whereby the Persons are distinguished, but relations
understood by God.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether there are ideas of all things that God

knows?
Objection 1: It seems that there are not ideas in God of all things that
He knows. For the idea of evil is not in God; since it would follow
that evil was in Him. But evil things are known by God. Therefore
there are not ideas of all things that God knows.
Objection 2: Further, God knows things that neither are, nor will be,
nor have been, as has been said above (Article 9). But of such things
there are no ideas, since, as Dionysius says (Div. Nom. v): "Acts of
the divine will are the determining and effective types of things."
Therefore there are not in God ideas of all things known by Him.
Objection 3: Further, God knows primary matter, of which there can
be no idea, since it has no form. Hence the same conclusion.
Objection 4: Further, it is certain that God knows not only species,
but also genera, singulars, and accidents. But there are not ideas of
these, according to Plato's teaching, who first taught ideas, as
Augustine says (Octog. Tri. Quaest. qu. xlvi). Therefore there are not
ideas in God of all things known by Him.
On the contrary, Ideas are types existing in the divine mind, as is
clear from Augustine (Octog. Tri. Quaest. qu. xlvi). But God has the
proper types of all things that He knows; and therefore He has ideas
of all things known by Him.
I answer that, As ideas, according to Plato, are principles of the
knowledge of things and of their generation, an idea has this twofold
office, as it exists in the mind of God. So far as the idea is the
principle of the making of things, it may be called an "exemplar," and
belongs to practical knowledge. But so far as it is a principle of
knowledge, it is properly called a "type," and may belong to
speculative knowledge also. As an exemplar, therefore, it has
respect to everything made by God in any period of time; whereas as
a principle of knowledge it has respect to all things known by God,
even though they never come to be in time; and to all things that He
knows according to their proper type, in so far as they are known by
Him in a speculative manner.