THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.80, C.8.

Lord's table unworthily.
Yet by no means should an unconsecrated host be given in place of
a consecrated one; because the priest by so doing, so far as he is
concerned, makes others, either the bystanders or the communicant,
commit idolatry by believing that it is a consecrated host; because,
as Augustine says on Ps. 98:5: "Let no one eat Christ's flesh, except
he first adore it." Hence in the Decretals (Extra, De Celeb. Miss., Ch.
De Homine) it is said: "Although he who reputes himself unworthy of
the Sacrament, through consciousness of his sin, sins gravely, if he
receive; still he seems to offend more deeply who deceitfully has
presumed to simulate it."
Reply to Objection 3: Those decrees were abolished by contrary
enactments of Roman Pontiffs: because Pope Stephen V writes as
follows: "The Sacred Canons do not allow of a confession being
extorted from any person by trial made by burning iron or boiling
water; it belongs to our government to judge of public crimes
committed, and that by means of confession made spontaneously,
or by proof of witnesses: but private and unknown crimes are to be
left to Him Who alone knows the hearts of the sons of men." And the
same is found in the Decretals (Extra, De Purgationibus, Ch. Ex
tuarum). Because in all such practices there seems to be a tempting
of God; hence such things cannot be done without sin. And it would
seem graver still if anyone were to incur judgment of death through
this sacrament, which was instituted as a means of salvation.
Consequently, the body of Christ should never be given to anyone
suspected of crime, as by way of examination.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.80, C.9.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether the seminal loss that occurs during sleep

hinders anyone from receiving this sacrament?
Objection 1: It seems that seminal loss does not hinder anyone from
receiving the body of Christ: because no one is prevented from
receiving the body of Christ except on account of sin. But seminal
loss happens without sin: for Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. xii) that
"the same image that comes into the mind of a speaker may present
itself to the mind of the sleeper, so that the latter be unable to
distinguish the image from the reality, and is moved carnally and
with the result that usually follows such motions; and there is as
little sin in this as there is in speaking and therefore thinking about
such things." Consequently these motions do not prevent one from
receiving this sacrament.
Objection 2: Further, Gregory says in a Letter to Augustine, Bishop
of the English (Regist. xi): "Those who pay the debt of marriage not
from lust, but from desire to have children, should be left to their
own judgment, as to whether they should enter the church and
receive the mystery of our Lord's body, after such intercourse:
because they ought not to be forbidden from receiving it, since they
have passed through the fire unscorched."
From this it is evident that seminal loss even of one awake, if it be
without sin, is no hindrance to receiving the body of Christ.
Consequently, much less is it in the case of one asleep.
Objection 3: Further, these movements of the flesh seem to bring
with them only bodily uncleanness. But there are other bodily
defilements which according to the Law forbade entrance into the
holy places, yet which under the New Law do not prevent receiving
this sacrament: as, for instance, in the case of a woman after childbirth, or in her periods, or suffering from issue of blood, as Gregory
writes to Augustine, Bishop of the English (Regist. xi). Therefore it
seems that neither do these movements of the flesh hinder a man
from receiving this sacrament.
Objection 4: Further, venial sin is no hindrance to receiving the
sacrament, nor is mortal sin after repentance. But even supposing
that seminal loss arises from some foregoing sin, whether of
intemperance, or of bad thoughts, for the most part such sin is