calamity; but when he tells them what more there is (to come) of the calamity,
and then predicts the good, then he is acceptable. Therefore he attacks them then
first, when "all hope that they should be saved was taken away:" that none may
say, Nothing has come of it. And their fear also bears witness. Moreover, the
place is a trying one, for it was in the Adriatic, and then their long abstinence.
They were in the midst of death. It was now the fourteenth day that they were
going without food, having taken nothing. "Wherefore," said he, "I pray you to
take some meat: for this is for your health" [Acts 27:34], that you should eat, lest
ye perish of hunger. Observe, his giving thanks after all that had happened
strengthened them. For this showed an assured mind that they would be saved.
(b) "Then were they all of good cheer; and they also took some meat." [Acts
27:36] And not only so, but henceforth they so cast all their care upon Paul, that
they even cast out the grain [Acts 27:37], being so many. (a) Two hundred and
seventy-six souls [Acts 27:38]: whence had they victuals? (c) See how they do
their part as men, and how Paul does not forbid them. "And when it was day,"
etc., "they loosed the rudder-bands." (v. 39, 40.) And the vessel goes to pieces in
the daytime, that they may not be clean dissolved with the terror: that you may
see the prophecy brought out as fact. "And the soldiers' counsel," etc. [Acts
27:42] Do you mark that in this respect also they were given to Paul? Since for
his sake the centurion suffered them not to be slain. So confessedly wicked do
those men seem to me to have been: insomuch that they would have chosen even
to slay them: but some swam on shore, others were borne on boards, and they all
were thus saved, and the prophecy received accomplishment; (a prophecy,)
although not solemn from length of time, since he did not deliver it a number of
years before, but keeping close to the nature of the things themselves: (still a
prophecy it was,) for all was beyond the reach of hope. And (so) it was through
themselves being saved that they learned who Paul was. But some one may say:
why did he not save the ship? That they might perceive how great a danger they
had escaped: and that the whole matter depended, not on the help of man, but on
God's hand saving them independently of a ship. So that righteous men, though

they may be in a tempest, or on the sea, or in the deep, suffer nothing dreadful,
but even save others together with themselves. If (here was) a ship in danger and
suffering wreck, and prisoners were saved for Paul's sake, consider what a thing
it is to have a holy man in a house: for many are the tempests which assail us
also, tempests far more grievous than these (natural ones), but He can also give
us to be delivered, if only we obey holy men as those (in the ship) did, if we do
what they enjoin. For they are not simply saved, but themselves also contributed
to other men's believing ([πίστιν εἰσήνεγκαν]). Though the holy man be in
bonds, he does greater works than those who are free. And look how this was the
case here. The free centurion stood in need of his bound prisoner: the skilful
pilot was in want of him who was no pilot— nay rather, of him who was the true
pilot. For he steered as pilot not a vessel of this (earthly) kind, but the Church of
the whole world, having learned of Him Who is Lord also of the sea; (steered it,)
not by the art of man, but by the wisdom of the Spirit. In this vessel are many
shipwrecks, many waves, spirits of wickedness, "from within are fightings, from
without are fears" [2 Corinthians 7:5]: so that he was the true pilot. Look at our
whole life: it is just such (as was this voyage). For at one time we meet with
kindliness, at another with a tempest; sometimes from our own want of counsel,
sometimes from our idleness, we fall into numberless evils; from our not
hearkening to Paul, when we are eager to go somewhere, where he bids us not.
For Paul is sailing even now with us, only not bound as he was then: he
admonishes us even now, and says to those who are (sailing) on this sea, "take
heed unto yourselves: for after my departing grievous wolves shall enter in
among you" [Acts 20:29]: and again, "In the last times perilous times shall
come: and men shall be lovers of their own selves, lovers of money, boasters." [2
Timothy 3:2] This is more grievous than all storms. Let us therefore abide where
he bids us— in faith, in the safe haven: let us hearken unto him rather than to the
pilot that is within us, that is, our own reason. Let us not straightway do just
what this may suggest; not what the owner of the ship: no, but what Paul
suggests: he has passed through many such tempests. Let us not learn (to our