SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.43, C.2.

of the commandment is charity from a pure heart, and a good
conscience, and an unfeigned faith." For all the virtues, about whose
acts the precepts are given, are directed either to the freeing of the
heart from the whirl of the passions---such are the virtues that
regulate the passions---or at least to the possession of a good
conscience---such are the virtues that regulate operations---or to the
having of a right faith---such are those which pertain to the worship
of God: and these three things are required of man that he may love
God. For an impure heart is withdrawn from loving God, on account
of the passion that inclines it to earthly things; an evil conscience
gives man a horror for God's justice, through fear of His
punishments; and an untrue faith draws man's affections to an
untrue representation of God, and separates him from the truth of
God. Now in every genus that which is for its own sake takes
precedence of that which is for the sake of another, wherefore the
greatest precept is that of charity, as stated in Mt. 22:39.
Reply to Objection 1: As stated above (FS, Question 100, Article 10)
when we were treating of the commandments, the mode of love does
not come under those precepts which are about the other acts of
virtue: for instance, this precept, "Honor thy father and thy mother,"
does not prescribe that this should be done out of charity. The act of
love does, however, fall under special precepts.
Reply to Objection 2: The obligation of a precept is not opposed to
liberty, except in one whose mind is averted from that which is
prescribed, as may be seen in those who keep the precepts through
fear alone. But the precept of love cannot be fulfilled save of one's
own will, wherefore it is not opposed to charity.
Reply to Objection 3: All the precepts of the decalogue are directed
to the love of God and of our neighbor: and therefore the precepts of
charity had not to be enumerated among the precepts of the
decalogue, since they are included in all of them.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.43, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether there should have been given two

precepts of charity?
Objection 1: It would seem that there should not have been given
two precepts of charity. For the precepts of the Law are directed to
virtue, as stated above (Article 1, Objection 3). Now charity is one
virtue, as shown above (Question 33, Article 5). Therefore only one
precept of charity should have been given.
Objection 2: Further, as Augustine says (De Doctr. Christ. i, 22,27),
charity loves none but God in our neighbor. Now we are sufficiently
directed to love God by the precept, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy
God." Therefore there was no need to add the precept about loving
our neighbor.
Objection 3: Further, different sins are opposed to different precepts.
But it is not a sin to put aside the love of our neighbor, provided we
put not aside the love of God; indeed, it is written (Lk. 15:26): "If any
man come to Me, and hate not his father, and mother . . . he cannot
be My disciple." Therefore the precept of the love of God is not
distinct from the precept of the love of our neighbor.
Objection 4: Further, the Apostle says (Rm. 13:8): "He that loveth his
neighbor hath fulfilled the Law." But a law is not fulfilled unless all
its precepts be observed. Therefore all the precepts are included in
the love of our neighbor: and consequently the one precept of the
love of our neighbor suffices. Therefore there should not be two
precepts of charity.
On the contrary, It is written (1 Jn. 4:21): "This commandment we
have from God, that he who loveth God, love also his brother."
I answer that, As stated above (FS, Question 91, Article 3; FS,
Question 94, Article 2) when we were treating of the commandments,
the precepts are to the Law what propositions are to speculative
sciences, for in these latter, the conclusions are virtually contained
in the first principles. Hence whoever knows the principles as to
their entire virtual extent has no need to have the conclusions put
separately before him. Since, however, some who know the
principles are unable to consider all that is virtually contained
therein, it is necessary, for their sake, that scientific conclusions