minister on whom it depends necessarily, and then the whole virtue
of the sacrament is in the matter. Again, sometimes the essence of
the sacrament requires the consecration or sanctification of the
minister without any sanctification of the matter, and then the entire
sacramental virtue is in the minister, as in Penance. Hence the power
of the keys which is in the priest, stands in the same relation to the
effect of Penance, as the virtue in the baptismal water does to the
effect of Baptism. Now Baptism and the sacrament of Penance agree
somewhat in their effect, since each is directly ordained against
guilt, which is not the case in the other sacraments: yet they differ in
this, that the sacrament of Penance, since the acts of the recipient
are as its matter, cannot be given save to adults, who need to be
disposed for the reception of the sacramental effect; whereas
Baptism is given, sometimes to adults, sometimes to children and
others who lack the use of reason, so that by Baptism children
receive grace and remission of sin without any previous disposition,
while adults do not, for they require to be disposed by the removal of
insincerity. This disposition sometimes precedes their Baptism by
priority of time, being sufficient for the reception of grace, before
they are actually baptized, but not before they have come to the
knowledge of the truth and have conceived the desire for Baptism.
At other times this disposition does not precede the reception of
Baptism by a priority of time, but is simultaneous with it, and then
the grace of the remission of guilt is bestowed through the reception
of Baptism. On the other hand, grace is never given through the
sacrament of Penance unless the recipient be disposed either
simultaneously or before. Hence the power of the keys operates unto
the remission of guilt, either through being desired or through being
actually exercised, even as the waters of Baptism. But just as
Baptism acts, not as a principal agent but as an instrument, and
does not go so far as to cause the reception itself of grace, even
instrumentally, but merely disposes the recipient to the grace
whereby his guilt is remitted, so is it with the power of the keys.
Wherefore God alone directly remits guilt, and Baptism acts through
His power instrumentally, as an inanimate instrument, and the priest
as an animate instrument, such as a servant is, according to the
Philosopher (Ethic. viii, 11): and consequently the priest acts as a
minister. Hence it is clear that the power of the keys is ordained, in a
manner, to the remission of guilt, not as causing that remission, but
as disposing thereto. Consequently if a man, before receiving
absolution, were not perfectly disposed for the reception of grace, he
would receive grace at the very time of sacramental confession and
absolution, provided he offered no obstacle. For if the key were in no