of the nest, He commands them to use their own wings. Then, that they might
not suppose that it was for weakness He is letting them alone, in commanding
them also to work their part, He reminds them of the former things, saying,
"When I sent you without purse, lacked ye anything?" that by both they might
learn His power, both wherein He protected them, and wherein He now leaves
them to themselves by degrees.
But whence were the swords there? They had come forth from the supper,
and from the table. It was likely also there should be swords because of the
lamb, and that the disciples, hearing that certain were coming forth against Him,
took them for defense, as meaning to fight in behalf of their Master, which was
of their thought only. Wherefore also Peter is rebuked for using it, and with a
severe threat. For he was resisting the servant who came, warmly indeed, yet not
defending himself, but doing this in behalf of his Master.
Christ however suffered not any harm to ensue. For He healed him, and
showed forth a great miracle, enough to indicate at once both His forbearance
and His power, and the affection and meekness of His disciple. For then he acted
from affection, now with dutifulness. For when he heard, "Put up your sword
into its sheath," [John 18:11] he obeyed straightway, and afterwards nowhere
does this.
But another says, that they moreover asked, "Shall we smite?" [Luke 22:49]
but that He forbad it, and healed the man, and rebuked His disciple, and
threatened, that He might move him to obedience. "For all they that take the
sword," He said, "shall die with the sword."
And he adds a reason, saying, "Think ye that I cannot pray to my Father,
and He shall presently give me more than twelve legions of angels? But that the
Scriptures might be fulfilled." [Matthew 26:53-54] By these words He quenched
their anger, indicating that to the Scriptures also, this seemed good. Wherefore
there too He prayed, that they might take meekly what befell Him, when they
had learned that this again is done according to God's will.
And by these two things, He comforted them, both by the punishment of

them that are plotting against Him, "For all they," He says, "that take the sword
shall perish with the sword;" and by His not undergoing these things against His
will, "For I can pray," He says, "to my Father."
And wherefore did He not say, "Think ye that I cannot destroy them all?"
Because He was more likely to be believed in saying what He did say; for not
yet had they the right belief concerning Him. And a little while before He had
said, "My soul is exceeding sorrowful even unto death," and, "Father, let the cup
pass from me;" [Matthew 26:38-39] and He had appeared in an agony and
sweating, and strengthened by an angel.
Since then He had shown forth many tokens of human nature, He did not
seem likely to speak so as to be believed, if He had said, "Think ye that I cannot
destroy them." Therefore He says, "What, think ye that I cannot pray to my
Father?" And again He speaks it humbly, in saying, "He will presently give me
twelve legions of angels." For if one angel slew one hundred and eighty-five
armed thousands, [2 Kings 19:35] what need of twelve legions against a
thousand men? But He frames His language with a view to their terror and
weakness, for indeed they were dead with fear. Wherefore also He brings against
them the Scriptures, saying, "How then shall the Scriptures be fulfilled?"
alarming them by this also. For if this be approved by the Scriptures, do ye
oppose and fight against them?
2. And to His disciples He says these things; but to the others, "Are ye come
out as against a thief with swords and staves for to take me? I sat daily teaching
in the temple, and you laid no hold on me."
See how many things He does that might awaken them. He cast them to the
ground, He healed the servant's ear, He threatened them with being slain; "For
they shall perish with the sword," He says, "who take the sword." By the healing
of the ear, He gave assurance of these things also; from every quarter, both from
the things present, and from the things to come, manifesting His power, and
showing that it was not a work of their strength to seize Him. Wherefore He also
adds, "I was daily with you, and sat teaching, and you laid no hold on me;" by