countenance both of the apostle himself, and of all those whose names
are there mentioned? And whereas, among such a multitude of men to
whom these books are known, each imagines in a different way those
bodily features and forms, it is assuredly uncertain which it is that
imagines them more nearly and more like the reality. Nor, indeed, is our
faith busied therein with the bodily countenance of those men; but only
that by the grace of God they so lived and so acted as that Scripture
witnesses: this it is which it is both useful to believe, and which must not
be despaired of, and must be sought. For even the countenance of our
Lord Himself in the flesh is variously fancied by the diversity of countless
imaginations, which yet was one, whatever it was. Nor in our faith which
we have of our Lord Jesus Christ, is that wholesome which the mind
imagines for itself, perhaps far other than the reality, but that which we
think of man according to his kind: for we have a notion of human nature
implanted in us, as it were by rule, according to which we know forthwith,
that whatever such thing we see is a man or the form of a man.

### CHAP. 5.—HOW THE TRINITY MAY BE LOVED THOUGH UNKNOWN.

Our conception is framed according to this notion, when we believe that
God was made man for us, as an example of humility, and to show the
love of God towards us. For this it is which it is good for us to believe, and
to retain firmly and unshakenly in our heart, that the humility by which
God was born of a woman, and was led to death through contumelies so
great by mortal men, is the chiefest remedy by which the swelling of our
pride may be cured, and the profound mystery by which the bond of sin
may be loosed. So also, because we know what omnipotence is, we believe
concerning the omnipotent God in the power of His miracles and of His
resurrection, and we frame conceptions respecting actions of this kind,
according to the species and genera of things that are either ingrafted in
us by nature, or gathered by experience, that our faith may not be
feigned. For neither do we know the countenance of the Virgin Mary;
from whom, untouched by a husband, nor tainted in the birth itself, He
was wonderfully born. Neither have we seen what were the lineaments of
the body of Lazarus; nor yet Bethany; nor the sepulchre, and that stone
which He commanded to be removed when He raised Him from the dead;
nor the new tomb cut out in the rock, whence He Himself arose; nor the

Mount of Olives, from whence He ascended into heaven. And, in short,
whoever of us have not seen these things, know not whether they are as
we conceive them to be, nay judge them more probably not to be so. For
when the aspect either of a place, or a man, or of any other body, which
we happened to imagine before we saw it, turns out to be the same when
it occurs to our sight as it was when it occurred to our mind, we are
moved with no little wonder. So scarcely and hardly ever does it happen.
And yet we believe those things most steadfastly, because we imagine
them according to a special and general notion, of which we are certain.
For we believe our Lord Jesus Christ to be born of a virgin who was called
Mary. But what a virgin is, or what it is to be born, and what is a proper
name, we do not believe, but certainly know. And whether that was the
countenance of Mary which occurred to the mind in speaking of those
things or recollecting them, we neither know at all, nor believe. It is
allowable, then, in this case to say without violation of the faith, perhaps
she had such or such a countenance, perhaps she had not: but no one
could say without violation of the Christian faith, that perhaps Christ was
born of a virgin.
8. Wherefore, since we desire to understand the eternity, and equality,
and unity of the Trinity, as much as is permitted us, but ought to believe
before we understand; and since we must watch carefully, that our faith
be not feigned; since we must have the fruition of the same Trinity, that
we may live blessedly; but if we have believed anything false of it, our
hope would be worthless, and our charity not pure: how then can we love,
by believing, that Trinity which we do not know? Is it according to the
special or general notion, according to which we love the Apostle Paul? In
whose case, even if he was not of that countenance which occurs to us
when we think of him (and this we do not know at all), yet we know what
a man is. For not to go far away, this we are; and it is manifest he, too,
was this, and that his soul joined to his body lived after the manner of
mortals. Therefore we believe this of him, which we find in ourselves,
according to the species or genus under which all human nature alike is
comprised. What then do we know, whether specially or generally, of that
most excellent Trinity, as if there were many such trinities, some of which
we had learned by experience, so that we may believe that Trinity, too, to
have been such as they, through the rule of similitude, impressed upon