triumph in the victory, because of the remissness of the multitude. For when we
conquer them ten thousand times over in doctrines, they reproach us with the
lives of the multitude of those who join our congregations, their wounds, their
diseases in their soul.
How then shall we with confidence show you in the battle array, when you
rather do us mischief, being straightway wounded by our enemies, and made a
mock of? For one man's hand is diseased, and shrunk so as not to be able to give
away. How then should such a one hold a shield, and thrust it before him, and
avoid being wounded by the jeers of cruelty. With others the feet halt, as many
as go up to the theatres, and to the resorts of the harlot women. How shall these
then be able to stand in the battle, and not to be wounded with the accusation of
wantonness? Another suffers and is maimed in his eyes, not looking straight, but
being full of lasciviousness, and assailing women's chastity, and overthrowing
marriages. How then should this man be able to look in the face of the enemy,
and brandish a spear, and throw his dart, being goaded on all sides with jeers. We
may see also many suffering with the belly not less than the dropsical, when they
are held in subjection by gluttony and drunkenness. How then shall I be able to
lead forth these drunken men to war? With others the mouth is rotten; such are
the passionate, and revilers, and blasphemers. How then shall this man ever
shout in battle, and achieve anything great and noble, he too being drunk with
another drunkenness, and affording much laughter to the enemy?
Therefore each day I go about this camp, dressing your wounds, healing
your sores. But if you ever rouse yourselves up, and become fit even to wound
others, I will both teach you this art of war, and instruct you how to handle these
weapons, or rather your works themselves will be weapons to you, and all men
will immediately submit, if you would become merciful, if forbearing, if mild
and patient, if you would show forth all other virtue. But if any gainsay, then we
will also add the proof of what we can show on our part, bringing you forward,
since now we rather are hindered (at least as to your part) in this race.
And mark. We say that Christ has done great things, having made angels of

men; then, when we are called upon to give account, and required to furnish a
proof out of this flock, our mouths are stopped. For I am afraid, lest in the place
of angels, I bring forth swine as from a style, and horses mad with lust.
I know you are pained, but not against you all are these things spoken, but
against the guilty, or rather not even against them if they awake, but for them.
Since now indeed all is lost and ruined, and the church has become nothing
better than a stable of oxen, and a fold for asses and camels, and I go round
seeking for a sheep, and am not able to see it. So much are all kicking, like
horses, and any wild asses, and they fill the place here with much dung, for like
this is their discourse. And if indeed one could see the things spoken at each
assemblage, by men, by women, you would see their words more unclean than
that dung.
Wherefore I entreat you to change this evil custom, that the church may
smell of ointment. But now, while we lay up in it perfumes for the senses, the
uncleanness of the mind we use no great diligence to purge out, and drive away.
What then is the advantage? For we do not so much disgrace the church by
bringing dung into it, as we disgrace it by speaking such things one to another,
about gains, about merchandise, about petty tradings, about things that are
nothing to us, when there ought to be choirs of angels here, and we ought to
make the church a heaven, and to know nothing else but earnest prayers, and
silence with listening.
This then let us do at any rate, from the present time, that we may both
purify our lives, and attain unto the promised blessings, by the grace and love
towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory world without end.
Amen.