variety of organs, that they might be adapted to various powers. In
the same way nature provided various mediums for the various
senses, according to the convenience of the acts of the powers. And
to be cognizant of the natures of sensible qualities does not pertain
to the senses, but to the intellect.
The reason of the number and distinction of the exterior senses
must therefore be ascribed to that which belongs to the senses
properly and "per se." Now, sense is a passive power, and is
naturally immuted by the exterior sensible. Wherefore the exterior
cause of such immutation is what is "per se" perceived by the sense,
and according to the diversity of that exterior cause are the sensitive
powers diversified.
Now, immutation is of two kinds, one natural, the other spiritual.
Natural immutation takes place by the form of the immuter being
received according to its natural existence, into the thing immuted,
as heat is received into the thing heated. Whereas spiritual
immutation takes place by the form of the immuter being received,
according to a spiritual mode of existence, into the thing immuted,
as the form of color is received into the pupil which does not thereby
become colored. Now, for the operation of the senses, a spiritual
immutation is required, whereby an intention of the sensible form is
effected in the sensile organ. Otherwise, if a natural immutation
alone sufficed for the sense's action, all natural bodies would feel
when they undergo alteration.
But in some senses we find spiritual immutation only, as in "sight"
while in others we find not only spiritual but also a natural
immutation; either on the part of the object only, or likewise on the
part of the organ. On the part of the object we find natural
immutation, as to place, in sound which is the object of "hearing";
for sound is caused by percussion and commotion of air: and we
find natural immutation by alteration, in odor which is the object of
"smelling"; for in order to exhale an odor, a body must be in a
measure affected by heat. On the part of an organ, natural
immutation takes place in "touch" and "taste"; for the hand that
touches something hot becomes hot, while the tongue is moistened
by the humidity of the flavored morsel. But the organs of smelling
and hearing are not affected in their respective operations by any
natural immutation unless indirectly.
Now, the sight, which is without natural immutation either in its

organ or in its object, is the most spiritual, the most perfect, and the
most universal of all the senses. After this comes the hearing and
then the smell, which require a natural immutation on the part of the
object; while local motion is more perfect than, and naturally prior to,
the motion of alteration, as the Philosopher proves (Phys. viii, 7).
Touch and taste are the most material of all: of the distinction of
which we shall speak later on (ad 3,4). Hence it is that the three other
senses are not exercised through a medium united to them, to
obviate any natural immutation in their organ; as happens as regards
these two senses.
Reply to Objection 1: Not every accident has in itself a power of
immutation but only qualities of the third species, which are the
principles of alteration: therefore only suchlike qualities are the
objects of the senses; because "the senses are affected by the same
things whereby inanimate bodies are affected," as stated in Phys. vii,
2.
Reply to Objection 2: Size, shape, and the like, which are called
"common sensibles," are midway between "accidental sensibles"
and "proper sensibles," which are the objects of the senses. For the
proper sensibles first, and of their very nature, affect the senses;
since they are qualities that cause alteration. But the common
sensibles are all reducible to quantity. As to size and number, it is
clear that they are species of quantity. Shape is a quality about
quantity. Shape is a quality about quantity, since the notion of shape
consists of fixing the bounds of magnitude. Movement and rest are
sensed according as the subject is affected in one or more ways in
the magnitude of the subject or of its local distance, as in the
movement of growth or of locomotion, or again, according as it is
affected in some sensible qualities, as in the movement of alteration;
and thus to sense movement and rest is, in a way, to sense one thing
and many. Now quantity is the proximate subject of the qualities that
cause alteration, as surface is of color. Therefore the common
sensibles do not move the senses first and of their own nature, but
by reason of the sensible quality; as the surface by reason of color.
Yet they are not accidental sensibles, for they produce a certain
variety in the immutation of the senses. For sense is immuted
differently by a large and by a small surface: since whiteness itself is
said to be great or small, and therefore it is divided according to its
proper subject.
Reply to Objection 3: As the Philosopher seems to say (De Anima ii,