Homily 47 on the Gospel of John
John 6:53-54
"Jesus therefore said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except you eat the
flesh of the Son of Man, and drink His blood, you have not eternal life in
yourselves. Whoso eats My flesh, and drinks My blood, has life in himself."
1. When we converse of spiritual things, let there be nothing secular in our
souls, nothing earthy, let all such thoughts retire, and be banished, and let us be
entirely given up to the hearing the divine oracles only. For if at the arrival of a
king all confusion is driven away, much more when the Spirit speaks with us do
we need great stillness, great awe. And worthy of awe is that which is said today.
How it is so, hear. "Verily I say unto you, Except a man eat My flesh, and drink
My blood, he has not eternal life in him." Since the Jews had before asserted that
this was impossible, He shows not only that it is not impossible, but that it is
absolutely necessary. Wherefore He adds, "He that eats My flesh and drinks My
blood, has eternal life."
"And I will raise him up at the last day." For since He had said, "He that
eats of this bread shall not die for ever" [John 6:50, not verbally quoted], and it
was likely that this would stand in their way, (just as they before said, "Abraham
is dead, and the prophets are dead; and how sayest Thou, that he shall not taste
of death?" [John 8:52, not verbally quoted]) He brings forward the Resurrection
to solve the question, and to show that (the man who eats) shall not die at the
last. He continually handles the subject of the Mysteries, showing the necessity
of the action, and that it must by all means be done.

John 6:55
"For My flesh is true meat, and My blood is true drink."
What is that He says? He either desires to declare that this is the true meat
which saves the soul, or to assure them concerning what had been said, that they
might not suppose the words to be a mere enigma or parable, but might know
that it is by all means needful to eat the Body. Then He says,

John 6:56
"He that eats My flesh, dwells in Me."
This He said, showing that such an one is blended with Him. Now what
follows seems unconnected, unless we enquire into the sense; for, says some
one, after saying, "He that eats My flesh, dwells in Me," what kind of a
consequence is it to add,

John 6:57
"As the living Father has sent Me, and I live by the Father."
Yet the words harmonize perfectly. For since He continually spoke of
"eternal life," to prove this point He introduces the expression, "dwells in Me";
for "if he dwells in Me, and I live, it is plain that he will live also." Then He says,
"As the living Father has sent Me." This is an expression of comparison and
resemblance, and its meaning is of this kind, "I live in like manner as the Father
lives." And that you may not deem Him unbegotten, He immediately subjoins,
"by the Father," not by this to show that He needs, in order to live, any power
working in Him, for He said before, to remove such a suspicion, "As the Father
has life in Himself, so has He given to the Son also to have life in Himself"; now
if He needs the working of another, it will be found that either the Father has not
given Him so to have it, and so the assertion is false, or if He has so given it,
then He will need no other one to support Him. What then means the, "By the
Father"? He here merely hints at the cause, and what He says is of this kind: "As
the Father lives, so I live, and he that eats Me shall live by Me." And the "life" of
which He speaks is not life merely, but the excellent life; for that He spoke not
simply of life, but of that glorious and ineffable life, is clear from this. For all
men "live," even unbelievers, and uninitiated, who eat not of that flesh. Do you
see that the words relate not to this life, but to that other? And what He says is of
this kind: "He that eats My flesh, when he dies shall not perish nor suffer
punishment"; He spoke not of the general resurrection, (for all alike rise again,)
but concerning the special, the glorious Resurrection, that which has a reward.