things in a sensible form, as did Daniel and Ezekiel, and had none to share in
what they saw; Moses also saw many things such as none other has seen; nor did
all the disciples enjoy the view of the Transfiguration on the mount, nor did they
all alike behold Him at the time of the Resurrection. And this Luke plainly
shows, when he says, that He showed Himself "to witnesses chosen before of
God." [Acts 10:41]
"And I saw, and bare record that this is the Son of God."
Where did he "bear record that this is the Son of God?" he called Him
indeed "Lamb," and said that He should "baptize with the Spirit," but nowhere
did he say of Him, "Son of God." But the other Evangelists do not write that He
said anything after the baptism, but having been silent as to the time intervening,
they mention the miracles of Christ which were done after John's captivity,
whence we may reasonably conjecture that these and many others are omitted.
And this our Evangelist himself has declared, at the end of his narrative. For they
were so far from inventing anything great concerning Him, that the things which
seem to bring reproach, these they have all with one voice and with all exactness
set down, and you will not find one of them omitting one of such circumstances;
but of the miracles, part some have left for the others to relate, part all have
passed over in silence.
I say not this without cause, but to answer the shamelessness of the heathen.
For this is a sufficient proof of their truth-loving disposition, and that they say
nothing for favor. And thus as well as in other ways you may arm yourselves for
trial of argument with them. But take heed. Strange were it that the physician, or
the shoemaker, or the weaver, in short all artists, should be able each to contend
correctly for his own art, but that one calling himself Christian should not be
able to give a reason for his own faith; yet those things if overlooked bring only
loss to men's property, these if neglected destroy our very souls. Yet such is our
wretched disposition, that we give all our care to the former, and the things
which are necessary, and which are the groundwork of our salvation, as though
of little worth, we despise.

4. That it is which prevents the heathen from quickly deriding his own
error. For when they, though established in a lie, use every means to conceal the
shamefulness of their opinions, while we, the servants of the truth, cannot even
open our mouths, how can they help condemning the great weakness of our
doctrine? How can they help suspecting our religion to be fraud and folly? How
shall they not blaspheme Christ as a deceiver, and a cheat, who used the folly of
the many to further his fraud? And we are to blame for this blasphemy, because
we will not be wakeful in arguments for godliness, but deem these things
superfluous, and care only for the things of earth. He who admires a dancer or a
charioteer, or one who contends with beasts, uses every exertion and contrivance
not to come off worst in any disputes concerning him, and they string together
long panegyrics, as they compose their defense against those who find fault with
them, and cast sneers without number at their opponents: but when arguments
for Christianity are proposed, they all hang their heads, and scratch themselves,
and gape, and retire at length the objects of contempt.
Must not this deserve excessive wrath, when Christ is shown to be less
honorable in your estimation than a dancer? Since you have contrived ten
thousand defenses for the things they have done, though more disgraceful than
any, but of the miracles of Christ, though they have drawn to Him the world, you
cannot bear even to think or care at all. We believe in the Father, and the Son,
and the Holy Ghost, in the Resurrection of bodies, and in Life everlasting. If
now any heathen say, "What is this Father, what this Son, what this Holy Ghost?
How do you who say that there are three Gods, charge us with having many
Gods?" What will you say? What will you answer? How will you repel the
attack of these arguments? But what if when you are silent, the unbeliever
should again propose this other question, and ask, "What in a word is
resurrection? Shall we rise again in this body? Or in another, different from
this? If in this, what need that it be dissolved?" What will you answer? And
what, if he say, "Why did Christ come now and not in old time? Has it seemed
good to Him now to care for men, and did He despise us during all the years that