[Hebrews 7:3]; by this expression showing that He is both without beginning and
without end. For as the one has no limit, so neither has the other. In one direction
there is no end, in the other no beginning.
3. And how again, since He is "Life," was there ever when He was not? For
all must allow, that Life both is always, and is without beginning and without
end, if It be indeed Life, as indeed It is. For if there be when It is not, how can It
be the life of others, when It even Itself is not?
"How then," says one, "does John lay down a beginning by saying, 'In the
beginning was'?" Tell me, have you attended to the "In the beginning," and to
the "was," and do you not understand the expression, "the Word was"? What!
When the Prophet says, "From everlasting and to everlasting You are" [Psalm
90:2], does he say this to assign Him limits? No, but to declare His Eternity.
Consider now that the case is the same in this place. He did not use the
expression as assigning limits, since he did not say, "had a beginning," but "was
in the beginning"; by the word "was" carrying you forward to the idea that the
Son is without beginning. "Yet observe," says he, "the Father is named with the
addition of the article, but the Son without it." What then, when the Apostle
says, "The Great God, and our Saviour Jesus Christ" [Titus 2:13]; and again,
"Who is above all, God"? [Romans 9:5] It is true that here he has mentioned the
Son, without the article; but he does the same with the Father also, at least in his
Epistle to the Philippians [Philippians 2:6], he says, "Who being in the form of
God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God"; and again to the Romans,
"Grace to you, and peace, from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ."
[Romans 1:7] Besides, it was superfluous for it to be attached in that place, when
close above it was continually attached to "the Word." For as in speaking
concerning the Father, he says, "God is a Spirit" [John 4:24], and we do not,
because the article is not joined to "Spirit," yet deny the Spiritual Nature of God;
so here, although the article is not annexed to the Son, the Son is not on that
account a less God. Why so? Because in saying "God," and again "God," he
does not reveal to us any difference in this Godhead, but the contrary; for having

before said, "and the Word was God"; that no one might suppose the Godhead of
the Son to be inferior, he immediately adds the characteristics of genuine
Godhead, including Eternity, (for "He was," says he, "in the beginning with
God,") and attributing to Him the office of Creator. For "by Him were all things
made, and without Him was not anything made that was made"; which His
Father also everywhere by the Prophets declares to be especially characteristic of
His own Essence. And the Prophets are continually busy on this kind of
demonstration, not only of itself, but when they contend against the honor shown
to idols; "Let the gods perish," says one "who have not made heaven and earth"
[Jeremiah 10:11]: and again, "I have stretched out the heaven with My hand"
[Isaiah 44:24]; and it is as declaring it to be indicative of Divinity, that He
everywhere puts it. And the Evangelist himself was not satisfied with these
words, but calls Him "Life" too and "Light." If now He was ever with the Father,
if He Himself created all things, if He brought all things into existence, and
keeps together all things, (for, this he meant by "Life,") if He enlightens all
things, who so senseless as to say, that the Evangelist desired to teach an
inferiority of Divinity by those very expressions, by which, rather than by any
others, it is possible to express its equality and not differing? Let us not then
confound the creation with the Creator, lest we too hear it said of us, that "they
served the creature rather than the Creator" [Romans 1:25]; for although it be
asserted that this is said of the heavens, still in speaking of the heavens he
positively says, that we must not serve the creature, for it is a heathenish thing.
4. Let us therefore not lay ourselves under this curse. For this the Son of
God came, that He might rid us from this service; for this He took the form of a
slave, that He might free us from this slavery; for this He was spit upon, for this
He was buffeted, for this He endured the shameful death. Let us not, I entreat
you, make all these things of none effect, let us not go back to our former
unrighteousness, or rather to unrighteousness much more grievous; for to serve
the creature is not the same thing as to bring down the Creator, as far at least as
in us lies, to the meanness of the creature. For He continues being such as He is;