this also he testifies of them, saying, "For you became imitators of the Churches
of God which are in Judæa."
"And of hope," he says, "in our Lord Jesus Christ, before our God and
Father." For all these things proceed from faith and hope, so that what happened
to them showed not their fortitude only, but that they believed with full
assurance in the rewards laid up for them. For on this account God permitted that
persecutions should arise immediately, that no one might say, that the Preaching
was established lightly or by flattery, and that their fervor might be shown, and
that it was not human persuasion, but the power of God, that persuaded the souls
of the believers, so that they were prepared even for ten thousand deaths, which
would not have been the case, if the Preaching had not immediately been deeply
fixed and remained unshaken.
Ver. 4, 5. "Knowing, brethren beloved of God, your election, how that our
Gospel came not unto you in word only, but also in power, and in the Holy
Ghost, and in much assurance; even as you know what manner of men we
showed ourselves among you for your sake."
Knowing what? How "we showed ourselves among you"? Here he also
touches upon his own good actions, but covertly. For he wishes first to enlarge
upon their praises, and what he says is something of this sort. I knew that you
were men of great and noble sort, that you were of the Elect. For this reason we
also endure all things for your sake. For this, "what manner of men we showed
ourselves among you," is the expression of one showing that with much zeal and
much vehemence we were ready to give up our lives for your sake; and for this
thanks are due not to us, but to you, because you were elect. On this account also
he says elsewhere, "And these things I endure for the Elect's sake." [2 Timothy
2:10] For what would not one endure for the sake of God's beloved ones? And
having spoken of his own part, he all but says, For if you were both beloved and
elect, we suffer all things with reason. For not only did his praise of them
confirm them, but his reminding them that they too themselves had displayed a
fortitude corresponding to their zeal: he says,

Ver. 6. "And ye became imitators of us, and of the Lord, having received the
word in much affliction, with joy of the Holy Ghost."
Strange! What an encomium is here! The disciples have suddenly become
teachers! They not only heard the word, but they quickly arrived at the same
height with Paul. But this is nothing; for see how he exalts them, saying, "You
became imitators of the Lord." How? "Having received the word in much
affliction, with joy of the Holy Ghost." Not merely with affliction, but with much
affliction. And this we may learn from the Acts of the Apostles, how they raised
a persecution against them. [Acts 17:5-8] And they troubled all the rulers of the
city, and they instigated the city against them. And it is not enough to say, you
were afflicted indeed, and believed, and that grieving, but even rejoicing. Which
also the Apostles did: "Rejoicing," it is said, "that they were counted worthy to
suffer dishonor for the Name." [Acts 5:41] For it is this that is admirable.
Although neither is that a slight matter, in any way to bear afflictions. But this
now was the part of men surpassing human nature, and having, as it were, a body
incapable of suffering.
But how were they imitators of the Lord? Because He also endured many
sufferings, but rejoiced. For He came to this willingly. For our sakes He emptied
Himself. He was about to be spit upon, to be beaten and crucified, and He so
rejoiced in suffering these things, that He said to the Father, "Glorify Me." [John
17:1-5]
"With joy of the Holy Ghost," he says. That no one may say, how do you
speak of "affliction"? How "of joy"? How can both meet in one? He has added,
"with joy of the Holy Ghost." The affliction is in things bodily, and the joy in
things spiritual. How? The things which happened to them were grievous, but
not so the things which sprang out of them, for the Spirit does not allow it. So
that it is possible both for him who suffers, not to rejoice, when one suffers for
his sins; and being beaten to take pleasure, when one suffers for Christ's sake.
For such is the joy of the Spirit. In return for the things which appear to be
grievous, it brings out delight. They have afflicted you, he says, and persecuted