while another consists in certain legitimate bodily actions. These
different manners of communion are signified in the verse which
declares that those who are excommunicate are deprived of--"os, orare, vale, communio, mensa." "Os," i.e. we must not give them
tokens of goodwill; "orare," i.e. we must not pray with them; "vale,"
we must not give them marks of respect; "communio," i.e. we must
not communicate with them in the sacraments; "mensa," i.e. we
must not take meals with them. Accordingly the above definition
includes privation of the sacraments in the words "as to the fruit,"
and from partaking together with the faithful in spiritual things, in the
words, "and the general prayers of the Church."
Another definition is given which expresses the privation of both
kinds of acts, and is as follows: "Excommunication is the privation
of all lawful communion with the faithful."
Reply to Objection 1: Prayers are said for unbelievers, but they do
not receive the fruit of those prayers unless they be converted to the
faith. In like manner prayers may be offered up for those who are
excommunicated, but not among the prayers that are said for the
members of the Church. Yet they do not receive the fruit so long as
they remain under the excommunication, but prayers are said for
them that they may receive the spirit of repentance, so that they may
be loosed from excommunication.
Reply to Objection 2: One man's prayers profit another in so far as
they can reach to him. Now the action of one man may reach to
another in two ways. First, by virtue of charity which unites all the
faithful, making them one in God, according to Ps. 118:63: "I am a
partaker with all them that fear Thee." Now excommunication does
not interrupt this union, since no man can be justly excommunicated
except for a mortal sin, whereby a man is already separated from
charity, even without being excommunicated. An unjust
excommunication cannot deprive a man of charity, since this is one
of the greatest of all goods, of which a man cannot be deprived
against his will. Secondly, through the intention of the one who
prays, which intention is directed to the person he prays for, and this
union is interrupted by excommunication, because by passing
sentence of excommunication, the Church severs a man from the
whole body of the faithful, for whom she prays. Hence those prayers
of the Church which are offered up for the whole Church, do not
profit those who are excommunicated. Nor can prayers be said for

them among the members of the Church as speaking in the Church's
name, although a private individual may say a prayer with the
intention of offering it for their conversion.
Reply to Objection 3: The spiritual fruit of the Church is derived not
only from her prayers, but also from the sacraments received and
from the faithful dwelling together.
Reply to Objection 4: The minor excommunication does not fulfill all
the conditions of excommunication but only a part of them, hence
the definition of excommunication need not apply to it in every
respect, but only in some.