And "by Him let us offer a sacrifice to God." Of what kind of sacrifice does
he speak? "The fruit of lips giving thanks to His Name." They [the Jews] brought
sheep, and calves, and gave them to the Priest: let "us" bring none of these
things, but thanksgiving. This "fruit" let "our lips" put forth.
"For with such sacrifices God is well pleased." Let us give such a sacrifice
to Him, that He may offer [it] to The Father. For in no other way it is offered
except through the Son, or rather also through a contrite mind. All these things
[are said] for the weak. For that the thanks belong to the Son is evident: since
otherwise, how is the honor equal? "That all men" (He says) "should honor the
Son even as they honor the Father." [John 5:23] Wherein is the honor equal?
"The fruit of our lips giving thanks to His Name."
8. Let us bear all things thankfully, be it poverty, be it disease, be it
anything else whatever: for He alone knows the things expedient for us. "For we
know not what we should pray for as we ought." [Romans 8:26] We then who do
not know even how to ask for what is fitting, unless we have received of the
Spirit, let us take care to offer up thanksgiving for all things, and let us bear all
things nobly. Are we in poverty? Let us give thanks. Are we in sickness? Let us
give thanks. Are we falsely accused? Let us give thanks: when we suffer
affliction, let us give thanks.
This brings us near to God: then we even have God for our debtor. But
when we are in prosperity, it is we who are debtors and liable to be called to
account. For when we are in prosperity, we are debtors to God: and oftentimes
these things bring a judgment upon us, while those are for a payment of sins.
Those [afflictions] draw down mercy, they draw down kindness: while these on
the other hand lift up even to an insane pride, and lead also to slothfulness, and
dispose a man to fancy great things concerning himself; they puff up. Therefore
the prophet also said, "It is good for me, Lord, that You have afflicted me; that I
may learn Your statutes." [Psalm 119:71] When Hezekiah had received blessings
and been freed from calamities, his heart was lifted up on high; when he fell
sick, then was he humbled, then he became near to God. "When He slew them,"

it says, "then they sought Him diligently, and turned, and were early in coming
to God." [Psalm 78:34] And again, "When the beloved waxed gross and fat, then
he kicked." [Deuteronomy 32:15] For "the Lord is known when He executes
judgments." [Psalm 9:16]
9. Affliction is a great good. "Narrow is the way" [Matthew 7:14], so that
affliction thrusts us into the narrow [way]. He who is not pressed by affliction
cannot enter. For he who afflicts himself in the narrow [way], is he who also
enjoys ease; but he that spreads himself out, does not enter in, and suffers from
being so to say wedged in. See how Paul enters into this narrow way. He "keeps
under" his "body" [1 Corinthians 9:27], so as to be able to enter. Therefore, in all
his afflictions, he continued giving thanks unto God. Have you lost your
property? This has lightened you of the most of your wideness. Have you fallen
from glory? This is another sort of wideness. Have you been falsely accused?
Have the things said against you, of which you are nowise conscious to yourself
been believed? "Rejoice and leap for joy." For "blessed are you" (He says)
"when men reproach you, and say all manner of evil against you, falsely, for My
sake. Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in Heaven."
[Matthew 5:11-12]
Why do you marvel, if you are grieved, and wish to be set free from
temptations? Paul wished to be set free, and oftentimes entreated God, and did
not obtain. For the "thrice for this I besought the Lord," is oftentimes; "and He
said unto me, My grace is sufficient for you, for My strength is made perfect in
weakness." [2 Corinthians 12:8-9] By "weakness," he here means "afflictions."
What then? When he heard this he received it thankfully, and says, "Wherefore I
take pleasure in infirmities" [2 Corinthians 12:10]; that is, I am pleased, I rest in
my afflictions. For all things then let us give thanks, both for comfort, and for
affliction. Let us not murmur: let us not be unthankful. "Naked came I out of my
mother's womb, naked also shall I depart." [Job 1:21] You did not come forth
glorious, do not seek glory. You were brought into life naked, not of money
alone, but also of glory, and of honorable name.