26] And that these things seem good to God, hear him saying, "For this I
besought the Lord thrice, and He said to me, My Grace is sufficient for you; for
My strength is made perfect in weakness." [2 Corinthians 12:8-10] "Wherefore,"
he says, "I take pleasure in infirmities, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses,
in stripes, in imprisonments, that the power of Christ may rest upon me."
Moreover, hear Christ Himself saying, "In the world you shall have tribulation."
[John 16:33]

Hebrews 12:3
6. "For consider," says he, "Him that endured such contradiction of sinners
against Himself, lest ye be wearied and faint in your minds." For if the sufferings
of those near us arouse us, what earnestness will not those of our Master give us!
What will they not work in us!
And passing by all [else], he expressed the whole by the [word]
"Contradiction"; and by adding "such." For the blows upon the cheek, the
laughter, the insults, the reproaches, the mockeries, all these he indicated by
"contradiction." And not these only, but also the things which befell Him during
His whole life, of teaching.
For a great, a truly great consolation are both the sufferings of Christ, and
those of the Apostles. For He so well knew that this is the better way of virtue,
as even to go that way Himself, not having need thereof: He knew so well that
tribulation is expedient for us, and that it becomes rather a foundation for repose.
For hear Him saying, "If a man take not his cross, and follow after Me, he is not
worthy of Me." [Matthew 10:38] If you are a disciple, He means, imitate the
Master; for this is [to be] a disciple. But if while He went by [the path of]
affliction, thou [goest] by that of ease, thou no longer treadest the same path,
which He trod, but another. How then do you follow, when you follow not? How
shall you be a disciple, not going after the Master? This Paul also says, "We are
weak, but you are strong; we are despised, but you are honored." [1 Corinthians
4:10] How is it reasonable, he means, that we should be striving after opposite
things, and yet that you should be disciples and we teachers?
7. Affliction then is a great thing, beloved, for it accomplishes two great
things; It wipes out sins, and it makes men strong.
What then, you say, if it overthrow and destroy? Affliction does not do this,
but our own slothfulness. How (you say)? If we are sober and watchful, if we

beseech God that He would not "suffer us to be tempted above that we are able"
[1 Corinthians 10:13], if we always hold fast to Him, we shall stand nobly, and
set ourselves against our enemy. So long as we have Him for our helper, though
temptations blow more violently than all the winds, they will be to us as chaff
and a leaf borne lightly along. Hear Paul saying, "In all these things" (are his
words) "we are more than conquerors." [Romans 8:37] And again, "For I reckon
that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the
glory which shall be revealed in us." [Romans 8:18] And again, "For the light
affliction which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of glory." [2 Corinthians 4:17]
Consider what great dangers, shipwrecks, afflictions one upon another, and
other such things, he calls "light"; and emulate this inflexible one, who wore this
body simply and heedlessly. You are in poverty? But not in such as Paul, who
was tried by hunger, and thirst, and nakedness. For he suffered this not for one
day, but endured it continually. Whence does this appear? Hear himself saying,
"Even unto this present hour we both hunger and thirst and are naked." [1
Corinthians 4:11] Oh! How great glory did he already have in preaching, when
he was undergoing so great [afflictions]! Having now [reached] the twentieth
year [thereof], at the time when he wrote this. For he says, "I knew a man
fourteen years ago, whether in the body, or out of the body, I know not." [2
Corinthians 12:2] And again, "After three years" (he says) "I went up to
Jerusalem." [Galatians 1:18] And again hear him saying, "It were better for me
to die, than that any man should make my glorying void." [1 Corinthians 9:15]
And not only this, but again also in writing he said, "We have become as the filth
of the world." [1 Corinthians 4:13] What is more difficult to endure than hunger?
What than freezing cold? What than plottings made by brethren whom he
afterwards calls "false brethren"? [2 Corinthians 11:26] Was he not called the
pest of the world? An Impostor? A subverter? Was he not cut with scourging?
8. These things let us take into our mind, beloved, let us consider them, let
us hold them in remembrance, and then we shall never faint, though we be