that "they are not to act as advocates in lawsuits." Again the
Decretal quoted, De Statu Monach., after the statement that "canons
regular are not considered to be separated from the fellowship of
monks," goes on to say: "Nevertheless they obey an easier rule."
Hence it is evident that they are not bound to all that monks are
bound.
Reply to Objection 3: A man may be in the world in two ways: in one
way by his bodily presence, in another way by the bent of his mind.
Hence our Lord said to His disciples (Jn. 15:19): "I have chosen you
out of the world," and yet speaking of them to His Father He said (Jn.
17:11): "These are in the world, and I come to Thee." Although, then,
religious who are occupied with the works of the active life are in the
world as to the presence of the body, they are not in the world as
regards their bent of mind, because they are occupied with external
things, not as seeking anything of the world, but merely for the sake
of serving God: for "they . . . use this world, as if they used it not," to
quote 1 Cor. 7:31. Hence (James 1:27) after it is stated that "religion
clean and undefiled . . . is . . . to visit the fatherless and widows in
their tribulation," it is added, "and to keep one's self unspotted from
this world," namely to avoid being attached to worldly things.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.187, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether a religious order can be directed to

soldiering?
Objection 1: It would seem that no religious order can be directed to
soldiering. For all religious orders belong to the state of perfection.
Now our Lord said with reference to the perfection of Christian life
(Mt. 5:39): "I say to you not to resist evil; but if one strike thee on the
right cheek, turn to him also the other," which is inconsistent with
the duties of a soldier. Therefore no religious order can be
established for soldiering.
Objection 2: Further, the bodily encounter of the battlefield is more
grievous than the encounter in words that takes place between
counsel at law. Yet religious are forbidden to plead at law, as
appears from the Decretal De Postulando quoted above (Article 2,
Objection 2). Therefore it is much less seemly for a religious order to
be established for soldiering.
Objection 3: Further, the religious state is a state of penance, as we
have said above (Question 187, Article 6). Now according to the code
of laws soldiering is forbidden to penitents. for it is said in the
Decretal De Poenit., Dist. v, cap. 3: "It is altogether opposed to the
rules of the Church, to return to worldly soldiering after doing
penance." Therefore it is unfitting for any religious order to be
established for soldiering.
Objection 4: Further, no religious order may be established for an
unjust object. But as Isidore says (Etym. xviii, 1), "A just war is one
that is waged by order of the emperor." Since then religious are
private individuals, it would seem unlawful for them to wage war;
and consequently no religious order may be established for this
purpose.
On the contrary, Augustine says (Ep. clxxxix; ad Bonifac.), "Beware
of thinking that none of those can please God who handle war-like
weapons. Of such was holy David to whom the Lord gave great
testimony." Now religious orders are established in order that men
may please God. Therefore nothing hinders the establishing of a
religious order for the purpose of soldiering.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 2), a religious order may be