the regeneration of water and the Spirit. And observe I pray you, the awful and
ineffable nature of the mystery. He inhabits this tabernacle for ever, for He
clothed Himself with our flesh, not as again to leave it, but always to have it with
Him. Had not this been the case, He would not have deemed it worthy of the
royal throne, nor would He while wearing it have been worshipped by all the
host of heaven, angels, archangels, thrones, principalities, dominions, powers.
What word, what thought can represent such great honor done to our race, so
truly marvelous and awful? What angel, what archangel? Not one in any place,
whether in heaven, or upon earth. For such are the mighty works of God, so
great and marvelous are His benefits, that a right description of them exceeds not
only the tongue of men, but even the power of angels.
Wherefore we will for a while close our discourse, and be silent; only
delivering to you this charge, that you repay this our so great Benefactor by a
return which again shall bring round to us all profit. The return is, that we look
with all carefulness to the state of our souls. For this too is the work of His
lovingkindness, that He who stands in no need of anything of ours says that He
is repaid when we take care of our own souls. It is therefore an act of extremist
folly, and one deserving ten thousand chastisements, if we, when such honor has
been lavished upon us, will not even contribute what we can, and that too when
profit comes round to us again by these means, and ten thousand blessings are
laid before us on these conditions. For all these things let us return glory to our
merciful God, not by words only, but much more by works that we may obtain
the good things hereafter, which may it be that we all attain to, through the grace
and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom and with whom, to the
Father and the Holy Ghost, be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Homily 12 on the Gospel of John
John 1:14
"And we beheld His glory, the glory as of the Only-Begotten of the Father, full of
grace and truth."
1. Perhaps we seemed to you the other day needlessly hard upon you and
burdensome, using too sharp language, and extending too far our reproaches
against the sluggishness of the many. Now if we had done this merely from a
desire to vex you, each of you would with cause have been angry; but if, looking
to your advantage, we neglected in our speech what might gratify you, if you
will not give us credit for our forethought, you should at least pardon us on
account of such tender love. For in truth we greatly fear, lest, if we are taking
pains, and you are not willing to manifest the same diligence in listening your
future reckoning may be the more severe. Wherefore we are compelled
continually to arouse and waken you, that nothing of what is said may escape
you. For so you will be enabled to live for the present with much confidence,
and to exhibit it at that Day before the judgment-seat of Christ. Since then we
have lately sufficiently touched you, let us today at the outset enter on the
expressions themselves.
"We beheld," he says, "His glory, the glory as of the Only-Begotten of the
Father."
Having declared that we were made "sons of God," and having shown in
what manner, namely, by the "Word" having been "made Flesh," he again
mentions another advantage which we gain from this same circumstance. What
is it? "We beheld His glory, the glory as of the Only-Begotten of the Father";
which we could not have beheld, had it not been shown to us, by means of a
body like to our own. For if the men of old time could not even bear to look