For Scripture says, "Not the hearers of a law, but the doers of a law shall be
justified." [Romans 2:13] Yea, knowledge itself condemns, when it is without
action and deeds of virtue. Wherefore that we may escape the condemnation, let
us follow after the practice, that we may obtain those good things that are
promised to us, by the grace and love of our Lord Jesus Christ.

## Homily 6 on Philippians

[Philippians 2:5-8]
"Have this mind in you, which was also in Christ Jesus: who, being in the
form of God, counted it not a prize to be on an equality with God, but emptied
Himself, taking the form of a servant, being made in the likeness of men; and
being found in fashion as a man, He humbled Himself, becoming obedient even
unto death, yea, the death of the cross."
Our Lord Jesus Christ, when exhorting His disciples to great actions, places
before them Himself, and the Father, and the Prophets, as examples; as when He
says, "For thus they did unto the Prophets which were before you" [Matthew
5:12; Luke 6:23]; and again, "If they persecuted Me, they will also persecute
you" [John 15:20]; and, "Learn of me, for I am meek" [Matthew 11:29]; and
again, "Be merciful, as your Father which is in heaven is merciful." [Luke 6:36]
This too the blessed Paul did; in exhorting them to humility, he brought forward
Christ. And he does so not here only, but also when he discourses of love
towards the poor, he speaks in this wise. "For you know the grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that though He was rich, yet for your sakes He became poor." [2
Corinthians 8:9] Nothing rouses a great and philosophic soul to the performance
of good works, so much as learning that in this it is likened to God. What
encouragement is equal to this? None. This Paul well knowing, when he would
exhort them to humility, first beseeches and supplicates them, then to awe them
he says, "That ye stand fast in one Spirit"; he says also, that it "is for them an
evident token of perdition, but of your salvation." [Philippians 1:27-28] And last
of all he says this, "Have this mind in you, which was also in Christ Jesus, who,
being in the form of God, counted it not a prize to be on an equality with God,
but emptied Himself, taking upon Him the form of a servant." [Philippians 2:5-7]
Attend, I entreat you, and rouse yourselves. For as a sharp two-edged sword,

wheresoever it falls, though it be among ten thousand phalanxes, easily cuts
through and destroys, because it is sharp on every side, and nought can bear its
edge; so are the words of the Spirit. [Hebrews 4:12; Revelation 1:16] For by
these words he has laid low the followers of Arius of Alexandria, of Paul of
Samosata, of Marcellus the Galatian, of Sabellius the Libyan, of Marcion that
was of Pontus, of Valentinus, of Manes, of Apollinarius of Laodicea, of
Photinus, of Sophronius, and, in one word, all the heresies. Rouse yourselves
then to behold so great a spectacle, so many armies falling by one stroke, lest the
pleasure of such a sight should escape you. For if when chariots contend in the
horse race there is nothing so pleasing as when one of them dashes against and
overthrows whole chariots with their drivers, and after throwing down many
with the charioteers that stood thereon, drives by alone towards the goal, and the
end of the course, and amid the applause and clamor which rises on all sides to
heaven, with coursers winged as it were by that joy and that applause, sweeps
over the whole ground; how much greater will the pleasure be here, when by the
grace of God we overthrow at once and in a body the combinations and devilish
machinations of all these heresies together with their charioteers?
And if it seem good to you, we will first arrange the heresies themselves in
order. Would you have them in the order of their impiety, or of their dates? In the
order of time, for it is difficult to judge of the order of their impiety. First then let
Sabellius the Libyan come forward. What does he assert? That the Father, Son,
and Holy Spirit, are mere names given to one Person. Marcion of Pontus says,
that God the Creator of all things is not good, nor the Father of the good Christ,
but another righteous one, and that he did not take flesh for us. Marcellus, and
Photinus, and Sophronius assert, that the Word is an energy, and that it was this
energy that dwelt in Him who was of the seed of David, and not a personal
substance.
Arius confesses indeed the Son, but only in word; he says that He is a
creature, and much inferior to the Father. And others say that He has not a soul.
Do you see the chariots standing? See then their fall, how he overthrows them all