God, that for eternity they can never sin. Therefore, as Adam did sin,
it is clear that he did not see God through His Essence.
Nevertheless he knew God with a more perfect knowledge than we
do now. Thus in a sense his knowledge was midway between our
knowledge in the present state, and the knowledge we shall have in
heaven, when we see God through His Essence. To make this clear,
we must consider that the vision of God through His Essence is
contradistinguished from the vision of God through His creatures.
Now the higher the creature is, and the more like it is to God, the
more clearly is God seen in it; for instance, a man is seen more
clearly through a mirror in which his image is the more clearly
expressed. Thus God is seen in a much more perfect manner
through His intelligible effects than through those which are only
sensible or corporeal. But in his present state man is impeded as
regards the full and clear consideration of intelligible creatures,
because he is distracted by and occupied with sensible things. Now,
it is written (Eccles. 7:30): "God made man right." And man was
made right by God in this sense, that in him the lower powers were
subjected to the higher, and the higher nature was made so as not to
be impeded by the lower. Wherefore the first man was not impeded
by exterior things from a clear and steady contemplation of the
intelligible effects which he perceived by the radiation of the first
truth, whether by a natural or by a gratuitous knowledge. Hence
Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. xi, 33) that, "perhaps God used to speak
to the first man as He speaks to the angels; by shedding on his mind
a ray of the unchangeable truth, yet without bestowing on him the
experience of which the angels are capable in the participation of the
Divine Essence." Therefore, through these intelligible effects of God,
man knew God then more clearly than we know Him now.
Reply to Objection 1: Man was happy in paradise, but not with that
perfect happiness to which he was destined, which consists in the
vision of the Divine Essence. He was, however, endowed with "a life
of happiness in a certain measure," as Augustine says (Gen. ad lit.
xi, 18), so far as he was gifted with natural integrity and perfection.
Reply to Objection 2: A good will is a well-ordered will; but the will of
the first man would have been ill-ordered had he wished to have,
while in the state of merit, what had been promised to him as a
reward.
Reply to Objection 3: A medium (of knowledge) is twofold; one

through which, and, at the same time, in which, something is seen,
as, for example, a man is seen through a mirror, and is seen with the
mirror: another kind of medium is that whereby we attain to the
knowledge of something unknown; such as the medium in a
demonstration. God was seen without this second kind of medium,
but not without the first kind. For there was no need for the first man
to attain to the knowledge of God by demonstration drawn from an
effect, such as we need; since he knew God simultaneously in His
effects, especially in the intelligible effects, according to His
capacity. Again, we must remark that the obscurity which is implied
in the word enigma may be of two kinds: first, so far as every
creature is something obscure when compared with the immensity
of the Divine light; and thus Adam saw God in an enigma, because
he saw Him in a created effect: secondly, we may take obscurity as
an effect of sin, so far as man is impeded in the consideration of
intelligible things by being preoccupied with sensible things; in
which sense Adam did not see God in an enigma.