The first is by reason of the brevity of his writing; wherefore, he says, "I restrain my pen by
brevity," according to that saying of Horace: "While I labor to be brief, I become obscure."

The second arises from the subtlety of the reasoning which he introduces; thus he says: "truths
gleaned from the deepest teachings of philosophy," which are those doctrines abstracted from the
senses, the principles and conclusions which metaphysics and logic make use of.

The third difficulty arises from the newness of the words used; wherefore he says: "I veil over
by the signification of new words." These words are called "new" either with reference to the
matter, because others treating of this same question did not employ the same vocabulary, or with
reference to those who read them, because they are unaccustomed to such terms.

These three difficulties he adds to the fourth which he had previously mentioned: that is, the
difficulty of the subject; consequently, in regard to those things written in this book, the meaning
is clear only to the wise, to such men as the author himself and the one to whom he has
addressed it. But others who cannot comprehend it are excluded from the reading of it. For
things which are not understood are not read with pleasure. And because his reason for so
writing is connected with preceding statements, he introduces it 'with "therefore," which is a sign
of a conclusion. The meaning is clear.

"Only so much ought one require of me as the intuition of human reason can approximate about
the sublime truths of the Godhead." Here he excuses a defect of the work, because, indeed, one
ought not demand from him in this task any more certitude than that which the human reason, in
mounting up to the divine, is capable of; a position which he justifies by reference to matters of
less importance in other arts, in which only such an end is established for each craftsman as he
can accomplish, one such as human reason allows. A physician does not always, indeed, effect a
cure, but if he omits nothing which he ought to do, he will be without blame; and the same is true
in regard to other arts. Therefore in this work, where the matter is difficult, going beyond the
experience of human nature, the greater leniency ought to be granted if he does not solve the

question with perfect certitude.

Then, when he says: "You must also determine this: whether the seeds of speculation, gathered
from the writings of the blessed Augustine, have in my work borne fruit," he adduces whose
authority he follows in his work, namely, Augustine. Not that he says only those things that are
to be found in the books of Augustine, but because those things which Augustine said regarding
the TrinityÑnamely, that the divine Persons are equal in an absolute sense and are distinguished
according to relationshipsÑhe accepts as seeds and principles, which he uses in resolving this
difficult question; and so this explanation of truth by means of many considerations of reason is
the fruit springing forth from those seeds found in the writings of Augustine himself; but
whether they are acceptable and productive, he leaves to the judgment of him to whom he writes,
thus coming directly to the proposed question.