trifling, in order that we may carry everything back to our home. You are a
wayfarer and traveller, and indeed more insignificant than the wayfarer. How so?
I will tell you. The wayfarer knows when he is going into the inn, and when he is
going out; for the egress as well as the regress is in his own power: but when I
enter the inn, that is to say this present life, I know not when I shall go out: and it
may be that I am providing myself with sustenance for a long time when the
Master suddenly summons me saying "You fool, for whom shall those things be
which you have prepared? For on this very night your soul is being taken from
you." The time of your departure is uncertain, the tenure of your possessions
insecure, there are innumerable precipices, and billows on every side of you.
Why do you rave about shadows? Why desert the reality and run after shadows?
6. I say these things, and shall not cease saying them, causing continual
pain, and dressing the wounds; and this not for the sake of the fallen, but of those
who are still standing. For they have departed, and their career is ended, but
those who are yet standing have gained a more secure position through their
calamities. "What then," you say, "shall we do?" Do one thing only, hate riches,
and love your life— cast away your goods; I do not say all of them, but cut off
the superfluities. Be not covetous of other men's goods, strip not the widow,
plunder not the orphan, seize not his house: I do not address myself to persons
but to facts. But if any one's conscience attacks him, he himself is responsible for
it, not my words. Why are you grasping where you bring ill-will upon yourself?
Grasp where there is a crown to be gained. Strive to lay hold not of earth but of
heaven. "The kingdom of Heaven belongs to violent men and men of violence
take it by force." Why do you lay hold of the poor man who reproaches you? Lay
hold of Christ who praises you for it. Do you see your senselessness and
madness? Do you lay hold of the poor man who has little? Christ says "lay hold
of me; I thank you for it, lay hold of my kingdom and take it by violence." If you
are minded to lay hold of an earthly kingdom, or rather if you are minded to
have designs upon it you are punished; but in the case of the heavenly kingdom
you are punished if you dost not lay hold of it. Where worldly things are

concerned there is ill-will, but where spiritual there is love. Meditate daily on
these things, and if two days hence you see another riding in a chariot, arrayed in
raiment of silk, and elated with pride, be not again dismayed and troubled. Praise
not a rich man, but only him who lives in righteousness. Revile not a poor man,
but learn to have an upright and accurate judgment in all things.
Do not hold aloof from the Church; for nothing is stronger than the Church.
The Church is your hope, your salvation, your refuge. It is higher than the
heaven, it is wider than the earth. It never waxes old, but is always in full vigour.
Wherefore as significant of its solidity and stability Holy Scripture calls it a
mountain: or of its purity a virgin, or of its magnificence a queen; or of its
relationship to God a daughter; and to express its productiveness it calls her
barren who has borne seven: in fact it employs countless names to represent its
nobleness. For as the master of the Church has many names: being called the
Father, and the way, [John 14:6] and the life, [Ibid] and the light, and the arm,
and the propitiation, [1 John 2:2] and the foundation, [1 Corinthians 3:11] and
the door, [John 10:7] and the sinless one, and the treasure, and Lord, and God,
and Son, and the only begotten, and the form of God, [Philippians 2:6] and the
image [Colossians 1:15] of God so is it with the Church itself: does one name
suffice to present the whole truth? By no means. But for this reason there are
countless names, that we may learn something concerning God, though it be but
a small part. Even so the Church also is called by many names. She is called a
virgin, albeit formerly she was an harlot: for this is the miracle wrought by the
Bridegroom, that He took her who was an harlot and has made her a virgin. Oh!
What a new and strange event! With us marriage destroys virginity, but with God
marriage has restored it. With us she who is a virgin, when married, is a virgin
no longer: with Christ she who is an harlot, when married, becomes a virgin.
7. Let the heretic who inquires curiously into the nature of heavenly
generation saying "how did the Father beget the Son?" interpret this single fact,
ask him how did the Church, being an harlot, become a virgin? And how did she
having brought forth children remain a virgin? "For I am jealous over you," says