possession, he it is who now suggests the saying and fancying of these things.
And for this reason he persuades some to suspect there is no hell, that he may
thrust them into hell. As God on the other hand threatens hell, and made hell
ready, that by coming to know of it you might so live as not to fall into hell. And
yet if, when there is a hell, the devil persuades you to these things, how came the
devils to confess it, if it did not exist, whose aim and desire it is that we should
not suspect anything of the kind, that through fearlessness we might become the
more listless, and so fall with them into that fire? How then (it will be said) came
they to confess it? It was through their not bearing the compulsion laid upon
them. Taking all these things into consideration then, let those who talk in this
way leave off deceiving both themselves and others since even for these words
of theirs they will be punished for detracting ([διασύροντες]) from those awful
things, and relaxing the vigor of many who are minded to be in earnest, and do
not even do as much as those barbarians, for they, though they were ignorant of
everything, when they heard that the city was to be destroyed, were so far from
disbelieving, that they even groaned, and girded themselves with sackcloth, and
were confounded, and did not cease to use every means until they had allayed
the wrath. [Jonah 3:5] But do you, who hast had so great experience of facts and
of teaching, make light of what is told you? The contrary then will be your fate.
For as they through fear of the words had not to undergo the vengeance in act, so
thou who despisest the threatening by words, wilt have to undergo the
punishment in very deed. And if now what you are told seems a fable to you, it
will not, however, seem so when the very things convince you, in that Day. Have
you never noticed what He did even in this world? How when He met with two
thieves, He counted them not worthy of the same estate, but one He led into the
Kingdom, and the other He sent away into Hell? And why speak I of a robber
and murderer? For even the Apostle He did not spare, when he had become a
traitor, but even when He saw him rushing to the halter, and hanging, and
bursting asunder in the midst (for he did "burst asunder, and all his bowels
gushed out") [Acts 1:18], still when He foresaw all these things, He let him

suffer all the same, giving you from the present a proof of all that is in the other
world also. Do not then cheat yourselves, through being persuaded of the devil.
These devices are his. For if both judges, and masters, and teachers, and savages,
respect the good, and punish the evil, with what reason is the contrary to be the
case with God, while the good man and he who is not so are deemed worthy of
the same estate? And when will they leave off their wickedness? For they who
now are expecting punishment, and are among so many terrors, those from the
judges and from the laws, and yet do not for this depart from iniquity; when on
their departing this life they are to lay aside even this fear, and are not only not to
be cast into hell, but are even to obtain a kingdom; when will they leave doing
wickedly? Is this then mercy, pray? To add to wickedness, to set up rewards for
iniquity, to count the sober and the unchastened, the faithful and the irreligious,
Paul and the devil, to have the same deserts? But how long am I to be trifling?
Wherefore I exhort you to get you free from this madness, and having grown to
be your own masters, persuade your souls to fear and to tremble, that they may
at once be saved from the hell to come, and may, after passing the life in this
world soberly, attain unto the good things to come by the grace and love towards
man, etc.