I answer that, At the resurrection human nature will be restored not
only in the self-same species but also in the selfsame individual: and
consequently we must observe in the resurrection what is requisite
not only to the specific but also to the individual nature. Now the
specific nature has a certain quantity which it neither exceeds nor
fails without error, and yet this quantity has certain degrees of
latitude and is not to be attached to one fixed measure; and each
individual in the human species aims at some degree of quantity
befitting his individual nature within the bounds of that latitude, and
reaches it at the end of his growth, if there has been no error in the
working of nature, resulting in the addition of something to or the
subtraction of something from the aforesaid quantity: the measure
whereof is gauged according to the proportion of heat as expanding,
and of humidity as expansive, in point of which all are not of the
same power. Therefore all will not rise again of the same quantity,
but each one will rise again of that quantity which would have been
his at the end of his growth if nature had not erred or failed: and the
Divine power will subtract or supply what was excessive or lacking
in man.
Reply to Objection 1: It has already been explained (Article 1, ad 2)
that all are said to rise again of the same age, not as though the
same length of time were befitting to each one, but because the
same state of perfection will be in all, which state is indifferent to a
great or small quantity.
Reply to Objection 2: The quantity of a particular individual
corresponds not only to the form of the species, but also to the
nature or matter of the individual: wherefore the conclusion does not
follow.
Reply to Objection 3: The quantity of those who will be raised from
the dead is not proportionate to the restoring power, because the
latter does not belong to the power of the body---nor to the ashes, as
to the state in which they are before the resurrection---but to nature
which the individual had at first. Nevertheless if the formative power
on account of some defect was unable to effect the due quantity that
is befitting to the species, the Divine power will supply the defect at
the resurrection, as in dwarfs, and in like manner in those who by
immoderate size have exceeded the due bounds of nature.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether all will rise again of the male sex?

Objection 1: It would seem that all will rise again of the male sex. For
it is written (Eph. 4:13) that we shall all meet "unto a perfect man,"
etc. Therefore there will be none but the male sex.
Objection 2: Further, in the world to come all pre-eminence will
cease, as a gloss observes on 1 Cor. 15:24. Now woman is subject to
man in the natural order. Therefore women will rise again not in the
female but in the male sex.
Objection 3: Further, that which is produced incidentally and beside
the intention of nature will not rise again, since all error will be
removed at the resurrection. Now the female sex is produced beside
the intention of nature, through a fault in the formative power of the
seed, which is unable to bring the matter of the fetus to the male
form: wherefore the Philosopher says (De Anima xvi, i.e. De Generat.
Animal. ii) that "the female is a misbegotten male." Therefore the
female sex will not rise again.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xxii): "Those are wiser,
seemingly, who doubt not that both sexes will rise again."
Further, at the resurrection God will restore man to what He made
him at the creation. Now He made woman from the man's rib (Gn.
2:22). Therefore He will also restore the female sex at the
resurrection.
I answer that, Just as, considering the nature of the individual, a
different quantity is due to different men, so also, considering the
nature of the individual, a different sex is due to different men.
Moreover, this same diversity is becoming to the perfection of the
species, the different degrees whereof are filled by this very
difference of sex and quantity. Wherefore just as men will rise again
of various stature, so will they rise again of different sex. And though
there be difference of sex there will be no shame in seeing one
another, since there will no lust to invite them to shameful deeds
which are the cause of shame.
Reply to Objection 1: When it is said: We shall all meet "Christ unto a
perfect man," this refers not to the male sex but to the strength of