to the former: yet in the case before us, where the gain is so great, thou dost not
thus calculate, and will not at length desist from expending without purpose, and
laying out without return?
"But," says one, "this also has a gain." Of what kind, tell me? "It increases
friendships." Nothing is colder than men who are made friends by these things,
by the table, and surfeiting. The friendships of parasites are born only from that
source.
Insult not a thing so marvelous as love, nor say that this is its root. As if one
were to say, that a tree which bore gold and precious stones had not its root of
the same, but that it was gendered of rottenness; so doest even thou: for even
though friendship should be born from that source, nothing could possibly be
colder. But those other tables produce friendship, not with man, but with God;
and that an intense one, so thou be intent on preparing them. For he that expends
part in this way and part in that, even should he have bestowed much, has done
no great thing: but he that expends all in this way, even though he should have
given little, has done the whole. For what is required is that we give, not much or
little, but not less than is in our power. Think we on him with the five talents,
and on him with the two. [Matthew 25:15] Think we on her who cast in those
two mites. [Mark 12:41] Think we on the widow in Elijah's days. She who threw
in those two mites said not, What harm if I keep the one mite for myself, and
give the other? But gave her whole living. [1 Kings 17] But you, in the midst of
so great plenty, art more penurious than she. Let us then not be careless of our
own salvation, but apply ourselves to almsgiving. For nothing is better than this,
as the time to come shall show; meanwhile the present shows it also. Live we
then to the glory of God, and do those things that please Him, that we may be
counted worthy of the good things of promise; which may all we obtain, through
the grace and love toward man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be the glory
and the power and honor, now and ever, and world without end. Amen.

## Homily 2 on Colossians

[Colossians 1:9, 10]
"For this cause we also, since the day we heard it, do not cease to pray and
make request for you, that you may be filled with the knowledge of His will in all
spiritual wisdom and understanding; to walk worthily of the Lord unto all
pleasing, bearing fruit in every good work, and increasing in the knowledge of
God."
"For this cause." What cause? Because we heard of your faith and love,
because we have good hopes, we are hopeful to ask for future blessings also. For
as in the games we cheer on those most who are near upon gaining the victory,
just so does Paul also most exhort those who have achieved the greater part.
"Since the day we heard it," says he, "we do not cease to pray for you." Not
for one day do we pray for you, nor yet for two, nor three. Herein he both shows
his love, and gives them a gentle hint that they had not yet arrived at the end. For
the words, "that you may be filled," are of this significancy. And observe, I pray,
the prudence of this blessed one. He nowhere says that they are destitute of
everything, but that they are deficient; everywhere the words, "that you may be
filled," show this. And again, "unto all pleasing, in every good work"
[Colossians 1:11], and again, "strengthened with all power," and again, "unto all
patience and long-suffering"; for the constant addition of "all" bears witness to
their doing well in part, though, it might be, not in all. And, "that you may be
filled," he says; not, "that you may receive," for they had received; but "that you
may be filled" with what as yet was lacking. Thus both the rebuke was given
without offense, and the praise did not suffer them to sink down, and become
supine, as if it had been complete. But what is, "that you may be filled with the
knowledge of His will"? That through the Son we should be brought unto Him,
and no more through Angels. Now that you must be brought unto Him, you have