FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.9, C.3.

man is affected by a passion, something seems to him fitting, which
does not seem so when he is not so affected: thus that seems good
to a man when angered, which does not seem good when he is calm.
And in this way, the sensitive appetite moves the will, on the part of
the object.
Reply to Objection 1: Nothing hinders that which is better simply and
in itself, from being less excellent in a certain respect. Accordingly
the will is simply more excellent than the sensitive appetite: but in
respect of the man in whom a passion is predominant, in so far as he
is subject to that passion, the sensitive appetite is more excellent.
Reply to Objection 2: Men's acts and choices are in reference to
singulars. Wherefore from the very fact that the sensitive appetite is
a particular power, it has great influence in disposing man so that
something seems to him such or otherwise, in particular cases.
Reply to Objection 3: As the Philosopher says (Polit. i, 2), the reason,
in which resides the will, moves, by its command, the irascible and
concupiscible powers, not, indeed, "by a despotic sovereignty," as a
slave is moved by his master, but by a "royal and politic
sovereignty," as free men are ruled by their governor, and can
nevertheless act counter to his commands. Hence both irascible and
concupiscible can move counter to the will: and accordingly nothing
hinders the will from being moved by them at times.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.9, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the will moves itself?

Objection 1: It would seem that the will does not move itself. For
every mover, as such, is in act: whereas what is moved, is in
potentiality; since "movement is the act of that which is in
potentiality, as such" [Aristotle, Phys. iii, 1]. Now the same is not in
potentiality and in act, in respect of the same. Therefore nothing
moves itself. Neither, therefore, can the will move itself.
Objection 2: Further, the movable is moved on the mover being
present. But the will is always present to itself. If, therefore, it moved
itself, it would always be moving itself, which is clearly false.
Objection 3: Further, the will is moved by the intellect, as stated
above (Article 1). If, therefore, the will move itself, it would follow that
the same thing is at once moved immediately by two movers; which
seems unreasonable. Therefore the will does not move itself.
On the contrary, The will is mistress of its own act, and to it belongs
to will and not to will. But this would not be so, had it not the power
to move itself to will. Therefore it moves itself.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), it belongs to the will to
move the other powers, by reason of the end which is the will's
object. Now, as stated above (Question 8, Article 2), the end is in
things appetible, what the principle is in things intelligible. But it is
evident that the intellect, through its knowledge of the principle,
reduces itself from potentiality to act, as to its knowledge of the
conclusions; and thus it moves itself. And, in like manner, the will,
through its volition of the end, moves itself to will the means.
Reply to Objection 1: It is not in respect of the same that the will
moves itself and is moved: wherefore neither is it in act and in
potentiality in respect of the same. But forasmuch as it actually wills
the end, it reduces itself from potentiality to act, in respect of the
means, so as, in a word, to will them actually.
Reply to Objection 2: The power of the will is always actually present
to itself; but the act of the will, whereby it wills an end, is not always
in the will. But it is by this act that it moves itself. Accordingly it does
not follow that it is always moving itself.