Reply to 6. Simple bodies and their properties remain in composite bodies although in a different
way, as the proper qualities of the elements and their proper movements are found in a mixed
body. What is proper to composite bodies, however, is not found in simple bodies. And so it is
that the more abstract and simple the objects of a science are, the more applicable its principles
are to the other sciences. Thus the principles of mathematics are applicable to natural things, but
not visa versa, because physics presupposes mathematics; but the converse is not true, as is clear
in the De Caelo et Mundo. So there are three levels of sciences concerning natural and
mathematical entities. Some are purely natural and treat of the properties of natural things as
such, like physics, agriculture, and the like. Others are purely mathematical and treat of quantities
absolutely, as geometry considers magnitude and arithmetic numbers. Still others are
intermediate, and these apply mathematical principles to natural things; for instance, music,
astronomy, and the like. These sciences, however, have a closer affinity to mathematics, because
in their thinking that which is physical is, as it were, material, whereas that which is mathematical
is, as it were, formal. For example, music considers sounds, not inasmuch as they are sounds,
but inasmuch as they are proportionable according to numbers; and the same holds in other
sciences. Thus they demonstrate their conclusions concerning natural things, but by means of
mathematics. Therefore nothing prevents their being concerned with sensible matter insofar as
they have something in common with natural science, but insofar as they have something in
common with mathematics they are abstract.

Reply to 7. Because the intermediate sciences mentioned above have something in common with
natural science as regards what is material in their procedure, but differ from it as regards what is

formal in it, nothing prevents these sciences from occasionally having the same conclusions as
natural science. Nevertheless, they do not use the same means of demonstration, unless the
sciences are mixed and one occasionally uses what belongs to another, as the natural scientist
proves that the earth is round from the movement of heavy bodies, while the astronomer proves
it by considering eclipses of the moon.

Reply to 8. As the Commentator says, the Philosopher there did not intend to distinguish
between the speculative sciences, because the natural scientist treats of everything subject to
motion, whether it be corruptible or incorruptible, while the mathematician as such does not treat
of anything subject to motion. But he intended to distinguish between the things studied by the
speculative sciences, which must be treated separately and in order, although these three sorts of
things can be apportioned to the three sciences. For incorruptible and immobile beings pertain
precisely to the metaphysician. However, mobile and incorruptible beings, owing to their
uniformity and regularity, can be determined in their movements by mathematical principles; this
cannot be said of beings that are mobile and corruptible. Therefore, as Ptolemy says, the second
kind of beings is ascribed to mathematics through astronomy, while the third kind remains the
proper domain of natural science alone.