Corinthians 7:28-40] Yet let us attend to what follows, "But she is happier if she
so abide." This state is much better than the other. Wherefore? For many
reasons. For if it is better not to marry at all than to marry, much more in this
case. "But some, you say, could not endure widowhood, and have fallen into
many misfortunes." Yes; because they know not what widowhood is. For it is not
widowhood to be exempt from a second marriage, as neither is it virginity to be
altogether unmarried. For as "that which is comely," and "that you may attend
upon the Lord without distraction," is the mark of the one state, so it is the mark
of the other to be desolate, to "continue in supplications and prayers," to
renounce luxury and pleasure. For "she that lives in pleasure is dead while she
lives." [1 Timothy 5:6] If remaining a widow, you would have the same pomp,
the same show, the same attire, as you had while your husband was living, it
were better for you to marry. For it is not the union that is objectionable, but the
multitude of cares that attend it. But that which is not wrong, thou dost not: but
that which is not indifferent, which is liable to blame, in that you involve
yourself. On this account "some have turned aside after Satan," because they
have not been able to live properly as widows.
Would you know what a widow is, and what a widow's dignity, hear Paul's
account of it. "If she have brought up children, if she have lodged strangers, if
she have washed the Saints' feet, if she have relieved the afflicted, if she have
diligently followed every good work." [1 Timothy 5:10] But when after the death
of your husband, you are arrayed in the same pomp of wealth, no wonder if you
can not support widowhood. Transfer this wealth, therefore, to heaven, and you
will find the burden of widowhood tolerable. But, you say, what if I have
children to succeed to their father's inheritance? Instruct them also to despise
riches. Transfer your own possessions, reserving for them just a sufficiency.
Teach them too to be superior to riches. But what if besides my silver and gold, I
am surrounded by a crowd of slaves, oppressed by a multitude of affairs, how
shall I be equal to the care of all these things, when deprived of the support of
my husband? This is but an excuse, a pretense, as appears from many causes.

For if you do not deserve wealth, nor seek to increase your present possessions,
your burden will be light. To get riches is much more laborious than to take care
of them. If therefore you cut off this one thing, accumulating, and suppliest the
needy out of your substance, God will hold over you His protecting hand. And if
you say this from a real desire to preserve the inheritance of your fatherless
children, and art not, under this pretense, possessed with covetousness; He who
searches the heart knows how to secure their riches, even He who commanded
you to bring up children.
For it is not possible, indeed it is not, that a house established by almsgiving
should suffer any calamity. If it should be unfortunate for a time, in the end it
will prosper. This will be more than spear and shield to all the household. Hear
what the devil says concerning Job. "Have you not made an hedge about him
and about his house, and about all that he has on every side?" [Job 1:10]
Wherefore? Hear Job himself saying, "I was eyes to the blind, and feet was I to
the lame. I was a father to the orphans." [Job 29:15] As he who does not turn
aside from the calamities of others, will not suffer even in his own misfortunes,
because he has learned to sympathize; so he who will not bear the griefs of
sympathy, will learn all sorrow in his own person. And, as in the case of a bodily
disease, if, when the foot is mortified, the hand does not sympathize by cleansing
the wound, washing away the discharge, and applying a plaster, it will suffer the
like disease of its own; so she who will not minister to another when she is not
herself afflicted, will have to bear sufferings of her own. For the evil spreading
from the other part will reach to this also, and the question will not be of
ministering to the other, but of its own cure and relief. So it is here also. He that
will not relieve others, will be a sufferer himself. "You have hedged him in," says
Satan, "within and without," and I dare not attack him! But he suffered
afflictions, you say. True. But those afflictions were the occasion of great good.
His substance was doubled, his reward increased, his righteousness enlarged, his
crown was splendid, his prize glorious. Both his spiritual and temporal blessings
were augmented. He lost his children, but he received, not these restored, but