Again, natural reason has its efficacy from first principles of natural cognition: but that God is
three and one cannot be deduced from principles naturally known, for these are derived from
sense experience, and in sensible things there is found nothing like to three supposita of one
essence; therefore God cannot be known as three and one from reason.

Moreover, according to the words of Ambrose: "It is impossible for anyone to know the secret
of generation; the mind fails; the voice is silent; not only mine, but even that of the angels";
therefore natural reason does not suffice for knowledge of divine generation, and consequently
for knowledge of the Trinity of persons.

Response. I answer that the truth that God is three and one is altogether a matter of faith; and in
no way can it be demonstratively proved. For, although certain reasons can be found (by way of
demonstration ad hoc), they are not necessary, or even very probable except to one who believes
it. This is evident from the fact that in this life we know God only from His effects, as previous
statements have proved. Hence, according to natural cognition, we can know nothing of God
except what we can derive concerning Him from viewing the relationship of effects to Him. Thus
there are things that designate His causality and His eminence over creatures and that deny in
Him any of the imperfections found in effects. The existence of a Trinity of persons, however,
cannot be perceived from a consideration of divine causality, since causality is common to the
whole Trinity. Nor can it be known from His lacking any imperfection. Therefore in no way can
it be demonstratively proved that God is three and one.

#### Answers to objections

1. It may be said: Those things which are many among created beings are in fact one in God: and
therefore, although in every creature there is found a certain kind of trinity, it cannot be
necessarily concluded from this that there is such a trinity in God, except logically, and this kind
of plurality is not sufficient to prove a distinction of persons.

2. It may be answered: The perfection of the number three is found in God according even to the
unity of His essence, not because His essence is subject to numeration, but because in it there is
contained virtually the perfection of every number, as is said in the Arithmetica of Boethius.

3. It may be said: Apart from any distinction of persons, there is equality in the Divinity,
inasmuch as Its wisdom is equal to Its power. Or it can be said that in regard to equality there are
two points of consideration, namely, plurality of supposita, among whom equality exists, and
unity of quantity, which is the cause of equality. The reduction of inequality to equality,
therefore, does not occur by reason of the plurality of supposita, but by reason of the cause; for
just as unity is the cause of equality, so inequality is the cause of plurality. Hence it must be that
the cause of equality precedes the cause of inequality, but not that any kind of inequality is
preceded by some kind of equality: otherwise it would be necessary in an order of numbers that
there should be something before unity and duality, which are unequals; or that in unity itself
there should be found plurality.