brought by the resurrection to the state of its ultimate perfection
which is in the youthful age, at which the movement of growth
terminates, and from which the movement of decrease begins.
Reply to Objection 1: Old age calls for reverence, not on account of
the state of the body which is at fault; but on account of the soul's
wisdom which is taken for granted on account of its being advanced
in years. Wherefore in the elect there will remain the reverence due
to old age on account of the fulness of Divine wisdom which will be
in them, but the defect of old age will not be in them.
Reply to Objection 2: We speak of age not as regards the number of
years, but as regards the state which the human body acquires from
years. Hence Adam is said to have been formed in the youthful age
on account of the particular condition of body which he had at the
first day of his formation. Thus the argument is not to the point.
Reply to Objection 3: The strength of the species is said to be more
perfect in a child than in a young man, as regards the ability to
transform nourishment in a certain way, even as it is more perfect in
the seed than in the mature man. In youth, however, it is more
perfect as regards the term of completion. Wherefore that which
belonged principally to the truth of human nature will be brought to
that perfection which it has in the age of youth, and not to that
perfection which it has in the age of a child, wherein the humors
have not yet reached their ultimate disposition.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether all will rise again of the same stature?

Objection 1: It would seem that all will rise again of the same stature.
For just as man is measured by dimensive quantity, so is he by the
quantity of time. Now the quantity of time will be reduced to the
same measure in all, since all will rise again of the same age.
Therefore the dimensive quantity will also be reduced to the same
measure in all, so that all will rise again of the same stature.
Objection 2: Further, the Philosopher says (De Anima ii, 4) that "all
things in nature have a certain limit end measure of size and
growth." Now this limitation can only arise by virtue of the form, with
which the quantity as well as all the other accidents ought to agree.
Therefore since all men have the same specific form, there should be
the same measure of quantity in respect of matter in all, unless an
error should occur. But the error of nature will be set right at the
resurrection. Therefore all will rise again of the same stature.
Objection 3: Further, it will be impossible for man in rising again to
be of a quantity proportionate to the natural power which first formed
his body; for otherwise those who could not be brought to a greater
quantity by the power of nature will never rise again of a greater
quantity, which is false. Therefore that quantity must needs be
proportionate to the power which will restore the human body by the
resurrection, and to the matter from which it is restored. Now the
selfsame, namely the Divine, power will restore all bodies; and all the
ashes from which the human bodies will be restored are equally
disposed to receive the action of that power. Therefore the
resurrection of all men will bring them to the same quantity: and so
the same conclusion follows.
On the contrary, Natural quantity results from each individual's
nature. Now the nature of the individual will not be altered at the
resurrection. Therefore neither will its natural quantity. But all are
not of the same natural quantity. Therefore all will not rise again of
the same stature.
Further, human nature will be restored by resurrection unto glory or
unto punishment. But there will not be the same quantity of glory or
punishment in all those who rise again. Neither therefore will there
be the same quantity of stature.