them; and they spoke with tongues, and prophesied." [Acts 19:6] ([β] ) The gift
is twofold: tongues and prophesyings. Hence is shown an important doctrine,
that the baptism of John is incomplete. And he does not say, "Baptism" of
forgiveness, but, "of repentance." What (is it) then? These had not the Spirit:
they were not so fervent, not even instructed. And why did (Apollos) not receive
baptism? (The case) seems to me to be this: Great was the boldness of the man.
"He taught diligently the things concerning Jesus," but he needed more diligent
teaching. Thus, though not knowing all, by his zeal he attracted the Holy Ghost,
in the same manner as Cornelius and his company.
Perhaps it is the wish of many, Oh that we had the baptism of John now!
But (if we had), many would still be careless of a life of virtue, and it might be
thought that each for this, and not for the kingdom of heaven's sake, aimed at
virtue. There would be many false prophets: for then "they which are approved"
would not be very "manifest." [1 Corinthians 11:19] As, "blessed are they that
have not seen and yet have believed" [John 20:29], so they that (believe) without
signs. "Except," says (Christ), "ye see signs, you will not believe." [John 4:48]
For we lose nothing (by lack of miracles), if we will but take heed to ourselves.
We have the sum and substance of the good things: through baptism we received
remission of sins, sanctification, participation of the Spirit, adoption, eternal life.
What would ye more? Signs? But they come to an end ([ἀ] [λλὰ καταργεἵται]).
You have "faith, hope, charity," the abiding things: these seek thou, these are
greater than signs. Nothing is equal to charity. For "greater than all," says he, "is
charity." [cf. 1 Corinthians 13:5] But now, love is in jeopardy, for only its name
is left behind, while the reality is nowhere (seen), but we are divided each from
the other. What then shall one do to reunite (ourselves)? For to find fault is easy,
but how may one make friendship, this is the point to be studied; how we may
bring together the scattered members. For be it so, that we have one Church, or
one doctrine— yet this is not the (main) consideration: no, the evil is, that in
these we have not fellowship— "living peaceably," as the Apostle says, "with all
men" [Romans 12:18], on the contrary, we are at variance one with another. For

be it that we are not having fights every day, yet look not thou to this, but (to
this), that neither have we charity, genuine and unswerving. There is need of
bandages and oil. Let us bear it in mind, that charity is the cognizance of the
disciples of Christ: that without this, all else avails nothing: that it is an easy task
if we will. Yes, say you, we know all this, but how (to go to work) that it may be
achieved? What (to do), that it may be effected? In what way, that we may love
one another? First, let us put away the things which are subversive of charity,
and then we shall establish this. Let none be resentful, none be envious, none
rejoicing in (others') misfortunes: these are the things that hinder love; well then,
the things that make it are of the other sort. For it is not enough to put away the
things that hinder; the things that establish must also be forthcoming. Now
Sirach tells us the things that are subversive (of friendship), and does not go on
to speak of the things which make union. "Reproaching," he says, "and revealing
of a secret, and a treacherous wound." [cf.Sirach 22:27] But in speaking of the
men of those times, these things might well be named, seeing they were carnal:
but in our case, God forbid they should be (even) named. Not from these things
do we bring our inducements for you, but from the others. For us, there is
nothing good without friendship. Let there be good things without number, but
what is the benefit— be it wealth, be it luxury— without friendship? No
possession equal to this, even in matters of this life, just as there is nothing
worse than men hating (us). "Charity hides a multitude of sins" [1 Peter 4:8]: but
enmity, even where sins are not, suspects them to be. It is not enough not to be
an enemy; no, one must also love. Bethink you, that Christ has bidden, and this
is enough. Even affliction makes friendships, and draws (men) together. "What
then," say you, "now, when there is no affliction? Say, how (are we to act) to
become friends?" Have ye not other friends, I ask? In what way are you their
friends, how do ye continue such? For a beginning, let none have any enemy:
this (in itself) is not a small matter: let none envy; it is not possible to accuse the
man who envies not. (b) How then shall we be warmly affected? What makes
love of persons? Beauty of person. Then let us also make our souls beautiful, and