Ver. 14. "That we may be no longer."— The word, "no longer," shows that
they had of old been in this case, and he reckons himself moreover as a subject
for correction, and corrects himself. For this cause, he would say, are there so
many workmen, that the building may not be shaken, may not be "carried
about," that the stones may be firmly fixed. For this is the character of children,
to be tossed to and fro, to be carried about and shaken. "That we may be no
longer," says he, "children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind
of doctrine, by the sleight of men, in craftiness, after the wiles of error." "And
carried about," says he, "with every wind." He comes to this figure of speech, to
point out in how great peril doubting souls are. "With every wind," says he, "by
the sleight of men, in craftiness, after the wiles of error." The word "sleight"
means the art of gamesters. Such are the "crafty," whenever they lay hold on the
simpler sort. For they also change and shift about everything. He here glances
also at human life.
Ver. 15, 16. "But speaking truth," says he, "in love, may grow up in all
things into Him, which is the Head, even Christ, from whom," (that is, from
Christ,) "all the body fitly framed and knit together, through that which every
joint supplies, according to the working in due measure of each several part,
makes increase of the body unto the building up of itself in love."
He expresses himself with great obscurity, from his desire to utter
everything at once. What he means, however, is this. In the same way as the
spirit, or vital principle, which descends from the brain, communicates the
sensitive faculty which is conveyed through the nerves, not simply to all the
members, but according to the proportion of each member, to that which is
capable of receiving more, more, to that which is capable of less, less, (for the
spirit is the root or source;) so also is Christ. For the souls of men being
dependent upon Him as members, His provident care, and supply of the spiritual
gifts according to a due proportion in the measure of every single member,
effects their increase. But what is the meaning of this, "by the touch of the
supply"? that is to say, by the sensitive faculty. For that spirit which is supplied

to the members from the head, "touches," each single member, and thus actuates
it. As though one should say, "the body receiving the supply according to the
proportion of its several members, thus makes the increase"; or, in other words,
"the members receiving the supply according to the proportion of their proper
measure, thus make increase"; or otherwise again thus, the spirit flowing
plenteously from above, and touching all the members, and supplying them as
each is capable of "receiving it, thus makes increase." But wherefore does he
add, "in love"? Because in no other way is it possible for that Spirit to descend.
For as, in case a hand should happen to be torn from the body, the spirit which
proceeds from the brain seeks the limb, and if it finds it not, does not leap forth
from the body, and fly about and go to the hand, but if it finds it not in its place,
does not touch it; so also will it be here, if we be not bound together in love. All
these expressions he uses as tending to humility. For what, he seems to say, if
this or that man receives more than another? He has received the same Spirit,
sent forth from the same Head, effectually working in all alike, communicating
itself to all alike.
"Fitly framed and knit together."
That is, having great care bestowed upon it; for the body must not be put
together anyhow, but with exceeding art and nicety, since if it gets out of place, it
is no longer. So that each must not only be united to the body, but also occupy
his proper place, since if you shall go beyond this, you are not united to it,
neither do you receive the Spirit. Do you not see, that in those dislocations of the
bones which take place in any accident, when a bone gets out of its proper place
and occupies that of another, how it injures the whole body, and oftentimes will
produce death? So that sometimes it will be found to be no longer worth
preserving. For many in many cases will cut it off, and leave a void in its place;
because everywhere what is in excess is an evil. And so again with the elements,
if they lose their proper proportion and be in excess, they impair the whole
system. This is the meaning of the being "fitly framed and knit together."
Consider then of how vast importance it is, that each should remain in his own