rebuke. This above all it was that hindered them, the saying, "Preaching unto
you to turn from these vanities unto God." [Acts 14:15] We are men indeed, they
say, but greater than these: for these are dead things. Mark how they not only
subvert (the false), but teach (the true), saying nothing about things invisible—
"Who made," say they, "heaven and earth, and the sea, and all things that are
therein. Who in times past," etc. (v. 16, 17.) He names as witnesses even the
years (in their courses). "And there came there certain Jews," etc. [Acts 14:19] O
that Jewish madness! Among a people that had so honored the Apostles, they
had the hardihood to come, and to stone Paul. "And they dragged him out of the
city," being afraid of those (others)—"Supposing he had been dead." (k)
"Howbeit," etc. "and came into the city." [Acts 14:20] For that the spirits of the
disciples might not be downcast because they who were accounted gods suffered
such treatment, they came in unto them and discoursed. "Then on the morrow,"
etc. And observe, first he goes forth to Derbe, and then comes back to Lystra and
Iconium and Antioch, [Acts 14:21] giving way to them while their passions are
roused, but when they have ceased, then attacking them again. Do you mark, that
it was not by (supernatural) grace that they managed all that they did, but by
their own diligence? "Confirming," it says "the souls of the disciples:" [ἐ]
[πιστηρίζοντες], "further establishing;" so that they were established, but they
added more thereto. "And that we must," etc. [Acts 14:22]: they foretold (this),
that they might not be offended. "And when they had appointed for them," etc.
Again the ordinations accompanied with fastings: and again fasting, that
purifying of our souls. (m) "And having prayed," it says, "with fastings, they
commended them unto the Lord" [Acts 14:23]: they taught them to fast also in
their trials. (o) Why did they not make elders in Cyprus nor in Samaria? Because
the latter was near to Jerusalem, the former to Antioch, and the word was strong
there; whereas in those parts they needed much consolation, especially they of
the Gentiles, who behooved to have much instruction. "And when they had
come," etc. [Acts 14:27] They came, teaching them that with good reason had
they been ordained by the Spirit. (n) They said not what they themselves, but

"what God had done with them." It seems to me, that they mean their trials. It
was not for nothing that they come here, nor to rest, but providentially guided by
the Spirit, to the end that the preaching to the Gentiles might be firmly
established. (p) And mark Paul's ardor. He does not ask whether it be right to
speak to Gentiles, but he straightway speaks: therefore it is that he says, "I did
not refer myself to flesh and blood." [Galatians 1:16]
For it is indeed a great thing, a great, a generous soul (like this)! How many
have since believed, and none of them all has shone like him! What we want is
earnestness, exceeding ardor, a soul ready to encounter death. Else is it not
possible to attain unto the Kingdom, not being crucified. Let us not deceive
ourselves. For if in war it is impossible to come off safe while living daintily,
and trafficking, and huckstering and idling, much more in this war. Or think ye
not that it is a war worse than all others? (Infra, p. 204, note 1.) "For we wrestle
not," he says, "against flesh and blood." [Ephesians 6:12] Since even while
taking our meals and walking, and bathing, the enemy is present with us, and
knows no time of truce, except that of sleep only: nay, often even then he carries
on the war, injecting into us unclean thoughts, and making us lewd by means of
dreams. We watch not, we do not rouse ourselves up, do not look to the
multitude of the forces opposed to us, do not reflect, that this very thing
constitutes the greatest misfortune— that though surrounded by so great wars,
we live daintily as in time of peace. Believe me, worse than Paul suffered may
have to be suffered now. Those enemies wounded him with stones: there is a
wounding with words, even worse than stones. What then must we do? The
same that he did: he did not hate those who cast stones at him, but after they had
dragged him out, he entered again into their city, to be a benefactor to those who
had done him such wrongs. If you also endurest him who harshly insults you,
and has done you wrongs, then have you too been stoned. Say not, "I have done
him no injury." For what injury had Paul done, that he should be stoned? He was
announcing a Kingdom, he was bringing men away from error, and bringing
them to God: benefits these, worthy of crowns, worthy of proclamation by voice