learned, but it remains for you to learn this, and why He sent the Son. For had it
been that we were to have been saved by Angels, He would not have sent Him,
would not have given Him up. "In all spiritual wisdom," he says, "and
understanding." For since the philosophers deceived them; I wish you, he says,
to be in spiritual wisdom, not after the wisdom of men. But if in order to know
the will of God, there needs spiritual wisdom; to know His Essence what it is,
there is need of continual prayers.
And Paul shows here, that since that time he has been praying, and has not
yet prevailed, and yet has not desisted; for the words, "from the day we heard it,"
show this. But it implies condemnation to them, if, from that time, even assisted
by prayers, they had not amended themselves. "And making request," he says,
with much earnestness, for this the expression "ye knew" shows. But it is
necessary still to know somewhat besides. "To walk worthily," he says, "of the
Lord." Here he speaks of life and its works, for so he does also everywhere: with
faith he always couples conduct. "Unto all pleasing." And how, "all pleasing"?
"Bearing fruit in every good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God."
Seeing, says he, He has fully revealed Himself unto you, and seeing you have
received knowledge so great; do ye then show forth a conduct worthy of the
faith; for this needs elevated conduct, greater far than the old dispensation. For,
he that has known God, and been counted worthy to be God's servant, yea,
rather, even His Son, see how great virtue he needs. "Strengthened with all
power." He is here speaking of trials and persecutions. We pray that you might
be filled with strength, that you faint not for sorrow, nor despair. "According to
the might of His glory." But that you may take up again such forwardness as it
becomes the power of His glory to give. "Unto all patience and long-suffering."
What he says is of this sort. Summarily, he says, we pray that you may lead a life
of virtue, and worthy of your citizenship, and may stand firmly, being
strengthened as it is reasonable to be strengthened by God. For this cause he
does not as yet touch upon doctrines, but dwells upon life, wherein he had
nothing to charge them with, and having praised them where praise was due, he

then comes down to accusation. And this he does everywhere: when he is about
writing to any with somewhat to blame them for, and somewhat to praise, he first
praises them, and then comes down to his charges. For he first conciliates the
hearer, and frees his accusation from all suspicion, and shows that for his own
part he could have been glad to praise them throughout; but by the necessity of
the case is forced into saying what he does. And so he does in the first Epistle to
the Corinthians. For after having exceedingly praised them as loving him, even
from the case of the fornicator, he comes down to accuse them. But in that to the
Galatians not so, but the reverse. Yea, rather, if one should look close into it,
even there the accusation follows upon praise. For seeing he had no good deeds
of theirs then to speak of, and the charge was an exceeding grave one, and they
were every one of them corrupted; and were able to bear it because they were
strong, he begins with accusation, saying, "I marvel." [Galatians 1:6] So that this
also is praise. But afterwards he praises them, not for what they were, but what
they had been, saying, "If possible, you would have plucked out your eyes, and
given them to me." [Galatians 5:15].
"Bearing fruit," he says: this has reference to works. "Strengthened": this to
trials. "Unto all patience and longsuffering": long-suffering towards one another,
patience towards those without. For longsuffering is toward those whom we can
requite, but patience toward those whom we cannot. For this reason the term
patient is never applied to God, but longsuffering frequently; as this same
blessed one says otherwhere in his writings, "Or do you despise the riches of His
goodness, and forbearance, and longsuffering?" "Unto all pleasing." Not, one
while, and afterwards not so. "In all spiritual wisdom," he says, "and
understanding." For otherwise it is not possible to know His will. Although
indeed they thought they had His will; but that wisdom was not spiritual. "To
walk," says he, "worthily of the Lord." For this is the way of the best life. For he
that has understood God's love to man, (and he does understand it if he have seen
the Son delivered up,) will have greater forwardness. And besides, we pray not
for this alone that you may know, but that you may show forth your knowledge