1 Cor. viii. 11.

"He began to show to His disciples, how that He must go unto Jerusalem, and suffer many things
of the priests, and be rejected, and crucified, and rise again the third day." He who was
acknowledged by Peter as Christ, who pronounced him blessed because the Father had revealed
the Son of the living God to him, said that He must Himself suffer many things, and be crucified;
and then He rebuked Peter, who imagined that He was the Christ as the generality of men supposed
[that the Christ should be], and was averse to the idea of His suffering, [and] said to the disciples,
"If any man will come after Me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow Me. For
whosoever will save his life, shall lose it; and whosoever will lose it for My sake shall save it."
For these things Christ spoke openly, He being Himself the Saviour of those who should be delivered
over to death for their confession of Him, and lose their lives.
5. If, however, He was Himself not to suffer, but should fly away from Jesus, why did He exhort
His disciples to take up the cross and follow Him,—that cross which these men represent Him as
not having taken up, but [speak of Him] as having relinquished the dispensation of suffering? For
that He did not say this with reference to the acknowledging of the Stauros (cross) above, as some
among them venture to expound, but with respect to the suffering which He should Himself undergo,
and that His disciples should endure, He implies when He says, "For whosoever will save his life,
shall lose it; and whosoever will lose, shall find it." And that His disciples must suffer for His sake,
He [implied when He] said to the Jews, "Behold, I send you prophets, and wise men, and scribes:
and some of them ye shall kill and crucify." And to the disciples He was wont to say, "And ye
shall stand before governors and kings for My sake; and they shall scourge some of you, and slay
you, and persecute you from city to city." He knew, therefore, both those who should suffer
persecution, and He knew those who should have to be scourged and slain because of Him; and
He did not speak of any other cross, but of the suffering which He should Himself undergo first,
and His disciples afterwards. For this purpose did He give them this exhortation: "Fear not them
which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul; but rather fear Him who is able to send both
soul and body into hell;" [thus exhorting them] to hold fast those professions of faith which they
had made in reference to Him. For He promised to confess before His Father those who should
confess His name before men; but declared that He would deny those who should deny Him, and
would be ashamed of those who should be ashamed to confess Him. And although these things are
so, some of these men have proceeded to such a degree of temerity, that they even pour contempt
upon the martyrs, and vituperate those who are slain on account of the confession of the Lord, and
who suffer all things predicted by the Lord, and who in this respect strive to follow the footprints