Rom. xiii. 1—7.

[namely] his younger son, he ordered the fatted calf to be killed, and he gave him the best robe.
Also by the parable of the workmen who were sent into the vineyard at different periods of the day,
one and the same God is declared as having called some in the beginning, when the world was
first created; but others afterwards, and others during the intermediate period, others after a long
lapse of time, and others again in the end of time; so that there are many workmen in their
generations, but only one householder who calls them together. For there is but one vineyard, since
there is also but one righteousness, and one dispensator, for there is one Spirit of God who arranges
all things; and in like manner is there one hire, for they all received a penny each man, having
[stamped upon it] the royal image and superscription, the knowledge of the Son of God, which is
immortality. And therefore He began by giving the hire to those [who were engaged] last, because
in the last times, when the Lord was revealed He presented Himself to all [as their reward].
8. Then, in the case of the publican, who excelled the Pharisee in prayer, [we find] that it was
not because he worshipped another Father that he received testimony from the Lord that he was
justified rather [than the other]; but because with great humility, apart from all boasting and pride,
he made confession to the same God. The parable of the two sons also: those who are sent into
the vineyard, of whom one indeed opposed his father, but afterwards repented, when repentance
profited him nothing; the other, however, promised to go, at once assuring his father, but he did
not go (for "every man is a liar;" "to will is present with him, but he finds not means to
perform"),—[this parable, I say], points out one and the same Father. Then, again, this truth was
clearly shown forth by the parable of the fig-tree, of which the Lord says, "Behold, now these three
years I come seeking fruit on this fig-tree, but I find none" (pointing onwards, by the prophets,
to His advent, by whom He came from time to time, seeking the fruit of righteousness from them,
which he did not find), and also by the circumstance that, for the reason already mentioned, the
fig-tree should be hewn down. And, without using a parable, the Lord said to Jerusalem, "O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets, and stonest those that are sent unto thee; how
often would I have gathered thy children together, as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings,
and ye would not! Behold, your house shall be left unto you desolate." For that which had been
said in the parable, "Behold, for three years I come seeking fruit," and in clear terms, again, [where
He says], "How often would I have gathered thy children together," shall be [found] a falsehood,
if we do not understand His advent, which is [announced] by the prophets—if, in fact, He came to