The spiritual savour of being a people

268. The word of God also invites us to recognise that we are a people: “Once you were no people
but now you are God’s people” (1 Pet 2:10). To be evangelizers of souls, we need to develop a
spiritual taste for being close to people’s lives and to discover that this is itself a source of greater

joy. Mission is at once a passion for Jesus and a passion for his people. When we stand before
Jesus crucified, we see the depth of his love which exalts and sustains us, but at the same time,
unless we are blind, we begin to realize that Jesus’ gaze, burning with love, expands to embrace
all his people. We realize once more that he wants to make use of us to draw closer to his beloved
people. He takes us from the midst of his people and he sends us to his people; without this sense
of belonging we cannot understand our deepest identity.

269. Jesus himself is the model of this method of evangelization which brings us to the very heart
of his people. How good it is for us to contemplate the closeness which he shows to everyone! If
he speaks to someone, he looks into their eyes with deep love and concern: “Jesus, looking upon
him, loved him” (Mk 10:21). We see how accessible he is, as he draws near the blind man (cf. Mk
10:46-52) and eats and drinks with sinners (cf. Mk 2:16) without worrying about being thought a
glutton and a drunkard himself (cf. Mt 11:19). We see his sensitivity in allowing a sinful woman to
anoint his feet (cf. Lk 7:36-50) and in receiving Nicodemus by night (cf. Jn 3:1-15). Jesus’ sacrifice
on the cross is nothing else than the culmination of the way he lived his entire life. Moved by his
example, we want to enter fully into the fabric of society, sharing the lives of all, listening to their
concerns, helping them materially and spiritually in their needs, rejoicing with those who rejoice,
weeping with those who weep; arm in arm with others, we are committed to building a new world.
But we do so not from a sense of obligation, not as a burdensome duty, but as the result of a
personal decision which brings us joy and gives meaning to our lives.

270. Sometimes we are tempted to be that kind of Christian who keeps the Lord’s wounds at arm’s
length. Yet Jesus wants us to touch human misery, to touch the suffering flesh of others. He hopes
that we will stop looking for those personal or communal niches which shelter us from the
maelstrom of human misfortune and instead enter into the reality of other people’s lives and know
the power of tenderness. Whenever we do so, our lives become wonderfully complicated and we
experience intensely what it is to be a people, to be part of a people.

271. It is true that in our dealings with the world, we are told to give reasons for our hope, but not
as an enemy who critiques and condemns. We are told quite clearly: “do so with gentleness and
reverence” (1 Pet 3:15) and “if possible, so far as it depends upon you, live peaceably with all”
(Rom 12:18). We are also told to overcome “evil with good” (Rom 12:21) and to “work for the good
of all” (Gal 6:10). Far from trying to appear better than others, we should “in humility count others
better” than ourselves (Phil 2:3). The Lord’s apostles themselves enjoyed “favour with all the
people” (Acts 2:47; 4:21, 33; 5:13). Clearly Jesus does not want us to be grandees who look down
upon others, but men and women of the people. This is not an idea of the Pope, or one pastoral
option among others; they are injunctions contained in the word of God which are so clear, direct
and convincing that they need no interpretations which might diminish their power to challenge us.
Let us live them sine glossa, without commentaries. By so doing we will know the missionary joy of
sharing life with God’s faithful people as we strive to light a fire in the heart of the world.