Now we must consider how that can be. In every active principle the perfection of its
power depends on some superior active principle: for a secondary agent acts by virtue
of the power of the prime agent. So long then as the secondary agent remains
under the power of the prime agent, it will act unfailingly: but it will fail in its action
whenever it happens to swerve from the order of the prime agent, as appears in an
instrument when it ceases to respond to the movement of the agent who uses it. Now it
has been said above that in the order of moral actions principles go before volition, the
apprehensive faculty and the object apprehended, which is the end in view. But since to
everything movable there corresponds a proper motive power, not any and every
apprehensive faculty is the due motive power of any and every appetite, but one
apprehension is the proper motive of one appetite, another of another. As then the
sensible apprehensive faculty is the proper motive power of the sensible appetite, so
the proper motive power of the will is reason itself. Further, as reason can apprehend
many sorts of good things and many ends of action; as moreover every power has its
own proper end; the will also must have some object and end of action and prime
motive, and that must be not any and every sort of good, but some definite good.
Whenever then the will tends to act under the motive of an apprehension of reason
representing to it its own proper good, a due action ensues. But when the will bursts out
into action upon the apprehension of the sensible apprehensive faculty, or even upon
the apprehension of reason itself, representing some other good than the proper good
of the will, there ensues in the action of the will a moral fault. Therefore any faulty
action in the will is preceded by a lack of due regard to reason and to the proper end of
willing. I say `a lack of due regard to reason,' in such cases as when, upon some
sudden aprehension of sense, the will tends to some good that is pleasant according to
sense. I say `a lack of due regard to the proper end of willing,' in cases when the reason
arrives by reasoning at some good, which is not either now or in this way good, and still
the will tends to it as though it were its proper good. Now this lack of due regard is
voluntary: for it is in the power of the will to will and not to will: it is likewise in its power
to direct reason actually to consider or to cease from considering, or to consider this or
that. Still this failure of due consideration is not a moral evil: for, consideration or
no consideration, or whatever the consideration be on reason's part, there is not sin until
the will comes to tend to some undue end, which then is an act of will. -- Thus it remains
true that in moral as well as in physical actions, evil is not caused by good except
accidentally.