individual selves, but only according to their species; for in this
respect they are incorruptible. They are represented as saying (Job
22:14): "The clouds are His covert; and He doth not consider our
things; and He walketh about the poles of heaven." Rabbi Moses,
however, excluded men from the generality of things corruptible, on
account of the excellence of the intellect which they possess, but in
reference to all else that suffers corruption he adhered to the opinion
of the others.
We must say, however, that all things are subject to divine
providence, not only in general, but even in their own individual
selves. This is mad evident thus. For since every agent acts for an
end, the ordering of effects towards that end extends as far as the
causality of the first agent extends. Whence it happens that in the
effects of an agent something takes place which has no reference
towards the end, because the effect comes from a cause other than,
and outside the intention of the agent. But the causality of God, Who
is the first agent, extends to all being, not only as to constituent
principles of species, but also as to the individualizing principles;
not only of things incorruptible, but also of things corruptible. Hence
all things that exist in whatsoever manner are necessarily directed
by God towards some end; as the Apostle says: "Those things that
are of God are well ordered" (Rm. 13:1). Since, therefore, as the
providence of God is nothing less than the type of the order of things
towards an end, as we have said; it necessarily follows that all
things, inasmuch as they participate in existence, must likewise be
subject to divine providence. It has also been shown (Question 14,
Articles 6,11) that God knows all things, both universal and
particular. And since His knowledge may be compared to the things
themselves, as the knowledge of art to the objects of art, all things
must of necessity come under His ordering; as all things wrought by
art are subject to the ordering of that art.
Reply to Objection 1: There is a difference between universal and
particular causes. A thing can escape the order of a particular cause;
but not the order of a universal cause. For nothing escapes the order
of a particular cause, except through the intervention and hindrance
of some other particular cause; as, for instance, wood may be
prevented from burning, by the action of water. Since then, all
particular causes are included under the universal cause, it could
not be that any effect should take place outside the range of that
universal cause. So far then as an effect escapes the order of a
particular cause, it is said to be casual or fortuitous in respect to that

cause; but if we regard the universal cause, outside whose range no
effect can happen, it is said to be foreseen. Thus, for instance, the
meeting of two servants, although to them it appears a chance
circumstance, has been fully foreseen by their master, who has
purposely sent to meet at the one place, in such a way that the one
knows not about the other.
Reply to Objection 2: It is otherwise with one who has care of a
particular thing, and one whose providence is universal, because a
particular provider excludes all defects from what is subject to his
care as far as he can; whereas, one who provides universally allows
some little defect to remain, lest the good of the whole should be
hindered. Hence, corruption and defects in natural things are said to
be contrary to some particular nature; yet they are in keeping with
the plan of universal nature; inasmuch as the defect in one thing
yields to the good of another, or even to the universal good: for the
corruption of one is the generation of another, and through this it is
that a species is kept in existence. Since God, then, provides
universally for all being, it belongs to His providence to permit
certain defects in particular effects, that the perfect good of the
universe may not be hindered, for if all evil were prevented, much
good would be absent from the universe. A lion would cease to live,
if there were no slaying of animals; and there would be no patience
of martyrs if there were no tyrannical persecution. Thus Augustine
says (Enchiridion 2): "Almighty God would in no wise permit evil to
exist in His works, unless He were so almighty and so good as to
produce good even from evil." It would appear that it was on account
of these two arguments to which we have just replied, that some
were persuaded to consider corruptible things---e.g. casual and evil
things---as removed from the care of divine providence.
Reply to Objection 3: Man is not the author of nature; but he uses
natural things in applying art and virtue to his own use. Hence
human providence does not reach to that which takes place in nature
from necessity; but divine providence extends thus far, since God is
the author of nature. Apparently it was this argument that moved
those who withdrew the course of nature from the care of divine
providence, attributing it rather to the necessity of matter, as
Democritus, and others of the ancients.
Reply to Objection 4: When it is said that God left man to himself,
this does not mean that man is exempt from divine providence; but
merely that he has not a prefixed operating force determined to only