"Behold, you are made whole, sin no more." [John 5:14] They therefore, having
understood that he was palsied on account of sin, said, "Well, that other was
palsied because of his sins; but concerning this man, what wouldest Thou say?
Has he sinned? It is not possible to say so, for he is blind from his birth. Have
his parents sinned? Neither can one say this, for the child suffers not punishment
for the father." As therefore when we see a child evil entreated, we exclaim,
"What can one say of this? What has the child done?" not as asking a question,
but as being perplexed, so the disciples spoke here, not so much asking for
information, as being in perplexity. What then says Christ?

John 9:3
"Neither has this man sinned, nor his parents."
This He says not as acquitting them of sins, for He says not simply,
"Neither has this man sinned, nor his parents," but adds, "that he should have
been born blind — but that the Son of God should be glorified in him." "For both
this man has sinned and his parents, but his blindness proceeds not from that."
And this He said, not signifying that though this man indeed was not in such
case, yet that others had been made blind from such a cause, the sins of their
parents, since it cannot be that when one sins another should be punished. For if
we allow this, we must also allow that he sinned before his birth. As therefore
when He declared, "neither has this man sinned," He said not that it is possible
to sin from one's very birth, and be punished for it; so when He said, "nor his
parents," He said not that one may be punished for his parents' sake. This
supposition He re moves by the mouth of Ezekiel; "As I live says the Lord, this
proverb shall not be, that is used, The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the
children's teeth are set on edge." [Ezekiel 18:3] And Moses says, "The father
shall not die for the child, neither shall the child die for the father."
[Deuteronomy 24:16] And of a certain king Scripture says, that for this very
reason he did not this thing, observing the law of Moses. But if any one argue,
"How then is it said, 'Who visits the sins of the parents upon the children unto
the third and fourth generation'?" [Deuteronomy 5:9]; we should make this
answer, that the assertion is not universal, but that it is spoken with reference to
certain who came out of Egypt. And its meaning is of this kind; "Since these who
have come out of Egypt, after signs and wonders, have become worse than their
forefathers who saw none of these things, they shall suffer," It says, "the same
that those others suffered, since they have dared the same crimes." And that it
was spoken of those men, any one who will give attention to the passage will
more certainly know. Wherefore then was he born blind?

"That the glory of God should be made manifest," He says.
Lo, here again is another difficulty, if without this man's punishment, it was
not possible that the glory of God should be shown. Certainly it is not said that it
was impossible, for it was possible, but, "that it might be manifested even in this
man." "What," says some one, "did he suffer wrong for the glory of God?" What
wrong, tell me? For what if God had never willed to produce him at all? But I
assert that he even received benefit from his blindness: since he recovered the
sight of the eyes within. What were the Jews profited by their eyes? They
incurred the heavier punishment, being blinded even while they saw. And what
injury had this man by his blindness? For by means of it he recovered sight. As
then the evils of the present life are not evils, so neither are the good things
good; sin alone is an evil, but blindness is not an evil. And He who had brought
this man from not being into being, had also power to leave him as he was.
2. But some say, that this conjunction is not at all expressive of cause, but
relates to the consequence of the miracle; as when He says, "For judgment I
have come into this world, that they which see not might see, and that they which
see might be made blind" [John 9:39]; and yet it was not for this He came, that
those who saw might be made blind. And again Paul, "Because that which may
be known of God is manifested in them, that they may be without excuse"
[Romans 1:19-20]; yet He showed it not unto them for this, that they might be
deprived of excuse, but that they might obtain excuse. And again in another
place, "The Law entered, that the offense might abound" [Romans 5:20]; yet it
was not for this that it entered, but that sin might be checked. Do you see
everywhere that the conjunction relates to the consequence? For as some
excellent architect may build part of a house, and leave the rest unfinished, so
that to those who believe not he may prove, by means of that remnant, that he is
author of the whole; so also God joins together and completes our body, as it
were a house decayed, healing the withered hand, bracing the palsied limbs,
straightening the lame, cleansing the lepers, raising up the sick, making sound
the crippled, recalling the dead from death, opening the eyes that were closed, or