prophet." [Matthew 13:3-5]
And wherefore does he not address his discourse at all to her, but to the
man? Because it depended more on him.
But see how inoffensive he makes his accusation, as relating a history rather
than bringing a charge.
4. "But when Herod's birth-day was kept," says he, "the daughter of
Herodias danced before them, and pleased Herod." [Matthew 13:6] O diabolical
revel! O satanic spectacle! O lawless dancing! And more lawless reward for the
dancing. For a murder more impious than all murders was perpetrated, and he
that was worthy to be crowned and publicly honored, was slain in the midst, and
the trophy of the devils was set on the table.
And the means too of the victory were worthy of the deeds done. For,
"The daughter of Herodias," it is said, "danced in the midst, and pleased
Herod. Whereupon he swore with an oath to give her whatsoever she would ask.
And she being before instructed of her mother, said, Give me here John Baptist's
head in a charger." [Matthew 13:6-8]
Her reproach is twofold; first, that she danced, then that she pleased him,
and so pleased him, as to obtain even murder for her reward.
Do you see how savage he was? How senseless? How foolish? In putting
himself under the obligation of an oath, while to her he gives full power over her
request. But when he saw the evil actually ensuing, "he was sorry," it is said; and
yet in the first instance he had put him in bonds. Wherefore then is he sorry?
Such is the nature of virtue, even among the wicked admiration and praises are
its due. But alas for her madness! When she too ought to admire, yea, to bow
down to him, for trying to redress her wrong, she on the contrary even helps to
arrange the plot, and lays a snare, and asks a diabolical favor.
But he was afraid "for the oath's sake," it is said, "and them that sat at meat
with him." And how did you not fear that which is more grievous? Surely if you
were afraid to have witnesses of your perjury, much more ought thou to fear
having so many witnesses of a murder so lawless.

But as I think many are ignorant of the grievance itself, whence the murder
had its origin, I must declare this too, that you may learn the wisdom of the
lawgiver. What then was the ancient law, which Herod indeed trampled on, but
John vindicated? The wife of him that died childless was to be given to his
brother. [Deuteronomy 25:5] For since death was an incurable ill, and all was
contrived for life's sake; He makes a law that the living brother should marry her,
and should call the child that is born by the name of the dead, so that his house
should not utterly perish. For if the dead were not so much as to leave children,
which is the greatest mitigation of death, the sorrow would be without remedy.
Therefore you see, the lawgiver devised this refreshment for those who were by
nature deprived of children, and commanded the issue to be reckoned as
belonging to the other.
But when there was a child, this marriage was no longer permitted. "And
wherefore?" one may say, "for if it was lawful for another, much more for the
brother." By no means. For He will have men's consanguinity extended, and the
sources multiplied of our interest in each other.
Why then, in the case also of death without offspring, did not another marry
her? Because it would not so be accounted the child of the departed; but now his
brother begetting it, the fiction became probable. And besides, any other man
had no constraining call to build up the house of the dead, but this had incurred
the claim by relationship.
Forasmuch then as Herod had married his brother's wife, when she had a
child, therefore John blames him, and blames him with moderation, showing
together with his boldness, his consideration also.
But mark thou, I pray you, how the whole theatre was devilish. For first, it
was made up of drunkenness and luxury, whence nothing healthful could come.
Secondly, the spectators in it were depraved, and he that gave the banquet the
worst transgressor of all. Thirdly, there was the irrational pleasure. Fourthly, the
damsel, because of whom the marriage was illegal, who ought even to have hid
herself, as though her mother were dishonored by her, comes making a show,