"through weakness!" That even although He was crucified after enduring peril
and treachery, (for we have showed that peril and treachery are called weakness,)
yet still He was nothing harmed thereby. And he said this to draw the example
unto his own case. For since the Corinthians beheld them persecuted, driven
about, despised, and not avenging nor visiting it, in order to teach them that
neither do they so suffer from want of power, nor from being unable to visit it,
he leads on the argument up to The Master, because 'He too,' says he, 'was
crucified, was bound, suffered ten thousand things, and He visited them not, but
continued to endure things which appeared to argue weakness, and in this way
displaying His Power, in that although He punishes not nor requites, He is not
injured any thing at all. For instance, the Cross did not cut asunder His life, nor
yet impeded His resurrection, but He both rose again and lives.' And when you
hear of the Cross and of life, expect to find the doctrine concerning the
Incarnation, for all that is said here has reference to that. And if he says "though
the Power of God," it is not as though He were Himself void of strength to
quicken His flesh; but it was indifferent with him to mention either Father or
Son. For when he said, "the Power of God," he said by His own Power. For that
both He Himself raised it up and sustains it, hear Him saying, "Destroy this
temple, and in three days I will raise it up." [John 2:19] But if that which is His,
this he says to be the Father's, be not disturbed; "For," He says, "all My Father's
things are Mine." [John 16:15] And again, "All Mine are Yours, and Yours are
Mine." [John 17:10] 'As then He that was crucified was nothing harmed,' he
says, 'so neither are we when persecuted and warred against;' wherefore also he
adds,
"For even we also if we are weak in Him, yet we shall live with Him
through the Power of God."
What is the meaning of "we are weak in Him?" We are persecuted, are
driven here and there, suffer extremity. But what is "with Him?" 'Because of the
preaching,' he says, 'and our faith in Him. But if for His sake we undergo what is
sad and disagreeable, it is quite plain that we shall what is pleasant also:' and so

he added, "but we are saved with Him by the Power of God."

2 Corinthians 13:5-6
4. "Try your own selves, whether ye be in the faith, prove your own selves.
Do you not know as to your own selves, that Christ is in you, unless indeed ye be
reprobate? But I hope that you shall know that we are not reprobate."
For since by what he has said he has shown that even if he does not punish,
it is not because he has not Christ in himself, but because he intimates His longsuffering, Who was crucified and yet avenged not Himself; he again, in another
manner, produces the same effect, and still more irrefragably, establishing his
argument by the disciples. 'For why speak I of myself,' he says 'the teacher, who
have so much care upon me and am entrusted with the whole world and have
done such great miracles. For if you will but examine yourselves who are in the
rank of disciples, you will see that Christ is in you also. But if in you, then much
more in your teacher. For if you have faith, Christ is in you also.' For they who
then believed wrought miracles. Wherefore also he added, "Try your own selves,
prove your own selves, whether ye be in the faith. Do you not know as to your
own selves, unless indeed that Christ is in you, you be reprobate?" 'But if in you,
much more in your teacher?' He seems to me here to speak of the "faith" which
relates to miracles. 'For if you have faith,' he says, "Christ is in you, except you
have become reprobates." Do you see how again he terrifies them, and shows
even to superfluity that Christ is with Him. For he seems to me to be here
alluding to them, even as to their lives. For since faith is not enough [by itself] to
draw down the energy of the Spirit, and he had said that '"if you are in the faith"
you have Christ in you,' and it happened that many who had faith were destitute
of that energy; in order to solve the difficulty, he says, "except ye be reprobate,"
except [that is] you are corrupt in life. "But I hope that you shall know that we
are not reprobate." What followed naturally was to have said, "but if you have
become reprobate, yet we have not." He does not, however, say so, for fear of