Gen. iii. 9.

substance from which we have been formed, besides what was mentioned beforehand, and shown
forth by the Lord; nor another hand of God besides that which, from the beginning even to the end,
forms us and prepares us for life, and is present with His handiwork, and perfects it after the image
and likeness of God.
2. And then, again, this Word was manifested when the Word of God was made man, assimilating
Himself to man, and man to Himself, so that by means of his resemblance to the Son, man might
become precious to the Father. For in times long past, it was said that man was created after the
image of God, but it was not [actually] shown; for the Word was as yet invisible, after whose image
man was created, Wherefore also he did easily lose the similitude. When, however, the Word of
God became flesh, He confirmed both these: for He both showed forth the image truly, since He
became Himself what was His image; and He re-established the similitude after a sure manner, by
assimilating man to the invisible Father through means of the visible Word.
3. And not by the aforesaid things alone has the Lord manifested Himself, but [He has done
this] also by means of His passion. For doing away with [the effects of] that disobedience of man
which had taken place at the beginning by the occasion of a tree, "He became obedient unto death,
even the death of the cross;" rectifying that disobedience which had occurred by reason of a tree,
through that obedience which was [wrought out] upon the tree [of the cross]. Now He would not
have come to do away, by means of that same [image], the disobedience which had been incurred
towards our Maker if He proclaimed another Father. But inasmuch as it was by these things that
we disobeyed God, and did not give credit to His word, so was it also by these same that He brought
in obedience and consent as respects His Word; by which things He clearly shows forth God
Himself, whom indeed we had offended in the first Adam, when he did not perform His
commandment. In the second Adam, however, we are reconciled, being made obedient even unto
death. For we were debtors to none other but to Him whose commandment we had transgressed at
the beginning.

### Chapter XVII.—There is but one Lord and one God, the Father and Creator of all things,
who has loved us in Christ, given us commandments, and remitted our sins; whose Son and
Word Christ proved Himself to be, when He forgave our sins.
1. Now this being is the Creator (Demiurgus), who is, in respect of His love, the Father; but in
respect of His power, He is Lord; and in respect of His wisdom, our Maker and Fashioner; by
transgressing whose commandment we became His enemies. And therefore in the last times the
Lord has restored us into friendship through His incarnation, having become "the Mediator between
God and men;" propitiating indeed for us the Father against whom we had sinned, and cancelling