penance for another: thus we read in the Lives of the Fathers of a
certain man who, in order to incite his companion to do penance, did
penance together with him. And if the sin be public, the penitent, by
fulfilling his penance, shows that he has been to confession.
Reply to Objection 2: A solemn penance, as to its imposition, does
not go beyond the limits of a secret tribunal, since, just as the
confession is made secretly, so the penance is imposed secretly. It
is the execution of the penance, that goes beyond the limits of the
secret tribunal: and there is nothing objectionable in this.
Reply to Objection 3: Although Penance cancels all deficiencies, by
restoring man to his former state of grace, yet it does not always
restore him to his former dignity. Hence women after doing penance
for fornication are not given the veil, because they do not recover the
honor of virginity. In like manner, after doing public penance, a
sinner does not recover his former dignity so as to be eligible for the
clerical state and a bishop who would ordain such a one ought to be
deprived of the power of ordaining, unless perhaps the needs of the
Church or custom require it. In that case such a one would be
admitted to minor orders by way of exception, but not to the sacred
orders. First, on account of the dignity of the latter; secondly, for
fear of relapse; thirdly, in order to avoid the scandal which the
people might take through recollection of his former sins; fourthly,
because he would not have the face to correct others, by reason of
the publicity of his own sin.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether a solemn penance can be repeated?

Objection 1: It would seem that a solemn penance can be repeated.
For those sacraments which do not imprint a character, can be
solemnized a second time, such as the Eucharist, Extreme Unction
and the like. But Penance does not imprint a character, therefore it
can be solemnized over again.
Objection 2: Further, penance is solemnized on account of the
gravity and publicity of the sin. Now, after doing penance, a person
may commit the same sins over again, or even more grievous sins.
Therefore the solemn penance should be imposed again.
On the contrary, Solemn penance signifies the expulsion of the first
man from paradise. Now this was done but once. Therefore solemn
penance should be imposed once only.
I answer that, Solemn penance ought not to be repeated, for three
reasons. First, lest frequency bring it into contempt. Secondly, on
account of its signification; for it signifies the expulsion of the first
man from paradise, which happened only once; thirdly, because the
solemnization indicates, in a way, that one makes profession of
continual repentance. Wherefore repetition is inconsistent with
solemnization. And if the sinner fall again, he is not precluded from
doing penance, but a solemn penance should not be imposed on him
again.
Reply to Objection 1: In those sacraments which are solemnized
again and again, repetition is not inconsistent with solemnity, as it is
in the present case. Hence the comparison fails.
Reply to Objection 2: Although, if we consider his crime, he ought to
do the same penance again, yet the repeated solemnization is not
becoming, for the reasons stated above.