Ezek. xxxvii. 12, etc.

the breath of life; and that men might not rise to such a pitch of madness as to feign another Father
above the Creator. And thus also He healed by a word all the others who were in a weakly condition
because of sin; to whom also He said, "Behold, thou art made whole, sin no more, lest a worse
thing come upon thee:" pointing out by this, that, because of the sin of disobedience, infirmities
have come upon men. To that man, however, who had been blind from his birth, He gave sight,
not by means of a word, but by an outward action; doing this not without a purpose, or because it
so happened, but that He might show forth the hand of God, that which at the beginning had moulded
man. And therefore, when His disciples asked Him for what cause the man had been born blind,
whether for his own or his parents' fault, He replied, "Neither hath this man sinned, nor his parents,
but that the works of God should be made manifest in him." Now the work of God is the
fashioning of man. For, as the Scripture says, He made [man] by a kind of process: "And the Lord
took clay from the earth, and formed man." Wherefore also the Lord spat on the ground and
made clay, and smeared it upon the eyes, pointing out the original fashioning [of man], how it was
effected, and manifesting the hand of God to those who can understand by what [hand] man was
formed out of the dust. For that which the artificer, the Word, had omitted to form in the womb,
[viz., the blind man's eyes], He then supplied in public, that the works of God might be manifested
in him, in order that we might not be seeking out another hand by which man was fashioned, nor
another Father; knowing that this hand of God which formed us at the beginning, and which does
form us in the womb, has in the last times sought us out who were lost, winning back His own, and
taking up the lost sheep upon His shoulders, and with joy restoring it to the fold of life.
3. Now, that the Word of God forms us in the womb, He says to Jeremiah, "Before I formed
thee in the womb, I knew thee; and before thou wentest forth from the belly, I sanctified thee, and
appointed thee a prophet among the nations." And Paul, too, says in like manner, "But when it
pleased God, who separated me from my mother's womb, that I might declare Him among the
nations." As, therefore, we are by the Word formed in the womb, this very same Word formed
the visual power in him who had been blind from his birth; showing openly who it is that fashions
us in secret, since the Word Himself had been made manifest to men: and declaring the original
formation of Adam, and the manner in which he was created, and by what hand he was fashioned,
indicating the whole from a part. For the Lord who formed the visual powers is He who made the
whole man, carrying out the will of the Father. And inasmuch as man, with respect to that formation
which, was after Adam, having fallen into transgression, needed the laver of regeneration, [the
Lord] said to him [upon whom He had conferred sight], after He had smeared his eyes with the