things, paying no regard to worldly things. It was thus with the Levites; they had
no worldly concerns, because the laity took care to provide for them, and their
revenues were appointed by the law, as tythes, offerings of gold, first-fruits,
vows, and many other things. And the law properly assigned these things to
them, as seeking things present. But I shall say no more than that those who
preside ought to have food and raiment, that they may not be distracted by care
for these things. But what is double support? Double that of the widows, or of
the deacons, or simply, liberal support. Let us not then think only of the double
maintenance granted them, but of what is added, "Those who rule well." And
what is it to rule well? Let us hear Christ, Who says, "The good shepherd gives
his life for his sheep." [John 10:11] Thus to rule well is, from our concern for
them, never to spare ourselves.
"Especially those who labor in the word and doctrine." Where then are
those who say that there is no occasion for the word and doctrine? Whereas he
says to Timothy, "Meditate upon these things; give yourself wholly to them";
and, "Give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine; for in doing this
you shall save both yourself, and them that hear you." [1 Timothy 4:15-16]
These are the men whom he wishes to be honored most of all, and he adds the
reason, for they sustain great labor. For when one is neither watchful, nor
diligent, but merely sits in his stall easy and unconcerned, while another wears
himself out with anxiety and exertion, especially if he is ignorant of profane
literature, ought not the latter to be honored above all others, who more than
others gives himself up to such labors? For he is exposed to numberless tongues.
One censures him, another praises him, a third mocks him, another finds fault
with his memory and his composition, and it requires great strength of mind to
endure all this. It is an important point, and contributes much to the edification
of the Church, that the rulers of it should be apt to teach. If this be wanting,
many things in the Church go to ruin. Therefore in addition to the qualifications
of hospitality, moderation, and a blameless life, he enumerates this also, saying,
"Apt to teach." For why else indeed is he called a teacher? Some say that he may

teach philosophy by the example of his life, so that all else is superfluous, and
there is no need of verbal instruction in order to proficiency. But why then does
Paul say, "especially they who labor in the word and doctrine"? For when
doctrines are concerned, what life will answer the purpose? And of what word is
he speaking? Not of pompous language, nor of discourse set off with external
decorations, but that which possesses the mighty power of the Spirit, and
abounds with wisdom and understanding. It needs not set phrases, but thoughts
to give it utterance, not skill in composition, but power of mind.
Ver. 19. "Against an elder receive not an accusation, but before two or three
witnesses."
May we then receive an accusation against a younger man, or against any
one at all without witnesses? Ought we not in all cases to come to our judgments
with the greatest exactness? What then does he mean? Do not so, he means, with
any, but especially in the case of an elder. For he speaks of an elder not with
respect to office, but to age, since the young more easily fall into sin than their
elders. And it is manifest from hence that the Church, and even the whole people
of Asia, had been now entrusted to Timothy, which is the reason why he
discourses with him concerning elders.
Ver. 20. "Them that sin rebuke before all, that others also may fear."
Do not, he says, hastily cut them off, but carefully enquire into all the
circumstances, and when you have thoroughly informed yourself, then proceed
against the offender with rigor, that others may take warning. For as it is wrong
to condemn hastily and rashly, so not to punish manifest offenses is to open the
way to others, and embolden them to offend.
"Rebuke," he says, to show that it is not to be done lightly, but with severity.
For thus others will be deterred. How is it then that Christ says, "Go and tell him
his fault between him and you alone, if one sin against you." [Matthew 18:15]
But Christ Himself permits him to be censured in the Church. What then? Is it
not a greater scandal, that one should be rebuked before all? How so? For it is a
much greater scandal, that the offense should be known, and not the punishment.