the greater, may easily master the less; even so God likewise has brought
forward the greatest of sins, that they also who offend in small things may find
the cure of these easy, by means of the other: since if those admitted of healing,
much more the less.
Let us look then to the manner both of the sickness, and of the speedy
recovery of that blessed man. What then was the manner of his sickness? He
committed adultery and murder. For I shrink not from proclaiming these things
with a loud voice. Since if the Holy Ghost thought it no shame to record all this
history, much less ought we to draw any shade over it. Wherefore I not only
proclaim it, but I add another circumstance also. For in fact, whosoever hide
these things, they most of all men throw his virtue into the shade. And as they
that say nothing of the battle with Goliath deprive him of no small crowns, so
also they that hurry by this history. Does not my saying seem a paradox? Nay,
wait a little, and then you shall know that with reason have we said this. For to
this end do I magnify the sin, and make my statement stranger, that I may the
more abundantly provide the medicines.
What is it then which I add? The man's virtue; which makes the fault also
greater. For all things are not judged alike in all men. "For mighty" men (it is
said) "shall be mightily tormented:" and "He that knew his Lord's will, and does
it not, shall be beaten with many stripes." [Luke 12:47] So that more knowledge
is a ground of more punishment. For this same reason the priest, if he commit
the same sin as those under government, shall not have the same to endure, but
things far more grievous.
Perhaps, seeing the charge against him amplified, you tremble and fear, and
marvel at me, as though I were going down a precipice. But I am so confident on
that righteous man's behalf, that I will proceed even farther; for the more I
aggravate the charge, so much the more shall I be able to show forth the praise of
David.
"And what more than this," you will say, "can be uttered?" Abundantly
more. For as in the case of Cain, what was done was not a murder only, but

worse than even many murders; for it was not a stranger, but a brother, whom he
slew; and a brother who had not done but suffered wrong; not after many
murderers, but having first originated the horrid crime: so here too that which
was perpetrated was not murder only. For it was no ordinary man that did it, but
a prophet: and he slays not him that had done wrong, but him that had suffered
wrong; for indeed he had been mortally wronged, by the forcing away his wife:
nevertheless after that he added this also.
9. Perceive ye, how I have not spared that righteous one? How without any
the least reserve I have mentioned his offenses? But yet, so confident am I
concerning his defense, that after so great load as this of his sin, I would there
were present both the Manichæans who most deride all this, and they that are
diseased in Marcion's way, that I might fully stop their mouths. For they indeed
say "he committed murder and adultery;" but I say not this only, but have also
proved the murder to be twofold, first from him who suffered the wrong, then
from the quality of the person who offended. For it is not the same thing, for one
to whom the Spirit was vouchsafed, and on whom so great benefits had been
conferred, and who had been admitted to such freedom of speech, and at such a
time of life, to venture on crimes of that sort; as without all these, to commit this
self-same thing. Nevertheless even in this respect is that illustrious man most of
all worthy of admiration, that when he had fallen into the very pit of wickedness,
he did not sink nor despair, nor cast himself down in supineness, on receiving of
the devil so fatal a wound; but quickly, or rather straightway, and with great
force, he gave a more fatal blow than he had received.
And the same thing occurred, as if in war and in battle some barbarian had
struck his spear into the heart of a chieftain, or shot an arrow into his liver, and
had added to the former wound a second more fatal than it, and he that had
received these grievous blows, when fallen, and wallowing in much blood all
about him, were first to rise up quickly, then to hurl a spear at him that wounded
him, and exhibit him dead on the ground in a moment. Even so in this case also,
the greater you declare the wound, so much the more admirable do you imply