THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.83, C.4.

performed in houses which have not been consecrated, or which
have been profaned; but with the bishop's consent. Hence we read in
the same distinction: "We deem that masses are not to be celebrated
everywhere, but in places consecrated by the bishop, or where he
gives permission." But not without a portable altar consecrated by
the bishop: hence in the same distinction we read: "We permit that, if
the churches be devastated or burned, masses may be celebrated in
chapels, with a consecrated altar." For because Christ's holiness is
the fount of all the Church's holiness, therefore in necessity a
consecrated altar suffices for performing this sacrament. And on this
account a church is never consecrated without consecrating the
altar. Yet sometimes an altar is consecrated apart from the church,
with the relics of the saints, "whose lives are hidden with Christ in
God" (Col. 3:3). Accordingly under the same distinction we read: "It
is our pleasure that altars, in which no relics of saints are found
enclosed, be thrown down, if possible, by the bishops presiding over
such places."
Reply to Objection 3: The church, altar, and other like inanimate
things are consecrated, not because they are capable of receiving
grace, but because they acquire special spiritual virtue from the
consecration, whereby they are rendered fit for the Divine worship,
so that man derives devotion therefrom, making him more fitted for
Divine functions, unless this be hindered by want of reverence.
Hence it is written (2 Macc. 3:38): "There is undoubtedly in that place
a certain power of God; for He that hath His dwelling in the heavens
is the visitor, and the protector of that place."
Hence it is that such places are cleansed and exorcised before being
consecrated, that the enemy's power may be driven forth. And for
the same reason churches defiled by shedding of blood or seed are
reconciled: because some machination of the enemy is apparent on
account of the sin committed there. And for this reason we read in
the same distinction: "Wherever you find churches of the Arians,
consecrate them as Catholic churches without delay by means of
devout prayers and rites." Hence, too, it is that some say with
probability, that by entering a consecrated church one obtains
forgiveness of venial sins, just as one does by the sprinkling of holy
water; alleging the words of Ps. 84:2,3: "Lord, Thou hast blessed Thy
land . . . Thou hast forgiven the iniquity of Thy people." And
therefore, in consequence of the virtue acquired by a church's
consecration, the consecration is never repeated. Accordingly we
find in the same distinction the following words quoted from the

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.83, C.4.

Council of Nicaea: "Churches which have once been consecrated,
must not be consecrated again, except they be devastated by fire, or
defiled by shedding of blood or of anyone's seed; because, just as a
child once baptized in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost, ought not to be baptized again, so neither ought a
place, once dedicated to God, to be consecrated again, except owing
to the causes mentioned above; provided that the consecrators held
faith in the Holy Trinity": in fact, those outside the Church cannot
consecrate. But, as we read in the same distinction: "Churches or
altars of doubtful consecration are to be consecrated anew."
And since they acquire special spiritual virtue from their
consecration, we find it laid down in the same distinction that "the
beams of a dedicated church ought not to be used for any other
purpose, except it be for some other church, or else they are to be
burned, or put to the use of brethren in some monastery: but on no
account are they to be discarded for works of the laity." We read
there, too, that "the altar covering, chair, candlesticks, and veil, are
to be burned when warn out; and their ashes are to be placed in the
baptistery, or in the walls, or else cast into the trenches beneath the
flag-stones, so as not to be defiled by the feet of those that enter."
Reply to Objection 4: Since the consecration of the altar signifies
Christ's holiness, and the consecration of a house the holiness of
the entire Church, therefore the consecration of a church or of an
altar is more fittingly commemorated. And on this account the
solemnity of a church dedication is observed for eight days, in order
to signify the happy resurrection of Christ and of the Church's
members. Nor is the consecration of a church or altar man's doing
only, since it has a spiritual virtue. Hence in the same distinction (De
Consecr.) it is said: "The solemnities of the dedication of churches
are to be solemnly celebrated each year: and that dedications are to
be kept up for eight days, you will find in the third book of
Kings" (8:66).
Reply to Objection 5: As we read in De Consecr., dist. 1, "altars, if
not of stone, are not to be consecrated with the anointing of chrism."
And this is in keeping with the signification of this sacrament; both
because the altar signifies Christ, for in 1 Cor. 10:3, it is written, "But
the rock was Christ": and because Christ's body was laid in a stone
sepulchre. This is also in keeping with the use of the sacrament.
Because stone is solid, and may be found everywhere. which was
not necessary in the old Law, when the altar was made in one place.