near, seeing they asked this as a thing beside his mark, and not now in the
regular course. "Not to delay to come unto them:" for she was a disciple. And
Peter arose, and went with them. And when he had come, they led him into the
upper chamber. [Acts 9:39] They do not beseech, but leave it to him to give her
life ([σωτηρίαν].) See what a cheering inducement to alms is here! "And all the
widows," it says, "stood round him weeping, and showing the coats and
garments which Dorcas had made while she was with them." Peter went into the
apartment, as one who took it calmly, but see what an accession came of it! It is
not without a meaning that the Writer has informed us of the woman's name, but
to show that the name she bore ([φερώνυμος ἦν]) matched her character; as
active and wakeful was she as an antelope. For in many instances there is a
Providence in the giving of names, as we have often told you. "She was full," it
says, "of good works:" not only of alms, but "of good works," first, and then of
this good work in particular. "Which," it says, "Dorcas made while she was with
them." Great humility! Not as we do; but they were all together in common, and
in company with them she made these things and worked. "But Peter put them
all forth, and kneeled down, and prayed; and turning him to the body said,
Tabitha, arise. And she opened her eyes: and when she saw Peter, she sat up."
[Acts 9:40] Why does he put them all out? That he may not be confused nor
disturbed by their weeping. "And having knelt down, he prayed." Observe the
intentness of his prayer "And he gave her his hand." [Acts 9:41] So did Christ to
the daughter of Jairus: "And (says the Evangelist) having taken her by the hand."
Mark severally, first the life, then the strength brought into her, the one by the
word, the other by his hand— "And he gave her his hand, and lifted her up, and
when he had called the saints and widows, presented her alive:" to some for
comfort, because they received back their sister, and because they saw the
miracle, and for kindly support ([προστασίαν]) to others. "And it was known
throughout all Joppa; and many believed in the Lord. And it came to pass, that
he tarried many days in Joppa with one Simon a tanner." [Acts 9:42-43] Mark
the unassuming conduct, mark the moderation of Peter, how he does not make

his abode with this lady, or some other person of distinction, but with a tanner:
by all his acts leading men to humility, neither suffering the mean to be ashamed,
nor the great to be elated! "Many days;" for they needed his instruction, who had
believed through the miracles.— Let us look then again at what has been said.
"Assayed," it says, "to join himself to the disciples." [Recapitulation, Acts
9:26] He did not come up to them unabashed, but with a subdued manner.
"Disciples" they were all called at that time by reason of their great virtue, for
there was the likeness of the disciples plainly to be seen. "But they were all
afraid of him." See how they feared the dangers, how the alarm was yet at its
height in them. "But Barnabas," etc. [Acts 9:27]— it seems to me that Barnabas
was of old a friend of his— "and related," etc.: observe how Paul says nothing
of all this himself: nor would he have brought it forward to the others, had he not
been compelled to do so. "And he was with them, coming in and going out at
Jerusalem, and speaking boldly in the name of the Lord Jesus." (v. 28, 29.) This
gave them all confidence. "But they went about to slay him: which when the
brethren knew" etc. [Acts 9:30] Do you observe how both there (at Damascus),
and here, the rest take care for him, and provide for him the means of departure,
and that we nowhere find him thus far receiving (direct supernatural) aid from
God? So the energy of his character is betokened. "To Cæsarea, and sent him
forth to Tarsus:" so that, I suppose, he did not continue his journey by land, but
sailed the rest of it. And this (departure) is Providentially ordered, that he might
preach there also: and so likewise were the plots against him ordered by God's
Providence, and his coming to Jerusalem, that the story about him might no
longer be disbelieved. For there he was "speaking boldly," it says, "in the name
of the Lord Jesus; and he spoke and disputed against the Hellenists;" and again,
"he was with them coming in and going out.— So the Church throughout all
Judea and Galilee and Samaria had peace"— i.e. it increased: and peace with
itself, that peace which is peace indeed: for the war from without would have
done them no harm — "they being edified, and walking in the fear of the Lord,
and abounded in the consolation of the Holy Ghost." And the spirit consoled