THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.77, C.3.

Reply to Objection 1: One accident cannot of itself be the subject of
another, because it does not exist of itself. But inasmuch as an
accident is received in another thing, one is said to be the subject of
the other, inasmuch as one is received in a subject through another,
as the surface is said to be the subject of color. Hence when God
makes an accident to exist of itself, it can also be of itself the subject
of another.
Reply to Objection 2: The other accidents, even as they were in the
substance of the bread, were individuated by means of dimensive
quantity, as stated above. And therefore dimensive quantity is the
subject of the other accidents remaining in this sacrament, rather
than conversely.
Reply to Objection 3: Rarity and density are particular qualities
accompanying bodies, by reason of their having much or little matter
under dimensions; just as all other accidents likewise follow from
the principles of substance. And consequently, as the accidents are
preserved by Divine power when the substance is withdrawn, so,
when matter is withdrawn, the qualities which go with matter, such
as rarity and density, are preserved by Divine power.
Reply to Objection 4: Mathematical quantity abstracts not from
intelligible matter, but from sensible matter, as is said in Metaph. vii.
But matter is termed sensible because it underlies sensible qualities.
And therefore it is manifest that the dimensive quantity, which
remains in this sacrament without a subject, is not mathematical
quantity.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.77, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the species remaining in this sacrament

can change external objects?
Objection 1: It seems that the species which remain in this
sacrament cannot affect external objects. For it is proved in Phys.
vii, that forms which are in matter are produced by forms that are in
matter, but not from forms which are without matter, because like
makes like. But the sacramental species are species without matter,
since they remain without a subject, as is evident from what was
said above (Article 1). Therefore they cannot affect other matter by
producing any form in it.
Objection 2: Further, when the action of the principal agent ceases,
then the action of the instrument must cease, as when the carpenter
rests, the hammer is moved no longer. But all accidental forms act
instrumentally in virtue of the substantial form as the principal agent.
Therefore, since the substantial form of the bread and wine does not
remain in this sacrament, as was shown above (Question 75, Article
6), it seems that the accidental forms which remain cannot act so as
to change external matter.
Objection 3: Further, nothing acts outside its species, because an
effect cannot surpass its cause. But all the sacramental species are
accidents. Therefore they cannot change external matter, at least as
to a substantial form.
On the contrary, If they could not change external bodies, they could
not be felt; for a thing is felt from the senses being changed by a
sensible thing, as is said in De Anima ii.
I answer that, Because everything acts in so far as it is an actual
being, the consequence is that everything stands in the same
relation to action as it does to being. Therefore, because, according
to what was said above (Article 1), it is an effect of the Divine power
that the sacramental species continue in the being which they had
when the substance of the bread and wine was present, it follows
that they continue in their action. Consequently they retain every
action which they had while the substance of the bread and wine
remained, now that the substance of the bread and wine has passed
into the body and blood of Christ. Hence there is no doubt but that
they can change external bodies.