order that every way the power of the prediction should clearly shine forth.
"Then, if any man shall say unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or there; believe it
not: for there shall arise false Christs, and false prophets, and shall show signs
and wonders, so as to deceive, if possible, the very elect. Behold, I have told you
before. Wherefore if they shall say unto you, Behold, He is in the desert, go not
forth: behold, He is in the secret chambers, believe it not. For as the lightning
comes out of the east, and shines even unto the west, so shall also the coming of
the Son of Man be. For wheresoever the carcass is, there shall the eagles be
gathered together."
Having finished what concerned Jerusalem, He passes on to His own
coming, and tells the signs of it, not for their use only, but for us also, and for all
that shall come after us.
"Then." When? Here, as I have often said, the word, "then," relates not to
the connection in order of time with the things before mentioned. At least, when
He was minded to express the connection of time, He added, "Immediately after
the tribulation of those days," [Matthew 24:29] but here not so, but, "then," not
meaning what should follow straightway after these things, but what should be
in the time, when these things were to be done, of which He was about to speak.
So also when it is said, "In those days comes John the Baptist," he is not
speaking of the time that should straightway follow, but that many years after,
and that in which these things were done, of which He was about to speak. For,
in fact, having spoken of the birth of Jesus, and of the coming of the magi, and
of the death of Herod, He at once says, "In those days comes John the Baptist;"
although thirty years had intervened. But this is customary in the Scripture, I
mean, to use this manner of narration. So then here also, having passed over all
the intermediate time from the taking of Jerusalem unto the preludes of the
consummation, He speaks of the time just before the consummation. "Then," He
says therefore, "if any man shall say unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or there,
believe it not."
Awhile He secures them by the place, mentioning the distinguishing marks

of His second coming, and the indications of the deceivers. For not, as when at
His former coming He appeared in Bethlehem, and in a small corner of the
world, and no one knew Him at the beginning, so does He say it shall be then
too; but openly and with all circumstance, and so as not to need one to tell these
things. And this is no small sign that He will not come secretly.
But mark how here He says nothing of war (for He is interpreting the
doctrine concerning His advent), but of them that attempt to deceive. For some
in the days of the apostles deceived the multitude, "for they shall come," says
He, "and shall deceive many;" [Matthew 24:11] and others shall do so before
His second coming, who shall also be more grievous than the former. "For they
shall show," He says, "signs and wonders, so as to deceive if possible the very
elect:" [Matthew 24:24] here He is speaking of Antichrist, and indicates that
some also shall minister to him. Of him Paul too speaks on this wise. Having
called him "man of sin," and "son of perdition," He added, "Whose coming is
after the working of Satan, with all power and signs and lying wonders; and with
all deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that perish." [2 Thessalonians 2:910]
And see how He secures them; "Go not forth into the deserts, enter not into
the secret chambers." He did not say, "Go, and do not believe;" but, "Go not
forth, neither depart there." For great then will be the deceiving, because that
even deceiving miracles are wrought.
3. Having told them how Antichrist comes, as, for instance, that it will be in
a place; He says how Himself also comes. How then does He Himself come? "As
the lightning comes out of the east, and shines even unto the west, so shall also
the coming of the Son of Man be. For wheresoever the carcass is, there also will
the eagles be gathered together." [Matthew 24:27-28]
How then shines the lightning? It needs not one to talk of it, it needs not a
herald, but even to them that sit in houses, and to them in chambers it shows
itself in an instant of time throughout the whole world. So shall that coming be,
showing itself at once everywhere by reason of the shining forth of His glory.