THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.73, C.6.

Reply to Objection 3: This sacrament was instituted during the
supper, so as in the future to be a memorial of our Lord's Passion as
accomplished. Hence He said expressively: "As often as ye shall do
these things" [Canon of the Mass], speaking of the future.
Reply to Objection 4: The institution responds to the order of
intention. But the sacrament of the Eucharist, although after Baptism
in the receiving, is yet previous to it in intention; and therefore it
behooved to be instituted first. or else it can be said that Baptism
was already instituted in Christ's Baptism; hence some were already
baptized with Christ's Baptism, as we read in Jn. 3:22.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.73, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether the Paschal Lamb was the chief figure of

this sacrament?
Objection 1: It seems that the Paschal Lamb was not the chief figure
of this sacrament, because (Ps. 109:4) Christ is called "a priest
according to the order of Melchisedech," since Melchisedech bore
the figure of Christ's sacrifice, in offering bread and wine. But the
expression of likeness causes one thing to be named from another.
Therefore, it seems that Melchisedech's offering was the "principal"
figure of this sacrament.
Objection 2: Further, the passage of the Red Sea was a figure of
Baptism, according to 1 Cor. 10:2: "All . . . were baptized in the cloud
and in the sea." But the immolation of the Paschal Lamb was
previous to the passage of the Red Sea, and the Manna came after it,
just as the Eucharist follows Baptism. Therefore the Manna is a more
expressive figure of this sacrament than the Paschal Lamb.
Objection 3: Further, the principal power of this sacrament is that it
brings us into the kingdom of heaven, being a kind of "viaticum." But
this was chiefly prefigured in the sacrament of expiation when the
"high-priest entered once a year into the Holy of Holies with blood,"
as the Apostle proves in Heb. 9. Consequently, it seems that that
sacrifice was a more significant figure of this sacrament than was
the Paschal Lamb.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (1 Cor. 5:7,8): "Christ our Pasch is
sacrificed; therefore let us feast . . . with the unleavened bread of
sincerity and truth."
I answer that, We can consider three things in this sacrament:
namely, that which is sacrament only, and this is the bread and wine;
that which is both reality and sacrament, to wit, Christ's true body;
and lastly that which is reality only, namely, the effect of this
sacrament. Consequently, in relation to what is sacrament only, the
chief figure of this sacrament was the oblation of Melchisedech, who
offered up bread and wine. In relation to Christ crucified, Who is
contained in this sacrament, its figures were all the sacrifices of the
Old Testament, especially the sacrifice of expiation, which was the
most solemn of all. While with regard to its effect, the chief figure
was the Manna, "having in it the sweetness of every taste" (Wis.