contempt, the fault is not in what is said, but in their insensibility; since what is
said surely is enough both to restrain those that attend to it, and to prick their
hearts; and the meeker sort, when they see on the one hand the greatness of their
sins, and learn also on the other hand the power of repentance, will cleave to it
the more, wherefore it is needful to speak.
I will speak then, and will set forth our sins, both wherein we offend against
God, and wherein against men, and I will set forth not each person's own, but
what are common; but his own let each one join to them after that from his
conscience.
And I will do this, having first set forth the good deeds of God to us. What
then are His good deeds? He created us when we were not, and made all things
for our sakes that are seen, Heaven, sea, air, all that in them is, living creatures,
plants, seeds; for we must needs speak briefly for the boundless ocean of the
works. Into us alone of all that are on earth He breathed a living soul such as we
have, He planted a garden, He gave a help-meet, He set us over all the brutes, He
crowned us with glory and honor.
After that, when man had been unthankful towards his benefactor, He
vouchsafed unto him a greater gift.
2. For look not to this only, that He cast him out of paradise, but mark also
the gain that arose from thence. For after having cast him out of paradise, and
having wrought those countless good works, and having accomplished His
various dispensations, He sent even His own Son for the sake of them that had
been benefited by Him and were hating Him, and opened Heaven to us, and
unfolded paradise itself, and made us sons, the enemies, the unthankful.
Wherefore it were even seasonable now to say, "O the depth of the riches
both of the wisdom and knowledge of God!" [Romans 11:33]
And He gave us also a baptism of the re mission of sins, and a deliverance
from vengeance, and an inheritance of a kingdom, and He promised numberless
good things on our doing what is right, and stretched forth His hand, and shed
abroad His Spirit into our hearts.

What then? After so many and such great blessings, what ought to be our
disposition; should we indeed, even if each day we died for Him who so loves
us, make due recompense, or rather should we repay the smallest portion of the
debt? By no means, for moreover even this again is turned to our advantage.
How then are we disposed, whose disposition ought to be like this? Each
day we insult His law. But be ye not angry, if I let loose my tongue against them
that sin, for not you only will I accuse, but myself also.
Where then would ye that I should begin? With the slaves, or with the free?
With them that serve in the army, or with private persons? With the rulers, or
with the subjects? With the women, or with the men? With the aged men, or with
the young? With what age? With what race? With what rank? With what pursuit?
Would ye then that I should make the beginning with them that serve as
soldiers? What sin then do not these commit every day, insulting, reviling,
frantic, making a gain of other men's calamities, being like wolves, never clear
from offenses, unless one might say the sea too was without waves. What
passion does not trouble them? What disease does not lay siege to their soul?
For to their equals they show a jealous disposition, and they envy, and seek
after vainglory; and to those that are subject to them, their disposition is
covetous; but to them that have suits, and run unto them as to a harbor, their
conduct is that of enemies and perjured persons. How many robberies are there
with them! How many frauds! How many false accusations, and meannesses!
How many servile flatteries!
Come then, let us apply in each case the law of Christ. "He that says to his
brother, You fool, shall be in danger of hell fire. [Matthew 5:22] He that has
looked on a woman to lust after her, has already committed adultery with her.
[Matthew 5:28] Unless one humble himself as the little child, he shall not enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven."
But these even study haughtiness, becoming towards them that are subject
to them, and are delivered into their hands, and who tremble at them, and are
afraid of them, more fierce than a wild beast; for Christ's sake doing nothing, but