THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.83, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether the actions performed in celebrating this

sacrament are becoming?
Objection 1: It seems that the actions performed in celebrating this
mystery are not becoming. For, as is evident from its form, this
sacrament belongs to the New Testament. But under the New
Testament the ceremonies of the old are not to be observed, such as
that the priests and ministers were purified with water when they
drew nigh to offer up the sacrifice: for we read (Ex. 30:19,20): "Aaron
and his sons shall wash their hands and feet . . . when they are going
into the tabernacle of the testimony . . . and when they are to come to
the altar." Therefore it is not fitting that the priest should wash his
hands when celebrating mass.
Objection 2: Further, (Ex. 30:7), the Lord commanded Aaron to "burn
sweet-smelling incense" upon the altar which was "before the
propitiatory": and the same action was part of the ceremonies of the
Old Law. Therefore it is not fitting for the priest to use incense
during mass.
Objection 3: Further, the ceremonies performed in the sacraments of
the Church ought not to be repeated. Consequently it is not proper
for the priest to repeat the sign of the cross many times over this
sacrament.
Objection 4: Further, the Apostle says (Heb. 7:7): "And without all
contradiction, that which is less, is blessed by the better." But
Christ, Who is in this sacrament after the consecration, is much
greater than the priest. Therefore quite unseemingly the priest, after
the consecration, blesses this sacrament, by signing it with the
cross.
Objection 5: Further, nothing which appears ridiculous ought to be
done in one of the Church's sacraments. But it seems ridiculous to
perform gestures, e.g. for the priest to stretch out his arms at times,
to join his hands, to join together his fingers, and to bow down.
Consequently, such things ought not to be done in this sacrament.
Objection 6: Further, it seems ridiculous for the priest to turn round
frequently towards the people, and often to greet the people.
Consequently, such things ought not to be done in the celebration of

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.83, C.6.

this sacrament.
Objection 7: Further, the Apostle (1 Cor. 13) deems it improper for
Christ to be divided. But Christ is in this sacrament after the
consecration. Therefore it is not proper for the priest to divide the
host.
Objection 8: Further, the ceremonies performed in this sacrament
represent Christ's Passion. But during the Passion Christ's body was
divided in the places of the five wounds. Therefore Christ's body
ought to be broken into five parts rather than into three.
Objection 9: Further, Christ's entire body is consecrated in this
sacrament apart from the blood. Consequently, it is not proper for a
particle of the body to be mixed with the blood.
Objection 1:: Further, just as, in this sacrament, Christ's body is set
before us as food, so is His blood, as drink. But in receiving Christ's
body no other bodily food is added in the celebration of the mass.
Therefore, it is out of place for the priest, after taking Christ's blood,
to receive other wine which is not consecrated.
Objection 1:: Further, the truth ought to be conformable with the
figure. But regarding the Paschal Lamb, which was a figure of this
sacrament, it was commanded that nothing of it should "remain until
the morning." It is improper therefore for consecrated hosts to be
reserved, and not consumed at once.
Objection 1:: Further, the priest addresses in the plural number
those who are hearing mass, when he says, "The Lord be with you":
and, "Let us return thanks." But it is out of keeping to address one
individual in the plural number, especially an inferior. Consequently
it seems unfitting for a priest to say mass with only a single server
present. Therefore in the celebration of this sacrament it seems that
some of the things done are out of place.
On the contrary, The custom of the Church stands for these things:
and the Church cannot err, since she is taught by the Holy Ghost.
I answer that, As was said above (Question 60, Article 6), there is a
twofold manner of signification in the sacraments, by words, and by
actions, in order that the signification may thus be more perfect.