elated? He shows too, that not death alone has been put an end to, but that
thereby he also who is ever showing that war without truce against us, I mean
the devil, has been brought to nought; since he that fears not death is out of reach
of the devil's tyranny. For if "skin for skin, yea all things a man would give for
his life" [Job 2:4]— when any one has determined to disregard even this, of what
henceforward will he be the slave? He fears no one, he is in terror of no one, he
is higher than all, and more free than all. For he that disregards his own life,
much more [does he disregard] all other things. And when the devil finds a soul
such as this, he can accomplish in it none of his works. For what? Tell me, shall
he threaten the loss of property, and degradation, and banishment from one's
country? But these are small matters to him who "counts not even his life dear"
[Acts 20:24] unto him, according to the blessed Paul. You see that in casting out
the tyranny of death, he also overthrew the strength of the devil. For he who has
learned to study innumerable [truths] concerning the resurrection, how should he
fear death? How should he shudder any more?
7. Therefore be ye not grieved, saying, why do we suffer such and such
things? For so the victory becomes more glorious. And it would not have been
glorious, unless by death He had destroyed death; but the most wonderful thing
is that He conquered him by the very means by which he was strong, showing in
every point the abundance of His means, and the excellence of His contrivances.
Let us not then prove false to the gift bestowed on us. "For we," he says, "have
received not a spirit of fear, but a spirit of power, and of love, and of a sound
mind." [Romans 8:15; 2 Timothy 1:7] Let us stand then nobly, laughing death to
scorn.
But [I pause] for it comes over me to groan bitterly [at the thought of]
whither Christ has raised us up, and whither we have brought ourselves down.
For when I see the wailings in the public places, the groanings over those
departing life, the howlings, the other unseemly behavior, believe me, I am
ashamed before those heathen, and Jews, and heretics who see it, and before all
who for this cause openly laugh us to scorn. For whatever I may afterwards say, I

shall talk to no purpose, when philosophizing concerning the resurrection. Why?
Because the heathen do not attend to what is said by me, but to what is done by
you. For they will say at once, 'when will any of these [fellows] be able to
despise death, when he is not able to see another dead?'
Beautiful things were spoken by Paul, beautiful and worthy of Heaven, and
of the love of God to man. For what does he say? "And He shall deliver them
who through fear of death, were all their life-time subject to bondage." But ye do
not allow these things to be believed, fighting against them by your deeds. And
yet many things exist for this very end, God building a stronghold against it, that
He might destroy this same evil custom. For tell me, what mean the bright
torches? Do we not send them before as athletes? And what [mean] the hymns?
Do we not glorify God, and give thanks that at last He has crowned the departed
one, that He has freed him from his labors, that taking away uncertainty, He has
him with Himself? Are not the Hymns for this? Is not Psalmody for this? All
these are the acts of those rejoicing. "For," it is said, "is any merry? Let him sing
psalms." [James 5:13] But to these things the heathen give no heed. For (one will
say) do not tell me of him who is philosophical when out of the affliction, for
this is nothing great or surprising—show me a man who in the very affliction
itself is philosophical, and then I will believe the resurrection,
And indeed, that women engaged in the affairs of this life should act thus is
no way surprising. And yet indeed this even is dreadful; for from them also is the
same philosophy required. Wherefore also Paul says, "But concerning them
which are asleep, I would not have you ignorant, that you sorrow not even as the
rest who have no hope." [1 Thessalonians 4:13] He wrote not this to solitaries,
nor to perpetual virgins, but to women and men in the world. But however this is
not so dreadful. But when any man or woman, professing to be crucified to the
world, he tears his hair, and she shrieks violently— what can be more unseemly
than this? Believe me when I say if things were done as they ought, such persons
should be excluded for a long time from the thresholds of the Church. For those
who are indeed worthy of being grieved for, are these who still fear and shudder