FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.96, C.4.

Reply to Objection 1: Human law does not forbid all vicious acts, by
the obligation of a precept, as neither does it prescribe all acts of
virtue. But it forbids certain acts of each vice, just as it prescribes
some acts of each virtue.
Reply to Objection 2: An act is said to be an act of virtue in two
ways. First, from the fact that a man does something virtuous; thus
the act of justice is to do what is right, and an act of fortitude is to do
brave things: and in this way law prescribes certain acts of virtue.
Secondly an act of virtue is when a man does a virtuous thing in a
way in which a virtuous man does it. Such an act always proceeds
from virtue: and it does not come under a precept of law, but is the
end at which every lawgiver aims.
Reply to Objection 3: There is no virtue whose act is not ordainable
to the common good, as stated above, either mediately or
immediately.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.96, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether human law binds a man in conscience?

Objection 1: It would seem that human law does not bind man in
conscience. For an inferior power has no jurisdiction in a court of
higher power. But the power of man, which frames human law, is
beneath the Divine power. Therefore human law cannot impose its
precept in a Divine court, such as is the court of conscience.
Objection 2: Further, the judgment of conscience depends chiefly on
the commandments of God. But sometimes God's commandments
are made void by human laws, according to Mt. 15:6: "You have
made void the commandment of God for your tradition." Therefore
human law does not bind a man in conscience.
Objection 3: Further, human laws often bring loss of character and
injury on man, according to Is. 10:1 et seqq.: "Woe to them that make
wicked laws, and when they write, write injustice; to oppress the
poor in judgment, and do violence to the cause of the humble of My
people." But it is lawful for anyone to avoid oppression and violence.
Therefore human laws do not bind man in conscience.
On the contrary, It is written (1 Pt. 2:19): "This is thankworthy, if the
conscience . . . a man endure sorrows, suffering wrongfully."
I answer that, Laws framed by man are either just or unjust. If they be
just, they have the power of binding in conscience, from the eternal
law whence they are derived, according to Prov. 8:15: "By Me kings
reign, and lawgivers decree just things." Now laws are said to be
just, both from the end, when, to wit, they are ordained to the
common good---and from their author, that is to say, when the law
that is made does not exceed the power of the lawgiver---and from
their form, when, to wit, burdens are laid on the subjects, according
to an equality of proportion and with a view to the common good.
For, since one man is a part of the community, each man in all that
he is and has, belongs to the community; just as a part, in all that it
is, belongs to the whole; wherefore nature inflicts a loss on the part,
in order to save the whole: so that on this account, such laws as
these, which impose proportionate burdens, are just and binding in
conscience, and are legal laws.
On the other hand laws may be unjust in two ways: first, by being