SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.117, C.3.

the name of money, whence covetousness [avaritia] is denominated.
Since, however, the verb "to have," which seems to have been
originally employed in connection with possessions whereof we are
absolute masters, is applied to many other things (thus a man is said
to have health, a wife, clothes, and so forth, as stated in De
Praedicamentis), consequently the term "covetousness" has been
amplified to denote all immoderate desire for having anything
whatever. Thus Gregory says in a homily (xvi in Ev.) that
"covetousness is a desire not only for money, but also for
knowledge and high places, when prominence is immoderately
sought after." In this way covetousness is not a special sin: and in
this sense Augustine speaks of covetousness in the passage quoted
in the First Objection. Wherefore this suffices for the Reply to the
First Objection.
Reply to Objection 2: All those external things that are subject to the
uses of human life are comprised under the term "money," inasmuch
as they have the aspect of useful good. But there are certain external
goods that can be obtained by money, such as pleasures, honors,
and so forth, which are desirable under another aspect. Wherefore
the desire for such things is not properly called covetousness, in so
far as it is a special vice.
Reply to Objection 3: This gloss speaks of the inordinate
concupiscence for anything whatever. For it is easy to understand
that if it is forbidden to covet another's possessions it is also
forbidden to covet those things that can be obtained by means of
those possessions.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.117, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether covetousness is opposed to liberality?

Objection 1: It seems that covetousness is not opposed to liberality.
For Chrysostom, commenting on Mt. 5:6, "Blessed are they that
hunger and thirst after justice," says, (Hom. xv in Matth.) that there
are two kinds of justice, one general, and the other special, to which
covetousness is opposed: and the Philosopher says the same (Ethic.
v, 2). Therefore covetousness is not opposed to liberality.
Objection 2: Further, the sin of covetousness consists in a man's
exceeding the measure in the things he possesses. But this measure
is appointed by justice. Therefore covetousness is directly opposed
to justice and not to liberality.
Objection 3: Further, liberality is a virtue that observes the mean
between two contrary vices, as the Philosopher states (Ethic. i, 7; iv,
1). But covetousness has no contrary and opposite sin, according to
the Philosopher (Ethic. v, 1,2). Therefore covetousness is not
opposed to liberality.
On the contrary, It is written (Eccles. 5:9): "A covetous man shall not
be satisfied with money, and he that loveth riches shall have no
fruits from them." Now not to be satisfied with money and to love it
inordinately are opposed to liberality, which observes the mean in
the desire of riches. Therefore covetousness is opposed to liberality.
I answer that, Covetousness denotes immoderation with regard to
riches in two ways. First, immediately in respect of the acquisition
and keeping of riches. In this way a man obtains money beyond his
due, by stealing or retaining another's property. This is opposed to
justice, and in this sense covetousness is mentioned (Ezech. 22:27):
"Her princes in the midst of her are like wolves ravening the prey to
shed blood . . . and to run after gains through covetousness."
Secondly, it denotes immoderation in the interior affections for
riches; for instance, when a man loves or desires riches too much,
or takes too much pleasure in them, even if he be unwilling to steal.
In this way covetousness is opposed to liberality, which moderates
these affections, as stated above (Question 117, Article 2, ad 3,
Article 3, ad 3, Article 6). In this sense covetousness is spoken of (2
Cor. 9:5): "That they would . . . prepare this blessing before
promised, to be ready, so as a blessing, not as covetousness,"