singly, we seem not to conceive that which we remember; while we really
do this under the law of the memory, whence we take everything which
we join together after our own pleasure in manifold and diverse ways. For
we do not conceive even the very magnitudes of bodies, which
magnitudes we never saw, without help of the memory; for the measure
of space to which our gaze commonly reaches through the magnitude of
the world, is the measure also to which we enlarge the bulk of bodies,
whatever they may be, when we conceive them as great as we can. And
reason, indeed, proceeds still beyond, but phantasy does not follow her;
as when reason announces the infinity of number also, which no vision of
him who conceives according to corporeal things can apprehend. The
same reason also teaches that the most minute atoms are infinitely
divisible; yet when we have come to those slight and minute particles
which we remember to have seen, then we can no longer behold
phantasms more slender and more minute, although reason does not
cease to continue to divide them. So we conceive no corporeal things,
except either those we remember, or from those things which we
remember.

### CHAP. 11.—NUMBER, WEIGHT, MEASURE.

18. But because those things which are impressed on the memory singly,
can be conceived according to number, measure seems to belong to the
memory, but number to the vision; because, although the multiplicity of
such visions is innumerable, yet a limit not to be transgressed is
prescribed for each in the memory. Therefore, measure appears in the
memory, number in the vision of things: as there is some measure in
visible bodies themselves, to which measure the sense of those who see is
most numerously adjusted, and from one visible object is formed the
vision of many beholders, so that even a single person sees commonly a
single thing under a double appearance, on account of the number of his
two eyes, as we have laid down above. Therefore there is some measure in
those things whence visions are copied, but in the visions themselves
there is number. But the will which unites and regulates these things, and
combines them into a certain unity, and does not quietly rest its desire of
perceiving or of conceiving, except in those things from
whence the visions are formed, resembles weight. And therefore I would

just notice by way of anticipation these three things, measure, number,
weight, which are to be perceived in all other things also. In the
meantime, I have now shown as much as I can, and to whom I can, that
the will is the uniter of the visible thing and of the vision; as it were, of
parent and of offspring; whether in  perception or in
conception, and that it cannot be called either parent or offspring.
Wherefore time admonishes us to seek for this same trinity in the inner
man, and to strive to pass inwards from that animal and carnal and (as he
is called) outward man, of whom I have so long spoken. And here we
hope to be able to find an image of God according to the Trinity, He
Himself helping our efforts, who as things themselves show, and as Holy
Scripture also witnesses, has regulated all things in measure, and
number, and weight.