can be in us only by grace. Yet there is a certain natural knowledge
and love as seen above (Question 12, Article 12; Question 56, Article
3; Question 60, Article 5). This, too, is natural that the mind, in order
to understand God, can make use of reason, in which sense we have
already said that the image of God abides ever in the soul; "whether
this image of God be so obsolete," as it were clouded, "as almost to
amount to nothing," as in those who have not the use of reason; "or
obscured and disfigured," as in sinners; or "clear and beautiful," as
in the just; as Augustine says (De Trin. xiv, 6).
Reply to Objection 4: By the vision of glory temporal things will be
seen in God Himself; and such a vision of things temporal will
belong to the image of God. This is what Augustine means (De Trin.
xiv, 6), when he says that "in that nature to which the mind will
blissfully adhere, whatever it sees it will see as unchangeable"; for in
the Uncreated Word are the types of all creatures.

### ARTICLE 9. Whether "likeness" is properly distinguished from

"image"?
Objection 1: It would seem that "likeness" is not properly
distinguished from "image." For "genus" is not properly
distinguished from "species." Now, "likeness" is to "image" as
genus to species: because, "where there is image, forthwith there is
likeness, but not conversely" as Augustine says (Questions. 83, qu.
74). Therefore "likeness" is not properly to be distinguished from
"image."
Objection 2: Further, the nature of the image consists not only in the
representation of the Divine Persons, but also in the representation
of the Divine Essence, to which representation belong immortality
and indivisibility. So it is not true to say that the "likeness is in the
essence because it is immortal and indivisible; whereas the image is
in other things" (Sent. ii, D, xvi).
Objection 3: Further, the image of God in man is threefold---the
image of nature, of grace, and of glory, as above explained (Article
4). But innocence and righteousness belong to grace. Therefore it is
incorrectly said (Sent. ii, D, xvi) "that the image is taken from the
memory, the understanding and the will, while the likeness is from
innocence and righteousness."
Objection 4: Further, knowledge of truth belongs to the intellect, and
love of virtue to the will; which two things are parts of the image.
Therefore it is incorrect to say (Sent. ii, D, xvi) that "the image
consists in the knowledge of truth, and the likeness in the love of
virtue."
On the contrary, Augustine says (Questions. 83, qu. 51): "Some
consider that these two were mentioned not without reason, namely
"image" and "likeness," since, if they meant the same, one would
have sufficed."
I answer that, Likeness is a kind of unity, for oneness in quality
causes likeness, as the Philosopher says (Metaph. v, Did. iv, 15).
Now, since "one" is a transcendental, it is both common to all, and
adapted to each single thing, just as the good and the true.
Wherefore, as the good can be compared to each individual thing