prevents any near approach being made.
But now hear how this has actually occurred in real instances. Amongst the
Corinthians some man of mark committed a sin such as was not named even
among the Gentiles. This man was a believer and belonged to the household of
Christ; and some say that he was actually a member of the priesthood. What
then? Did Paul cut him off from the communion of those who were in the way of
salvation. By no means: for he himself it is who rebukes the Corinthians
countless times, backwards and forwards, because they did not bring the man to
a state of repentance: but, desiring to prove to us that there is no sin which
cannot be healed, he said again concerning the man who had transgressed more
grievously than the Gentiles: "Deliver such an one to Satan for destruction of the
flesh that his spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus Christ."
[1 Corinthians 5:5] Now this was prior to repentance: but after he had repented
"Sufficient," said he, "for such an one is this punishment which was inflicted by
the many [2 Corinthians 2:6] " and he charged them by a letter to console the
man again, and to welcome his repentance, so that he should not be got the better
of by Satan. Moreover when the whole Galatian people fell after having
believed, and wrought miracles, and endured many trials for the sake of their
faith in Christ he sets them up again. For that they had done miracles he testified
when he said: "He therefore that supplies to you the Spirit and works miracles
among you:" [Galatians 3:5] and that they endured many contests for the sake of
the faith, he also testified when he says: "Have ye suffered so many things in
vain if it be indeed in vain." [Galatians 3:4] Nevertheless after making so great
an advance they committed sin sufficient to estrange them from Christ
concerning which he declares saying: "Behold, I Paul tell you, that if you be
circumcised, Christ will profit you nothing:" and again "ye who would be
justified by the law are fallen away from grace:" and yet even after so great a
lapse he welcomes them saying "my little children of whom I am in travail again
until Christ be formed in you [Galatians 4:19] " showing that after extreme
perversion it is possible for Christ to be formed again in us: for He does not

desire the death of a sinner, but rather that he should be convened and live.
9. Let us then turn to Him, my beloved friend, and execute the will of God.
For He created us and brought us into being, that He might make us partakers of
eternal blessings, that He might offer us the kingdom of Heaven, not that He
might cast us into Hell and deliver us to the fire; for this was made not for us,
but for the devil: but for us the kingdom has been destined and made ready of
old time. And by way of indicating both these truths He says to those on the
right hand, "Come ye blessed of my Father inherit the kingdom prepared for you
from the foundation of the world:" but to those on the left "Depart from me, you
cursed, into fire everlasting prepared" (he no longer says "for you" but) "for the
devil and his angels." [Matthew 25:34] Thus hell has not been made for us but
for him and his angels: but the kingdom has been prepared for us before the
foundation of the world. Let us not then make ourselves unworthy of entrance
into the bride-chamber: for as long as we are in this world, even if we commit
countless sins it is possible to wash them all away by manifesting repentance for
our offenses: but when once we have departed to the other world, even if we
display the most earnest repentance it will be of no avail, not even if we gnash
our teeth, beat our breasts, and utter innumerable calls for succour, no one with
the tip of his finger will apply a drop to our burning bodies, but we shall only
hear those words which the rich man heard in the parable "Between us and you a
great gulf has been fixed." [Luke 16:26] Let us then, I beseech you, recover our
senses here and let us recognize our Master as He ought to be recognized. For
only when we are in Hades should we abandon the hope derived from
repentance: for there only is this remedy weak and unprofitable: but while we
are here even if it is applied in old age itself it exhibits much strength. Wherefore
also the devil sets everything in motion in order to root in us the reasoning which
comes of despair: for he knows that if we repent even a little we shall not do this
without some reward. But just as he who gives a cup of cold water has his
recompense reserved for him, so also the man who has repented of the evils
which he has done, even if he cannot exhibit the repentance which his offenses