showing that they must not be proud of Abraham who do not believe as he did.
And see a third thing which faith effected besides. It makes the relationship to
that righteous man more definite ([ἀ] [κρι βεστέραν]), and holds him up as the
ancestor of a more numerous issue. And this is why he does not say merely
Abraham, but "our father," ours who believe. Then he also seals what he has said
by the testimony—
Ver. 17. "As it is written," he says, "I have made you a father of many
nations."
Do you observe that this was ordered by Providence from of old? What
then, he means, does He say this on account of the Ishmaelites, or of the
Amalekites, or of the Hagarenes? This however, as he goes on he proves more
distinctly not to be said of these. But as yet he presses forward to another point,
by which means he proves this very thing by defining the mode of the
relationship, and establishing it with a vast reach of mind. What then does he
say?
"Before (or, answering to, [κατέναντι]) Him Whom he believed, even God."
But his meaning is something of this sort, as God is not the God of a part,
but the Father of all, so is he also. And again, as God is a father not by way of
the relationship of nature, but by way of the affiance of faith, so is he also
inasmuch as it is obedience that makes him father of us all. For since they
thought nothing of this relationship, as clinging to that grosser one, he shows
that this is the truer relationship by lifting his discourse up to God. And along
with this he makes it plain that this was the reward of faith that he received.
Consequently, if it were not so, and he were the father of all the dwellers upon
earth, the expression before (or answering to) would be out of place, while the
gift of God would be curtailed. For the "before," is equivalent to "alike with."
Since where is the marvel, pray, in a man's being the father of those sprung from
himself? This is what is every man's lot. But the extraordinary thing is, that those
whom by nature he had not, them he received by the gift of God. And so if you
would believe that the patriarch was honored, believe that he is the father of all.

But after saying, "before Him Whom he believed, even God," he does not pause
here, but goes on thus; "Who quickens the dead, and calls those things which be
not as though they were," so laying beforehand his foundations for discoursing
upon the resurrection. And it was serviceable also to his present purpose. For if
He could "quicken the dead" and bring in "those things that were not as though
they were," then could He also make those who were not born of him to be his
children. And this is why he does not say, bringing in the things which are not,
but calling them, so showing the greater ease of it. For as it is easy to us to call
the things which are by name, so to Him it is easy, yea, and much easier to give a
subsistence to things that are not. But after saying, that the gift of God was great
and unspeakable, and having discoursed concerning His power, he shows farther
that Abraham's faith was deserving of the gift, that you may not suppose him to
have been honored without reason. And after raising the attention of his hearers
to prevent the Jew from clamoring and making doubts, and saying, "And how is
it possible for those who are not children to become children?" he passes on to
speak of the patriarch, and says,
Ver. 18. "Who against hope believed in hope, that he might become the
father of many nations, according to that which was spoken, So shall your seed
be."
How was it that he "believed in hope against hope?" It was against man's
hope, in hope which is of God. (For he is showing the loftiness of the action, and
leaving no room for disbelieving what is said.) Things which are contrary to one
another, yet faith blends them together. But if he were speaking about such as
were from Ishmael, this language would be superfluous: for it was not by faith
but by nature that they were begotten. But he brings Isaac also before us. For it
was not concerning those nations that he believed, but concerning him who was
to be from his barren wife. If then it be a reward to be father of many nations, it
would be so of those nations clearly of whom he so believed. For that you may
know that he is speaking of them, listen to what follows.
Ver. 19. "And being not weak in faith, he considered his own body now