Jews (at Ephesus) believe not, when we see that belief itself often comes round
for them into its opposite, into malignity; as, for instance, when they say that He
has a devil, He, the Son of God! Do you not see these things even now, and how
men are many of them like serpents, both faithless and thankless, men who,
viper-like, when they have enjoyed benefits and have been warmed by some,
then they sting their benefactors? This we have said, lest any should marvel,
how, such signs having been wrought, they were not all converted. For behold,
in our own times happened those (miracles) relating to the martyr Babylas, those
relating to Jerusalem, those relating to the destruction of the temples, and not all
were converted. Why need I speak of ancient things? I have told you what
happened last year; and none gave heed to it, but again little by little they fell off
and sunk back. The heaven stands perpetually crying aloud that it has a Master,
and that it is the work of an Artificer, all this that we see— I mean the world—
and yet some say that it is not so. What happened to that Theodorus last year—
whom did it not startle? And yet nothing came of it, but having for a season
become religious, they returned to the point from which they had started in their
attempt to be religious. So it was with the Jews. This is what the Prophet said of
them: "When He slew them, then they sought Him, and turned early unto God."
[Psalm 78:34] And what need to speak of those things that are common to all?
How many have fallen into diseases, how many have promised, if raised up, to
work so great a change, and yet they have again become the same as ever! This,
if nothing else, shows that we have natural free-will— our changing all at once.
Were evil natural, this would not be: things that are natural and necessary, we
cannot change from. "And yet," you will say, "we do change from them. For do
we not see some, who have the natural faculty to see, but are blinded by fear?"
(True—) because this also is natural: * * if a different (necessity of) nature come
not also into operation: (thus) it is natural to us, that being terrified we do not
see; it is natural to us that when a greater fear supervenes, the other gives way.
"What then," you will say, "if right-mindedness be indeed according to nature,
but fear having overpowered it cast it out?" What then if I shall show that some

even then are not brought to a right mind, but even in these fears are reckless? Is
this natural? Shall I speak of ancient things? Well then, of recent? How many in
the midst of those fears continued laughing, mocking, and experienced nothing
of the sort? Did not Pharaoh change immediately, and (as quickly) run back to
his former wickedness? But here, as if (the demons) knew Him not, they (the
exorcists) added, "Whom Paul preaches," whereas they ought to have said, "the
Saviour of the world." "Him that rose again." By this they show that they do
know, but they did not choose to confess His glory. Wherefore the demon
exposes them, leaping upon them, and saying, "Jesus I know, and Paul I know,
but who are you?" So that not you are believers, but you abuse that Name when
you say this. Therefore the Temple is desolate, the implement easy to be
overcome. So that you are not preachers; mine, says he, you are. Great was the
wrath of the demon. The Apostles had power to do this to them, but they did it
not as yet. For they that had power over the demons that did these things to
them, much more had power over the men themselves. Mark how their
forbearance is shown, in that they whom they repulsed do these things, while the
demons whom they courted do the contrary. "Jesus," says he, "I know." Be
ashamed, you that are ignorant (of Him). "And Paul I know." Well said, "Think
not that it is because I despise them, that I do these things." Great was the fear of
the demon. And why without these words did he not rend their garments? For so
he would both have sated his wrath, and established the delusion. He feared as I
said, the unapproachable force, and would not have had such power had he not
said this. But observe how we find the demons everywhere more right minded
(than the Jews), not daring to contradict nor accuse the Apostles, or Christ. There
they say, "We know You who You are" [Matthew 8:29]; and, "Why are You come
hither before the time to torment us" [Mark 1:24]: and again, "I know You who
You are, the Son of God." And here, "These men are servants of the most high
God" [Acts 16:17]: and again, "Jesus I know, and Paul I know." For they
exceedingly feared and trembled before those holy persons. Perhaps some one of
you, hearing of these things, wishes he were possessed of this power, so that the