12. Though it is true that this mission demands great generosity on our part, it would be wrong to
see it as a heroic individual undertaking, for it is first and foremost the Lord’s work, surpassing
anything which we can see and understand. Jesus is “the first and greatest evangelizer”. In
every activity of evangelization, the primacy always belongs to God, who has called us to
cooperate with him and who leads us on by the power of his Spirit. The real newness is the
newness which God himself mysteriously brings about and inspires, provokes, guides and
accompanies in a thousand ways. The life of the Church should always reveal clearly that God
takes the initiative, that “he has loved us first” (1 Jn 4:19) and that he alone “gives the growth” (1
Cor 3:7). This conviction enables us to maintain a spirit of joy in the midst of a task so demanding
and challenging that it engages our entire life. God asks everything of us, yet at the same time he
offers everything to us.

13. Nor should we see the newness of this mission as entailing a kind of displacement or
forgetfulness of the living history which surrounds us and carries us forward. Memory is a
dimension of our faith which we might call “deuteronomic”, not unlike the memory of Israel itself.
Jesus leaves us the Eucharist as the Church’s daily remembrance of, and deeper sharing in, the
event of his Passover (cf. Lk 22:19). The joy of evangelizing always arises from grateful
remembrance: it is a grace which we constantly need to implore. The apostles never forgot the
moment when Jesus touched their hearts: “It was about four o’clock in the afternoon” (Jn 1:39).
Together with Jesus, this remembrance makes present to us “a great cloud of witnesses” (Heb
12:1), some of whom, as believers, we recall with great joy: “Remember your leaders, those who
spoke to you the word of God” (Heb 13:7). Some of them were ordinary people who were close to

us and introduced us to the life of faith: “I am reminded of your sincere faith, a faith that dwelt first
in your grandmother Lois and your mother Eunice” (2 Tim 1:5). The believer is essentially “one
who remembers”.

### III. The new evangelization for the transmission of the faith

14. Attentive to the promptings of the Holy Spirit who helps us together to read the signs of the
times, the XIII Ordinary General Assembly of the Synod of Bishops gathered from 7-28 October
2012 to discuss the theme: The New Evangelization for the Transmission of the Christian Faith.
The Synod reaffirmed that the new evangelization is a summons addressed to all and that it is
carried out in three principal settings.

In first place, we can mention the area of ordinary pastoral ministry, which is “animated by the fire
of the Spirit, so as to inflame the hearts of the faithful who regularly take part in community
worship and gather on the Lord’s day to be nourished by his word and by the bread of eternal
life”. In this category we can also include those members of faithful who preserve a deep and
sincere faith, expressing it in different ways, but seldom taking part in worship. Ordinary pastoral
ministry seeks to help believers to grow spiritually so that they can respond to God’s love ever
more fully in their lives.