wickedness, the sentence had not taken effect, some one perhaps might have
brought a charge against what was uttered. But if when they had changed, and
desisted from their iniquity, God also desisted from His wrath, who shall be able
any longer to find fault with the prophecy, or to convict the things spoken of
falsehood. The same law indeed which God had laid down from the beginning,
publishing it to all men by the prophet, was on that occasion strictly observed.
What then is this law? "I shall speak a sentence," says He, "concerning a nation
or a kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy it; and it shall be,
that if they repent of their evil, I will also repent of the wrath which I said I
would do unto them." [Jeremiah 18:7-8] Guarding then this law, he saved those
who were converted and released from His wrath those who desisted from their
wickedness. He knew the virtue of the barbarians; therefore He hastened the
prophet there. Thus was the city agitated at the time, when it heard the prophet's
voice, but instead of being injured it was benefited by fear. For that fear was the
cause of its safety. The threatening effected the deliverance from the peril. The
sentence of overthrow put a stop to the overthrow. O strange and astonishing
event! The sentence threatening death, brought forth life! The sentence after it
was published became cancelled; the very opposite to that which takes place
among temporal judges! For in their case the proclamation of the sentence
causes it to become valid, is fully to ratify it; but on the contrary, with God, the
publication of the sentence, caused it to be cancelled. For if it had not been
published, the offenders would not have heard; and if they had not heard, they
would not have repented, and if they had not repented, they would not have
warded off the punishment, nor would they have obtained that astonishing
deliverance. For how is it less than astonishing, when the judge declares
sentence, and the condemned discharge the sentence by their repentance! They,
indeed, did not flee from the city as we are now doing, but remaining in it they
caused it to stand. It was a snare, and they made it a fortification! It was a gulph,
and a precipice, and they turned it into a tower of safety! They had heard that the
buildings would fall, and yet they fled not from the buildings, but they fled from

their sins. They did not depart each from his house as we do now, but each
departed from his evil way; for, said they, "why should we think the walls have
brought forth the wrath? We are the causes of the wound; we then should
provide the medicine." Therefore they trusted for safety, not to a change of
habitations, but of habits.
17. Thus did the barbarians! And are we not ashamed, and ought we not to
hide our faces, while instead of changing our habits, as they did, we change only
our habitations; privily removing our goods, and doing the deeds of men that are
drunken? Our Master is angry with us; and we, neglecting to appease His wrath,
carry about our household stuff from place to place, and run hither and there,
seeking where we may deposit our substance; while we ought rather to seek
where we may deposit our soul in safety; or rather, it behooves us not to seek,
but to entrust its safety to virtue and uprightness of life. For when we were angry
and displeased with a servant, if he, instead of defending himself against our
displeasure, went down to his apartment, and collecting together his clothes, and
binding up together all his movables, meditated a flight, we could not tamely put
up with this contempt. Let us then desist from this unseasonable endeavour, and
let us each say to God, "Whither shall I go from Your Spirit, and whither shall I
flee from Your presence?" Let us imitate the spiritual wisdom of the barbarians.
They repented even on uncertain grounds! For the sentence had no such clause,
"If you turn and repent, I will set up the city;" but simply, "Yet three days, and
Nineveh shall be overthrown." [Jonah 3:9] What then said they? "Who knows
whether God will repent of the evil He said He would do unto us?" Who knows?
They know not the end of the event, and yet they do not neglect repentance!
They are unacquainted with God's method of showing mercy, and yet they
change upon the strength of uncertainties! For neither was it in their power to
look at other Ninevites who had repented and been saved; nor had they read
prophets; nor had they heard patriarchs; nor had they enjoyed counsel, or
partaken of admonition; nor had they persuaded themselves that they should
certainly propitiate God by repentance. For the threatening did not imply this: