SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.183, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether, in this life, perfection consists in the

observance of the commandments or of the counsels?
Objection 1: It would seem that, in this life, perfection consists in the
observance not of the commandments but of the counsels. For our
Lord said (Mt. 19:21): "If thou wilt be perfect, go sell all thou hast,
and give to the poor . . . and come, follow Me." Now this is a counsel.
Therefore perfection regards the counsels and not the precepts.
Objection 2: Further, all are bound to the observance of the
commandments, since this is necessary for salvation. Therefore, if
the perfection of the Christian life consists in observing the
commandments, it follows that perfection is necessary for salvation,
and that all are bound thereto; and this is evidently false.
Objection 3: Further, the perfection of the Christian life is gauged
according to charity, as stated above (Article 1). Now the perfection
of charity, seemingly, does not consist in the observance of the
commandments, since the perfection of charity is preceded both by
its increase and by its beginning, as Augustine says (Super Canonic.
Joan. Tract. ix). But the beginning of charity cannot precede the
observance of the commandments, since according to Jn. 14:23, "If
any one love Me, he will keep My word." Therefore the perfection of
life regards not the commandments but the counsels.
On the contrary, It is written (Dt. 6:5): "Thou shalt love the Lord thy
God with thy whole heart," and (Lev. 19:18): "Thou shalt love thy
neighbor as thyself"; and these are the commandments of which our
Lord said (Mt. 22:40): "On these two commandments dependeth the
whole law and the prophets." Now the perfection of charity, in
respect of which the Christian life is said to be perfect, consists in
our loving God with our whole heart, and our neighbor as ourselves.
Therefore it would seem that perfection consists in the observance
of the precepts.
I answer that, Perfection is said to consist in a thing in two ways: in
one way, primarily and essentially; in another, secondarily and
accidentally. Primarily and essentially the perfection of the Christian
life consists in charity, principally as to the love of God, secondarily
as to the love of our neighbor, both of which are the matter of the
chief commandments of the Divine law, as stated above. Now the

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.183, C.4.

love of God and of our neighbor is not commanded according to a
measure, so that what is in excess of the measure be a matter of
counsel. This is evident from the very form of the commandment,
pointing, as it does, to perfection---for instance in the words, "Thou
shalt love the Lord thy God with thy whole heart": since "the whole"
is the same as "the perfect," according to the Philosopher (Phys. iii,
6), and in the words, "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself," since
every one loves himself most. The reason of this is that "the end of
the commandment is charity," according to the Apostle (1 Tim. 1:5);
and the end is not subject to a measure, but only such things as are
directed to the end, as the Philosopher observes (Polit. i, 3); thus a
physician does not measure the amount of his healing, but how
much medicine or diet he shall employ for the purpose of healing.
Consequently it is evident that perfection consists essentially in the
observance of the commandments; wherefore Augustine says (De
Perf. Justit. viii): "Why then should not this perfection be prescribed
to man, although no man has it in this life?"
Secondarily and instrumentally, however, perfection consists in the
observance of the counsels, all of which, like the commandments,
are directed to charity; yet not in the same way. For the
commandments, other than the precepts of charity, are directed to
the removal of things contrary to charity, with which, namely, charity
is incompatible, whereas the counsels are directed to the removal of
things that hinder the act of charity, and yet are not contrary to
charity, such as marriage, the occupation of worldly business, and
so forth. Hence Augustine says (Enchiridion cxxi): "Whatever things
God commands, for instance, 'Thou shalt not commit adultery,' and
whatever are not commanded, yet suggested by a special counsel,
for instance, 'It is good for a man not to touch a woman,' are then
done aright when they are referred to the love of God, and of our
neighbor for God's sake, both in this world and in the world to
come." Hence it is that in the Conferences of the Fathers (Coll. i, cap.
vii) the abbot Moses says: "Fastings, watchings, meditating on the
Scriptures, penury and loss of all one's wealth, these are not
perfection but means to perfection, since not in them does the
school of perfection find its end, but through them it achieves its
end," and he had already said that "we endeavor to ascend by these
steps to the perfection of charity."
Reply to Objection 1: In this saying of our Lord something is
indicated as being the way to perfection by the words, "Go, sell all
thou hast, and give to the poor"; and something else is added