supposing that Augustine maintained an empyrean heaven in the
sense understood by modern writers.
Reply to Objection 1: Sensible corporeal things are movable in the
present state of the world, for by the movement of corporeal
creatures is secured by the multiplication of the elements. But when
glory is finally consummated, the movement of bodies will cease.
And such must have been from the beginning the condition of the
empyrean.
Reply to Objection 2: It is sufficiently probable, as some assert, that
the empyrean heaven, having the state of glory for its ordained end,
does not influence inferior bodies of another order---those, namely,
that are directed only to natural ends. Yet it seems still more
probable that it does influence bodies that are moved, though itself
motionless, just as angels of the highest rank, who assist [Question
112, Article 3], influence those of lower degree who act as
messengers, though they themselves are not sent, as Dionysius
teaches (Coel. Hier. xii). For this reason it may be said that the
influence of the empyrean upon that which is called the first heaven,
and is moved, produces therein not something that comes and goes
as a result of movement, but something of a fixed and stable nature,
as the power of conservation or causation, or something of the kind
pertaining to dignity.
Reply to Objection 3: Corporeal place is assigned to contemplation,
not as necessary, but as congruous, that the splendor without may
correspond to that which is within. Hence Basil (Hom. ii in Hexaem.)
says: "The ministering spirit could not live in darkness, but made his
habitual dwelling in light and joy."
Reply to Objection 4: As Basil says (Hom. ii in Hexaem.): "It is certain
that the heaven was created spherical in shape, of dense body, and
sufficiently strong to separate what is outside it from what it
encloses. On this account it darkens the region external to it, the
light by which itself is lit up being shut out from that region. "But
since the body of the firmament, though solid, is transparent, for that
it does not exclude light (as is clear from the fact that we can see the
stars through the intervening heavens), we may also say that the
empyrean has light, not condensed so as to emit rays, as the sun
does, but of a more subtle nature. Or it may have the brightness of
glory which differs from mere natural brightness.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether time was created simultaneously with

formless matter?
Objection 1: It would seem that time was not created simultaneously
with formless matter. For Augustine says (Confess. xii, 12): "I find
two things that Thou didst create before time was, the primary
corporeal matter, and the angelic nature. "Therefore time was not
created with formless matter.
Objection 2: Further, time is divided by day and night. But in the
beginning there was neither day nor night, for these began when
"God divided the light from the darkness. "Therefore in the
beginning time was not.
Objection 3: Further, time is the measure of the firmament's
movement; and the firmament is said to have been made on the
second day. Therefore in the beginning time was not.
Objection 4: Further, movement precedes time, and therefore should
be reckoned among the first things created, rather than time.
Objection 5: Further, as time is the extrinsic measure of created
things, so is place. Place, then, as truly as time, must be reckoned
among the things first created.
On the contrary, Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. i, 3): "Both spiritual and
corporeal creatures were created at the beginning of time."
I answer that, It is commonly said that the first things created were
these four---the angelic nature, the empyrean heaven, formless
corporeal matter, and time. It must be observed, however, that this is
not the opinion of Augustine. For he (Confess. xii, 12) specifies only
two things as first created---the angelic nature and corporeal matter--making no mention of the empyrean heaven. But these two, namely,
the angelic nature and formless matter, precede the formation, by
nature only, and not by duration; and therefore, as they precede
formation, so do they precede movement and time. Time, therefore,
cannot be included among them. But the enumeration above given is
that of other holy writers, who hold that the formlessness of matter
preceded by duration its form, and this view postulates the existence
of time as the measure of duration: for otherwise there would be no