the living are by nature polluting; but that everywhere a wicked and perverted
intention is open to accusations from all.
The dead body then is not a pollution O Apollo, but to persecute a maiden
who wishes to be modest, and to outrage the dignity of a virgin, and to lament at
the failure of the shameless deed, this is worthy of accusation, and punishment.
There were at all events, many wonderful and great prophets among ourselves,
who spoke also many things concerning the future, and they in no case used to
bid those who asked them to dig up the bones of the departed. Yea Ezekiel
standing near the bones themselves was not only not hindered by them, but
added flesh, and nerves and skin to them, and brought them back to life again.
[Ezekiel xxxvii] But the great Moses did not stand near the bones of the dead,
but bearing off the whole dead body of Joseph, thus foretold things to come.
[Exodus 13:19] And very reasonably, for their words were the grace of the Holy
Spirit. But the words of these, a deceit, and a lie which is no wise able to be
concealed. For that these things were an excuse, and pretence and that he feared
the blessed Babylas, is manifest from what the emperor did. For leaving all the
other dead, he only moved that martyr. And yet if he did these things, in disgust
at him, and not in fear, it were necessary that he should order the coffin to be
broken, thrown into the sea, carried to the desert, be made to disappear by some
other method of destruction; for this is the part of one who is disgusted. Thus
God did when he spoke to the Hebrews about the abominations of the Gentiles.
He bade their statues to be broken, not to bring their abominations from the
suburbs to the city.
3. The martyr then was moved, but the demon not even then enjoyed
freedom from fear, but straightway learned that it is possible to move the bones
of a martyr, but not to escape his hands. For as soon as the coffin was drawn into
the city, a thunderbolt came from above upon the head of his image, and burnt it
all up. And yet, if not before, then at least there was likelihood that the impious
emperor would be angry, and that he would send forth his anger against the
testimony of the martyr. But not even then did he dare, so great fear possessed

him. But although he saw that the burning was intolerable, and knew the cause
accurately; he kept quiet. And this is not only wonderful that he did not destroy
the testimony, but that he not even dared to put the roof on to the temple again.
For he knew, he knew, that the stroke was divinely sent, and he feared lest by
forming any further plan, he should call down that fire upon his own head. On
this account he endured to see the shrine of Apollo brought to so great
desolation; For there was no other cause, on account of which he did not rectify
that which had happened, but fear alone. For which reason he unwillingly kept
quiet, and knowing this left as much reproach to the demon, as distinction to the
martyr. For the walls are now standing, instead of trophies, uttering a voice
clearer than a trumpet. To those in Daphne, to those in the city, to those who
arrive from far off, to those who are with us, to those men which shall be
hereafter, they declare everything by their appearance, the wrestling, the
struggle, the victory of the martyr. For it is likely that he who dwells far off from
the suburb, when he sees the chapel of the saint deprived of a shrine, and the
temple of Apollo deprived of its roof would ask the reason of each of these
things; and then after learning the whole history would depart hence. Such are
the noble deeds of the martyr after death, wherefore I count your city blessed,
that you have shown much zeal about this holy man. For then, when he returned
from Daphne, all our city poured forth into the road, and the market places were
empty of men, and the houses were empty of women, and the bedchambers were
destitute of maidens. Thus also every age and each sex passed forth from the
city, as if to receive a father long absent who was returning from sojourn far
away. And you indeed gave him back to the band of fellow enthusiasts. But the
grace of God did not suffer him to remain there for good, but again removed him
beyond the river, so that many parts of the country were filled with the sweet
savor of the martyr. Neither even when he came hither was he destined to be
alone, but he quickly received, a neighbor, and a fellow-lodger, and one of
similar life. For he shared with him the same dignity, and for the sake of religion
showed forth equal boldness. Wherefore he obtained the same abode as he, this