FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.6.

uncleanness of vessels, of which it is written (Num. 19:15): "The
vessel that hath no cover, and binding over it, shall be unclean." The
cause of this uncleanness was that anything unclean might easily
drop into such vessels, so as to render them unclean. Moreover, this
command aimed at the prevention of idolatry. For idolaters believed
that if mice, lizards, or the like, which they used to sacrifice to the
idols, fell into the vessels or into the water, these became more
pleasing to the gods. Even now some women let down uncovered
vessels in honor of the nocturnal deities which they call "Janae."
The figurative reason of these uncleannesses is that the leprosy of a
house signified the uncleanness of the assembly of heretics; the
leprosy of a linen garment signified an evil life arising from
bitterness of mind; the leprosy of a woolen garment denoted the
wickedness of flatterers; leprosy in the warp signified the vices of
the soul; leprosy on the woof denoted sins of the flesh, for as the
warp is in the woof, so is the soul in the body. The vessel that has
neither cover nor binding, betokens a man who lacks the veil of
taciturnity, and who is unrestrained by any severity of discipline.
Reply to Objection 5: As stated above (ad 4), there was a twofold
uncleanness in the Law; one by way of corruption in the mind or in
the body; and this was the graver uncleanness; the other was by
mere contact with an unclean thing, and this was less grave, and
was more easily expiated. Because the former uncleanness was
expiated by sacrifices for sins, since all corruption is due to sin, and
signifies sin: whereas the latter uncleanness was expiated by the
mere sprinkling of a certain water, of which water we read in Num.
19. For there God commanded them to take a red cow in memory of
the sin they had committed in worshipping a calf. And a cow is
mentioned rather than a calf, because it was thus that the Lord was
wont to designate the synagogue, according to Osee 4:16: "Israel
hath gone astray like a wanton heifer": and this was, perhaps,
because they worshipped heifers after the custom of Egypt,
according to Osee 10:5: "(They) have worshipped the kine of
Bethaven." And in detestation of the sin of idolatry it was sacrificed
outside the camp; in fact, whenever sacrifice was offered up in
expiation of the multitude of sins, it was all burnt outside the camp.
Moreover, in order to show that this sacrifice cleansed the people
from all their sins, "the priest" dipped "his finger in her blood," and
sprinkled "it over against the door of the tabernacle seven times";
for the number seven signified universality. Further, the very
sprinkling of blood pertained to the detestation of idolatry, in which

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.6.