John 11:9
"Are there not twelve hours of the day?"
He either says this, that "he who is conscious to himself of no evil, shall
suffer nothing dreadful; only he that does evil shall suffer, so that we need not
fear, because we have done nothing worthy of death"; or else that, "he who 'sees
the light of this world' is in safety; and if he that sees the light of this world is in
safety, much more he that is with Me, if he separate not himself from Me."
Having encouraged them by these words, He adds, that the cause of their going
there was pressing, and shows them that they were about to go not unto
Jerusalem, but unto Bethany.

John 11:11-12
"Our friend Lazarus sleeps, but I go that I may awake him out of sleep."
That is, "I go not for the same purpose as before, again to reason and
contend with the Jews, but to awaken our friend."

John 11:12
"Then said His disciples, Lord, if he sleep he shall do well."
This they said not without a cause, but desiring to hinder the going there.
"Sayest Thou," asks one of them, "that he sleeps? Then there is no urgent reason
for going." Yet on this account He had said, "Our friend," to show that the going
there was necessary. When therefore their disposition was somewhat reluctant,
He said,

John 11:14
"He is dead."
2. The former word He spoke, desiring to prove that He loved not boasting;
but since they understood not, He added, "He is dead."

John 11:15
"And I am glad for your sakes."
Why "for your sakes"? "Because I have forewarned you of his death, not
being there, and because when I shall raise him again, there will be no suspicion
of deceit." Do you see how the disciples were yet imperfect in their disposition,
and knew not His power as they ought? And this was caused by interposing
terrors, which troubled and disturbed their souls. When He said, "He sleeps," He
added, "I go to awake him"; but when He said, "He is dead," He added not, "I go
to raise him"; for He would not foretell in words what He was about to establish
certainly by works, everywhere teaching us not to be vainglorious, and that we
must not make promises without a cause. And if He did thus in the case of the
centurion when summoned, (for He said, "I will come and heal him," [Matthew
8:7]) it was to show the faith of the centurion that He said this. If any one ask,
"How did the disciples imagine sleep? How did they not understand that death
was meant from His saying, 'I go to awake him?' for it was folly if they expected
that He would go fifteen stadia to awake him"; we would reply, that they deemed
this to be a dark saying, such as He often spoke to them.
Now they all feared the attacks of the Jews, but Thomas above the rest;
wherefore also he said,

John 11:16
"Let us go, that we also may die with Him."
Some say that he desired himself to die; but it is not so; the expression is
rather one of cowardice. Yet he was not rebuked, for Christ as yet supported his
weakness, but afterwards he became stronger than all, and invincible. For the
wonderful thing is this; that we see one who was so weak before the Crucifixion,
become after the Crucifixion, and after having believed in the Resurrection,
more zealous than any. So great was the power of Christ. The very man who
dared not go in company with Christ to Bethany, the same while not seeing
Christ ran well near through the inhabited world, and dwelt in the midst of
nations that were full of murder, and desirous to kill him.
But if Bethany was "fifteen furlongs off," which is two miles, how was
Lazarus "dead four days"? Jesus tarried two days, on the day before those two
one had come with the message, (on which same day Lazarus died,) then in the
course of the fourth day He arrived. He waited to be summoned, and came not
uninvited on this account, that no one might suspect what took place; nor did
those women who were beloved by Him come themselves, but others were sent.