enduring what befalls us with fortitude; for we reap no small consolation from
this season. For our very meeting together daily as we do, and having the benefit
of hearing the divine Scriptures; and beholding each other; and weeping with
each other; and praying, and receiving Benedictions, and so departing home,
takes off the chief part of our distress.
7. Let us, therefore, not despond, nor give ourselves up by reason of our
distress; but let us wait, expecting a favourable issue; and let us give heed to the
things that are now about to be spoken. For it is my purpose to discourse to you
again to day respecting contempt for death. I said to you, yesterday, that we are
afraid of death, not because he is really formidable; but because the love of the
kingdom has not kindled us, nor the fear of hell laid hold of us; and because
besides this we have not a good conscience. Are you desirous that I should speak
of a fourth reason for this unseasonable distress, one which is not less, and truer
than the rest? We do not live with the austerity that becomes Christians. On the
contrary, we love to follow this voluptuous and dissolute and indolent life;
therefore also it is but natural that we cleave to present things; since if we spent
this life in fastings, vigils, and poverty of diet, cutting off all our extravagant
desires; setting a restraint upon our pleasures; undergoing the toils of virtue;
keeping the body under like Paul, and bringing it into subjection; not "making
provision for the lusts of the flesh;" and pursuing the strait and narrow way, we
should soon be earnestly desirous of future things, and eager to be delivered
from our present labours. And to prove that what I say is not untrue, ascend to
the tops of the mountains, and observe the monks who are there; some in
sackcloth; some in bonds; some in fastings; some shut up in darkness. You will
then perceive, that all these are earnestly desiring death, and calling it rest. For
even as the pugilist is eager to leave the stadium, in order that he may be freed
from wounds; and the wrestler longs for the theatre to break up, that he may be
released from his toils; so also he who by the aid of virtue leads a life of
austerity, and mortification, earnestly longs for death in order that he may be
freed from his present labours, and may be able to have full assurance in regard

to the crowns laid up in store, by arriving in the still harbour, and migrating to
the place where there is no further apprehension of shipwreck. Therefore, also,
has God provided for us a life that is naturally laborious and troublesome; to the
end that being here urged by tribulation, we may conceive an eager longing for
future blessings; for if now, while there are so many sorrows, and dangers, and
fears, and anxieties, surrounding us on all sides, we thus cling to the present life;
when should we ever be desirous of the life to come, if our present existence
were altogether void of grief and misery?
8. Thus also God acted towards the Jews. For wishing to infuse into them a
desire of returning (to Canaan), and to persuade them to hate Egypt, He
permitted them to be distressed by working in clay, and brick-making, that being
oppressed by that weight of toil and affliction, they might cry unto God
respecting their return. For if, indeed when they departed after these things had
happened, they did again remember Egypt, with their hard slavery, and were
urgent to turn back to that former tyranny; what if they had received no such
treatment from these barbarians? When would they have ever wished to leave
that strange land? To the end, therefore, that we may not be too closely attached
to the earth, and grow wretched while gaping after present things, and become
unmindful of futurity, God has made our lives here full of labour. Let us not then
cherish the love of the present life beyond what is necessary. For what does it
profit us? Or what is the advantage of being closely rivetted to the desire of this
present state? Are you willing to learn in what respect this life is advantageous?
It is so, inasmuch as it is the ground-work and starting point of the life to come;
the wrestling-school and the arena for crowns of victory hereafter! so that if it
does not provide these for us, it is worse than a thousand deaths. For if we do not
wish to live so as to please God, it is better to die. For what is the gain? What
have we the more? Do we not every day see the same sun, and the same moon,
the same winter, the same summer, the same course of things? "The thing that
has been, shall be; and that which is done, is that which shall be done."
[Ecclesiastes 1:9] Let us not then at once pronounce those happy, who are alive,