endure them if he does suffer them? Who would will to live in torments,
even although he is able to live laudably by holding fast to righteousness
in the midst of them through patience? They who have endured these
evils, either in wishing to have or in fearing to lose what they loved,
whether wickedly or laudably, have thought of them as transitory. For
many have stretched boldly through transitory evils to good things which
will last. And these, doubtless, are blessed through hope, even while
actually suffering such transitory evils, through which they arrive at good
things which will not be transitory. But he who is blessed through hope is
not yet blessed: for he expects, through patience, a blessedness which he
does not yet grasp. Whereas he, on the other hand, who is tormented
without any such hope, without any such reward, let him use as much
endurance as he pleases, is not truly blessed, but bravely miserable. For
he is not on that account not miserable, because he would be more so if
he also bore misery impatiently. Further, even if he does not suffer those
things which he would not will to suffer in his own body, not even then is
he to be esteemed blessed, inasmuch as he does not live as he wills. For to
omit other things, which, while the body remains unhurt, belong to those
annoyances of the mind, without which we should will to live, and which
are innumerable; he would will, at any rate, if he were able, so to have his
body safe and sound, and so to suffer no inconveniences from it, as to
have it within his own control, or even to have it with an
imperishableness of the body itself; and because he does not possess this,
and hangs in doubt about it, he certainly does not live as he wills. For
although he may be ready from fortitude to accept, and bear with an
equal mind, whatever adversities may happen to him, yet he had rather
they should not happen, and prevents them if he is able; and he is in such
way ready for both alternatives, that, as much as is in him, he wishes for
the one and shuns the other; and if he have fallen into that which he
shuns, he therefore bears it willingly, because that could not happen
which he willed. He bears it, therefore, in order that he may not be
crushed; but he would not willingly be even burdened. How, then, does
he live as he wills? Is it because he is willingly strong to bear what he
would not will to be put upon him? Then he only wills what he can,
because he cannot have what he wills. And here is the sum-total of the
blessedness of proud mortals, I know not whether to be laughed at, or not
rather to be pitied, who boast that they live as they will, because they

willingly bear patiently what they are unwilling should happen to them.
For this, they say, is like Terence's wise saying,—
"Since that cannot be which you will, will that which thou canst."
That this is aptly said, who denies? But it is advice given to the miserable
man, that he may not be more miserable. And it is not rightly or truly said
to the blessed man, such as all wish themselves to be, That cannot be
which you will. For if he is blessed, whatever he wills can be; since he
does not will that which cannot be. But such a life is not for this mortal
state, neither will it come to pass unless when immortality also shall
come to pass. And if this could not be given at all to man, blessedness too
would be sought in vain, since it cannot be without immortality.
CHAP.
8.—BLESSEDNESS
IMMORTALITY.