him; but to those who are capable of comprehending the unnameable Father, they did declare the
unspeakable mystery through parables and enigmas: so that the Lord and the apostles exercised the
office of teacher not to further the cause of truth, but even in hypocrisy, and as each individual was
able to receive it!
2. Such [a line of conduct] belongs not to those who heal, or who give life: it is rather that of
those bringing on diseases, and increasing ignorance; and much more true than these men shall the
law be found, which pronounces every one accursed who sends the blind man astray in the way.
For the apostles, who were commissioned to find out the wanderers, and to be for sight to those
who saw not, and medicine to the weak, certainly did not address them in accordance with their
opinion at the time, but according to revealed truth. For no persons of any kind would act properly,
if they should advise blind men, just about to fall over a precipice, to continue their most dangerous
path, as if it were the right one, and as if they might go on in safety. Or what medical man, anxious
to heal a sick person, would prescribe in accordance with the patient's whims, and not according
to the requisite medicine? But that the Lord came as the physician of the sick, He does Himself
declare saying, "They that are whole need not a physician, but they that are sick; I came not to call
the righteous, but sinners to repentance." How then shall the sick be strengthened, or how shall
sinners come to repentance? Is it by persevering in the very same courses? or, on the contrary, is
it by undergoing a great change and reversal of their former mode of living, by which they have
brought upon themselves no slight amount of sickness, and many sins? But ignorance, the mother
of all these, is driven out by knowledge. Wherefore the Lord used to impart knowledge to His
disciples, by which also it was His practice to heal those who were suffering, and to keep back
sinners from sin. He therefore did not address them in accordance with their pristine notions, nor
did He reply to them in harmony with the opinion of His questioners, but according to the doctrine
leading to salvation, without hypocrisy or respect of person.
3. This is also made clear from the words of the Lord, who did truly reveal the Son of God to
those of the circumcision— Him who had been foretold as Christ by the prophets; that is, He set
Himself forth, who had restored liberty to men, and bestowed on them the inheritance of incorruption.
And again, the apostles taught the Gentiles that they should leave vain stocks and stones, which
they imagined to be gods, and worship the true God, who had created and made all the human
family, and, by means of His creation, did nourish, increase, strengthen, and preserve them in being;
and that they might look for His Son Jesus Christ, who redeemed us from apostasy with His own
blood, so that we should also be a sanctified people,—who shall also descend from heaven in His
Father's power, and pass judgment upon all, and who shall freely give the good things of God to
those who shall have kept His commandments. He, appearing in these last times, the chief
cornerstone, has gathered into one, and united those that were far off and those that were near;