deeds which belong to the incorporeal powers. Moreover, she ought not to make
numerous or unnecessary journeys, neither is it permissible for her to utter idle
and random words; and as for abuse and flattery, she should not even know them
by name. On this account she needs the most careful guardianship, and the
greater assistance. For the enemy of holiness is always surprising and lying in
wait for these persons, ready to devour any one of them if she should slip and
fall; many men also there are who lay snares for them; and besides all these
things there is the passionateness of their own human nature, so that, speaking
generally, the virgin has to equip herself for a twofold war, one which attacks her
from without, and the other which presses upon her from within. For these
reasons he who has the superintendence of virgins suffers great alarm, and the
danger and distress is yet greater, should any of the things which are contrary to
his wishes occur, which God forbid. For if a daughter kept in seclusion is a cause
of sleeplessness to her father, his anxiety about her depriving him of sleep,
where the fear is so great lest she should be childless, or pass the flower of her
age (unmarried), or be hated (by her husband), [Sirach 42:9] what will he suffer
whose anxiety is not concerned with any of these things, but others far greater?
For in this case it is not a man who is rejected, but Christ Himself, nor is this
barrenness the subject merely of reproach, but the evil ends in the destruction of
the soul; "for every tree," it is said, "which brings not forth good fruit, is hewn
down and cast into the fire." [Matthew 3:10] And for one who has been
repudiated by the divine Bridegroom, it is not sufficient to receive a certificate of
divorce and so to depart, but she has to pay the penalty of everlasting
punishment. Moreover, a father according to the flesh has many things which
make the custody of his daughter easy; for the mother, and nurse, and a
multitude of handmaids share in helping the parent to keep the maiden safe. For
neither is she permitted to be perpetually hurrying into the market-place, nor
when she does go there is she compelled to show herself to any of the passersby, the evening darkness concealing one who does not wish to be seen no less
than the walls of the house. And apart from these things, she is relieved from

every cause which might otherwise compel her to meet the gaze of men; for no
anxiety about the necessaries of life, no menaces of oppressors, nor anything of
that kind reduces her to this unfortunate necessity, her father acting in her stead
in all these matters; while she herself has only one anxiety, which is to avoid
doing or saying anything unworthy the modest conduct which becomes her. But
in the other case there are many things which make the custody of the virgin
difficult, or rather impossible for the father; for he could not have her in his
house with himself, as dwelling together in that way would be neither seemly
nor safe. For even if they themselves should suffer no loss, but continue to
preserve their innocence unsullied, they would have to give an account for the
souls which they have offended, just as much as if they happened to sin with one
another. And it being impossible for them to live together, it is not easy to
understand the movements of the character, and to suppress the impulses which
are ill regulated, or train and improve those which are better ordered and tuned.
Nor is it an easy thing to interfere in her habits of walking out; for her poverty
and want of a guardian does not permit him to become an exact investigator of
the propriety of her conduct. For as she is compelled to manage all her affairs
she has many pretexts for going out, if at least she is not inclined to be selfcontrolled. Now he who commands her to stay always at home ought to cut off
these pretexts, providing for her independence in the necessaries of life, and
giving her some woman who will see to the management of these things. He
must also keep her away from funeral obsequies, and nocturnal festivals; for that
artful serpent knows only too well how to scatter his poison through the medium
even of good deeds. And the maiden must be fenced on every side, and rarely go
out of the house during the whole year, except when she is constrained by
inexorable necessity. Now if any one should say that none of these things is the
proper work of a bishop to take in hand, let him be assured that the anxieties and
the reasons concerning what takes place in every case have to be referred to him.
And it is far more expedient that he should manage everything, and so be
delivered from the complaints which he must otherwise undergo on account of