conceives such things, as of a single unity, to the combination of which
two there is to be joined as a third the will that combines them, that this
whole may be a certain unity made up from three?

### CHAP. 8.—DIFFERENT MODES OF CONCEIVING.

But since the eye of the mind cannot look at all things together, in one
glance, which the memory retains, these trinities of thought alternate in a
series of withdrawals and successions, and so that trinity becomes most
innumerably numerous; and yet not infinite, if it pass not beyond the
number of things stored up in the memory. For, although we begin to
reckon from the earliest perception which any one has of material things
through any bodily sense, and even take in also those things which he has
forgotten, yet the number would undoubtedly be certain and determined,
although innumerable. For we not only call infinite things innumerable,
but also those, which, although finite, exceed any one's power of
reckoning.
13. But we can hence perceive a little more clearly that what the memory
stores up and retains is a different thing from that which is thence copied
in the conception of the man who remembers, although, when both are
combined together, they appear to be one and the same; because we can
only remember just as many species of bodies as we have actually seen,
and so great, and such, as we have actually seen; for the mind imbibes
them into the memory from the bodily sense; whereas the things seen in
conception, although drawn from those things which are in the memory,
yet are multiplied and varied innumerably, and altogether without end.
For I remember, no doubt, but one sun, because according to the fact, I
have seen but one; but if I please, I conceive of two, or three, or as many
as I will; but the vision of my mind, when I conceive of many, is formed
from the same memory by which I remember one. And I remember it just
as large as I saw it. For if I remember it as larger or smaller than I saw it,
then I no longer remember what I saw, and so I do not remember it. But
because I remember it, I remember it as large as I saw it; yet I conceive of
it as greater or as less according to my will. And I remember it as I saw it;
but I conceive of it as running its course as I will, and as standing still
where I will, and as coming whence I will, and whither I will. For it is in
my power to conceive of it as square, although I remember it as round;

and again, of what color I please, although I have never seen, and
therefore do not remember, a green sun; and as the sun, so all other
things. But owing to the corporeal and sensible nature of these forms of
things, the mind falls into error when it imagines them to exist without,
in the same mode in which it conceives them within, either when they
have already ceased to exist without, but are still retained in the memory,
or when in any other way also, that which we remember is formed in the
mind, not by faithful recollection, but after the variations of thought.
14. Yet it very often happens that we believe also a true narrative, told us
by others, of things which the narrators have themselves perceived by
their senses. And in this case, when we conceive the things narrated to us,
as we hear them, the eye of the mind does not seem to be turned back to
the memory, in order to bring up visions in our thoughts; for we do not
conceive these things from our own recollection, but upon the narration
of another; and that trinity does not here seem to come to its completion,
which is made when the species lying hid in the memory, and the vision
of the man that remembers, are combined by will as a third. For I do not
conceive that which lay hid in my memory, but that which I hear, when
anything is narrated to me. I am not speaking of the words themselves of
the speaker, lest any one should suppose that I have gone off to that other
trinity, which is transacted without, in sensible things, or in the senses:
but I am conceiving of those species of material things, which the
narrator signifies to me by words and sounds; which species certainly I
conceive of not by remembering, but by hearing. But if we consider the
matter more carefully, even in this case, the limit of the memory is not
overstepped. For I could not even understand the narrator, if I did not
remember generically the individual things of which he speaks, even
although I then hear them for the first time as connected together in one
tale. For he who, for instance, describes to me some mountain stripped of
timber, and clothed with olive trees, describes it to me who remembers
the species both of mountains, and of timber, and of olive trees; and if I
had forgotten these, I should not know at all of what he was speaking,
and therefore could not conceive that description. And so it comes to
pass, that every one who conceives things corporeal, whether he himself
imagine anything, or hear, or read, either a narrative of things past, or a
foretelling of things future, has recourse to his memory, and finds there