SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.38, C.3.

of a rank in the army is less than the good of the commander-inchief. In like manner the good of ecclesiastical unity, to which
schism is opposed, is less than the good of Divine truth, to which
unbelief is opposed.
Reply to Objection 3: Charity has two objects; one is its principal
object and is the Divine goodness, the other is its secondary object
and is our neighbor's good. Now schism and other sins against our
neighbor, are opposed to charity in respect of its secondary good,
which is less than the object of faith, for this is God Himself; and so
these sins are less grievous than unbelief. On the other hand, hatred
of God, which is opposed to charity in respect of its principal object,
is not less grievous than unbelief. Nevertheless of all sins committed
by man against his neighbor, the sin of schism would seem to be the
greatest, because it is opposed to the spiritual good of the multitude.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.38, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether schismatics have any power?

Objection 1: It would seem that schismatics have some power. For
Augustine says (Contra Donat. i, 1): "Just as those who come back
to the Church after being baptized, are not baptized again, so those
who return after being ordained, are not ordained again." Now Order
is a kind of power. Therefore schismatics have some power since
they retain their Orders.
Objection 2: Further, Augustine says (De Unico Bapt. [De Bap. contra
Donat. vi, 5]): "One who is separated can confer a sacrament even as
he can have it." But the power of conferring a sacrament is a very
great power. Therefore schismatics who are separated from the
Church, have a spiritual power.
Objection 3: Further, Pope Urban II [Council of Piacenza, cap. x; cf.
Can. Ordinationes, ix, qu. 1] says: "We command that persons
consecrated by bishops who were themselves consecrated
according to the Catholic rite, but have separated themselves by
schism from the Roman Church, should be received mercifully and
that their Orders should be acknowledged, when they return to the
unity of the Church, provided they be of commendable life and
knowledge." But this would not be so, unless spiritual power were
retained by schismatics. Therefore schismatics have spiritual power.
On the contrary, Cyprian says in a letter (Ep. lii, quoted vii, qu. 1,
can. Novatianus): "He who observes neither unity of spirit nor the
concord of peace, and severs himself from the bonds of the Church,
and from the fellowship of her priests, cannot have episcopal power
or honor."
I answer that, Spiritual power is twofold, the one sacramental, the
other a power of jurisdiction. The sacramental power is one that is
conferred by some kind of consecration. Now all the consecrations
of the Church are immovable so long as the consecrated thing
remains: as appears even in inanimate things, since an altar, once
consecrated, is not consecrated again unless it has been broken up.
Consequently such a power as this remains, as to its essence, in the
man who has received it by consecration, as long as he lives, even if
he fall into schism or heresy: and this is proved from the fact that if
he come back to the Church, he is not consecrated anew. Since,