(Recapitulation.) "After these things were ended," it says, "Paul purposed in
the Spirit, when he had passed through Macedonia and Achaia, to go to
Jerusalem," saying, "After I have been there, I must also see Rome." [Acts
19:21] He no longer speaks here after the manner of a man, or, He purposed to
pass through those regions, without tarrying longer. Wherefore does he send
away Timothy and Erastus? Of this I suppose he says, "Wherefore when we
could no longer forbear, we thought it good to be left at Athens alone. He sent
away," it says, "two of those who ministered to him" [1 Thessalonians 3:1], both
to announce his coming, and to make them more eager. "But he himself tarried
awhile in Asia." [Acts 19:22] Most of all does he pass his time in Asia; and with
reason: there, namely, was the tyranny, of the philosophers. (Afterwards) also he
came and discoursed to them again. "And the same time" etc. [Acts 19:23], for
indeed the superstition was excessive. (a) "You both see and hear," so palpable
was the result that was taking place— "that not alone at Ephesus, but almost
throughout all Asia, this Paul by persuading has turned away," not by violence:
this is the way to persuade a city. Then, what touched them closely, "that they be
no gods which are made with hands." [Acts 19:26] He overturns, says he, our
craft: (e) "From this work we have our wealth. Hath persuaded." How did he
persuade— he, a man of mean consideration? How prevail over so great a force
of habit? By doing what— by saying what? It is not for a Paul (to effect this), it
is not for a man. Even this is enough, that he said, "They are no gods." Now if
the impiety (of the heathen religions) was so easy to detect, it ought to have been
condemned long ago: if it was strong, it ought not to have been overthrown so
quickly. (b) For, lest they should consider within themselves (how strange), that
a human being should have such power as this, and if a human being has power
to effect such things, why then one ought to be persuaded by that man, he adds:
(f) "not only is this our craft in danger to be set at naught, but also," as if
forsooth alleging a greater consideration, "the temple of the great goddess
Diana," etc. (c) "whom all Asia and the world worships." [Acts 19:27] (g) "And
when they heard, they were filled with wrath, and shouted, Great is Diana of the

Ephesians!" [Acts 19:28] For each city had its proper gods. (d) They thought to
make their voice a barrier against the Divine Spirit. Children indeed, these
Greeks! (h) And their feeling was as if by their voice they could reinstate the
worship of her, and undo what had taken place! "And the whole city," etc. [Acts
19:29] See a disorderly multitude! "And when Paul," etc. [Acts 19:30] Paul then
wished to enter in that he might harangue them: for he took his persecutions as
occasions for teaching: "but the disciples suffered him not." Mark, how great
forethought we always find them taking for him. At the very first they brought
him out that they might not (in his person) receive a mortal blow; and yet they
had heard him say, "I must also see Rome." But it was providential that he so
predicts beforehand, that they might not be confounded at the event. But they
would not that he should even suffer any evil. "And certain of the Asiarchs
besought him that he would not enter into the theatre." Knowing his eagerness,
they "besought him:" so much did all the believers love him.— "And they drew
Alexander," etc. [Acts 19:33] This Alexander, why did he wish to plead? Was he
accused? No, but it was to find an opportunity, and overturn the whole matter,
and inflame the anger of the people. "But when they knew that he was a Jew, all
with one voice about the space of two hours cried out, Great is Diana of the
Ephesians." [Acts 19:34] Do you mark the inordinate rage? Well, and with
rebuke does the town clerk say, "What man is there that knows not how that the
city of the Ephesians— " [Acts 19:35] (coming to the point) which they were
frightened about. Is it this, says he, that you do not worship her? And he does not
say, "That knows not" Diana, but, "our city," that it always worshipped her.
"Seeing then that these things cannot be spoken against." [Acts 19:36] Why then
do ye make a question about them, as if these things were not plain? (b) Then he
quietly chides them, showing that they had come together without reason. "And
to do nothing rashly," he says. Showing that they had acted rashly. (a) "For you
have brought hither," etc. [Acts 19:37] They wanted to make religion the pretext
for what concerned their own money-making: (c) and it was not right on account
of private charges to hold a public assembly. For he put them to a nonplus, and