SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.135, C.5.

Reply to Objection 2: The act of fortitude consists not only in holding
fast to good against the fear of future dangers, but also in not failing
through sorrow or pain occasioned by things present; and it is in the
latter respect that patience is akin to fortitude. Yet fortitude is chiefly
about fear, which of itself evokes flight which fortitude avoids; while
patience is chiefly about sorrow, for a man is said to be patient, not
because he does not fly, but because he behaves in a praiseworthy
manner by suffering [patiendo] things which hurt him here and now,
in such a way as not to be inordinately saddened by them. Hence
fortitude is properly in the irascible, while patience is in the
concupiscible faculty.
Nor does this hinder patience from being a part of fortitude, because
the annexing of virtue to virtue does not regard the subject, but the
matter or the form. Nevertheless patience is not to be reckoned a
part of temperance, although both are in the concupiscible, because
temperance is only about those sorrows that are opposed to
pleasures of touch, such as arise through abstinence from pleasures
of food and sex: whereas patience is chiefly about sorrows inflicted
by other persons. Moreover it belongs to temperance to control
these sorrows besides their contrary pleasures: whereas it belongs
to patience that a man forsake not the good of virtue on account of
such like sorrows, however great they be.
Reply to Objection 3: It may be granted that patience in a certain
respect is an integral part of justice, if we consider the fact that a
man may patiently endure evils pertaining to dangers of death; and it
is from this point of view that the objection argues. Nor is it
inconsistent with patience that a man should, when necessary, rise
up against the man who inflicts evils on him; for Chrysostom
[Homily v. in the Opus Imperfectum] says on Mt. 4:10, "Begone
Satan," that "it is praiseworthy to be patient under our own wrongs,
but to endure God's wrongs patiently is most wicked": and
Augustine says in a letter to Marcellinus (Ep. cxxxviii) that "the
precepts of patience are not opposed to the good of the
commonwealth, since in order to ensure that good we fight against
our enemies." But in so far as patience regards all kinds of evils, it is
annexed to fortitude as secondary to principal virtue.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.135, C.5.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.135, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether patience is the same as longanimity?

Objection 1: It seems that patience is the same as longanimity. For
Augustine says (De Patientia i) that "we speak of patience in God,
not as though any evil made Him suffer, but because He awaits the
wicked, that they may be converted." Wherefore it is written (Ecclus.
5:4): "The Most High is a patient rewarder." Therefore it seems that
patience is the same as longanimity.
Objection 2: Further, the same thing is not contrary to two things.
But impatience is contrary to longanimity, whereby one awaits a
delay: for one is said to be impatient of delay, as of other evils.
Therefore it seems that patience is the same as longanimity.
Objection 3: Further, just as time is a circumstance of wrongs
endured, so is place. But no virtue is distinct from patience on the
score of place. Therefore in like manner longanimity which takes
count of time, in so far as a person waits for a long time, is not
distinct from patience.
Objection 4: On the contrary, a gloss [Origen, Comment. in Ep. ad
Rom. ii] on Rm. 2:4, "Or despisest thou the riches of His goodness,
and patience, and longsuffering?" says: "It seems that longanimity
differs from patience, because those who offend from weakness
rather than of set purpose are said to be borne with longanimity:
while those who take a deliberate delight in their crimes are said to
be borne patiently."
I answer that, Just as by magnanimity a man has a mind to tend to
great things, so by longanimity a man has a mind to tend to
something a long way off. Wherefore as magnanimity regards hope,
which tends to good, rather than daring, fear, or sorrow, which have
evil as their object, so also does longanimity. Hence longanimity has
more in common with magnanimity than with patience.
Nevertheless it may have something in common with patience, for
two reasons. First, because patience, like fortitude, endures certain
evils for the sake of good, and if this good is awaited shortly,
endurance is easier: whereas if it be delayed a long time, it is more
difficult. Secondly, because the very delay of the good we hope for,
is of a nature to cause sorrow, according to Prov. 13:12, "Hope that