SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.26, C.5.

Accordingly, we must assert that to love which is an act of the
appetitive power, even in this state of life, tends to God first, and
flows on from Him to other things, and in this sense charity loves
God immediately, and other things through God. On the other hand,
with regard to knowledge, it is the reverse, since we know God
through other things, either as a cause through its effects, or by way
of pre-eminence or negation as Dionysius states (Div. Nom. i; cf. FP,
Question 12, Article 12).
Reply to Objection 1: Although the unknown cannot be loved, it does
not follow that the order of knowledge is the same as the order of
love, since love is the term of knowledge, and consequently, love
can begin at once where knowledge ends, namely in the thing itself
which is known through another thing.
Reply to Objection 2: Since to love God is something greater than to
know Him, especially in this state of life, it follows that love of God
presupposes knowledge of God. And because this knowledge does
not rest in creatures, but, through them, tends to something else,
love begins there, and thence goes on to other things by a circular
movement so to speak; for knowledge begins from creatures, tends
to God, and love begins with God as the last end, and passes on to
creatures.
Reply to Objection 3: Aversion from God, which is brought about by
sin, is removed by charity, but not by knowledge alone: hence
charity, by loving God, unites the soul immediately to Him with a
chain of spiritual union.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.26, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether God can be loved wholly?

Objection 1: It would seem that God cannot be loved wholly. For love
follows knowledge. Now God cannot be wholly known by us, since
this would imply comprehension of Him. Therefore He cannot be
wholly loved by us.
Objection 2: Further, love is a kind of union, as Dionysius shows
(Div. Nom. iv). But the heart of man cannot be wholly united to God,
because "God is greater than our heart" (1 Jn. 3:20). Therefore God
cannot be loved wholly.
Objection 3: Further, God loves Himself wholly. If therefore He be
loved wholly by another, this one will love Him as much as God
loves Himself. But this is unreasonable. Therefore God cannot be
wholly loved by a creature.
On the contrary, It is written (Dt. 6:5): "Thou shalt love the Lord thy
God with thy whole heart."
I answer that, Since love may be considered as something between
lover and beloved, when we ask whether God can be wholly loved,
the question may be understood in three ways, first so that the
qualification "wholly" be referred to the thing loved, and thus God is
to be loved wholly, since man should love all that pertains to God.
Secondly, it may be understood as though "wholly" qualified the
lover: and thus again God ought to be loved wholly, since man ought
to love God with all his might, and to refer all he has to the love of
God, according to Dt. 6:5: "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with thy
whole heart."
Thirdly, it may be understood by way of comparison of the lover to
the thing loved, so that the mode of the lover equal the mode of the
thing loved. This is impossible: for, since a thing is lovable in
proportion to its goodness, God is infinitely lovable, since His
goodness is infinite. Now no creature can love God infinitely,
because all power of creatures, whether it be natural or infused, is
finite.
This suffices for the Replies to the Objections, because the first