Kerygmatic and mystagogical catechesis

163. Education and catechesis are at the service of this growth. We already possess a number of
magisterial documents and aids on catechesis issued by the Holy See and by various

episcopates. I think in particular of the Apostolic Exhortation Catechesi Tradendae (1979), the
General Catechetical Directory (1997) and other documents whose contents need not be repeated
here. I would like to offer a few brief considerations which I believe to be of particular significance.

164. In catechesis too, we have rediscovered the fundamental role of the first announcement or
kerygma, which needs to be the centre of all evangelizing activity and all efforts at Church
renewal. The kerygma is trinitarian. The fire of the Spirit is given in the form of tongues and leads
us to believe in Jesus Christ who, by his death and resurrection, reveals and communicates to us
the Father’s infinite mercy. On the lips of the catechist the first proclamation must ring out over and
over: “Jesus Christ loves you; he gave his life to save you; and now he is living at your side every
day to enlighten, strengthen and free you.” This first proclamation is called “first” not because it
exists at the beginning and can then be forgotten or replaced by other more important things. It is
first in a qualitative sense because it is the principal proclamation, the one which we must hear
again and again in different ways, the one which we must announce one way or another
throughout the process of catechesis, at every level and moment. For this reason too, “the
priest – like every other member of the Church – ought to grow in awareness that he himself is
continually in need of being evangelized”.

165. We must not think that in catechesis the kerygma gives way to a supposedly more “solid”
formation. Nothing is more solid, profound, secure, meaningful and wisdom-filled than that initial
proclamation. All Christian formation consists of entering more deeply into the kerygma, which is
reflected in and constantly illumines, the work of catechesis, thereby enabling us to understand
more fully the significance of every subject which the latter treats. It is the message capable of
responding to the desire for the infinite which abides in every human heart. The centrality of the
kerygma calls for stressing those elements which are most needed today: it has to express God’s
saving love which precedes any moral and religious obligation on our part; it should not impose
the truth but appeal to freedom; it should be marked by joy, encouragement, liveliness and a
harmonious balance which will not reduce preaching to a few doctrines which are at times more
philosophical than evangelical. All this demands on the part of the evangelizer certain attitudes
which foster openness to the message: approachability, readiness for dialogue, patience, a
warmth and welcome which is non-judgmental.