stand naked in defiance of them all, and needing neither wall nor fence to protect
them? Such is the true philosopher, such is that wealth of which we spoke. He
has nothing, and has all things: he has all things, and has nothing. For a fence is
not within, but only without; a wall is not a thing of nature, but only built round
from without. And what again, I ask, what sort of body is a strong one? Is it not
that which is in health, and which is overcome neither by hunger nor repletion,
nor by cold, nor by heat; or is it that which in view of all these things, needs both
caterers, and weavers, and hunters, and physicians, to give it health? He is the
rich man, the true philosopher, who needs none of these things. For this cause it
was that this blessed Apostle said, "Bring them up in the chastening and
admonition of the Lord." Surround them not with outward defenses. For such is
wealth, such is glory; for when these fall, and they do fall, the plant stands naked
and defenseless, not only having derived no profit from them during the time
past, but even injury. For those very shelters that prevented its being inured to
the attacks of the winds, will now have prepared it for perishing all at once. And
so wealth is injurious rather, because it renders us undisciplined for the
vicissitudes of life. Let us therefore train up our children to be such, that they
shall be able to bear up against every trial, and not be surprised at what may
come upon them; "let us bring them up in the chastening and admonition of the
Lord." And great will be the reward which will be thus laid up in store for us.
For if men for making statues and painting portraits of kings enjoy so great
honor, shall not we who adorn the image of the King of kings, (for man is the
image of God,) receive ten thousand blessings, if we effect a true likeness? For
the likeness is in this, in the virtue of the soul, when we train our children to be
good, to be meek, to be forgiving, (because all these are attributes of God,) to be
beneficent, to be humane; when we train them to regard the present world as
nothing. Let this then be our task, to mold and to direct both ourselves and them
according to what is right. Otherwise with what sort of boldness shall we stand
before the judgment-seat of Christ? If a man who has unruly children is
unworthy to be a Bishop [Titus 1:6], much more is he unworthy of the kingdom

of Heaven. What do you say? If we have an unruly wife, or unruly children, shall
we have to render account? Yes, we shall, if we do not with exactness bring in
that which is due from ourselves; for our own individual virtue is not enough in
order to salvation. If the man who laid aside the one talent gained nothing, but
was punished even in such a manner, it is plain that one's own individual virtue
is not enough in order to salvation, but there is need of that of another also. Let
us therefore entertain great solicitude for our wives, and take great care of our
children, and of our servants, and of ourselves. And in our government both of
ourselves and of them, let us beseech God that He aid us in the work. If He shall
see us interested in this work, and solicitous about it, He will aid us; but if He
shall see us paying no regard to it, He will not give us His hand. For He does not
vouchsafe us His assistance when we sleep, but when we labor also ourselves.
For a helper, (as the name implies,) is not a helper of one that is inactive, but of
one who works also himself. But the good God is able of Himself to bring the
work to perfection, that we may be all counted worthy to attain to the blessings
promised us, through the grace and compassions of His only begotten Son, with
Whom together with the Holy Ghost be unto the Father, glory, might, and honor,
now and ever, and throughout all ages. Amen.