compliance; but they employed every device and expedient to enable them to
avoid the sin, although they were abandoned on every side. For they could not
influence men by money: how should they, being captives? Nor by friendship
and social intercourse? How should they being strangers? Nor could they get the
better of them by any exertion of power: how was it possible being slaves? Nor
master them by force of numbers: how could they being only three? Therefore
they approached the eunuch who possessed the necessary authority, and
persuaded him by their arguments. For when they saw him fearful and trembling,
and in an agony of alarm concerning his own safety, and the dread of death
which agitated his soul was intolerable: "for I fear" said he "my lord the king,
lest he should see your countenances sadder than the children which are of your
sort and so shall you endanger my head to the king," [Daniel 1:10] having
released him from this fear they persuaded him to grant them the favour. And
inasmuch as they brought to the work all the strength which they had, God also
henceforth contributed his strength to it. For it was not God's doing only that
they achieved those things for the sake of which they were to receive a reward,
but the beginning and starting point was from their own purpose, and having
manifested that to be noble and brave, they won for themselves the help of God,
and so accomplished their aim.
16. Do you then perceive that if a man does not injure himself, no one else
will be able to harm him? Behold at least youthfulness, and captivity and
destitution, and removal into a foreign land, and loneliness, and dearth of
protectors, and a stern command, and great fear of death assailing the mind of
the eunuch, and poverty, and feebleness of numbers, and dwelling in the midst of
barbarians, and having enemies for masters, and surrender into the hands of the
king himself, and separation from all their kindred, and removal from priests and
prophets, and from all others who cared for them, and the cessation of drink
offerings and sacrifices, and loss of the temple and psalmody, and yet none of
these things harmed them; but they had more renown then than when they
enjoyed these things in their native land. And after they had accomplished this

task first and had wreathed their brows with the glorious garland of victory, and
had kept the law even in a foreign land, and trampled under foot the tyrant's
command, and overcome fear of the avenger, and yet received no harm from any
quarter, as if they had been quietly living at home and enjoying the benefit of all
those things which I mentioned, after they had thus fearlessly accomplished their
work they were again summoned to other contests. And again they were the
same men; and they were subjected to a more severe trial than the former one,
and a furnace was kindled, and they were confronted by the barbarian army in
company with the king: and the whole Persian force was set in motion and
everything was devised which tended to put deceit or constraint upon them:
various kinds of music, and various forms of punishment, and threats, and what
they saw on every side of them was alarming, and the words which they heard
were more alarming than what they saw; nevertheless inasmuch as they did not
betray themselves, but made the most of their own strength, they never sustained
any kind of damage: but even won for themselves more glorious crowns of
victory than before. For Nabuchadonosor bound them and cast them into the
furnace, yet he burnt them not, but rather benefited them, and rendered them
more illustrious. And although they were deprived of temple (for I will repeat
my former remarks) and altar, and fatherland, and priests and prophets, although
they were in a foreign and barbarous country, in the very midst of the furnace,
surrounded by all that mighty host, the king himself who wrought this looking
on, they set up a glorious trophy, and won a notable victory, having sung that
admirable and extraordinary hymn which from that day to this has been sung
throughout the world and will continue to be sung to future generations.
Thus then when a man does not injure himself, he cannot possibly be hurt
by another: for I will not cease harping constantly upon this saying. For if
captivity, and bondage, and loneliness and loss of country and all kindred and
death, and burning, and a great army and a savage tyrant could not do any
damage to the innate virtue of the three children captives, bondmen, strangers
though they were in a foreign land, but the enemy's assault became to them