14. I know that you are now admiring the grace of Hermione, and you judge
that there is nothing in the world to be compared to her comeliness; but if you
choose, O friend, you shall yourself exceed her in comeliness and gracefulness,
as much as golden statues surpass those which are made of clay. For if beauty,
when it occurs in the body, so fascinates and excites the minds of most men,
when the soul is refulgent with it what can match beauty and grace of this kind?
For the groundwork of this corporeal beauty is nothing else but phlegm, and
blood, and humor, and bile, and the fluid of masticated food. For by these things
both eyes and cheeks, and all the other features, are supplied with moisture; and
if they do not receive that moisture, daily skin becoming unduly withered, and
the eyes sunken, the whole grace of the countenance immediately vanishes; so
that if you consider what is stored up inside those beautiful eyes, and that
straight nose, and the mouth and the cheeks, you will affirm the well-shaped
body to be nothing else than a whited sepulchre; the parts within are full of so
much uncleanness. Moreover when you see a rag with any of these things on it,
such as phlegm, or spittle you cannot bear to touch it with even the tips of your
fingers, nay you cannot even endure looking at it; and yet are you in a flutter of
excitement about the storehouses and depositories of these things? But your
beauty was not of this kind, but excelled it as heaven is superior to earth; or
rather it was much better and more brilliant than this. For no one has anywhere
seen a soul by itself, stripped of the body; but yet even so I will endeavour to
present to you the beauty of this soul from another source. I mean from the case
of the greater powers. Hear at least how the beauty of these struck the man
greatly beloved; for wishing to set forth their beauty and being unable to find a
body of the same character, he had recourse to metallic substances, and he was
not satisfied even with these, but took the brilliancy of lightning for his
illustration. [Daniel 10:6] Now if those powers, even when they did not disclose
their essential nature pure and bare, but only in a very dim and shadowy way,
nevertheless shone so brightly, what must naturally be their appearance, when set
free from every veil? Now we ought to form some such image of the beauty of

the soul. "For they shall be," we read "equal unto the angels." [Luke 20:36]
Now in the case of bodies the lighter and finer kinds, and those which have
retreated to the path which tend towards the incorporeal, are very much better
and more wonderful than the others. The sky at least is more beautiful than the
earth, and fire than water, and the stars than precious stones; and we admire the
rainbow far more than violets and roses, and all other flowers which are upon the
earth. And in short if it were possible with the bodily eyes to behold the beauty
of the soul you would laugh to scorn these corporeal illustrations, so feebly have
they presented to us the gracefulness of the soul. Let us not then neglect such a
possession, nor such great happiness, and especially when the approach to that
kind of beauty becomes easy to us by our hopes of the things to come. "For our
light affliction," we read, "which is but for the moment, works for us more and
more exceedingly an eternal weight of glory, while we look not at the things
which are seen but at the things which are not seen; for the things which are
seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen are eternal."
[2 Corinthians 4:17] Now if the blessed Paul called such afflictions as you know
of light and easy, because he did not look at the things which are seen, much
more tolerable is it merely to cease from wantonness. For we are not calling you
to those dangers which he underwent, nor to those deaths which he incurred
daily, the constant beatings and scourgings, the bonds, the enmity of the whole
world, the hatred of his own people, the frequent vigils, the long journies, the
shipwrecks, the attacks of robbers, the plots of his own kinsfolk, the distresses
on account of his friends, the hunger, the cold, the nakedness, the burning, the
despondency on account both of those who belonged to him, and those who did
not belong to him. None of these things do we now demand of you; all that we
ask for is that you would release yourself from your accursed bondage, and
return to your former freedom, having considered both the punishment arising
from your wantonness, and the honor belonging to your former manner of life.
For that unbelievers should be but languidly affected by the thought of the
resurrection and never be in fear of this kind, is nothing wonderful; but that we