SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.24, C.11.

genus, by reason of their sensitive nature; whereas we are partakers
of everlasting happiness, by reason not of our sensitive nature but of
our rational mind wherein we associate with the angels.
Reply to Objection 3: The companionship of the angels does not
consist in outward fellowship, which we have in respect of our
sensitive nature; it consists in a fellowship of the mind, imperfect
indeed in this life, but perfect in heaven, as stated above (Question
23, Article 1, ad 1).

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.24, C.12.

### ARTICLE 11. Whether we are bound to love the demons out of

charity?
Objection 1: It would seem that we ought to love the demons out of
charity. For the angels are our neighbors by reason of their
fellowship with us in a rational mind. But the demons also share in
our fellowship thus, since natural gifts, such as life and
understanding, remain in them unimpaired, as Dionysius states (Div.
Nom. iv). Therefore we ought to love the demons out of charity.
Objection 2: Further, the demons differ from the blessed angels in
the matter of sin, even as sinners from just men. Now the just man
loves the sinner out of charity. Therefore he ought to love the
demons also out of charity.
Objection 3: Further, we ought, out of charity, to love, as being our
neighbors, those from whom we receive favors, as appears from the
passage of Augustine quoted above (Article 9). Now the demons are
useful to us in many things, for "by tempting us they work crowns
for us," as Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xi, 17). Therefore we ought to
love the demons out of charity.
On the contrary, It is written (Is. 28:18): "Your league with death shall
be abolished, and your covenant with hell shall not stand." Now the
perfection of a peace and covenant is through charity. Therefore we
ought not to have charity for the demons who live in hell and
compass death.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 6), in the sinner, we are
bound, out of charity, to love his nature, but to hate his sin. But the
name of demon is given to designate a nature deformed by sin,
wherefore demons should not be loved out of charity. Without
however laying stress on the word, the question as to whether the
spirits called demons ought to be loved out of charity, must be
answered in accordance with the statement made above (Articles
2,3), that a thing may be loved out of charity in two ways. First, a
thing may be loved as the person who is the object of friendship, and
thus we cannot have the friendship of charity towards the demons.
For it is an essential part of friendship that one should be a wellwisher towards one's friend; and it is impossible for us, out of
charity, to desire the good of everlasting life, to which charity is

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.24, C.12.