SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.145, C.2.

of Peter's words quoted above, where he says that we ought "to join
abstinence with knowledge," namely that in abstaining from food a
man should act with due regard for those among whom he lives, for
his own person, and for the requirements of health.
Reply to Objection 1: The use of and abstinence from food,
considered in themselves, do not pertain to the kingdom of God,
since the Apostle says (1 Cor. 8:8): "Meat doth not commend us to
God. For neither, if we eat not, shall we have the less, nor if we eat,
shall we have the more," i.e. spiritually. Nevertheless they both
belong to the kingdom of God, in so far as they are done reasonably
through faith and love of God.
Reply to Objection 2: The regulation of food, in the point of quantity
and quality, belongs to the art of medicine as regards the health of
the body: but in the point of internal affections with regard to the
good of reason, it belongs to abstinence. Hence Augustine says
(Questions. Evang. ii, qu. 11): "It makes no difference whatever to
virtue what or how much food a man takes, so long as he does it
with due regard for the people among whom he lives, for his own
person, and for the requirements of his health: but it matters how
readily and uncomplainingly he does without food when bound by
duty or necessity to abstain."
Reply to Objection 3: It belongs to temperance to bridle the
pleasures which are too alluring to the soul, just as it belongs to
fortitude to strengthen the soul against fears that deter it from the
good of reason. Wherefore, just as fortitude is commended on
account of a certain excess, from which all the parts of fortitude take
their name, so temperance is commended for a kind of deficiency,
from which all its parts are denominated. Hence abstinence, since it
is a part of temperance, is named from deficiency, and yet it
observes the mean, in so far as it is in accord with right reason.
Reply to Objection 4: Those vices result from abstinence in so far as
it is not in accord with right reason. For right reason makes one
abstain as one ought, i.e. with gladness of heart, and for the due end,
i.e. for God's glory and not one's own.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.145, C.2.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.145, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether abstinence is a special virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that abstinence is not a special virtue. For
every virtue is praiseworthy by itself. But abstinence is not
praiseworthy by itself; for Gregory says (Pastor. iii, 19) that "the
virtue of abstinence is praised only on account of the other virtues."
Therefore abstinence is not a special virtue.
Objection 2: Further, Augustine [Fulgentius] says (De Fide ad Pet.
xlii) that "the saints abstain from meat and drink, not that any
creature of God is evil, but merely in order to chastise the body."
Now this belongs to chastity, as its very name denotes. Therefore
abstinence is not a special virtue distinct from chastity.
Objection 3: Further, as man should be content with moderate meat,
so should he be satisfied with moderate clothes, according to 1 Tim.
6:8, "Having food, and wherewith to be covered, with these we
should be content." Now there is no special virtue in being content
with moderate clothes. Neither, therefore, is there in abstinence
which moderates food.
On the contrary, Macrobius [In Somn. Scip. i, 8] reckons abstinence
as a special part of temperance.
I answer that, As stated above (Question 136, Article 1; Question 141,
Article 3) moral virtue maintains the good of reason against the
onslaught of the passions: hence whenever we find a special motive
why a passion departs from the good of reason, there is need of a
special virtue. Now pleasures of the table are of a nature to withdraw
man from the good of reason, both because they are so great, and
because food is necessary to man who needs it for the maintenance
of life, which he desires above all other things. Therefore abstinence
is a special virtue.
Reply to Objection 1: Virtues are of necessity connected together, as
stated above (FS, Question 65, Article 1). Wherefore one virtue
receives help and commendation from another, as justice from
fortitude. Accordingly in this way the virtue of abstinence receives
commendation on account of the other virtues.
Reply to Objection 2: The body is chastised by means of abstinence,