Ps. lxix. 25.

what had been spoken by the prophet: "It shall come to pass in the last days, saith God, I will pour
out of my Spirit upon all flesh, and they shall prophesy." The God, therefore, who did promise
by the prophet, that He would send His Spirit upon the whole human race, was He who did send;
and God Himself is announced by Peter as having fulfilled His own promise.
2. For Peter said, "Ye men of Israel, hear my words; Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved by God
among you by powers, and wonders, and signs, which God did by Him in the midst of you, as ye
yourselves also know: Him, being delivered by the determined counsel and foreknowledge of God,
by the hands of wicked men ye have slain, affixing [to the cross]: whom God hath raised up, having
loosed the pains of death; because it was not possible that he should be holden of them. For David
speaketh concerning Him, I foresaw the Lord always before my face; for He is on my right hand,
lest I should be moved: therefore did my heart rejoice, and my tongue was glad; moreover also,
my flesh shall rest in hope: because Thou wilt not leave my soul in hell, neither wilt Thou give Thy
Holy One to see corruption." Then he proceeds to speak confidently to them concerning the
patriarch David, that he was dead and buried, and that his sepulchre is with them to this day. He
said, "But since he was a prophet, and knew that God had sworn with an oath to him, that of the
fruit of his body one should sit in his throne; foreseeing this, he spake of the resurrection of Christ,
that He was not left in hell, neither did His flesh see corruption. This Jesus," he said, "hath God
raised up, of which we all are witnesses: who, being exalted by the right hand of God, receiving
from the Father the promise of the Holy Ghost, hath shed forth this gift which ye now see and
hear. For David has not ascended into the heavens; but he saith himself, The Lord said unto my
Lord, Sit Thou on My right hand, until I make Thy foes Thy footstool. Therefore let all the house
of Israel know assuredly, that God hath made that same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, both Lord
and Christ." And when the multitudes exclaimed, "What shall we do then?" Peter says to them,
"Repent, and be baptized everyone of you in the name of Jesus for the remission of sins, and ye
shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost." Thus the apostles did not preach another God, or another
Fulness; nor, that the Christ who suffered and rose again was one, while he who flew off on high
was another, and remained impassible; but that there was one and the same God the Father, and
Christ Jesus who rose from the dead; and they preached faith in Him, to those who did not believe
on the Son of God, and exhorted them out of the prophets, that the Christ whom God promised to
send, He sent in Jesus, whom they crucified and God raised up.