origin.
Reply to Objection 1: Some deny that this book is Augustine's: for it
is ascribed to a Cistercian who compiled it from Augustine's works
and added things of his own. Hence we are not to take what is
written there, as having authority. If, however, its authority should be
maintained, it must be said that the meaning is that the separated
soul is affected with imagination and other like powers, not as
though such affection were the act of the aforesaid powers, but in
the sense that the soul will be affected in the future life for good or
ill, according to the things which it committed in the body through
the imagination and other like powers: so that the imagination and
such like powers are not supposed to elicit that affection, but to have
elicited in the body the merit of that affection.
Reply to Objection 2: The soul is said to feel through the body, not
as though the act of feeling belonged to the soul by itself, but as
belonging to the whole composite by reason of the soul, just as we
say that heat heats. That which is added, namely that the soul feels
some things without the body, such as fear and so forth, means that
it feels such things without the outward movement of the body that
takes place in the acts of the proper senses: since fear and like
passions do not occur without any bodily movement.
It may also be replied that Augustine is speaking according to the
opinion of the Platonists who maintained this as stated above.
Reply to Objection 3: Augustine speaks there as nearly throughout
that book, as one inquiring and not deciding. For it is clear that there
is no comparison between the soul of a sleeper and the separated
soul: since the soul of the sleeper uses the organ of imagination
wherein corporeal images are impressed; which cannot be said of
the separated soul. Or we may reply that images of things are in the
soul, both as to the sensitive and imaginative power and as to the
intellective power, with greater or lesser abstraction from matter and
material conditions. Wherefore Augustine's comparison holds in this
respect that just as the images of corporeal things are in the soul of
the dreamer or of one who is carried out of his mind, imaginatively,
so are they in the separated soul intellectively: but not that they are
in the separated soul imaginatively.
Reply to Objection 4: As stated in the first book (Sent. i, D, 3, qu. 4),

memory has a twofold signification. Sometimes it means a power of
the sensitive part, in so far as its gaze extends over past time; and in
this way the act of the memory will not be in the separated soul.
Wherefore the Philosopher says (De Anima i, 4) that "when this," the
body to wit, "is corrupted, the soul remembers not." In another way
memory is used to designate that part of the imagination which
pertains to the intellective faculty, in so far namely as it abstracts
from all differences of time, since it regards not only the past but
also the present, and the future as Augustine says (De Trin. xiv, 11).
Taking memory in this sense the separated soul will remember [FP,
Question 77, Article 8; FP, Question 89, Article 6].
Reply to Objection 5: Love, joy, sorrow, and the like, have a twofold
signification. Sometimes they denote passions of the sensitive
appetite, and thus they will not be in the separated soul, because in
this way they are not exercised without a definite movement of the
heart. In another way they denote acts of the will which is in the
intellective part: and in this way they will be in the separated soul,
even as delight will be there without bodily movement, even as it is
in God, namely in so far as it is a simple movement of the will. In this
sense the Philosopher says (Ethic. vii, 14) that "God's joy is one
simple delight."