THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.55, C.7.

Him, and discoursing on the Scriptures. And, in order that nothing
might be wanting to make the manifestation complete, He also
showed that He had the Divine Nature, by working the miracle of the
draught of fishes, and further by ascending into heaven while they
were beholding Him: because, according to Jn. 3:13: "No man hath
ascended into heaven, but He that descended from heaven, the Son
of Man who is in heaven."
He also showed His disciples the glory of His Resurrection by
entering in among them when the doors were closed: as Gregory
says (Hom. xxvi in Evang.): "Our Lord allowed them to handle His
flesh which He had brought through closed doors, to show that His
body was of the same nature but of different glory." It likewise was
part of the property of glory that "He vanished suddenly from their
eyes," as related in the last chapter of Luke; because thereby it was
shown that it lay in His power to be seen or not seen; and this
belongs to a glorified body, as stated above (Question 54, Article 1,
ad 2, Article 2, ad 1).
Reply to Objection 1: Each separate argument would not suffice of
itself for showing perfectly Christ's Resurrection, yet all taken
collectively establish it completely, especially owing to the
testimonies of the Scriptures, the sayings of the angels, and even
Christ's own assertion supported by miracles. As to the angels who
appeared, they did not say they were men, as Christ asserted that He
was truly a man. Moreover, the manner of eating was different in
Christ and the angels: for since the bodies assumed by the angels
were neither living nor animated, there was no true eating, although
the food was really masticated and passed into the interior of the
assumed body: hence the angels said to Tobias (12:18,19): "When I
was with you . . . I seemed indeed to eat and drink with you; but I use
an invisible meat." But since Christ's body was truly animated, His
eating was genuine. For, as Augustine observes (De Civ. Dei xiii), "it
is not the power but the need of eating that shall be taken away from
the bodies of them who rise again." Hence Bede says on Lk. 24:41:
"Christ ate because He could, not because He needed."
Reply to Objection 2: As was observed above, some proofs were
employed by Christ to prove the truth of His human nature, and
others to show forth His glory in rising again. But the condition of
human nature, as considered in itself, namely, as to its present state,
is opposite to the condition of glory, as is said in 1 Cor. 15:43: "It is
sown in weakness, it shall rise in power." Consequently, the proofs

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.55, C.7.

brought forward for showing the condition of glory, seem to be in
opposition to nature, not absolutely, but according to the present
state, and conversely. Hence Gregory says (Hom. xxvi in Evang.):
"The Lord manifested two wonders, which are mutually contrary
according to human reason, when after the Resurrection He showed
His body as incorruptible and at the same time palpable."
Reply to Objection 3: As Augustine says (Tract. cxxi super Joan.),
"these words of our Lord, 'Do not touch Me, for I am not yet
ascended to My Father,'" show "that in that woman there is a figure
of the Church of the Gentiles, which did not believe in Christ until He
was ascended to the Father. Or Jesus would have men to believe in
Him, i.e. to touch Him spiritually, as being Himself one with the
Father. For to that man's innermost perceptions He is, in some sort,
ascended unto the Father, who has become so far proficient in Him,
as to recognize in Him the equal with the Father . . . whereas she as
yet believed in Him but carnally, since she wept for Him as for a
man." But when one reads elsewhere of Mary having touched Him,
when with the other women, she "'came up and took hold of His feet,'
that matters little," as Severianus says [Chrysologus, Serm. lxxvi],
"for, the first act relates to figure, the other to sex; the former is of
Divine grace, the latter of human nature." Or as Chrysostom says
(Hom. lxxxvi in Joan.): "This woman wanted to converse with Christ
just as before the Passion, and out of joy was thinking of nothing
great, although Christ's flesh had become much nobler by rising
again." And therefore He said: "I have not yet ascended to My
Father"; as if to say: "Do not suppose I am leading an earthly life; for
if you see Me upon earth, it is because I have not yet ascended to My
Father, but I am going to ascend shortly." Hence He goes on to say:
"I ascend to My Father, and to your Father."
Reply to Objection 4: As Augustine says ad Orosium (Dial. lxv, Qq.):
"Our Lord rose in clarified flesh; yet He did not wish to appear before
the disciples in that condition of clarity, because their eyes could not
gaze upon that brilliancy. For if before He died for us and rose again
the disciples could not look upon Him when He was transfigured
upon the mountain, how much less were they able to gaze upon Him
when our Lord's flesh was glorified." It must also be borne in mind
that after His Resurrection our Lord wished especially to show that
He was the same as had died; which the manifestation of His
brightness would have hindered considerably: because change of
features shows more than anything else the difference in the person
seen: and this is because sight specially judges of the common