28. The parish is not an outdated institution; precisely because it possesses great flexibility, it can
assume quite different contours depending on the openness and missionary creativity of the
pastor and the community. While certainly not the only institution which evangelizes, if the parish
proves capable of self-renewal and constant adaptivity, it continues to be “the Church living in the
midst of the homes of her sons and daughters”. This presumes that it really is in contact with
the homes and the lives of its people, and does not become a useless structure out of touch with
people or a self-absorbed group made up of a chosen few. The parish is the presence of the
Church in a given territory, an environment for hearing God’s word, for growth in the Christian life,
for dialogue, proclamation, charitable outreach, worship and celebration. In all its activities the
parish encourages and trains its members to be evangelizers. It is a community of

communities, a sanctuary where the thirsty come to drink in the midst of their journey, and a
centre of constant missionary outreach. We must admit, though, that the call to review and renew
our parishes has not yet sufficed to bring them nearer to people, to make them environments of
living communion and participation, and to make them completely mission-oriented.

29. Other Church institutions, basic communities and small communities, movements, and forms
of association are a source of enrichment for the Church, raised up by the Spirit for evangelizing
different areas and sectors. Frequently they bring a new evangelizing fervour and a new capacity
for dialogue with the world whereby the Church is renewed. But it will prove beneficial for them not
to lose contact with the rich reality of the local parish and to participate readily in the overall
pastoral activity of the particular Church. This kind of integration will prevent them from
concentrating only on part of the Gospel or the Church, or becoming nomads without roots.

30. Each particular Church, as a portion of the Catholic Church under the leadership of its bishop,
is likewise called to missionary conversion. It is the primary subject of evangelization, since it
is the concrete manifestation of the one Church in one specific place, and in it “the one, holy,
catholic, and apostolic Church of Christ is truly present and operative”. It is the Church
incarnate in a certain place, equipped with all the means of salvation bestowed by Christ, but with
local features. Its joy in communicating Jesus Christ is expressed both by a concern to preach him
to areas in greater need and in constantly going forth to the outskirts of its own territory or towards
new sociocultural settings. Wherever the need for the light and the life of the Risen Christ is
greatest, it will want to be there. To make this missionary impulse ever more focused,
generous and fruitful, I encourage each particular Church to undertake a resolute process of
discernment, purification and reform.