acres of land, so many and so many, and of houses ten or twenty or even more,
and of baths as many, and of slaves a thousand, or twice as many, and of chariots
fastened with silver and overlaid with gold; but I say this, that if each one of you
that are rich were to leave this poverty (for these things are poverty compared
with what I am about to say), and were possessed of a whole world, and each of
them had as many men as are now everywhere on land and sea, and each a world
both sea and land, and everywhere buildings, and cities, and nations, and from
every side instead of water, instead of fountains, gold flowed up for him, I would
not say those who are thus rich are worth three farthings, when they are cast out
of the kingdom.
For if now aiming at riches that perish, when they miss them, they are
tormented, if they should obtain a perception of those unspeakable blessings,
what then will suffice for consolation for them? There is nothing. Tell me not
then of the abundance of their possessions, but consider how great loss the lovers
of this abundance undergo in consequence thereof, for these things losing
Heaven, and being in the same state, as if any one after being cast out of the
highest honor in kings' courts, having a dung heap, were to pride himself on that.
For the storing up of money differs nothing from that, or rather that is even the
better. For that is serviceable both for husbandry, and for heating a bath, and for
other such uses, but the buried gold for none of these things. And would it were
merely useless; but as it is, it kindles moreover many furnaces for him that has it,
unless he use it rightly; countess evils at least spring therefrom.
Therefore they that are without used to call the love of money the citadel of
evils; but the blessed Paul spoke much better and more vividly, pronouncing it
"the root of all evils."
Considering then all these things, let us emulate the things worthy of
emulation, not gorgeous buildings not costly estates, but the men that have much
confidence towards God, those that have riches in Heaven, the owners of those
treasures, them that are really rich, them that are poor for Christ's sake, that we
may attain unto the good things of eternity by the grace and love towards man of

our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom be unto the Father, together with the Holy
Ghost, glory, might, honor, now and always and world without end. Amen.

## Homily 64 on Matthew

Matt. XIX. 27.
"Then answered Peter and said unto Him, Behold, we have forsaken all,
and followed You; what shall we have therefore?"
All which? O blessed Peter; the rod? The net? The boat? The craft? These
things do you tell me of, as all? Yea, says he, but not for display do I say these
things, but in order that by this question I may bring in the multitude of the poor.
For since the Lord had said, "If you will be perfect, sell that you have, and give
to the poor, and you shall have treasure in Heaven;" [Matthew 19:21] lest any
one of the poor should say, What then? If I have no possessions, can I not be
perfect? Peter asks, that you, the poor man, may learn, that you are made in no
respect inferior by this: Peter asks, that you may not learn from Peter and doubt
(for indeed he was imperfect as yet, and void of the Spirit), but that, having
received the declaration from Peter's Master, you may be confident.
For like as we do (we make things our own often when speaking of the
concerns of others), so did the apostle, when he put to Him this question in
behalf of all the world. Since that at least he knew with certainty his own
portion, is manifest from what had been said before; for he that had already
received the keys of the Heavens, much more might feel confidence about the
things hereafter.
But mark also how exactly his reply is according to Christ's demand. For
He had required of the rich man these two things, to give that he had to the poor,
and to follow Him. Wherefore he also expresses these two things, to forsake, and
to follow. "For behold we have forsaken all," says he, "and have followed You."
For the forsaking was done for the sake of following, and the following was
rendered easier by the forsaking, and made them feel confidence and joy
touching the forsaking.