the dead," etc. (v. 19, 20, 21): for in fact it was on this account they were sore
troubled from the first, because he preached the Resurrection. This being proved,
the things relating to Christ also were easily introduced, that He was risen.
"What evil doing," he says, "they found in me. In the council" [Acts 4:2] he says:
the examination not having taken place in private. That these things which I say
are true, those witness who bring this charge against me. "Having," he says, "a
conscience void of offense both toward God, and toward men." [Acts 24:16] This
is the perfection of virtue, when even to men we give no handle against us, and
are careful to be void of offense with God. "That I cried," he says, "in the
council." He also shows their violence. They have it not to say, Thou did these
things under the pretext of alms: for (it was) "not with multitude, nor with
tumult:" especially as upon enquiry made concerning this thing, nothing further
was found. Do you observe his moderation, though there were dangers? Do you
observe how he keeps his tongue from evil-speaking, how he seeks only one
thing, to free himself from the charges against himself, not that he may criminate
them, except so far as he might be obliged to do so while defending himself?
Just as Christ also said: "I have not a devil, but I honor My Father: but you do
dishonor Me." [John 8:49]
Let us imitate him, since he also was an imitator of Christ. If he, with
enemies, who went even to the length of murder and slaughter, said nothing
offensive to them, what pardon shall we deserve, who in reviling and abuse
become infuriated, calling our enemies villains, detestable wretches? What
pardon shall we deserve, for having enemies at all? Hear you not, that to honor
(another) is to honor one's self? So it is: but we disgrace ourselves. You accuse
(some one) that he has abused you: then why do you bring yourself under the
same accusation? Why inflict a blow on yourself? Keep free from passion, keep
unwounded: do not, by wishing to smite another, bring the hurt upon yourself.
What, is the other tumult of our soul not enough for us, the tumult that is stirred
up, though there be none to stir it up— for example, its outrageous lusts, its
griefs and sorrows, and such like— but we must needs heap up a pile of others

also? And how, you will say, is it possible, when one is insulted and abused, to
bear this? And how is it not possible, I ask? Is a wound got from words; or do
words inflict bruises on our bodies? Then where is the hurt to us? So that, if we
will, we can bear it. Let us lay down for ourselves a law not to grieve, and we
shall bear it: let us say to ourselves, "It is not from enmity; it is from infirmity"—
for it is indeed owing to an infirmity, since, for proof that it comes not from
enmity nor from malignity of disposition, but from infirmity, the other also
would fain have restrained (his anger), although he had suffered numberless
wrongs. If we only have this thought in our minds, that it is from infirmity, we
shall bear it, and while we forgive the offending person, we shall try not to fall
into it ourselves. For I ask all you who are present: would you have wished to be
able to exercise such a philosophic temper, as to bear with those who insult you?
I think so. Well, then, he insulted unwillingly; he would rather not have done so,
but he did it, forced by his passion: refrain yourself. Do you not see (how it is
with) the demoniacs (in their fits)? Just then as it is with them, so with him: it is
not so much from enmity, as from infirmity (that he behaves as he does): endure
it. And as for us— it is not so much from the insults as they are in themselves
that we are moved, as from our own selves: else how is it that when madmen
offer us the same insults, we bear it? Again, if those who insult us be our friends,
in that case too we bear it: or also our superiors, in that case also we bear it: how
then is it not absurd, that in the case of these three, friends, madmen, and
superiors, we bear it, but where they are of the same rank or our inferiors, we do
not bear it? I have oftentimes said: It is but an impulse of the moment, something
that hurries us away on the sudden: let us endure it for a little, and we shall bear
the whole thing. The greater the insults, the more weak the offender. Do you
know when it behooves us to grieve? When we have insulted another, and he
keeps silence: for then he is strong, and we weak: but if the contrary be the case,
you must even rejoice: you are crowned, you are proclaimed conqueror, without
having even entered into the contest, without having borne the annoyance of sun,
and heat, and dust, without having grappled with an antagonist and let him close