1 Corinthians 14:33
"For God is not a God of confusion, but of peace, as [I teach] in all the
Churches of the saints."
Do you see by how many reasons he leads him to silence and soothes him,
in the act of giving way to the other? By one thing and that the chief, that he was
not shut up by such a proceeding; "for you all can prophesy," says he, "one by
one." By a second, that this seems good to the Spirit Himself; "for the spirits of
the prophets are subject to the prophets." Besides these, that this is according to
the mind of God; "for God," says he, "is not a God of confusion, but of peace:"
and by a fourth, that in every part of the world this custom prevails, and no
strange thing is enjoined upon them. For thus, says he, "I teach in all the
Churches of the saints."
What now can be more awful than these things? For in truth the Church was
a heaven then, the Spirit governing all things, and moving each one of the rulers
and making him inspired. But now we retain only the symbols of those gifts. For
now also we speak two or three, and in turn, and when one is silent, another
begins. But these are only signs and memorials of those things. Wherefore when
we begin to speak, the people respond, "with your Spirit ," indicating that of old
they thus used to speak, not of their own wisdom, but moved by the Spirit. But
not so now: (I speak of my own case so far.) But the present Church is like a
woman who has fallen from her former prosperous days, and in many respects
retains the symbols only of that ancient prosperity; displaying indeed the
repositories and caskets of her golden ornaments, but bereft of her wealth: such
an one does the present Church resemble. And I say not this in respect of gifts:
for it were nothing marvelous if it were this only: but in respect also of life and
virtue. Thus the list of her widows, and the choir of her virgins, then gave great
ornament to the churches: but now she is made desolate and void, and the tokens

only remain. There are indeed widows now, there are also virgins; but they retain
not that adornment which women should have who prepare themselves for such
wrestlings. For the special distinction of the virgin is the caring for the things of
God alone, and the waiting on Him without distraction: and the widow's mark
too should be not so much the not engaging in a second marriage, as the other
things, charity to the poor, hospitality, continuing instant in prayers, all those
other things, which Paul writing to Timothy requires with great exactness. One
may see also the married women exhibiting among us great seemliness. But this
is not the only thing required, but rather that sedulous attention to the needy,
through which those women of old shone out most brightly. Not as the generality
now-a-days. For then instead of gold they were clothed with the fair array of
almsgiving: but now, having left off this, they are decked out on every side with
cords of gold woven of the chain of their sins.
Shall I speak of another repository too emptied of its hereditary splendor?
They all met together in old time and sang psalms in common. This we do also
now: but then among all was there one soul and one heart: but now not in one
single soul can one see that unanimity, rather great is the warfare every where.
"Peace," even now, "to all," he that presides in the Church prays for,
entering as it were into his Father's house: but of this peace the name is frequent,
but the reality no where.
8. Then the very houses were churches: but now the church itself is a house,
or rather worse than any house. For in a house one may see much good order:
since both the mistress of the house is seated on her chair with all seemliness,
and the maidens weave in silence, and each of the domestics has his appointed
task in hand. But here great is the tumult, great the confusion, and our
assemblies differ in nothing from a vintner's shop, so loud is the laughter, so
great the disturbance; as in baths, as in markets, the cry and tumult is universal.
And these things are here only: since elsewhere it is not permitted even to
address one's neighbor in the church, not even if one have received back a long
absent friend, but these things are done without, and very properly. For the