## Homily 32 on First Corinthians

1 Corinthians 12:27
Now you are the body of Christ and severally members thereof.
For lest any should say, "What is the example of the body to us? Since the
body is a slave to nature but our good deeds are of choice;" he applies it to our
own concerns; and to signify that we ought to have the same concord of design
as they have from nature, he says, "Now you are the body of Christ." But if our
body ought not to be divided, much less the body of Christ, and so much less as
grace is more powerful than nature.
But what is the expression, "severally?" "So far at least as appertains to
you; and so far as naturally a part should be built up from you." For because he
had said, "the body," whereas the whole body was not the Corinthian Church, but
the Church in every part of the world, therefore he said, "severally:" i.e., the
Church among you is a part of the Church existing every where and of the body
which is made up of all the Churches: so that not only with yourselves alone, but
also with the whole Church throughout the world, you ought to be at peace, if at
least ye be members of the whole body.

1 Corinthians 12:28
2. "And God has set some in the Church: first apostles, secondly prophets,
thirdly teachers, then miracles, then gifts of healings, helps, governments,
various kinds of tongues."
Thus what I spoke of before, this also he now does. Because they thought
highly of themselves in respect of the tongues he sets it last every where. For the
terms, "first" and "secondly," are not used by him here at random, but in order by
enumeration to point out the more honorable and the inferior. Wherefore also he
set the apostles first who had all the gifts in themselves. And he said not, "God
has set certain in the Church, apostles" simply, "or prophets," but he employs
"first, second," and "third," signifying that same thing which I told you of.
"Secondly, prophets." For they used to prophesy, as the daughters of Philip,
as Agabus, as these very persons among the Corinthians, of whom he says, "Let
the prophets speak, two or three." [1 Corinthians 14:29] And writing also to
Timothy, he said, "Neglect not the gift that is in you, which was given you by
prophecy." [1 Timothy 4:14] And they were much more many that prophesied.
And if Christ says, "The Law and the Prophets prophesied until John," [Matthew
11:13] He says it of those prophets who before proclaimed His coming.
"Thirdly, teachers." For he that prophesies speaks all things from the Spirit;
but he that teaches sometimes discourses also out of his own mind. Wherefore
also he said, "Let the elders that rule well be counted worthy of double honor,
especially they who labor in the word and in teaching:" [1 Timothy 5:17]
whereas he that speaks all things by the Spirit does not labor. This accordingly is
the reason why he set him after the prophet, because the one is wholly a gift but
the other is also man's labor. For he speaks many things of his own mind,
agreeing however with the sacred Scriptures.
3. "Then miracles, then gifts of healings." Do you see how he again divides