THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.37, C.2.

of the Law, He might set others free therefrom, according to Gal.
4:4,5: "God sent His Son . . . made under the Law, that He might
redeem them who were under the Law."
Reply to Objection 1: Circumcision by the removal of the piece of
skin in the member of generation, signified "the passing away of the
old generation" [Athanasius, De Sabb. et Circumcis.]: from the
decrepitude of which we are freed by Christ's Passion. Consequently
this figure was not completely fulfilled in Christ's birth, but in His
Passion, until which time the circumcision retained its virtue and
status. Therefore it behooved Christ to be circumcised as a son of
Abraham before His Passion.
Reply to Objection 2: Christ submitted to circumcision while it was
yet of obligation. And thus His action in this should be imitated by
us, in fulfilling those things which are of obligation in our own time.
Because "there is a time and opportunity for every business" (Eccl
8:6).
Moreover, according to Origen (Hom. xiv in Luc.), "as we died when
He died, and rose again when Christ rose from the dead, so were we
circumcised spiritually through Christ: wherefore we need no carnal
circumcision." And this is what the Apostle says (Col. 2:11): "In
whom," [i.e. Christ] "you are circumcised with circumcision not
made by hand in despoiling of the body of the flesh, but in the
circumcision of" our Lord Jesus "Christ."
Reply to Objection 3: As Christ voluntarily took upon Himself our
death, which is the effect of sin, whereas He had no sin Himself, in
order to deliver us from death, and to make us to die spiritually unto
sin, so also He took upon Himself circumcision, which was a remedy
against original sin, whereas He contracted no original sin, in order
to deliver us from the yoke of the Law, and to accomplish a spiritual
circumcision in us---in order, that is to say, that, by taking upon
Himself the shadow, He might accomplish the reality.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.37, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether His name was suitably given to Christ?

Objection 1: It would seem that an unsuitable name was given to
Christ. For the Gospel reality should correspond to the prophetic
foretelling. But the prophets foretold another name for Christ: for it is
written (Is. 7:14): "Behold a virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and
His name shall be called Emmanuel"; and (Is. 8:3): "Call His name,
Hasten to take away the spoils; Make haste to take away the prey";
and (Is. 9:6): "His name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor God
the Mighty, the Father of the world to come, the Prince of Peace";
and (Zach. 6:12): "Behold a Man, the Orient is His name." Thus it was
unsuitable that His name should be called Jesus.
Objection 2: Further, it is written (Is. 62:2): "Thou shalt be called by a
new name, which the mouth of the Lord hath named ." But the name
Jesus is not a new name, but was given to several in the Old
Testament: as may be seen in the genealogy of Christ (Lk. 3:29),
"Therefore it seems that it was unfitting for His name to be called
Jesus."
Objection 3: Further, the name Jesus signifies "salvation"; as is
clear from Mt. 1:21: "She shall bring forth a son, and thou shalt call
His name Jesus. For He shall save His people from their sins." But
salvation through Christ was accomplished not only in the
circumcision, but also in uncircumcision, as is declared by the
Apostle (Rm. 4:11,12). Therefore this name was not suitably given to
Christ at His circumcision.
On the contrary is the authority of Scripture, in which it is written
(Lk. 2:21): "After eight days were accomplished, that the child should
be circumcised, His name was called Jesus."
I answer that, A name should answer to the nature of a thing. This is
clear in the names of genera and species, as stated Metaph. iv:
"Since a name is but an expression of the definition" which
designates a thing's proper nature.
Now, the names of individual men are always taken from some
property of the men to whom they are given. Either in regard to time;
thus men are named after the Saints on whose feasts they are born:
or in respect of some blood relation; thus a son is named after his