SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.43, C.8.

only in good things, even as he ought to gratify his will in good
things alone, so that his love for his neighbor may be a "righteous"
love. Thirdly, as regards the reason for loving, namely, that a man
should love his neighbor, not for his own profit, or pleasure, but in
the sense of wishing his neighbor well, even as he wishes himself
well, so that his love for his neighbor may be a "true" love: since
when a man loves his neighbor for his own profit or pleasure, he
does not love his neighbor truly, but loves himself.
This suffices for the Replies to the Objections.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.43, C.9.

### ARTICLE 8. Whether the order of charity is included in the

precept?
Objection 1: It would seem that the order of charity is not included in
the precept. For whoever transgresses a precept does a wrong. But
if man loves some one as much as he ought, and loves any other
man more, he wrongs no man. Therefore he does not transgress the
precept. Therefore the order of charity is not included in the precept.
Objection 2: Further, whatever is a matter of precept is sufficiently
delivered to us in Holy Writ. Now the order of charity which was
given above (Question 26) is nowhere indicated in Holy Writ.
Therefore it is not included in the precept.
Objection 3: Further, order implies some kind of distinction. But the
love of our neighbor is prescribed without any distinction, in the
words, "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself." Therefore the order
of charity is not included in the precept.
On the contrary, Whatever God works in us by His grace, He teaches
us first of all by His Law, according to Jer. 31:33: "I will give My Law
in their heart." Now God causes in us the order of charity, according
to Cant 2:4: "He set in order charity in me." Therefore the order of
charity comes under the precept of the Law.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 4, ad 1), the mode which is
essential to an act of virtue comes under the precept which
prescribes that virtuous act. Now the order of charity is essential to
the virtue, since it is based on the proportion of love to the thing
beloved, as shown above (Question 25, Article 12; Question 26,
Articles 1,2). It is therefore evident that the order of charity must
come under the precept.
Reply to Objection 1: A man gratifies more the person he loves more,
so that if he loved less one whom he ought to love more, he would
wish to gratify more one whom he ought to gratify less, and so he
would do an injustice to the one he ought to love more.
Reply to Objection 2: The order of those four things we have to love
out of charity is expressed in Holy Writ. For when we are
commanded to love God with our "whole heart," we are given to

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.43, C.9.