(Questions. 83, qu. 79): "Every visible thing in this world has an
angelic power placed over it"; and Damascene says (De Fide Orth. ii,
4): "The devil was one of the angelic powers who presided over the
terrestrial order"; and Origen says on the text, "When the ass saw
the angel" (Num. 22:23), that "the world has need of angels who
preside over beasts, and over the birth of animals, and trees, and
plants, and over the increase of all other things" (Hom. xiv in Num.).
The reason of this, however, is not that an angel is more fitted by his
nature to preside over animals than over plants; because each angel,
even the least, has a higher and more universal power than any kind
of corporeal things: the reason is to be sought in the order of Divine
wisdom, Who places different rulers over different things. Nor does it
follow that there are more than nine orders of angels, because, as
above expounded (Question 108, Article 2), the orders are
distinguished by their general offices. Hence as according to
Gregory all the angels whose proper office it is to preside over the
demons are of the order of the "powers"; so to the order of the
"virtues" do those angels seem to belong who preside over purely
corporeal creatures; for by their ministration miracles are sometimes
performed.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether corporeal matter obeys the mere will of

an angel?
Objection 1: It would seem that corporeal matter obeys the mere will
of an angel. For the power of an angel excels the power of the soul.
But corporeal matter obeys a conception of the soul; for the body of
man is changed by a conception of the soul as regards heat and
cold, and sometimes even as regards health and sickness. Therefore
much more is corporeal matter changed by a conception of an angel.
Objection 2: Further, whatever can be done by an inferior power, can
be done by a superior power. Now the power of an angel is superior
to corporeal power. But a body by its power is able to transform
corporeal matter; as appears when fire begets fire. Therefore much
more efficaciously can an angel by his power transform corporeal
matter.
Objection 3: Further, all corporeal nature is under angelic
administration, as appears above (Article 1), and thus it appears that
bodies are as instruments to the angels, for an instrument is
essentially a mover moved. Now in effects there is something that is
due to the power of their principal agents, and which cannot be due
to the power of the instrument; and this it is that takes the principal
place in the effect. For example, digestion is due to the force of
natural heat, which is the instrument of the nutritive soul: but that
living flesh is thus generated is due to the power of the soul. Again
the cutting of the wood is from the saw; but that it assumes the
length the form of a bed is from the design of the [joiner's] art.
Therefore the substantial form which takes the principal place in the
corporeal effects, is due to the angelic power. Therefore matter
obeys the angels in receiving its form.
On the contrary, Augustine says "It is not to be thought, that this
visible matter obeys these rebel angels; for it obeys God alone."
I answer that, The Platonists [Phaedo. xlix: Tim. (Did.) vol. ii, p. 218]
asserted that the forms which are in matter are caused by immaterial
forms, because they said that the material forms are participations of
immaterial forms. Avicenna followed them in this opinion to some
extent, for he said that all forms which are in matter proceed from
the concept of the "intellect"; and that corporeal agents only dispose