FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.6, C.7.

concerned with singulars; and the singular, as such, is here and
now; that which is done is in act, in so far as it is here and now and
under other individuating circumstances. And that which is done
through fear is voluntary, inasmuch as it is here and now, that is to
say, in so far as, under the circumstances, it hinders a greater evil
which was feared; thus the throwing of the cargo into the sea
becomes voluntary during the storm, through fear of the danger:
wherefore it is clear that it is voluntary simply. And hence it is that
what is done out of fear is essentially voluntary, because its
principle is within. But if we consider what is done through fear, as
outside this particular case, and inasmuch as it is repugnant to the
will, this is merely a consideration of the mind. And consequently
what is done through fear is involuntary, considered in that respect,
that is to say, outside the actual circumstances of the case.
Reply to Objection 1: Things done through fear and compulsion
differ not only according to present and future time, but also in this,
that the will does not consent, but is moved entirely counter to that
which is done through compulsion: whereas what is done through
fear, becomes voluntary, because the will is moved towards it, albeit
not for its own sake, but on account of something else, that is, in
order to avoid an evil which is feared. For the conditions of a
voluntary act are satisfied, if it be done on account of something else
voluntary: since the voluntary is not only what we wish, for its own
sake, as an end, but also what we wish for the sake of something
else, as an end. It is clear therefore that in what is done from
compulsion, the will does nothing inwardly; whereas in what is done
through fear, the will does something. Accordingly, as Gregory of
Nyssa [Nemesius, De Nat. Hom. xxx.] says, in order to exclude things
done through fear, a violent action is defined as not only one, "the
principal whereof is from without," but with the addition, "in which
he that suffers violence concurs not at all"; because the will of him
that is in fear, does concur somewhat in that which he does through
fear.
Reply to Objection 2: Things that are such absolutely, remain such,
whatever be added to them; for instance, a cold thing, or a white
thing: but things that are such relatively, vary according as they are
compared with different things. For what is big in comparison with
one thing, is small in comparison with another. Now a thing is said to
be voluntary, not only for its own sake, as it were absolutely; but
also for the sake of something else, as it were relatively.
Accordingly, nothing prevents a thing which was not voluntary in

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.6, C.7.

comparison with one thing, from becoming voluntary when
compared with another.
Reply to Objection 3: That which is done through fear, is voluntary
without any condition, that is to say, according as it is actually done:
but it is involuntary, under a certain condition, that is to say, if such
a fear were not threatening. Consequently, this argument proves
rather the opposite.