2 Corinthians 3:9
"For if the ministration of condemnation is glory."
Also, he interprets more clearly the meaning of the words, "The letter kills,"
declaring it to be that which we have said above, namely, that the Law showed
sin, not caused it.
"Much rather does the ministration of righteousness exceed in glory." For
those Tables indeed showed the sinners and punished them, but this not only did
not punish the sinners, but even made them righteous: for this did Baptism
confer.

2 Corinthians 3:10
2. "For verily that which has been made glorious has not been made
glorious in this respect, by reason of the glory that surpasses."
Now in what has gone before, indeed, he showed that this also is with
glory; and not simply is with glory, but even exceeds in it: for he did not say,
"How shall not the ministration of the Spirit be rather in glory?" but, "exceed in
glory;" deriving the proof from the arguments before stated. Here he also shows
the superiority, how great it is, saying, 'if I compare this with that, the glory of
the Old Covenant is not glory at all;' not absolutely laying down that there was
no glory, but in view of the comparison. Wherefore also he added, "in this
respect," that is, in respect of the comparison. Not that this does disparage the
Old Covenant, yea rather it highly commends it: for comparisons are wont to be
made between things which are the same in kind. Next, he sets on foot yet
another argument to prove the superiority also from a fresh ground. What then is
this argument? That based upon duration, saying,

2 Corinthians 3:11
"For if that which passes away was with glory, much more that which
remains is in glory."
For the one ceased, but the other abides continually.

2 Corinthians 3:12
"Having therefore such a hope, we use great boldness of speech."
For since when he had heard so many and so great things concerning the
New [Covenant,] the hearer would be desirous of seeing this glory manifested to
the eye, mark whither he hurls him, [even] to the world to come. Wherefore also
he brought forward the "hope," saying, "Having therefore such a hope." Such?
Of what nature? That we have been counted worthy of greater things than
Moses; not we the Apostles only, but also all the faithful. "We use great boldness
of speech." Towards whom? Tell me. Towards God, or towards the disciples?
Towards you who are receiving instruction, he says; that is, we speak every
where with freedom, hiding nothing, withholding nothing, mistrusting nothing,
but speaking openly; and we have not feared lest we should wound your
eyesight, as Moses did that of the Jews. For that he alluded to this, hear what
follows; or rather, it is necessary first to relate the history, for he himself keeps
dwelling upon it. What then is the history? When, having received the Tables a
second time, Moses came down, a certain glory darting from his countenance
shone so much that the Jews were not able to approach and talk with him until he
put a veil over his face. And thus it is written in Exodus, [Exodus 34:29-34]
"When Moses came down from the Mount, the two Tables [were] in his hands.
And Moses knew not that the skin of his countenance was made glorious to
behold. And they were afraid to come near him. And Moses called them, and
spoke unto them. And when Moses had done speaking with them, he put a veil
over his face. But when he went in before the Lord to speak [with Him], he took
the veil off until he came out."
Putting them in mind then of this history, he says,