defence, teaching us to be gentle and loving. For if the master defends himself to
his servants, even when they have done him this wrong; much more ought we to
defend ourselves to one another, even if we are wronged to the highest degree.
See at least how he defends himself. "Behold they have all one mouth and one
speech" says he, "and this they have begun to do," as if he said let no one accuse
me of this when he sees the division of tongues. Let no one consider that this
difference of speech was made over to men from the beginning. "Behold they all
have one mouth, and one speech." But they did not use the gift aright. And in
order that you may understand that he does not chastise for what has taken place
so much as he provides for improvement in the future, hear the sequel "and now
none of all the things will fail them, which they set on foot to do." Now what he
says, is of such a kind as this. If they do not pay the penalty now, and be
restrained from the very root of their sins, they will never cease from
wickedness. For this is what "none of the things will fail them which they set on
foot to do" means, as if he said, and they will add other deeds yet more
monstrous. For such a thing is wickedness; if when it has taken a start it be not
hindered, as fire catching wood, so it rises to an unspeakable height. Do you see
that the deprivation of oneness of speech was a work of much lovingkindness?
He inflicted difference of speech upon them, in order that they might not fall into
greater wickedness. Hold fast this argument then with me, and let it ever be fixed
and immoveable in your minds, that not only when he confers benefits but even
when he chastises God is good and loving. For even his chastisements and his
punishments are the greatest part of his beneficence, the greatest form of his
providence. Whenever therefore you see that famines have taken place, and
pestilences, and drought and immoderate rains, and irregularities in the
atmosphere, or any other of the things which chasten human nature, be not
distressed, nor be despondent, but worship Him who caused them, marvel at
Him for His tender care. For He who does these things is such that He even
chastens the body that the soul may become sound. Then does God these things
saith one? God does these things, and even if the whole city, nay even if the

whole universe were here I will not shrink from saying this. Would that my voice
were clearer than a trumpet, and that it were possible to stand in a lofty place,
and to cry aloud to all men, and to testify that God does these things. I do not say
these things in arrogance but I have the prophet standing at my side, crying and
saying, "There is no evil in the city which the Lord has not done"—now evil is
an ambiguous term; and I wish that you shall learn the exact meaning of each
expression, in order that on account of ambiguity you may not confound the
nature of the things, and fall into blasphemy.
5. There is then evil, which is really evil; fornication, adultery,
covetousness, and the countless dreadful things, which are worthy of the utmost
reproach and punishment. Again there is evil, which rather is not evil, but is
called so, famine, pestilence, death, disease, and others of a like kind. For these
would not be evils. On this account I said they are called so only. Why then?
Because, were they evils, they would not have become the sources of good to us,
chastening our pride, goading our sloth, and leading us on to zeal, making us
more attentive. "For when," saith one, "he slew them, then they sought him, and
they returned, and came early to God." He calls this evil therefore which
chastens them, which makes them purer, which renders them more zealous,
which leads them on to love of wisdom; not that which comes under suspicion
and is worthy of reproach; for that is not a work of God, but an invention of our
own will, but this is for the destruction of the other. He calls then by the name of
evil the affliction, which arises from our punishment; thus naming it not in
regard to its own nature, but according to that view which men take of it. For
since we are accustomed to call by the name of evil, not only thefts and
adulteries, but also calamities; so he has called the matter, according to the
estimate of mankind. This then is that which the prophet saith "There is no evil
in the city which the Lord has not done." This too by means of Isaiah God has
made clear saying "I am God who makes peace and creates evil," again naming
calamities evils. This evil also Christ hints at, thus saying to the disciples,
"sufficient for the day is the evil thereof," that is to say the affliction, the misery.