miracles by the hands of Paul: so that from his body were brought unto the sick
handkerchiefs or aprons, and the diseases departed from them, and the evil
spirits went out of them." (v. 11, 12.) Not touched the wearer only (and so were
healed), but also receiving them, they laid them upon the sick (and so healed
them). (g) "He that believes in Me," says Christ, "does greater works than those
which I do." [John 14:12] This, and the miracle of the shadows is what He meant
(in those words). (d) "Then certain of the vagabond Jews, exorcists, took upon
them to call over them which had evil spirits the name of the Lord Jesus, saying,
We adjure you by Jesus whom Paul preaches." [Acts 19:13] So entirely did they
do all by way of trade! Observe: vagabond, or, itinerant, Jewish exorcists. And to
believe indeed, they had no mind; but by that Name they wished to cast out the
demons. "By Jesus, whom Paul preaches." Only see what a name Paul had got!
"And there were seven sons of one Sceva, a Jew, and chief of the priests, which
did so. And the evil spirit answered and said, Jesus I know, and Paul I know; but
who are you? And the man in whom the evil spirit was leaped on them, and
overcame them, and prevailed against them, so that they fled out of that house
naked and wounded." [Acts 19:14-16] They did it in secret: then their impotence
is publicly exposed. (f) Then not the Name does anything, unless it be spoken
with faith. (h) See how they used their weapons against themselves! (j) So far
were they from thinking Jesus to be anything great: no, they must needs add
Paul, as thinking him to be something great. Here one may marvel how it was
that the demon did not cooperate with the imposture of the exorcists, but on the
contrary exposed them, and laid open their stage-play. He seems to me (to have
done this) in exceeding wrath: just as it might be, if a person being in uttermost
peril, should be exposed by some pitiful creature, and wish to vent all his rage
upon him. "Jesus I know, and Paul I know." For, that there may not seem to be
any slight put upon the Name of Jesus, (the demon) first confesses (Him), and
then has permission given him. For, to show that it was not any weakness of the
Name, but all owing to the imposture of those men, why did not the same take
place in the case of Paul? "They fled out of that house naked and wounded:" he

sorely battered their heads, perhaps rent their garments. (e) "And this became
known to all, both Jews and Greeks, that dwelt at Ephesus, and fear fell upon
them all, and the name of the Lord Jesus was magnified. And many of them that
had believed came confessing and making known their practices." (v. 17, 18.)
For since they had got to possess such power as, by means of the demons, to do
such things, well might this be the consequence. "And many of them that
practised curious arts, brought their books together, and burnt them in the
presence of all men;"— having seen that there was no more use of them now
that the demons themselves do these things— "and reckoned up the price of
them, and found the amount fifty thousand pieces of silver. So mightily grew the
word of God and prevailed." (v. 19, 20.) (i) "And" (so) "he disputed," in the
school of one Tyrannus for two years: where were believers, and believers
exceedingly (advanced in the faith). Moreover (Paul) writes (to them) as to great
men.
(Recapitulation.) (b) "And having entered in to the synagogue," etc. [Acts
19:8] But why [ἐ] [παρρησιάζετο]? It means, he was ready to confront dangers,
and disputed more openly, not veiling the doctrines. (a) "But when some were
hardened, and spoke evil of the way, having departed from them, he separated
the disciples." [Acts 19:9] He put a stop, it means, to their evil-speaking: he did
not wish to kindle their envy, nor to bring them into more contention. (c) Hence
let us also learn not to put ourselves in the way of evil-speaking men, but to
depart from them: he did not speak evil, when himself evil spoken of. "He
disputed daily," and by this gained the many, that, being evil intreated and (evil)
spoken of, he did not (utterly) break away from them, and keep aloof. (e) The
evil-speakers are defeated. They calumniated the doctrine itself; (therefore) so as
neither to rouse the disciples to wrath, nor * * them, he withdrew, showing that
everywhere alike they repel salvation from them. Here now he does not even
apologize, seeing that the Gentiles everywhere have believed. "In the school of
one Tyrannus:" it was not that he sought the place, but without more ado where
there was a school (there he discoursed). (d) And look, no sooner is the trial