voluntary poverty?
Objection 1: It would seem that the judicial power does not
correspond to voluntary poverty. For it was promised to none but the
twelve apostles (Mt. 19:28): "You shall sit on twelve seats, judging,"
etc. Since then those who are voluntarily poor are not all apostles, it
would seem that the judicial power is not competent to all.
Objection 2: Further, to offer sacrifice to God of one's own body is
more than to do so of outward things. Now martyrs and also virgins
offer sacrifice to God of their own body. whereas the voluntarily poor
offer sacrifice of outward things. Therefore the sublimity of the
judicial power is more in keeping with martyrs and virgins than with
those who are voluntarily poor.
Objection 3: Further, it is written (Jn. 5:45): "There is one that
accuseth you, Moses in whom you trust---because you believe not
his voice," according to a gloss, and (Jn. 12:48): "The word that I
have spoken shall judge him in the last day." Therefore the fact that
a man propounds a law, or exhorts men by word to lead a good life,
gives him the right to judge those who scorn his utterances. But this
belongs to doctors. Therefore it is more competent to doctors than
to those who are poor voluntarily.
Objection 4: Further, Christ through being judged unjustly merited as
man to be judge of all in His human nature [TP, Question 59, Article
6], according to Jn. 5:27, "He hath given Him power to do judgment,
because He is the Son of man." Now those who suffer persecution
for justice' sake are judged unjustly. Therefore the judicial power is
competent to them rather than to the voluntarily poor.
Objection 5: Further, a superior is not judged by his inferior. Now
many who will have made lawful use of riches will have greater merit
than many of the voluntarily poor. Therefore the voluntarily poor will
not judge where those are to be judged.
On the contrary, It is written (Job 36:6): "He saveth not the wicked,
and He giveth judgment to the poor."
Further, a gloss on Mt. 19:28, "You who have left all things' " says:

"Those who left all things and followed God will be the judges; those
who made right use of what they had lawfully will be judged," and
thus the same conclusion follows as before.
I answer that, The judicial power is due especially to poverty on
three counts. First, by reason of congruity, since voluntary poverty
belongs to those who despise all the things of the world and cleave
to Christ alone. Consequently there is nothing in them to turn away
their judgment from justice, so that they are rendered competent to
be judges as loving the truth of justice above all things. Secondly, by
reason of merit, since exaltation corresponds by way of merit to
humility. Now of all the things that make man contemptible in this
world humility is the chief: and for this reason the excellence of
judicial power is promised to the poor, so that he who humbles
himself for Christ's sake shall be exalted. Thirdly, because poverty
disposes a man to the aforesaid manner of judging. For the reason
why one of the saints will be said to judge as stated above [Article 1],
is that he will have the heart instructed in all Divine truth which he
will be thus able to make known to others. Now in the advancement
to perfection, the first thing that occurs to be renounced is external
wealth, because this is the last thing of all to be acquired. And that
which is last in the order of generation is the first in the order of
destruction: wherefore among the beatitudes whereby we advance to
perfection, the first place is given to poverty. Thus judicial power
corresponds to poverty, in so far as this is the disposition to the
aforesaid perfection. Hence also it is that this same power is not
promised to all who are voluntarily poor, but to those who leave all
and follow Christ in accordance with the perfection of life.
Reply to Objection 1: According to Augustine (De Civ. Dei xx), "we
must not imagine that because He says that they will sit on twelve
seats only twelve men will judge with Him. else since we read that
Matthias was appointed apostle in the place of the traitor Judas, Paul
who worked more than the rest will have nowhere to sit as judge."
Hence "the number twelve," as he states (De Civ. Dei xx), "signifies
the whole multitude of those who will judge, because the two parts
of seven, namely three and four, being multiplied together make
twelve." Moreover twelve is a perfect number, being the double of
six, which is a perfect number.
Or, speaking literally, He spoke to the twelve apostles in whose
person he made this promise to all who follow them.