and from his fear; both from hunger, and from dejection of mind. Wishing
therefore to deepen his dejection, He made the man blind until the coming of
Ananias: and, that he might not imagine the blindness to be (only) fancy, this is
the reason of the scales. He needed no other teaching: that which had befallen
was made teaching (to him). "And he was with the disciples which were at
Damascus certain days. And straightway in the synagogues he preached Jesus,
that He is the Son of God." [Acts 9:20] See, straightway he was a teacher in the
synagogues. He was not ashamed of the change, was not afraid while the very
things in which he was glorious afore-time, the same he destroyed. Even from
his first appearance on the stage here was a man, death-dealing, ready for deeds
of blood: do you see what a manifest sign (was here)? And with this very thing,
he put all in fear: for, said they, Hither also is he come for this very thing. "But
all that heard him were amazed, and said: Is not this he that destroyed them
which called on this name in Jerusalem, and came hither for that intent, that he
might bring them bound unto the chief priests? But Saul increased the more in
strength, and confounded the Jews which dwelt at Damascus, proving that this is
very Christ." (v. 21, 22.) As one learned in the Law, he stopped their mouths, and
suffered them not to speak. They thought they were rid of disputation in such
matters, in getting rid of Stephen, and they found another, more vehement than
Stephen.
(Recapitulation.) But let us look at what relates to Ananias. The Lord said
not to him, Converse with him, and catechize him. For if, when He said, "He
prays, and has seen a man laying his hands upon him," (v. 11, 12.) He did not
persuade him, much less had He said this. So that he shall not disbelieve you,
"he has seen in a vision." Observe how in the former instance neither is Philip
told all immediately. Fear not, He says: for this man is a chosen vessel for Me.
[Acts 9:15] He more than sufficiently released him of his fear, if the case be so
that this man shall be so zealous in our cause, as even to suffer many things. And
justly he is called "a vessel" (or, instrument)— for reason shows that evil is not a
physical quality: "a vessel of election" (or, chosen instrument), He says; for we

choose that which is approved. And let not any imagine, that (Ananias) speaks in
unbelief of what was told him, as imagining that Christ was deceived: far from
it! But affrighted and trembling, he did not even attend to what was said, at
hearing the name of Paul. Moreover, the Lord does not tell that He has blinded
him: at the mention of his name fear had prepossessed his soul: "see," he says,
"to whom You are betraying me: 'and hither for this very purpose is he come, to
bind all that call upon Your Name.' I fear, lest he take me to Jerusalem: why dost
Thou cast me into the mouth of the lion?" He is terrified, even while he speaks
these words; that from every quarter we may learn the energetic character ([ἀ]
[ρετήν]) of the man. For that these things should be spoken by Jews, were
nothing wonderful: but that these (the believers) are so terrified, it is a most
mighty proof of the power of God. Both the fear is shown, and the obedience
greater after the fear. For there was indeed need of strength. Since He says, "a
vessel of election," that you may not imagine that God is to do all, He adds, to
bear My Name before Gentiles and kings, and the children of Israel. Ananias has
heard what he most desired— that against the Jews also he will take his stand:
this above all gave him courage. "For I," says He, "will show him how great
things he must suffer for My Name's sake." At the same time also this is said by
way of putting Ananias to the blush: If he, that was so frantic, shall suffer all
things, and thou not willing even to baptize him! "It is well," says he: "let him
continue blind" (this is why he says these words): "he is blind: why dost Thou at
all bid me open his eyes, that he may bind (men) again?" Fear not the future: for
that opening of his eyes he will use not against you, but for you (with reference
to that saying, "That he may receive his sight" [Acts 9:12], these words are
spoken): for not only will he do you no harm, but he "will suffer many things."
And what is wonderful indeed is, that he shall first know "how great things he
shall suffer," and then shall take the field against the perils.— "Brother Saul, the
Lord Jesus"— he says not, "Who made you blind," but, "Who appeared with you
in the way, has sent me unto you that you may receive your sight" [Acts 9:17]:
observe this man also, how he utters nothing boastful, but just as Peter said in