drunkenness is, there is unchasteness: where filthy talking, there the devil is at
hand bringing in his own contributions; with such an entertainment, tell me, do
you celebrate the mystery of Christ? And do you invite the devil?
I dare say you consider me offensive. For this too is a property of extreme
pervertedness, that even one that rebukes you incurs your ridicule as one that is
austere. Hear ye not Paul, saying, "Whatsoever ye do, whether you eat or drink
or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God"? [1 Corinthians 10:31] But ye
do all to ill report and dishonor. Hear ye not the Prophet, saying, "Serve the Lord
with fear, and rejoice unto Him with trembling?" [Psalm 2:11] But you are
wholly without restraint. Is it not possible both to enjoy pleasure, and to do so
with safety? Are you desirous of hearing beautiful songs? Best of all indeed, you
ought not; nevertheless, I condescend if you will have it so: do not hear those
Satanic ones, but the spiritual. Are you desirous of seeing choirs of dancers?
Behold the choir of Angels. And how is it possible, says one, to see them? If you
drive away all these things, even Christ will come to such a marriage, and Christ
being present, the choir of Angels is present also. If you will, He will even now
work miracles as He did then; He will make even now the water, wine [John 2];
and what is much more wonderful, He will convert this unstable and dissolving
pleasure, this cold desire, and change it into the spiritual. This is to make of
water, wine. Where pipers are, by no means there is Christ; but even if He should
have entered, He first casts these forth, and then He works His wonders. What
can be more disagreeable than this Satanic pomp? Where everything is
inarticulate, everything without significancy; and if there be anything articulate,
again all is shameful, all is noisome.
Nothing is more pleasurable than virtue, nothing sweeter than orderliness,
nothing more amiable than gravity. Let any celebrate such a marriage as I speak
of; and he shall find the pleasure; but what sort of marriages these are, take heed.
First seek a husband for the virgin, who will be truly a husband, and a protector;
as though thou were intending to place a head upon a body; as though about to
give not a slave, but a daughter into his hands. Seek not money, nor splendor of

family, nor greatness of country; all these things are superfluous; but piety of
soul, gentleness, the true understanding, the fear of God, if you wish your
darling to live with pleasure. For if you seek a wealthier husband, not only will
you not benefit her, but you will even harm her, by making her a slave instead of
free. For the pleasure she will reap from her golden trinkets will not be so great
as will be the annoyance that comes of her slavery. I pray you, seek not these
things, but most of all, one of equal condition; if however this cannot be, rather
one poorer than in better circumstances; if at least thou be desirous not of selling
your daughter to a master, but of giving her to a husband. When you have
thoroughly investigated the virtue of the man, and art about to give her to him,
beseech Christ to be present: for He will not be ashamed to be so; it is the
mystery of His presence. Yea rather beseech Him even in the first instance, to
grant her such a suitor. Be not worse than the servant of Abraham, who, when
sent on a pilgrimage so important, saw whither he ought to have recourse;
wherefore also he obtained everything. When you are taking anxious pains, and
seeking a husband for her, pray; say unto God, "whomsoever You will do Thou
provide:" into His hands commit the matter; and He, honored in this way by you,
will requite you with honor.
Two things indeed it is necessary to do; to commit the thing into His hands,
and to seek such an orderly person as He Himself approves.
When then you make a marriage, go not round from house to house
borrowing mirrors and dresses; for the matter is not one of display, nor do you
lead your daughter to a pageant; but decking out your house with what is in it,
invite your neighbors, and friends, and kindred. As many as you know to be of a
good character, those invite, and bid them be content with what there is. Let no
one from the orchestra be present, for such expense is superfluous, and
unbecoming. Before all the rest, invite Christ. Do you know whereby you will
invite Him? Whosoever, says He, "has done it to one of these least, has done it
to Me." [Matthew 25:40] And think it not an annoying thing to invite the poor
for Christ's sake; to invite harlots is an annoyance. For to invite the poor is a