fire from Heaven upon the sacrifice:— these are marvellous things, charged with
terror. Now then pass from this scene to the rites which are celebrated in the
present day; they are not only marvellous to behold, but transcendent in terror.
There stands the priest, not bringing down fire from Heaven, but the Holy Spirit:
and he makes prolonged supplication, not that some flame sent down from on
high may consume the offerings, but that grace descending on the sacrifice may
thereby enlighten the souls of all, and render them more refulgent than silver
purified by fire. Who can despise this most awful mystery, unless he is stark mad
and senseless? Or do you not know that no human soul could have endured that
fire in the sacrifice, but all would have been utterly consumed, had not the
assistance of God's grace been great.
5. For if any one will consider how great a thing it is for one, being a man,
and compassed with flesh and blood, to be enabled to draw near to that blessed
and pure nature, he will then clearly see what great honor the grace of the Spirit
has vouchsafed to priests; since by their agency these rites are celebrated, and
others nowise inferior to these both in respect of our dignity and our salvation.
For they who inhabit the earth and make their abode there are entrusted with the
administration of things which are in Heaven, and have received an authority
which God has not given to angels or archangels. For it has not been said to
them, "Whatsoever you shall bind on earth shall be bound in Heaven, and
whatsoever you shall loose on earth shall be loosed in Heaven."
[Matthew 18:18] They who rule on earth have indeed authority to bind, but only
the body: whereas this binding lays hold of the soul and penetrates the heavens;
and what priests do here below God ratifies above, and the Master confirms the
sentence of his servants. For indeed what is it but all manner of heavenly
authority which He has given them when He says, "Whose sins ye remit they are
remitted, and whose sins ye retain they are retained?" [John 20:23] What
authority could be greater than this? "The Father has committed all judgment to
the Son?" [John 5:22] But I see it all put into the hands of these men by the Son.
For they have been conducted to this dignity as if they were already translated to

Heaven, and had transcended human nature, and were released from the passions
to which we are liable. Moreover, if a king should bestow this honor upon any of
his subjects, authorizing him to cast into prison whom he pleased and to release
them again, he becomes an object of envy and respect to all men; but he who has
received from God an authority as much greater as heaven is more precious than
earth, and souls more precious than bodies, seems to some to have received so
small an honor that they are actually able to imagine that one of those who have
been entrusted with these things will despise the gift. Away with such madness!
For transparent madness it is to despise so great a dignity, without which it is not
possible to obtain either our own salvation, or the good things which have been
promised to us. For if no one can enter into the kingdom of Heaven except he be
regenerate through water and the Spirit, and he who does not eat the flesh of the
Lord and drink His blood is excluded from eternal life, and if all these things are
accomplished only by means of those holy hands, I mean the hands of the priest,
how will any one, without these, be able to escape the fire of hell, or to win those
crowns which are reserved for the victorious?
6. These verily are they who are entrusted with the pangs of spiritual travail
and the birth which comes through baptism: by their means we put on Christ,
and are buried with the Son of God, and become members of that blessed Head.
Wherefore they might not only be more justly feared by us than rulers and kings,
but also be more honored than parents; since these begot us of blood and the will
of the flesh, but the others are the authors of our birth from God, even that
blessed regeneration which is the true freedom and the sonship according to
grace. The Jewish priests had authority to release the body from leprosy, or,
rather, not to release it but only to examine those who were already released, and
you know how much the office of priest was contended for at that time. But our
priests have received authority to deal, not with bodily leprosy, but spiritual
uncleanness— not to pronounce it removed after examination, but actually and
absolutely to take it away. Wherefore they who despise these priests would be
far more accursed than Dathan and his company, and deserve more severe