SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.3, C.2.

Accordingly if anyone would reduce the foregoing words to the form
of a definition, he may say that "faith is a habit of the mind, whereby
eternal life is begun in us, making the intellect assent to what is nonapparent."
In this way faith is distinguished from all other things pertaining to
the intellect. For when we describe it as "evidence," we distinguish it
from opinion, suspicion, and doubt, which do not make the intellect
adhere to anything firmly; when we go on to say, "of things that
appear not," we distinguish it from science and understanding, the
object of which is something apparent; and when we say that it is
"the substance of things to be hoped for," we distinguish the virtue
of faith from faith commonly so called, which has no reference to the
beatitude we hope for.
Whatever other definitions are given of faith, are explanations of this
one given by the Apostle. For when Augustine says (Tract. xl in
Joan.: Questions. Evang. ii, qu. 39) that "faith is a virtue whereby we
believe what we do not see," and when Damascene says (De Fide
Orth. iv, 11) that "faith is an assent without research," and when
others say that "faith is that certainty of the mind about absent
things which surpasses opinion but falls short of science," these all
amount to the same as the Apostle's words: "Evidence of things that
appear not"; and when Dionysius says (Div. Nom. vii) that "faith is
the solid foundation of the believer, establishing him in the truth, and
showing forth the truth in him," comes to the same as "substance of
things to be hoped for."
Reply to Objection 1: "Substance" here does not stand for the
supreme genus condivided with the other genera, but for that
likeness to substance which is found in each genus, inasmuch as
the first thing in a genus contains the others virtually and is said to
be the substance thereof.
Reply to Objection 2: Since faith pertains to the intellect as
commanded by the will, it must needs be directed, as to its end, to
the objects of those virtues which perfect the will, among which is
hope, as we shall prove further on (Question 18, Article 1). For this
reason the definition of faith includes the object of hope.
Reply to Objection 3: Love may be of the seen and of the unseen, of
the present and of the absent. Consequently a thing to be loved is

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.3, C.2.

not so adapted to faith, as a thing to be hoped for, since hope is
always of the absent and the unseen.
Reply to Objection 4: "Substance" and "evidence" as included in the
definition of faith, do not denote various genera of faith, nor different
acts, but different relationships of one act to different objects, as is
clear from what has been said.
Reply to Objection 5: Evidence taken from the proper principles of a
thing, make it apparent, whereas evidence taken from Divine
authority does not make a thing apparent in itself, and such is the
evidence referred to in the definition of faith.