person, what does she gain? "But the golden ornaments are never worn out," he
answers. Assuredly this also is said that in the baths and many places both
precious stones and gold ornaments lose much of their value. But be it so, and
grant that they are not injured, tell me, what is the gain? And how is it when they
drop out, and are lost? Is there no loss sustained? And how when they draw
down upon you envy and intrigues? Is there no loss then? For when they do the
wearer no good, but rather inflame the eyes of the envious, and act as an
incitement to the robber, do they not become loss? And again, say, when a man
may use them for a serviceable purpose, but is unable on account of the
extravagance of his wife, and is obliged to starve and to stint himself, that he
may see her arrayed in gold, is it not a matter of loss? For it was on this account
that goods have their name from use, not that we should use them thus like
goldsmiths' samples, but that we should do some good therewith; so then when
love of gold does not allow this, is not the whole thing loss? For he that dares not
use them forbears the use as if they were another's property, and there is no use
of them in any way.
Again, how is it when we erect splendid and spacious mansions, decorated
with columns, marbles, porticos, arcades, and in every possible way, setting
images and statues everywhere? Many indeed even call demons out of these, i.e.
the images, but let us omit the examination of those points. What too is the
meaning of the gilded ceiling? Does it not supply the same need as to him,
whose house is on a moderate scale? "But there is great delight in it," he says.
Yes, for the first or second day, and afterwards, none at all, but it stands merely
for nothing. For if the sun does not strike us with wonder, from its being
customary, much more do works of art fail, and we only look at them like things
of clay. For tell me, what does a range of pillars contribute to make your
dwelling superior to others, or the finest statues, or the gilding spread over the
wall? Nothing; rather, these come of luxury and insolence, and overweening
pride and folly; for everything there ought to be necessary and useful, not
superfluous things. Do you see that the thing is loss? Do you see that it is

superfluous and unprofitable? For if it supplies no further use or delight, (and it
"does," in the course of time, bring satiety,) it is nothing else than loss, and
vainglory is the hindrance, which will not let us see this.
Did Paul then forsake those things which he "counted gain," and shall not
we even quit our loss, for Christ's sake? How long shall we be riveted to the
earth? How long till we shall look up to heaven? Do ye not mark the aged, what
little perception they have of the past? Do ye not mark those that are finishing
their course, both men in age, and men in youth? Do ye not see persons in the
midst of life bereft of them? Why are we so wedded to unstable objects? Why
are we linked to things that are shifting? How long before we lay hold of the
things that last? What would not the old give, were it granted them to divest
themselves of their old age? How irrational then to wish to return to our former
youth, and gladly to give everything for the sake of this, that we might become
younger, and yet when it is ours to receive a youth that knows no old age, a
youth too, which, joined with great riches, has far more of spirit, to be unwilling
to give up a little trifle, but to hold fast things that contribute not a whit to the
present life. They can never rescue you from death, they have no power to drive
away disease, to stay old age, or any one of those events, which happen by
necessity and according to the law of nature. And do you still hold to them? Tell
me, what do you gain? Drunkenness, gluttony, pleasures contrary to nature and
various in kind, which are far worse torturers than the hardest masters.
These are the advantages which we gain from riches, nor is there one
besides, since we are not so minded, for if we had had the mind, we might have
won heaven itself for our inheritance by our riches. "So then riches are good," he
says. It is not riches, but the will of the possessor that effects this, for because it
is the will that does this, it is in the power even of a poor man to win heaven.
For, as I have often said, God does not regard the amount of the gifts, but the
will of the givers; it is possible even for one in poverty, who has given but little,
to bear off all, for God requires a measure proportioned to our ability, neither
will riches secure heaven to us, nor poverty, hell; but a good or a bad will, either