Both willing is He and able, what is there to hinder? Nothing. But then, on our
part, let us draw near with faith, draw near, offering the gifts that He desires,
forgetfulness of wrongs, kindness, meekness. Though thou be a sinner, with
boldness shall you ask of Him forgiveness of your sins, if you can show that this
has been done by yourself: but though thou be righteous, and possess not this
virtue of forgetfulness of injuries, you are none the better for it. It cannot be that
a man who has forgiven his neighbor should not obtain perfect forgiveness: for
God is beyond comparison more merciful than we. What do you say? If you say,
"I have been wronged, I have subdued my anger, I have endured the onset of
wrath because of Your command, and dost Thou not forgive?" Full surely He
will forgive: and this is plain to all. Therefore let us purge our soul from all
resentment. This is sufficient for us, in order that we may be heard; and let us
pray with watching and much perseverance, that having enjoyed His bountiful
mercy, we may be found worthy of the good things promised, through the grace
and mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father, together with the
Holy Spirit, be glory, might, honor, now and ever, world without end. Amen.

Homily 37 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts XVII. 1, 2, 3
"Now when they had passed through Amphipolis and Apollonia, they came
to Thessalonica, where was a synagogue of the Jews: and Paul, as his manner
was, went in unto them, and three sabbath days reasoned with them out of the
Scriptures, opening and alleging that Christ must needs have suffered, and risen
again from the dead; and that this Jesus, whom I preach unto you, is Christ."
Again they haste past the small cities, and press on to the greater ones, since
from those the word was to flow as from a fountain into the neighboring cities.
"And Paul, as his manner was, went into the synagogue of the Jews." Although
he had said, "We turn to the Gentiles" [Acts 13:46], he did not leave these alone:
such was the longing affection he had towards them. For hear him saying,
"Brethren, my heart's desire and prayer to God for Israel is, that they might be
saved" [Romans 10:1]: and, "I wished myself accursed from Christ for my
brethren." [Romans 9:3] But he did this because of God's promise and the glory:
and this, that it might not be a cause of offense to the Gentiles. "Opening," it
says, "from the Scriptures, he reasoned with them for three sabbaths, putting
before them that the Christ must suffer." Do thou mark how before all other
things he preaches the Passion: so little were they ashamed of it, knowing it to be
the cause of salvation. "And some of them believed, and consorted with Paul and
Silas; and of the devout Greeks a great multitude, and of the chief women not a
few." [Acts 17:4] The writer mentions only the sum and substance of the
discoursing: he is not given to redundancy, and does not on every occasion
report the sermons. But the Jews which believed not (the best texts omit "which
believed not"), moved with envy, took unto them certain lewd fellows of the
baser sort, and gathered a company, and set all the city on an uproar, and
assaulted the house of Jason, and sought to bring them out to the people. And