sweetness, and is reduced to a bitter juice. Ears of grain are ruined by mildew
and drought, and the fruit, and leaves, and branches of vines by the mischievous
host of locusts, other trees by the caterpillar, and irrational creatures by diseases
of various kinds: and not to lengthen the list by going through all possible
examples, our own flesh is subject to fevers, and palsies, and a crowd of other
maladies. As then each one of these things is liable to that which ruins its virtue,
let us now consider what it is which injures the human race, and what it is which
ruins the virtue of a human being. Most men think that there are various things
which have this effect; for I must mention the erroneous opinions on the subject,
and, after confuting them, proceed to exhibit that which really does ruin our
virtue: and to demonstrate clearly that no one could inflict this injury or bring
this ruin upon us unless we betrayed ourselves. The multitude then having
erroneous opinions imagine that there are many different things which ruin our
virtue: some say it is poverty, others bodily disease, others loss of property,
others calumny, others death and they are perpetually bewailing and lamenting
these things: and while they are commiserating the sufferers and shedding tears
they excitedly exclaim to one another "What a calamity has befallen such and
such a man! He has been deprived of all his fortune at a blow." Of another again
one will say: "such and such a man has been attacked by severe sickness and is
despaired of by the physicians in attendance." Some bewail and lament the
inmates of the prison, some those who have been expelled from their country
and transported to the land of exile, others those who have been deprived of their
freedom, others those who have been seized and made captives by enemies,
others those who have been drowned, or burnt, or buried by the fall of a house,
but no one mourns those who are living in wickedness: on the contrary, which is
worse than all, they often congratulate them, a practice which is the cause of all
manner of evils. Come then (only, as I exhorted you at the outset, do not make a
commotion), let me prove that none of the things which have been mentioned
injure the man who lives soberly, nor can ruin his virtue. For tell me if a man has
lost his all either at the hands of calumniators or of robbers, or has been stripped

of his goods by knavish servants, what harm has the loss done to the virtue of the
man?
But if it seems well let me rather indicate in the first place what is the virtue
of a man, beginning by dealing with the subject in the case of existences of
another kind so as to make it more intelligible and plain to the majority of
readers.
3. What then is the virtue of a horse? Is it to have a bridle studded with gold
and girths to match, and a band of silken threads to fasten the housing, and
clothes wrought in various colours and gold tissue, and head gear studded with
jewels, and locks of hair plaited with gold cord? Or is it to be swift and strong in
its legs, and even in its paces, and to have hoofs suitable to a well bred horse,
and courage fitted for long journies and warfare, and to be able to behave with
calmness in the battle field, and if a rout takes place to save its rider? Is it not
manifest that these are the things which constitute the virtue of the horse, not the
others? Again, what should you say was the virtue of asses and mules? Is it not
the power of carrying burdens with contentment, and accomplishing journies
with ease, and having hoofs like rock? Shall we say that their outside trappings
contribute anything to their own proper virtue? By no means. And what kind of
vine shall we admire? One which abounds in leaves and branches, or one which
is laden with fruit? Or what kind of virtue do we predicate of an olive? Is it to
have large boughs, and great luxuriance of leaves, or to exhibit an abundance of
its proper fruit dispersed over all parts of the tree? Well, let us act in the same
way in the case of human beings also: let us determine what is the virtue of man,
and let us regard that alone as an injury, which is destructive to it. What then is
the virtue of man? Not riches that you should fear poverty: nor health of body
that you should dread sickness, nor the opinion of the public, that you should
view an evil reputation with alarm, nor life simply for its own sake, that death
should be terrible to you: nor liberty that you should avoid servitude: but
carefulness in holding true doctrine, and rectitude in life. Of these things not
even the devil himself will be able to rob a man, if he who possesses them