in the wilderness. When David then, he says, speaking at a later period, and after
these events, after that generation of men, said, "Today, if you will hear His
voice, harden not your hearts," that you may not suffer the same things which
your forefathers did, and be deprived of the Rest; he evidently [said this] as of
some [future] rest. For if they had received their Rest (he says) why does He
again say to them, "Today if you will hear His voice harden not your hearts," as
your fathers did? What other rest then is there, except the kingdom of Heaven, of
which the Sabbath was an image and type?
3. Next having set down the whole testimony (and this is, "Today if you will
hear His voice, harden not your hearts, as in the provocation in the day of
temptation in the wilderness, when your fathers tempted Me, proved Me, and
saw My works forty years. Wherefore I was grieved with that generation, and
said, They do always err in their heart, and they have not known My ways. So I
swore in My wrath, they shall not enter into My rest"), he then adds:

Hebrews 3:12
"Take heed, brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief in
departing from the living God." For from hardness unbelief arises: and as in
bodies, the parts that have become callous and hard do not yield to the hands of
the physicians, so also souls that are hardened yield not to the word of God. For
it is probable besides that some even disbelieved as though the things which had
been done were not true.
Therefore he says, "Take heed lest there be in any of you an evil heart of
unbelief in departing from the living God." For since the argument from the
future is not so persuasive as from the past, he reminds them of the history, in
which they had wanted faith. For if your fathers (he says) because they did not
hope as they ought to have hoped, suffered these things, much more will you.
Since to them also is this word addressed: for, "Today" (he says) is "ever," so
long as the world lasts.

Hebrews 3:13
4. Wherefore "exhort ye one another daily, while it is called today." That is,
edify one another, raise yourselves up: lest the same things should befall you.
"Lest any one of you be hardened by the deceitfulness of sin." Do you see that sin
produces unbelief? For as unbelief brings forth an evil life, so also a soul, "when
it has come into a depth of evils, becomes contemptuous" [Proverbs 18:3], and
having become contemptuous it endures not even to believe, in order thereby to
free itself from fear. For "they said" (one says), "The Lord shall not see, neither
shall the God of Jacob regard." [Psalm 94:7] And again, "Our lips are our own:
who is Lord over us?" [Psalm 12:4]; and again "Wherefore has the wicked man
provoked God to wrath?" [Psalm 10:13]; and again, "The fool has said in his
heart, there is no God; they are corrupt and become abominable in their
doings." [Psalm 14:1] "There is no fear of God before his eyes, for he was
deceitful before Him, to find out his iniquity and to hate." [Psalm 36:1-2] Yea
and Christ also says this same thing, "Every one that does evil, hates the light
and comes not to the light." [John 3:20]