crooked shall be made straight, and the rough ways smooth; and all flesh shall
see the salvation of God." [Luke 3:5-6] Do you perceive how the prophet has
anticipated all by his words; the concourse of the people, the change of things
for the better, the easiness of that which was preached, the first cause of all that
was occurring, even if he has expressed it rather as in figure, it being in truth a
prophecy which he was uttering? Thus, when he says, "Every valley shall be
filled, and every mountain and hill shall be brought low, and the rough ways
shall be made smooth;" he is signifying the exaltation of the lowly, the
humiliation of the self-willed, the hardness of the law changed into easiness of
faith. For it is no longer toils and labors, says he, but grace, and forgiveness of
sins, affording great facility of salvation. Next he states the cause of these things,
saying, "All flesh shall see the salvation of God;" no longer Jews and proselytes
only, but also all earth and sea, and the whole race of men. Because by "the
crooked things" he signified our whole corrupt life, publicans, harlots, robbers,
magicians, as many as having been perverted before afterwards walked in the
right way: much as He Himself likewise said, "publicans and harlots go into the
kingdom of God before you," [Matthew 21:31] because they believed. And in
other words also again the prophet declared the self-same thing, thus saying,
"Then wolves and lambs shall feed together." [Isaiah 11:6] For like as here by the
hills and valleys, he meant that incongruities of character are blended into one
and the same evenness of self-restraint, so also there, by the characters of the
brute animals indicating the different dispositions of men, he again spoke of their
being linked in one and the same harmony of godliness. Here also, as before,
stating the cause. That cause is, "There shall be He that rises to reign over the
Gentiles, in Him shall the Gentiles trust:" much the same as here too he said,
"All flesh shall see the salvation of God," everywhere declaring that the power
and knowledge of these our Gospels would be poured out to the ends of the
world, converting the human race, from a brutish disposition and a fierce temper
to something very gentle and mild.
4. "And the same John had his raiment of camel's hair, and a leathern

girdle about his loins." [Matthew 3:4]
Observe, how the prophets foretold some things, others they left to the
evangelists. Wherefore also Matthew both sets down the prophecies, and adds
his own part, not accounting even this superfluous, to speak of the dress of the
righteous man.
For indeed it was a marvellous and strange thing to behold so great
austerity in a human frame: which thing also particularly attracted the Jews,
seeing in him the great Elijah, and guided by what they then beheld, to the
memory of that blessed man; or rather, even to a greater astonishment. For the
one indeed was brought up in cities and in houses, the other dwelt entirely in the
wilderness from his very swaddling clothes. For it became the forerunner of Him
who was to put away all the ancient ills, the labor, for example, the curse, the
sorrow, the sweat; himself also to have certain tokens of such a gift, and to come
at once to be above that condemnation. Thus he neither ploughed land, nor
opened furrow, he ate not his bread by the sweat of his face, but his table was
hastily supplied, and his clothing more easily furnished than his table, and his
lodging yet less troublesome than his clothing. For he needed neither roof, nor
bed, nor table, nor any other of these things, but a kind of angel's life in this our
flesh did he exhibit. For this cause his very garment was of hair, that by his dress
he might instruct men to separate themselves from all things human, and to have
nothing in common with the earth, but to hasten back to their earlier nobleness,
wherein Adam was before he wanted garments or robe. Thus that garb bore
tokens of nothing less than a kingdom, and of repentance.
And do not say to me, "Whence had he a garment of hair and a girdle,
dwelling as he did in the wilderness?" For if you are to make a difficulty of this,
you will also inquire into more things besides; how in the winters, and how in
the heats of summer, he continued in the wilderness, and this with a delicate
body, and at an immature age? How the nature of his infant flesh endured such
great inconstancy of weather, and a diet so uncommon, and all the other
hardships arising from the wilderness?