time and transitorily, after the way in which such things affect the senses,
whether the carnal senses of animals and men, or even the heavenly
senses of the angels.
11. For that the Apostle Paul, when speaking outwardly of the sex of male
and female, figured the mystery of some more hidden truth, may be
understood from this, that when he says in another place that she is a
widow indeed who is desolate, without children and nephews, and yet
that she ought to trust in God, and to continue in prayers night and day,
he here indicates, that the woman having been brought into the
transgression by being deceived, is brought to salvation by child-bearing;
and then he has added, "If they continue in faith, and charity, and
holiness, with sobriety." As if it could possibly hurt a good widow, if
either she had not sons, or if those whom she had did not choose to
continue in good works. But because those things which are called good
works are, as it were, the sons of our life, according to that sense of life in
which it answers to the question, What is a man's life? that is, How does
he act in these temporal things? which life the Greeks do not call ξωἡ but
βίος; and because these good works are chiefly performed in the way of
offices of mercy, while works of mercy are of no profit, either to Pagans,
or to Jews who do not believe in Christ, or to any heretics or schismatics
whatsoever in whom faith and charity and sober holiness are not found:
what the apostle meant to signify is plain, and in so far figuratively and
mystically, because he was speaking of covering the head of the woman,
which will remain mere empty words, unless referred to some hidden
sacrament.
12. For, as not only most true reason but also the authority of the apostle
himself declares, man was not made in the image of God according to the
shape of his body, but according to his rational mind. For the thought is a
debased and empty one, which holds God to be circumscribed and limited
by the lineaments of bodily members. But further, does not the same
blessed apostle say, "Be renewed in the spirit of your mind, and put on
the new man, which is created after God;" and in another place more
clearly, "Putting off the old man," he says, "with his deeds; put on the new
man, which is renewed to the knowledge of God after the image of Him
that created him?" If, then, we are renewed in the spirit of our mind, and

he is the new man who is renewed to the knowledge of God after the
image of Him that created him; no one can doubt, that man was made
after the image of Him that created him, not according to the body, nor
indiscriminately according to any part of the mind, but according to the
rational mind, wherein the knowledge of God can exist And it is
according to this renewal, also, that we are made sons of God by the
baptism of Christ; and putting on the new man, certainly put on Christ
through faith. Who is there, then, who will hold women to be alien from
this fellowship, whereas they are fellow-heirs of grace with us; and
whereas in another place the same apostle says, "For ye are all the
children of God by faith in Christ Jesus; for as many as have been
baptized into Christ have put on Christ: there is neither Jew nor Greek,
there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female; for ye are
all one in Christ Jesus?" Pray, have faithful women then lost their bodily
sex? But because they are there renewed after the image of God, where
there is no sex; man is there made after the image of God, where there is
no sex, that is, in the spirit of his mind. Why, then, is the man on that
account not bound to cover his head, because he is the image and glory of
God, while the woman is bound to do so, because she is the glory of the
man; as though the woman were not renewed in the spirit of her mind,
which spirit is renewed to the knowledge of God after the image of Him
who created him? But because she differs from the man in bodily sex, it
was possible rightly to represent under her bodily covering that part of
the reason which is diverted to the government of temporal things; so
that the image of God may remain on that side of the mind of man on
which it cleaves to the beholding or the consulting of the eternal reasons
of things; and this, it is clear, not men only, but also women have.