THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.78, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether this is the proper form for the

consecration of the wine: "This is the chalice of My blood,"
etc.?
Objection 1: It seems that this is not the proper form for the
consecration of the wine. "This is the chalice of My blood, of the New
and Eternal Testament, the Mystery of Faith, which shall be shed for
you and for many unto the forgiveness of sins." For as the bread is
changed by the power of consecration into Christ's body, so is the
wine changed into Christ's blood, as is clear from what was said
above (Question 76, Articles 1,2,3). But in the form of the
consecration of the bread, the body of Christ is expressly
mentioned, without any addition. Therefore in this form the blood of
Christ is improperly expressed in the oblique case, and the chalice in
the nominative, when it is said: "This is the chalice of My blood."
Objection 2: Further, the words spoken in the consecration of the
bread are not more efficacious than those spoken in the
consecration of the wine, since both are Christ's words. But directly
the words are spoken---"This is My body," there is perfect
consecration of the bread. Therefore, directly these other words are
uttered---"This is the chalice of My blood," there is perfect
consecration of the blood; and so the words which follow do not
appeal to be of the substance of the form, especially since they refer
to the properties of this sacrament.
Objection 3: Further, the New Testament seems to be an internal
inspiration, as is evident from the Apostle quoting the words of
Jeremias (31:31): "I will perfect unto the house of Israel a New
Testament . . . I will give My laws into their mind" (Heb. 8:8). But a
sacrament is an outward visible act. Therefore, in the form of the
sacrament the words "of the New Testament" are improperly added.
Objection 4: Further, a thing is said to be new which is near the
beginning of its existence. But what is eternal has no beginning of
its existence. Therefore it is incorrect to say "of the New and
Eternal," because it seems to savor of a contradiction.
Objection 5: Further, occasions of error ought to be withheld from
men, according to Is. 57:14: "Take away the stumbling blocks out of
the way of My people." But some have fallen into error in thinking

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.78, C.4.

that Christ's body and blood are only mystically present in this
sacrament. Therefore it is out of place to add "the mystery of faith."
Objection 6: Further, it was said above (Question 73, Article 3, ad 3),
that as Baptism is the sacrament of faith, so is the Eucharist the
sacrament of charity. Consequently, in this form the word "charity"
ought rather to be used than "faith."
Objection 7: Further, the whole of this sacrament, both as to body
and blood, is a memorial of our Lord's Passion, according to 1 Cor.
11:26: "As often as you shall eat this bread and drink the chalice,
you shall show the death of the Lord." Consequently, mention ought
to be made of Christ's Passion and its fruit rather in the form of the
consecration of the blood, than in the form of the consecration of the
body, especially since our Lord said: "This is My body, which shall
be delivered up for you" (Lk. 22:19).
Objection 8: Further, as was already observed (Question 48, Article
2; Question 49, Article 3), Christ's Passion sufficed for all; while as to
its efficacy it was profitable for many. Therefore it ought to be said:
"Which shall be shed for all," or else "for many," without adding, "for
you."
Objection 9: Further, the words whereby this sacrament is
consecrated draw their efficacy from Christ's institution. But no
Evangelist narrates that Christ spoke all these words. Therefore this
is not an appropriate form for the consecration of the wine.
On the contrary, The Church, instructed by the apostles, uses this
form.
I answer that, There is a twofold opinion regarding this form. Some
have maintained that the words "This is the chalice of My blood"
alone belong to the substance of this form, but not those words
which follow. Now this seems incorrect, because the words which
follow them are determinations of the predicate, that is, of Christ's
blood. consequently they belong to the integrity of the expression.
And on this account others say more accurately that all the words
which follow are of the substance of the form down to the words, "As
often as ye shall do this," which belong to the use of this sacrament,
and consequently do not belong to the substance of the form. Hence