sufficiently represent what exists in God; so according to none of
the modes enumerated by the Philosopher, are the Son and the
Father in each other. The mode the most nearly approaching to the
reality is to be found in that whereby something exists in its
originating principle, except that the unity of essence between the
principle and that which proceeds therefrom is wanting in things
created.
Reply to Objection 2: The Son's going forth from the Father is by
mode of the interior procession whereby the word emerges from the
heart and remains therein. Hence this going forth in God is only by
the distinction of the relations, not by any kind of essential
separation.
Reply to Objection 3: The Father and the Son are relatively opposed,
but not essentially; while, as above explained, one relative opposite
is in the other.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether the Son is equal to the Father in power?

Objection 1: It would seem that the Son is not equal to the Father in
power. For it is said (Jn. 5:19): "The Son cannot do anything of
Himself but what He seeth the Father doing." But the Father can act
of Himself. Therefore the Father's power is greater than the Son's.
Objection 2: Further, greater is the power of him who commands and
teaches than of him who obeys and hears. But the Father commands
the Son according to Jn. 14:31: "As the Father gave Me
commandment so do I." The Father also teaches the Son: "The
Father loveth the Son, and showeth Him all things that Himself
doth" (Jn. 5:20). Also, the Son hears: "As I hear, so I judge" (Jn.
5:30). Therefore the Father has greater power than the Son.
Objection 3: Further, it belongs to the Father's omnipotence to be
able to beget a Son equal to Himself. For Augustine says (Contra
Maxim. iii, 7), "Were He unable to beget one equal to Himself, where
would be the omnipotence of God the Father?" But the Son cannot
beget a Son, as proved above (Question 41, Article 6). Therefore the
Son cannot do all that belongs to the Father's omnipotence; and
hence He is not equal to Him power.
On the contrary, It is said (Jn. 5:19): "Whatsoever things the Father
doth, these the Son also doth in like manner."
I answer that, The Son is necessarily equal to the Father in power.
Power of action is a consequence of perfection in nature. In
creatures, for instance, we see that the more perfect the nature, the
greater power is there for action. Now it was shown above (Article 4)
that the very notion of the divine paternity and filiation requires that
the Son should be the Father's equal in greatness---that is, in
perfection of nature. Hence it follows that the Son is equal to the
Father in power; and the same applies to the Holy Ghost in relation
to both.
Reply to Objection 1: The words, "the Son cannot of Himself do
anything," do not withdraw from the Son any power possessed by
the Father, since it is immediately added, "Whatsoever things the
Father doth, the Son doth in like manner"; but their meaning is to
show that the Son derives His power from the Father, of Whom He