FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.77, C.2.

distraction, when the movement of the sensitive appetite is enforced
in respect of any passion whatever, the proper movement of the
rational appetite or will must, of necessity, become remiss or
altogether impeded.
Secondly, this may happen on the part of the will's object, which is
good apprehended by reason. Because the judgment and
apprehension of reason is impeded on account of a vehement and
inordinate apprehension of the imagination and judgment of the
estimative power, as appears in those who are out of their mind. Now
it is evident that the apprehension of the imagination and the
judgment of the estimative power follow the passion of the sensitive
appetite, even as the verdict of the taste follows the disposition of
the tongue: for which reason we observe that those who are in some
kind of passion, do not easily turn their imagination away from the
object of their emotion, the result being that the judgment of the
reason often follows the passion of the sensitive appetite, and
consequently the will's movement follows it also, since it has a
natural inclination always to follow the judgment of the reason.
Reply to Objection 1: Although the passion of the sensitive appetite
is not the direct object of the will, yet it occasions a certain change
in the judgment about the object of the will, as stated.
Reply to Objection 2: The higher mover is not directly moved by the
lower; but, in a manner, it can be moved by it indirectly, as stated.
The Third Objection is solved in like manner.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.77, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the reason can be overcome by a

passion, against its knowledge?
Objection 1: It would seem that the reason cannot be overcome by a
passion, against its knowledge. For the stronger is not overcome by
the weaker. Now knowledge, on account of its certitude, is the
strongest thing in us. Therefore it cannot be overcome by a passion,
which is weak and soon passes away.
Objection 2: Further, the will is not directed save to the good or the
apparent good. Now when a passion draws the will to that which is
really good, it does not influence the reason against its knowledge;
and when it draws it to that which is good apparently, but not really,
it draws it to that which appears good to the reason. But what
appears to the reason is in the knowledge of the reason. Therefore a
passion never influences the reason against its knowledge.
Objection 3: Further, if it be said that it draws the reason from its
knowledge of something in general, to form a contrary judgment
about a particular matter---on the contrary, if a universal and a
particular proposition be opposed, they are opposed by
contradiction, e.g. "Every man," and "Not every man." Now if two
opinions contradict one another, they are contrary to one another, as
stated in Peri Herm. ii. If therefore anyone, while knowing something
in general, were to pronounce an opposite judgment in a particular
case, he would have two contrary opinions at the same time, which
is impossible.
Objection 4: Further, whoever knows the universal, knows also the
particular which he knows to be contained in the universal: thus who
knows that every mule is sterile, knows that this particular animal is
sterile, provided he knows it to be a mule, as is clear from Poster. i,
text. 2. Now he who knows something in general, e.g. that "no
fornication is lawful," knows this general proposition to contain, for
example, the particular proposition, "This is an act of fornication."
Therefore it seems that his knowledge extends to the particular.
Objection 5: Further, according to the Philosopher (Peri Herm. i),
"words express the thoughts of the mind." Now it often happens that
man, while in a state of passion, confesses that what he has chosen
is an evil, even in that particular case. Therefore he has knowledge,