SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.25, C.8.

Now the object of charity's love is God, and man is the lover.
Therefore the specific diversity of the love which is in accordance
with charity, as regards the love of our neighbor, depends on his
relation to God, so that, out of charity, we should wish a greater
good to one who is nearer to God; for though the good which charity
wishes to all, viz. everlasting happiness, is one in itself, yet it has
various degrees according to various shares of happiness, and it
belongs to charity to wish God's justice to be maintained, in
accordance with which better men have a fuller share of happiness.
And this regards the species of love; for there are different species
of love according to the different goods that we wish for those whom
we love.
On the other hand, the intensity of love is measured with regard to
the man who loves, and accordingly man loves those who are more
closely united to him, with more intense affection as to the good he
wishes for them, than he loves those who are better as to the greater
good he wishes for them.
Again a further difference must be observed here: for some
neighbors are connected with us by their natural origin, a connection
which cannot be severed, since that origin makes them to be what
they are. But the goodness of virtue, wherein some are close to God,
can come and go, increase and decrease, as was shown above
(Question 24, Articles 4,10,11). Hence it is possible for one, out of
charity, to wish this man who is more closely united to one, to be
better than another, and so reach a higher degree of happiness.
Moreover there is yet another reason for which, out of charity, we
love more those who are more nearly connected with us, since we
love them in more ways. For, towards those who are not connected
with us we have no other friendship than charity, whereas for those
who are connected with us, we have certain other friendships,
according to the way in which they are connected. Now since the
good on which every other friendship of the virtuous is based, is
directed, as to its end, to the good on which charity is based, it
follows that charity commands each act of another friendship, even
as the art which is about the end commands the art which is about
the means. Consequently this very act of loving someone because
he is akin or connected with us, or because he is a fellowcountryman or for any like reason that is referable to the end of
charity, can be commanded by charity, so that, out of charity both

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.25, C.8.

eliciting and commanding, we love in more ways those who are more
nearly connected with us.
Reply to Objection 1: We are commanded to hate, in our kindred, not
their kinship, but only the fact of their being an obstacle between us
and God. In this respect they are not akin but hostile to us,
according to Micah 7:6: "A men's enemies are they of his own
household."
Reply to Objection 2: Charity conforms man to God proportionately,
by making man comport himself towards what is his, as God does
towards what is His. For we may, out of charity, will certain things as
becoming to us which God does not will, because it becomes Him
not to will them, as stated above (FS, Question 19, Article 10), when
we were treating of the goodness of the will.
Reply to Objection 3: Charity elicits the act of love not only as
regards the object, but also as regards the lover, as stated above.
The result is that the man who is more nearly united to us is more
loved.