threatening, "Dark water in clouds of the air;" — so here, because it was His
desire not to alarm, but to teach, it is a bright cloud.
And whereas Peter had said "Let us make three tabernacles," He showed a
tabernacle not made with hands. Wherefore in that case it was smoke, and vapor
of a furnace; but in this, light unspeakable and a voice.
Then, to signify that not merely concerning some one of the three was it
spoken, but concerning Christ only; when the voice was uttered, they were taken
away. For by no means, had it been spoken merely concerning any one of them,
would this man have remained alone, the two being severed from Him.
Why then did not the cloud likewise receive Christ alone, but all of them
together? If it had received Christ alone, He would have been thought to have
Himself uttered the voice. Wherefore also the evangelist, making sure this same
point, says, that the voice was from the cloud, that is, from God.
And what says the voice? "This is my beloved Son." Now if He is beloved,
fear not thou, O Peter. For you ought indeed to know His power already, and to
be fully assured touching His resurrection; but since you know not, at least from
the voice of the Father take courage. For if God be mighty, as surely He is
mighty, very evidently the Son is so likewise. Be not afraid then of those fearful
things.
But if as yet thou receive it not, consider at least that other fact, that He is
both a Son, and is beloved. For "This," it is said, "is My beloved Son." Now if He
is beloved, fear not. For no one gives up one whom he loves. Be not thou
therefore confounded; though you love Him beyond measure, you love Him not
as much as He that begot Him.
"In whom I am well pleased." For not because He begot Him only, does He
love Him, but because He is also equal to Him in all respects, and of one mind
with Him. So that the charm of love is twofold, or rather even threefold, because
He is the Son, because He is beloved, because in Him He is well pleased.
But what means, "In whom I am well pleased?" As though He had said, "In
whom I am refreshed, in whom I take delight;" because He is in all respects

perfectly equal with Himself, and there is but one will in Him and in the Father,
and though He continue a Son, He is in all respects one with the Father.
"Hear ye Him." So that although He choose to be crucified, you are not to
oppose Him.
6. "And when they heard it, they fell on their face, and were sore afraid.
And Jesus came and touched them, and said, Arise, and be not afraid. And when
they lifted up their eyes, they saw no man, save Jesus only." [Matthew 17:6-8]
How was it that, when they heard these words, they were dismayed? And
yet before this also a like voice was uttered at Jordan, and a multitude was
present, and no one felt anything of the kind; and afterwards again, when also
they said, "It thundered," [John 12:28-29] yet neither at that time did they
experience anything like this. How then did they fall down in the mount?
Because there was solitude, and height, and great quietness, and a transfiguration
full of awe, and a pure light, and a cloud stretched out; all which things put them
in great alarm. And the amazement came thick on every side, and they fell down
both in fear at once and in adoration.
But that the fear abiding so long might not drive out their recollection,
presently He puts an end to their alarm, and is seen Himself alone, and
commands them to tell no man this, until He is risen from the dead.
For "as they came down from the mount, He charged them to tell the vision
to no man, until He were risen from the dead." what they were about.
7. Nothing then is more blessed than the apostles, and especially the three,
who even in the cloud were counted worthy to be under the same roof with the
Lord.
But if we will, we also shall behold Christ, not as they then on the mount,
but in far greater brightness. For not thus shall He come hereafter. For whereas
then, to spare His disciples, He discovered so much only of His brightness as
they were able to bear; hereafter He shall come in the very glory of the Father,
not with Moses and Elias only, but with the infinite host of the angels, with the
archangels, with the cherubim, with those infinite tribes, not having a cloud over