## Homily 5 on Second Timothy

[2 Timothy 2:11-14]
"It is a faithful saying: for if we be dead with Him, we shall also live with
Him: if we suffer, we shall also reign with Him: if we deny Him, He also will
deny us: if we believe not, yet He abides faithful: He cannot deny Himself. Of
these things put them in remembrance, charging them before the Lord, that they
strive not about words to no profit, but to the subverting of the hearers."
Many of the weaker sort of men give up the effort of faith, and do not
endure the deferring of their hope. They seek things present, and form from
these their judgment of the future. When therefore their lot here was death,
torments, and chains, and yet he says, they shall come to eternal life, they would
not have believed, but would have said, "What do you say? When I live, I die;
and when I die, I live? You promise nothing on earth, and do you give it in
heaven? Little things you do not bestow; and do you offer great things?" That
none therefore may argue thus, he places beyond doubt the proof of these things,
laying it down beforehand already, and giving certain signs. For, "remember," he
says, "that Jesus Christ was raised from the dead"; that is, rose again after death.
And now showing the same thing he says, "It is a faithful saying," that he who
has attained a heavenly life, will attain eternal life also. Whence is it "faithful"?
Because, he says, "If we be dead with Him, we shall also live with Him." For say,
shall we partake with Him in things laborious and painful; and shall we not in
things beneficial? But not even a man would act thus, nor, if one had chosen to
suffer affliction and death with him, would he refuse to him a share in his rest, if
he had attained it. But how are we "dead with Him"? This death he means both
of that in the Laver, and that in sufferings. For he says, "Bearing about in the
body the dying of the Lord Jesus" [2 Corinthians 4:10]; and, "We are buried with
Him by baptism into death" [Romans 6:4]; and, "Our old man is crucified with

Him"; and, "We have been planted together in the likeness of His death."
[Romans 6:5-6] But he also speaks here of death by trials: and that more
especially, for he was also suffering trials when he wrote it. And this is what he
says, "If we have suffered death on His account, shall we not live on His
account? This is not to be doubted. 'If we suffer, we shall also reign with Him,'"
not absolutely, we shall reign, but "if we suffer," showing that it is not enough to
die once, (the blessed man himself died daily,) but there was need of much
patient endurance; and especially Timothy had need of it. For tell me not, he
says, of your first sufferings, but that you continue to suffer.
Then on the other side he exhorts him, not from the good, but from the evil.
For if wicked men were to partake of the same things, this would be no
consolation. And if having endured they were to reign with Him, but not having
endured were not indeed to reign with Him, but were to suffer no worse evil,
though this were terrible, yet it would not be enough to affect most men with
concern. Wherefore he speaks of something more dreadful still. If we deny Him,
He will also deny us. So then there is a retribution not of good things only, but of
the contrary. And consider what it is probable that he will suffer, who is denied
in that kingdom. "Whosoever shall deny Me, him will I also deny." [Matthew
10:33] And the retribution is not equal, though it seems so expressed. For we
who deny Him are men, but He who denies us is God; and how great is the
distance between God and man, it is needless to say.
Besides, we injure ourselves; Him we cannot injure. And to show this, he
has added, "If we believe not, He abides faithful: He cannot deny Himself": that
is, if we believe not that He rose again, He is not injured by it. He is faithful and
unshaken, whether we say so or not. If then He is not at all injured by our
denying Him, it is for nothing else than for our benefit that He desires our
confession. For He abides the same, whether we deny Him or not. He cannot
deny Himself, that is, His own Being. We may say that He is not; though such is
not the fact. It is not in His nature, it is not possible for Him not to be, that is, to
go into nonentity. His subsistence always abides, always is. Let us not therefore