commination is always fulfilled in a certain sense, because as
Augustine says (De Civ. Dei. xxi, 24): "Nineve has been overthrown,
that was evil, and a good Nineve is built up, that was not: for while
the walls and the houses remained standing, the city was
overthrown in its wicked ways."
Reply to Objection 4: These words of the Psalm refer to the vessels
of mercy, which have not made themselves unworthy of mercy,
because in this life (which may be called God's anger on account of
its unhappiness) He changes vessels of mercy into something
better. Hence the Psalm continues (Ps. 76:11): "This is the change of
the right hand of the most High." We may also reply that they refer to
mercy as granting a relaxation but not setting free altogether if it be
referred also to the damned. Hence the Psalm does not say: "Will He
from His anger shut up His mercies?" but "in His anger," because
the punishment will not be done away entirely; but His mercy will
have effect by diminishing the punishment while it continues.
Reply to Objection 5: This gloss is speaking not absolutely but on an
impossible supposition in order to throw into relief the greatness of
the devil's sin, or of Nabuchodonosor's.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the punishment of Christians is brought

to an end by the mercy of God?
Objection 1: It would seem that at least the punishment of Christians
is brought to an end by the mercy of God. "For he that believeth and
is baptized shall be saved" (Mk. 16:16). Now this applies to every
Christian. Therefore all Christians will at length be saved.
Objection 2: Further, it is written (Jn. 6:55): "He that eateth My body
and drinketh My blood hath eternal life." Now this is the meat and
drink whereof Christians partake in common. Therefore all Christians
will be saved at length.
Objection 3: Further, "If any man's work burn, he shall suffer loss:
but he himself shall be saved, yet so as by fire" (1 Cor. 3:15), where it
is a question of those who have the foundation of the Christian faith.
Therefore all such persons will be saved in the end.
On the contrary, It is written (1 Cor. 6:9): "The unjust shall not
possess the kingdom of God." Now some Christians are unjust.
Therefore Christians will not all come to the kingdom of God, and
consequently they will be punished for ever.
Further, it is written (2 Pt. 2:21): "It had been better for them not to
have known the way of justice, than after they have known it, to turn
back from that holy commandment which was delivered to them."
Now those who know not the way of truth will be punished for ever.
Therefore Christians who have turned back after knowing it will also
be punished for ever.
I answer that, According to Augustine (De Civ. Dei xxi, 20,21), there
have been some who predicted a delivery from eternal punishment
not for all men, but only for Christians. although they stated the
matter in different ways. For some said that whoever received the
sacraments of faith would be immune from eternal punishment. But
this is contrary to the truth, since some receive the sacraments of
faith, and yet have not faith, without which "it is impossible to please
God" (Heb. 11:6). Wherefore others said that those alone will be
exempt from eternal punishment who have received the sacraments
of faith, and professed the Catholic faith. But against this it would
seem to be that at one time some people profess the Catholic faith,