But here he gives the cause also by which he was let, and that not once, but
twice even, aye, and many times. For as he says there, "oftentimes I purposed to
come to you," so here too, "I have been much (or often, [τὰ πολλὰ]) hindered
from coming to you." Now it is a thing which proves a very strong desire, that he
attempted it so often.
Ver. 23. "But now having no more place in these parts."
See how he shows that it was not from any coveting of glory from them,
that he both wrote and was also coming. "And having a great desire to come to
you these many years,"
Ver. 24. "Whenever I take my journey into Spain, I trust to see you in my
journey; and to be brought on my way thitherward by you, if first I be somewhat
filled with your company,"
For that he might not seem to be holding them very cheap, by saying, Since
I have not anything to do, therefore I am coming to you, he again touches on the
point of love by saying, "I have a great desire, these many years, to come unto
you." For the reason why I desire to come, is not because I am disengaged, but
that I may give birth to that desire wherewith I am travailing so long. Then that
this again should not puff them up, consider how he lowers them by saying,
"Whenever I take my journey into Spain, I trust to see you in my journey." For
this was why he stated this, that they should not be high-minded. For what he
wants is to show his love, and at the same time to prevent them from being
dainty. And so he places this close on the other, and uses things confirmative of
either alternately. For this reason again that they might not say, Do you make us
a by-object of your journey? He adds, and to be brought on my way thitherward
by you: that is, that you may be my witnesses that it is not through any slight of
you, but by force of necessity, that I run by you. But as this is still distressing, he
heals it over more carefully, by saying, "If I be first somewhat filled with your
company." For by his saying, "in my journey," he shows that he did not covet
their good opinion. But by saying "be filled," that he was eager for their love,
and not only was eager for it, but exceedingly so; and this is why he does not say

"be filled," but be "somewhat" so. That is, no length of time can fill me or create
in me a satiety of your company. See how he shows his love, when even though
in haste he does not rise up until he be filled. And this is a sign of his great
affectionateness, that he uses his words in so warm a way. For he does not say
even I will see, but "shall be filled," imitating thus the language of parents. And
at the beginning he said, "that I might have some fruit." [Romans 1:13] But here
that I may be "filled." And both these are like a person who is drawing others to
him. For the one was a very great commendation of them, if they were likely to
yield him fruit from their obedience; and the other, a genuine proof of his own
friendship. And in writing to the Corinthians he thus says, "That ye may bring
me on my journey wherever I go" [1 Corinthians 16:6], so in all ways exhibiting
an unrivalled love to his disciples. And so at the beginning of all his Epistles it is
with this he starts, and at the end in this he concludes again. For as an indulgent
father does an only and true born son, so did he love all the faithful. Whence it
was that he said, "Who is weak, and I am not weak? Who is offended, and I burn
not?" [2 Corinthians 11:29]
For before everything else this is what the teacher ought to have. Wherefore
also to Peter Christ says, "If you love Me, feed My sheep." [John 21:16] For he
who loves Christ loves also His flock. And Moses too did He then set over the
people of the Jews, when he had shown a kindly feeling towards them. And
David in this way came to be king, having been first seen to be affectionatelyminded towards them; so much indeed, though yet young, did he grieve for the
people, as to risk his life for them, when he killed that barbarian. But if he said,
"What shall be done to the man that kills this Philistine?" [1 Samuel 19:5; ib.
17:26] he said it not in order to demand a reward, but out of a wish to have
confidence placed in himself, and to have the battle with him delivered to his
charge. And therefore, when he came to the king after the victory, he said
nothing of these things. And Samuel too was very affectionate; whence it was
that he said, "But God forbid that I should sin in ceasing to pray unto the Lord
for you." [1 Samuel 12:23] In like way Paul also, or rather not in like way, but