who are more firmly persuaded concerning the things of the other world than
those of the present, should spend our life in this miserable and deplorable way
and be nowise affected by the memory of those things, but sink into a state of
extreme insensibility— this is irrational in the highest degree. For when we who
believe do the deeds of unbelievers, or rather are in a more miserable plight than
they (for there are some among them who have been eminent for the virtue of
their life), what consolation, what excuse will be left for us? And many
merchants indeed who have incurred shipwreck have not given way, but have
pursued the same journey, and this when the loss which has befallen them was
not owing to their own carelessness, but to the force of the winds; and shall we
who have reason to be confident concerning the end, and know certainly that if
we do not wish it, neither shipwreck nor accident of any kind will bring us
damage, not lay hold of the work again, and carry on our business as we did
aforetime, but lie in idleness and keep our hands to ourselves? And would that
we kept them merely to ourselves and did not use them against ourselves which
is a token of stark madness. For if any pugilist, leaving his antagonist were to
turn his hands against his own head, and deal blows to his own face, should we
not, I ask, rank him among madmen? For the devil has upset us and cast us
down; therefore we ought to get up, and not to be dragged down again and
precipitate ourselves, and add blows dealt by ourselves to the blows dealt by
him. For the blessed David also had a fall like that which has now happened to
you; and not this only but another also which followed it. I mean that of murder.
What then? Did he remain prostrate? Did he not immediately rise up again with
energy and place himself in position to fight the enemy? In fact he wrestled with
him so bravely, that even after his death he was the protector of his offspring.
For when Solomon had perpetrated great iniquity, and had deserved countless
deaths, God said that He would leave him the kingdom intact, thus speaking "I
will surely rend the kingdom out of your hand and will give it to your servant.
Nevertheless I will not do this in your days." Wherefore? "For David your
father's sake, I will take it out of the hand of your son." [1 Kings 11:11] And

again when Hezekiah was about to run the greatest possible risk, although he
was a righteous man, God said that He would succour him for the sake of this
saint. "For I will cast my shield" He says, "over this city to save it for my own
sake, and for my servant David's sake." [2 Kings 19:34] So great is the force of
repentance. But if he had determined with himself, as you do now, that
henceforth it was impossible to propitiate God, and if he had said within himself:
"God has honoured me with great honour, and has given me a place among the
prophets, and has entrusted me with the government of my countrymen, and
rescued me out of countless perils, how then, when I have offended against Him
after such great benefits, and have perpetrated the worst crimes, shall I be able
to recover his favour?" If he had thought thus, not only would he not have done
the things which he afterwards did, but he would have aggravated his former
evils.
15. For not only the bodily wounds work death, if they are neglected, but
also those of the soul; and yet we have arrived at such a pitch of folly as to take
the greatest care of the former, and to overlook the latter; and although in the
case of the body it naturally often happens that many wounds are incurable, yet
we do not abandon hope, but even when we hear the physicians constantly
declaring, that it is not possible to get rid of this suffering by medicines, we still
persist in exhorting them to devise at least some slight alleviation; but in the case
of souls, where there is no incurable malady; for it is not subject to the necessity
of nature; here, as if the infirmities were strange we are negligent and despairing;
and where the nature of the disorder might naturally plunge us into despair, we
take as much pains as if there were great hope of restoration to health; but where
there is no occasion to renounce hope, we desist from efforts, and become as
heedless as if matters were desperate; so much more account do we take of the
body than of the soul. And this is the reason why we are not able to save even
the body. For he who neglects the leading element, and manifests all his zeal
about inferior matters destroys and loses both; whereas he who observes the
right order, and preserves and cherishes the more commanding element, even if