THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.54, C.4.

who handled Him were confirmed, brought back to subtlety whatever
could be handled in Him" [St. Gregory, Moral. in Job 14:56]. Now
Gregory condemns this in the same book, because Christ's body
was not changed after the Resurrection, according to Rm. 6:9:
"Christ rising from the dead, dieth now no more." Accordingly, the
very man who had said these things, himself retracted them at his
death. For, if it be unbecoming for Christ to take a body of another
nature in His conception, a heavenly one for instance, as Valentine
asserted, it is much more unbecoming for Him at His Resurrection to
resume a body of another nature, because in His Resurrection He
resumed unto an everlasting life, the body which in His conception
He had assumed to a mortal life.
Reply to Objection 1: Flesh and blood are not to be taken there for
the nature of flesh and blood, but, either for the guilt of flesh and
blood, as Gregory says [St. Gregory, Moral. in Job 14:56], or else for
the corruption of flesh and blood: because, as Augustine says (Ad
Consent., De Resur. Carn.), "there will be neither corruption there,
nor mortality of flesh and blood." Therefore flesh according to its
substance possesses the kingdom of God, according to Lk. 24:39:
"A spirit hath not flesh and bones, as you see Me to have." But flesh,
if understood as to its corruption, will not possess it; hence it is
straightway added in the words of the Apostle: "Neither shall
corruption possess incorruption."
Reply to Objection 2: As Augustine says in the same book:
"Perchance by reason of the blood some keener critic will press us
and say; If the blood was" in the body of Christ when He rose, "why
not the rheum?" that is, the phlegm; "why not also the yellow gall?"
that is, the gall proper; "and why not the black gall?" that is, the bile,
"with which four humors the body is tempered, as medical science
bears witness. But whatever anyone may add, let him take heed not
to add corruption, lest he corrupt the health and purity of his own
faith; because Divine power is equal to taking away such qualities as
it wills from the visible and tractable body, while allowing others to
remain, so that there be no defilement," i.e. of corruption, "though
the features be there; motion without weariness, the power to eat,
without need of food."
Reply to Objection 3: All the blood which flowed from Christ's body,
belonging as it does to the integrity of human nature, rose again with
His body: and the same reason holds good for all the particles which
belong to the truth and integrity of human nature. But the blood

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.54, C.4.

preserved as relics in some churches did not flow from Christ's side,
but is said to have flowed from some maltreated image of Christ.