FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.20, C.4.

ordained to one another. Now it may happen, in things that are
subordinate to something else, that a thing is good merely from
being subordinate; thus a bitter draught is good merely because it
procures health. Wherefore there are not two goodnesses, one the
goodness of health, and the other the goodness of the draught; but
one and the same. On the other hand it happens sometimes that that
which is subordinate to something else, has some aspect of
goodness in itself, besides the fact of its being subordinate to some
other good: thus a palatable medicine can be considered in the light
of a pleasurable good, besides being conducive to health.
We must therefore say that when the external action derives
goodness or malice from its relation to the end only, then there is
but one and the same goodness of the act of the will which of itself
regards the end, and of the external action, which regards the end
through the medium of the act of the will. But when the external
action has goodness or malice of itself, i.e. in regard to its matter
and circumstances, then the goodness of the external action is
distinct from the goodness of the will in regarding the end; yet so
that the goodness of the end passes into the external action, and the
goodness of the matter and circumstances passes into the act of the
will, as stated above (Articles 1,2).
Reply to Objection 1: This argument proves that the internal and
external actions are different in the physical order: yet distinct as
they are in that respect, they combine to form one thing in the moral
order, as stated above (Question 17, Article 4).
Reply to Objection 2: As stated in Ethic. vi, 12, a moral virtue is
ordained to the act of that virtue, which act is the end, as it were, of
that virtue; whereas prudence, which is in the reason, is ordained to
things directed to the end. For this reason various virtues are
necessary. But right reason in regard to the very end of a virtue has
no other goodness than the goodness of that virtue, in so far as the
goodness of the reason is participated in each virtue.
Reply to Objection 3: When a thing is derived by one thing from
another, as from a univocal efficient cause, then it is not the same in
both: thus when a hot thing heats, the heat of the heater is distinct
from the heat of the thing heated, although it be the same
specifically. But when a thing is derived from one thing from
another, according to analogy or proportion, then it is one and the
same in both: thus the healthiness which is in medicine or urine is

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.20, C.4.

derived from the healthiness of the animal's body; nor is health as
applied to urine and medicine, distinct from health as applied to the
body of an animal, of which health medicine is the cause, and urine
the sign. It is in this way that the goodness of the external action is
derived from the goodness of the will, and vice versa; viz. according
to the order of one to the other.