THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.46, C.4.

and deliver man, not merely by the power of His Godhead, but
likewise by the justice and lowliness of the Passion," as Augustine
says (De Trin. xiii).

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.46, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether Christ ought to have suffered on the

cross?
Objection 1: It would seem that Christ ought not to have suffered on
the cross. For the truth ought to conform to the figure. But in all the
sacrifices of the Old Testament which prefigured Christ the beasts
were slain with a sword and afterwards consumed by fire. Therefore
it seems that Christ ought not to have suffered on a cross, but rather
by the sword or by fire.
Objection 2: Further, Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii) that Christ
ought not to assume "dishonoring afflictions." But death on a cross
was most dishonoring and ignominious; hence it is written (Wis.
2:20): "Let us condemn Him to a most shameful death." Therefore it
seems that Christ ought not to have undergone the death of the
cross.
Objection 3: Further, it was said of Christ (Mt. 21:9): "Blessed is He
that cometh in the name of the Lord." But death upon the cross was
a death of malediction, as we read Dt. 21:23: "He is accursed of God
that hangeth on a tree." Therefore it does not seem fitting for Christ
to be crucified.
On the contrary, It is written (Phil. 2:8): "He became obedient unto
death, even the death of the cross."
I answer that, It was most fitting that Christ should suffer the death
of the cross.
First of all, as an example of virtue. For Augustine thus writes
(Questions. lxxxiii, qu. 25): "God's Wisdom became man to give us
an example in righteousness of living. But it is part of righteous
living not to stand in fear of things which ought not to be feared.
Now there are some men who, although they do not fear death in
itself, are yet troubled over the manner of their death. In order, then,
that no kind of death should trouble an upright man, the cross of this
Man had to be set before him, because, among all kinds of death,
none was more execrable, more fear-inspiring, than this."
Secondly, because this kind of death was especially suitable in order
to atone for the sin of our first parent, which was the plucking of the

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.46, C.5.

apple from the forbidden tree against God's command. And so, to
atone for that sin, it was fitting that Christ should suffer by being
fastened to a tree, as if restoring what Adam had purloined;
according to Ps. 68:5: "Then did I pay that which I took not away."
Hence Augustine says in a sermon on the Passion [Serm. ci De
Tempore]: "Adam despised the command, plucking the apple from
the tree: but all that Adam lost, Christ found upon the cross."
The third reason is because, as Chrysostom says in a sermon on the
Passion (De Cruce et Latrone i, ii): "He suffered upon a high rood
and not under a roof, in order that the nature of the air might be
purified: and the earth felt a like benefit, for it was cleansed by the
flowing of the blood from His side." And on Jn. 3:14: "The Son of
man must be lifted up," Theophylact says: "When you hear that He
was lifted up, understand His hanging on high, that He might sanctify
the air who had sanctified the earth by walking upon it."
The fourth reason is, because, by dying on it, He prepares for us an
ascent into heaven, as Chrysostom says. Hence it is that He says
(Jn. 12:32): "If I be lifted up from the earth, I will draw all things to
Myself."
The fifth reason is because it is befitting the universal salvation of
the entire world. Hence Gregory of Nyssa observes (In Christ.
Resurr., Orat. i) that "the shape of the cross extending out into four
extremes from their central point of contact denotes the power and
the providence diffused everywhere of Him who hung upon it."
Chrysostom also says that upon the cross "He dies with
outstretched hands in order to draw with one hand the people of old,
and with the other those who spring from the Gentiles."
The sixth reason is because of the various virtues denoted by this
class of death. Hence Augustine in his book on the grace of the Old
and New Testament (Ep. cxl) says: "Not without purpose did He
choose this class of death, that He might be a teacher of that
breadth, and height, and length, and depth," of which the Apostle
speaks (Eph. 3:18): "For breadth is in the beam, which is fixed
transversely above; this appertains to good works, since the hands
are stretched out upon it. Length is the tree's extent from the beam
to the ground; and there it is planted---that is, it stands and abides--which is the note of longanimity. Height is in that portion of the tree
which remains over from the transverse beam upwards to the top,
and this is at the head of the Crucified, because He is the supreme