## Homily 31 on Matthew

Matt. IX. 18.
" While He spoke these things unto them, behold, there came in a ruler, and
worshipped Him, saying, My daughter is even now dead; but come and lay Your
hand upon her, and she shall live."
The deed overtook the words; so that the mouths of the Pharisees were the
more stopped. For both he that came was a ruler of the synagogue, and his
affliction terrible. For the young damsel was both his only child, and twelve
years old, the very flower of her age; on which account especially He raised her
up again, and that immediately.
And if Luke say that men came, saying, "Trouble not the Master, for she is
dead;" [Luke 8:49] we will say this, that the expression, "she is even now dead,"
was that of one conjecturing from the time of his journeying, or exaggerating his
affliction. For it is an usual thing with persons in need to heighten their own
evils by their report, and to say something more than is really true, the more to
attract those whom they are beseeching.
But see his dullness: how he requires of Christ two things, both His actual
presence, and the laying on of His hand: and this by the way is a sign that he had
left her still breathing. This Naaman also, that Syrian, required of the prophet.
"For I thought," says he, "he will surely come out, and will lay on his hand." For
in truth they who are more or less dull of temper, require sight and sensible
things.
And whereas Mark [Mark 5:37] says, He took the three disciples, and so
does Luke; [Luke 8:51] our evangelist merely says, "the disciples." Wherefore
then did He not take with Him Matthew, though he had but just come unto Him?
To bring him to a more earnest longing, and because he was yet rather in an
imperfect state. For to this intent does He honor those, that these may grow such

as those are. But for him it sufficed for the present, to see what befell the woman
with the issue of blood, and to be honored by His table, and by His partaking of
his salt.
And when He had risen up many followed Him, as for a great miracle, both
on account of the person who had come, and because the more part being of a
grosser disposition were seeking not so much the care of the soul, as the healing
of the body; and they flowed together, some urged by their own afflictions, some
hastening to behold how other men's were cured: however, there were as yet but
few in the habit of coming principally for the sake of His words and doctrine.
Nevertheless, He did not suffer them to enter into the house, but His disciples
only; and not even all of these, everywhere instructing us to repel the applause of
the multitude.
2. "And, behold," it is said, "a woman that had an issue of blood twelve
years, came behind Him, and touched the hem of His garment. For she said
within herself, If I may but touch His garment, I shall be whole."
Wherefore did she not approach Him boldly? She was ashamed on account
of her affliction, accounting herself to be unclean. For if the menstruous woman
was judged not to be clean, much more would she have the same thought, who
was afflicted with such a disease; since in fact that complaint was under the law
accounted a great uncleanness. [Leviticus 15:25] Therefore she lies hidden, and
conceals herself. For neither had she as yet the proper and correct opinion
concerning Him: else she would not have thought to be concealed. And this is
the first woman that came unto Him in public, having heard of course that He
heals women also, and that He is on His way to the little daughter that was dead.
And she dared not invite Him to her house, although she was wealthy; nay,
neither did she approach publicly, but secretly with faith she touched His
garments. For she did not doubt, nor say in herself, "Shall I indeed be delivered
from the disease? Shall I indeed fail of deliverance?" But confident of her
health, she so approached Him. "For she said," we read, "in herself, If I may
only touch His garment, I shall be whole." Yea, for she saw out of what manner