[1 Corinthians 13:12] And again, "If I may apprehend that, for which also I am
apprehended of Christ Jesus." [Philippians 3:12] First we are apprehended, and
afterwards we know: first we are known, and then we apprehend: first we were
called, and then we obeyed. But in saying, "according to the faith of the elect,"
all is reckoned to them, because on their account I am an Apostle, not for my
worthiness, but "for the elect's sake." As he elsewhere says, "All things are
yours, whether Paul, or Apollos." [1 Corinthians 3:21]
"And the acknowledging the truth that is after godliness." For there is a
truth in other things, that is not according to godliness; for knowledge in matters
of agriculture, knowledge of the arts, is true knowledge; but this truth is after
godliness. Or this, "according to faith," means that they believed, as the other
elect believed, and acknowledged the truth. This acknowledging then is from
faith, and not from reasonings.
"In hope of eternal life." He spoke of the present life, which is in the grace
of God, and he also speaks of the future, and sets before us the rewards that
follow the mercies which God has bestowed upon us. For He is willing to crown
us because we have believed, and have been delivered from error. Observe how
the introduction is full of the mercies of God, and this whole Epistle is especially
of the same character, thus exciting the holy man himself, and his disciples also,
to greater exertions. For nothing profits us so much as constantly to remember
the mercies of God, whether public or private. And if our hearts are warmed
when we receive the favors of our friends, or hear some kind word or deed of
theirs, much more shall we be zealous in His service when we see into what
dangers we had fallen, and that God has delivered us from them all.
"And the acknowledging of the truth." This he says with reference to the
type. For that was an "acknowledging" and a "godliness," yet not of the Truth,
yet neither was it falsehood, it was godliness, but it was in type and figure. And
he has well said, "In hope of eternal life." For the former was in hope of the
present life. For it is said, "he that does these things shall live in them." [Romans
10:5] You see how at the beginning he sets forth the difference of grace. They

are not the elect, but we. For if they were once called the elect, yet are they no
longer called so.
Ver. 2. "Which God, that cannot lie, promised before the world began."
That is, not now upon a change of mind, but from the beginning it was so
foreordained. This he often asserts, as when he says, "Separated unto the Gospel
of God." [Romans 1:1] And again, "Whom He did foreknow, He also did
predestinate." [Romans 8:29] Thus showing our high origin, in that He did not
love us now first, but from the beginning: and it is no little matter to be loved of
old, and from the beginning.
"Which God, that cannot lie, promised." If He "cannot lie," what He has
promised will assuredly be fulfilled. If He "cannot lie," we ought not to doubt it,
though it be after death. "Which God, that cannot lie," he says, "promised before
the world began"; by this also, "before the world began," he shows that it is
worthy of our belief. It is not because the Jews have not come in, that these
things are promised. It had been so planned from the first. Hear therefore what
he says,
"But has in His own times manifested."
Wherefore then was the delay? From His concern for men, and that it might
be done at a seasonable time. "It is time for You, Lord, to work" [Psalm 119:125],
says the Prophet. For by "His own times" is meant the suitable times, the due, the
fitting.
Ver. 3. "But has in due times manifested His word through preaching, which
is committed unto me."
That is, the preaching is committed unto me. For this included everything,
the Gospel, and things present, and things future, life, and godliness, and faith,
and all things at once. "Through preaching," that is, openly and with all
boldness, for this is the meaning of "preaching." For as a herald proclaims in the
theater in the presence of all, so also we preach, adding nothing, but declaring
the things which we have heard. For the excellence of a herald consists in
proclaiming to all what has really happened, not in adding or taking away