SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.82, C.3.

to imply changeableness on the part of the Divine disposition.
In order to throw light on this question we must consider that Divine
providence disposes not only what effects shall take place, but also
from what causes and in what order these effects shall proceed. Now
among other causes human acts are the causes of certain effects.
Wherefore it must be that men do certain actions. not that thereby
they may change the Divine disposition, but that by those actions
they may achieve certain effects according to the order of the Divine
disposition: and the same is to be said of natural causes. And so is it
with regard to prayer. For we pray not that we may change the Divine
disposition, but that we may impetrate that which God has disposed
to be fulfilled by our prayers in other words "that by asking, men
may deserve to receive what Almighty God from eternity has
disposed to give," as Gregory says (Dial. i, 8)
Reply to Objection 1: We need to pray to God, not in order to make
known to Him our needs or desires but that we ourselves may be
reminded of the necessity of having recourse to God's help in these
matters.
Reply to Objection 2: As stated above, our motive in praying is, not
Divine disposition, we may change the Divine disposition, but that,
by our prayers, we may obtain what God has appointed.
Reply to Objection 3: God bestows many things on us out of His
liberality, even without our asking for them: but that He wishes to
bestow certain things on us at our asking, is for the sake of our
good, namely, that we may acquire confidence in having recourse to
God, and that we may recognize in Him the Author of our goods.
Hence Chrysostom says [Hom. ii, de Orat.: Hom. xxx in Genes.;
Caten. Aur. on Lk. 18]: "Think what happiness is granted thee, what
honor bestowed on thee, when thou conversest with God in prayer,
when thou talkest with Christ, when thou askest what thou wilt,
whatever thou desirest."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.82, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether prayer is an act of religion?

Objection 1: It would seem that prayer is not an act of religion. Since
religion is a part of justice, it resides in the will as in its subject. But
prayer belongs to the intellective part, as stated above (Article 1).
Therefore prayer seems to be an act, not of religion, but of the gift of
understanding whereby the mind ascends to God.
Objection 2: Further, the act of "latria" falls under a necessity of
precept. But prayer does not seem to come under a necessity of
precept, but to come from the mere will, since it is nothing else than
a petition for what we will. Therefore prayer seemingly is not an act
of religion.
Objection 3: Further, it seems to belong to religion that one "offers
worship end ceremonial rites to the Godhead" [Cicero, Rhet. ii, 53].
But prayer seems not to offer anything to God, but to. ask to obtain
something from Him. Therefore prayer is not an act of religion.
On the contrary, It is written (Ps. 140:2): "Let my prayer be directed
as incense in Thy sight": and a gloss on the passage says that "it
was to signify this that under the old Law incense was said to be
offered for a sweet smell to the Lord." Now this belongs to religion.
Therefore prayer is an act of religion.
I answer that, As stated above (Question 81, Articles 2,4), it belongs
properly to religion to show honor to God, wherefore all those things
through which reverence is shown to God, belong to religion. Now
man shows reverence to God by means of prayer, in so far as he
subjects himself to Him, and by praying confesses that he needs
Him as the Author of his goods. Hence it is evident that prayer is
properly an act of religion.
Reply to Objection 1: The will moves the other powers of the soul to
its end, as stated above (Question 82, Article 1, ad 1), and therefore
religion, which is in the will, directs the acts of the other powers to
the reverence of God. Now among the other powers of the soul the
intellect is the highest, and the nearest to the will; and consequently
after devotion which belongs to the will, prayer which belongs to the
intellective part is the chief of the acts of religion, since by it religion
directs man's intellect to God.