SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.78, C.2.

with others, as shown above (Question 58, Article 2): and it pertains
to the same cause to establish and to preserve that which it has
established. Now a person establishes the equality of justice by
doing good, i.e. by rendering to another his due: and he preserves
the already established equality of justice by declining from evil, that
is by inflicting no injury on his neighbor.
Reply to Objection 1: Good and evil are here considered under a
special aspect, by which they are appropriated to justice. The reason
why these two are reckoned parts of justice under a special aspect
of good and evil, while they are not reckoned parts of any other
moral virtue, is that the other moral virtues are concerned with the
passions wherein to do good is to observe the mean, which is the
same as to avoid the extremes as evils: so that doing good and
avoiding evil come to the same, with regard to the other virtues. On
the other hand justice is concerned with operations and external
things, wherein to establish equality is one thing, and not to disturb
the equality established is another.
Reply to Objection 2: To decline from evil, considered as a part of
justice, does not denote a pure negation, viz."not to do evil"; for this
does not deserve the palm, but only avoids the punishment. But it
implies a movement of the will in repudiating evil, as the very term
"decline" shows. This is meritorious; especially when a person
resists against an instigation to do evil.
Reply to Objection 3: Doing good is the completive act of justice,
and the principal part, so to speak, thereof. Declining from evil is a
more imperfect act, and a secondary part of that virtue. Hence it is a.
material part, so to speak, thereof, and a necessary condition of the
formal and completive part.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.78, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether transgression is a special sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that transgression is not a special sin.
For no species is included in the definition of its genus. Now
transgression is included in the definition of sin; because Ambrose
says (De Parad. viii) that sin is "a transgression of the Divine law."
Therefore transgression is not a species of sin.
Objection 2: Further, no species is more comprehensive than its
genus. But transgression is more comprehensive than sin, because
sin is a "word, deed or desire against the law of God," according to
Augustine (Contra Faust. xxii, 27), while transgression is also
against nature, or custom. Therefore transgression is not a species
of sin.
Objection 3: Further, no species contains all the parts into which its
genus is divided. Now the sin of transgression extends to all the
capital vices, as well as to sins of thought, word and deed. Therefore
transgression is not a special sin.
On the contrary, It is opposed to a special virtue, namely justice.
I answer that, The term transgression is derived from bodily
movement and applied to moral actions. Now a person is said to
transgress in bodily movement, when he steps [graditur] beyond
[trans] a fixed boundary---and it is a negative precept that fixes the
boundary that man must not exceed in his moral actions. Wherefore
to transgress, properly speaking, is to act against a negative
precept.
Now materially considered this may be common to all the species of
sin, because man transgresses a Divine precept by any species of
mortal sin. But if we consider it formally, namely under its special
aspect of an act against a negative precept, it is a special sin in two
ways. First, in so far as it is opposed to those kinds of sin that are
opposed to the other virtues: for just as it belongs properly to legal
justice to consider a precept as binding, so it belongs properly to a
transgression to consider a precept as an object of contempt.
Secondly, in so far as it is distinct from omission which is opposed
to an affirmative precept.