FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.38, C.2.

contrary to every sorrow, yet it is generically, as stated above
(Question 35, Article 4). And consequently, on the part of the
disposition of the subject, any sorrow can be assuaged by any
pleasure.
Reply to Objection 2: The pleasures of wicked men are not a cause
of sorrow while they are enjoyed, but afterwards: that is to say, in so
far as wicked men repent of those things in which they took
pleasure. This sorrow is healed by contrary pleasures.
Reply to Objection 3: When there are two causes inclining to
contrary movements, each hinders the other; yet the one which is
stronger and more persistent, prevails in the end. Now when a man
is made sorrowful by those things in which he took pleasure in
common with a deceased or absent friend, there are two causes
producing contrary movements. For the thought of the friend's death
or absence, inclines him to sorrow: whereas the present good
inclines him to pleasure. Consequently each is modified by the
other. And yet, since the perception of the present moves more
strongly than the memory of the past, and since love of self is more
persistent than love of another; hence it is that, in the end, the
pleasure drives out the sorrow. Wherefore a little further on
(Confess. iv, 8) Augustine says that his "sorrow gave way to his
former pleasures."

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.38, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether pain or sorrow is assuaged by tears?

Objection 1: It would seem that tears do not assuage sorrow.
Because no effect diminishes its cause. But tears or groans are an
effect of sorrow. Therefore they do not diminish sorrow.
Objection 2: Further, just as tears or groans are an effect of sorrow,
so laughter is an effect of joy. But laughter does not lessen joy.
Therefore tears do not lessen sorrow.
Objection 3: Further, when we weep, the evil that saddens us is
present to the imagination. But the image of that which saddens us
increases sorrow, just as the image of a pleasant thing adds to joy.
Therefore it seems that tears do not assuage sorrow.
On the contrary, Augustine says (Confess. iv, 7) that when he
mourned the death of his friend, "in groans and in tears alone did he
find some little refreshment."
I answer that, Tears and groans naturally assuage sorrow: and this
for two reasons. First, because a hurtful thing hurts yet more if we
keep it shut up, because the soul is more intent on it: whereas if it be
allowed to escape, the soul's intention is dispersed as it were on
outward things, so that the inward sorrow is lessened. This is why
men, burdened with sorrow, make outward show of their sorrow, by
tears or groans or even by words, their sorrow is assuaged.
Secondly, because an action, that befits a man according to his
actual disposition, is always pleasant to him. Now tears and groans
are actions befitting a man who is in sorrow or pain; and
consequently they become pleasant to him. Since then, as stated
above (Article 1), every pleasure assuages sorrow or pain somewhat,
it follows that sorrow is assuaged by weeping and groans.
Reply to Objection 1: This relation of the cause to effect is opposed
to the relation existing between the cause of sorrow and the
sorrowing man. For every effect is suited to its cause, and
consequently is pleasant to it; but the cause of sorrow is
disagreeable to him that sorrows. Hence the effect of sorrow is not
related to him that sorrows in the same way as the cause of sorrow
is. For this reason sorrow is assuaged by its effect, on account of
the aforesaid contrariety.