if in a case where neither prayer was made, nor men of worth were the agents,
the casting of lots so much availed, because it was done of a right intention, I
mean in the case of Jonah [Jonah 1:7]; much more did it here. Thus, did he, the
designated, fill up the company, complete the order: but the other candidate was
not annoyed; for the apostolic writers would not have concealed [that or any
other] failings of their own, seeing they have told of the very chief Apostles, that
on other occasions they had indignation [Matthew 20:24; Matthew 26:8], and
this not once only, but again and again.
Let us then also imitate them. And now I address no longer every one, but
those who aim at preferment. If you believe that the election is with God, be not
displeased. [Mark 10:14-21 and 14:4] For it is with Him you are displeased, and
with Him you are exasperated: it is He who has made the choice; you do the very
thing that Cain did; because, forsooth, his brother's sacrifice was preferred, he
was indignant, when he ought to have felt compunction. However, that is not
what I mean here; but this, that God knows how to dispense things for the best.
In many cases, you are in point of disposition more estimable than the other but
not the fit person. Besides, on the other hand, your life is irreproachable, and
your habits those of a well-nurtured man, but in the Church this is not all that is
wanted. Moreover, one man is adapted for one thing, another for another. Do you
not observe, how much discourse the holy Scripture has made on this matter?
But let me say why it is that the thing has become a subject of competition: it is
because we come to the Episcopate not as unto a work of governing and
superintending the brethren, but as to a post of dignity and repose. Did you but
know that a Bishop is bound to belong to all, to bear the burden of all; that
others, if they are angry, are pardoned, but he never; that others, if they sin, have
excuses made for them, he has none; you would not be eager for the dignity,
would not run after it. So it is, the Bishop is exposed to the tongues of all, to the
criticism of all, whether they be wise or fools. He is harassed with cares every
day, nay, every night. He has many to hate him, many to envy him. Talk not to
me of those who curry favor with all, of those who desire to sleep, of those who

advance to this office as for repose. We have nothing to do with these; we speak
of those who watch for your souls, who consider the safety and welfare of those
under them before their own. Tell me now: suppose a man has ten children,
always living with him, and constantly under his control; yet is he solicitous
about them; and a bishop, who has such numbers, not living under the same roof
with him, but owing obedience to his authority— what does he not need to be!
But he is honored, you will say. With what sort of honor, indeed! Why, the
paupers and beggars abuse him openly in the market-place. And why does he not
stop their mouths then? Yes, very proper work, this, for a bishop, is it not? Then
again, if he do not give to all, the idle and the industrious alike, lo! A thousand
complaints on all sides. None is afraid to accuse him, and speak evil of him. In
the case of civil governors, fear steps in; with bishops, nothing of the kind. As
for the fear of God, it does not influence people, as regards them, in the least
degree. Why speak of the anxiety connected with the word and doctrine? The
painful work in Ordinations? Either, perhaps, I am a poor wretched incompetent
creature, or else, the case is as I say. The soul of a Bishop is for all the world like
a vessel in a storm: lashed from every side, by friends, by foes, by one's own
people, by strangers. Does not the Emperor rule the whole world, the Bishop a
single city? Yet a Bishop's anxieties are as much beyond those of the emperor, as
the waters of a river simply moved, by the wind are surpassed in agitation by the
swelling and raging sea. And why? Because in the one case there are many to
lend a hand, for all goes on by law and by rule; but in the other there is none of
this, nor is there authority to command; but if one be greatly moved, then he is
harsh; if the contrary, then he is cold! And in him these opposites must meet, that
he may neither be despised, nor be hated. Besides, the very demands of business
preoccupy him: how many is he obliged to offend, whether he will or not! How
many to be severe with! I speak not otherwise than it is, but as I find it in my
own actual experience. I do not think there are many among Bishops that will be
saved, but many more that perish: and the reason is, that it is an affair that
requires a great mind. Many are the exigencies which throw a man out of his