our power, yet in some respect they are, in so far as we use them
patiently. In this way man makes a virtue of necessity, so that such
things can become both meritorious and satisfactory.
Reply to Objection 2: As Augustine observes (De Civ. Dei i, 8), even
as "the same fire makes gold glisten and straw reek," so by the same
scourges are the good cleansed and the wicked worsened on
account of their impatience. Hence, though the scourges are
common to both, satisfaction is only on the side of the good.
Reply to Objection 3: These scourges always regard past guilt, not
always the guilt of the person, but sometimes the guilt of nature. For
had there not been guilt in human nature, there would have been no
punishment. But since guilt preceded in nature, punishment is
inflicted by God on a person without the person's fault, that his
virtue may be meritorious, and that he may avoid future sin.
Moreover, these two things are necessary in satisfaction. For the
work needs to be meritorious, that honor may be given to God, and it
must be a safeguard of virtue, that we may be preserved from future
sins.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the works of satisfaction are suitably

enumerated?
Objection 1: It would seem that the works of satisfaction are
unsuitably enumerated by saying that there are three, viz.
almsdeeds, fasting, and prayer. For a work of satisfaction should be
penal. But prayer is not penal, since it is a remedy against penal
sorrow, and is a source of pleasure, wherefore it is written (James
5:13): "Is any of you sad? Let him pray. Is he cheerful in mind? Let
him sing." Therefore prayer should not be reckoned among the
works of satisfaction.
Objection 2: Further, every sin is either carnal or spiritual. Now, as
Jerome says on Mk. 9:28, "This kind" of demons "can go out by
nothing, but by prayer and fasting: Diseases of the body are healed
by fasting, diseases of the mind, by prayer." Therefore no other work
of satisfaction is necessary.
Objection 3: Further, satisfaction is necessary in order for us to be
cleansed from our sins. But almsgiving cleanses from all sins,
according to Lk. 11:41: "Give alms, and behold all things are clean
unto you." Therefore the other two are in excess.
Objection 4: On the other hand, it seems that there should be more.
For contrary heals contrary. But there are many more than three
kinds of sin. Therefore more works of satisfaction should be
enumerated.
Objection 5: Further, pilgrimages and scourgings are also enjoined
as works of satisfaction, and are not included among the above.
Therefore they are not sufficiently enumerated.
I answer that, Satisfaction should be of such a nature as to involve
something taken away from us for the honor of God. Now we have
but three kinds of goods, bodily, spiritual, and goods of fortune, or
external goods. By alms-deeds we deprive ourselves of some goods
of fortune, and by fasting we retrench goods of the body. As to
goods of the soul, there is no need to deprive ourselves of any of
them, either in whole or in part, since thereby we become acceptable
to God, but we should submit them entirely to God, which is done by
prayer.