since he said, "For what if some did not believe?" (while clearly it was all of
them that did not believe,) lest by speaking here too as the history allowed him,
he should seem to be a severe accuser of them like an enemy, he puts that, which
really took place, in the method of reasoning and syllogism, saying as follows:
"Yea, let God be true, but every man a liar." What he says is something of this
sort. I do not mean, he says, that some did not believe, but if you will, suppose
that all were unbelieving, so waiving what really happened, to fall in with the
objector, that he might seem overbearing or to be suspected. Well, he says, in
this way God is the more justified. What does the word justified mean? That, if
there could be a trial and an examination of the things He had done for the Jews,
and of what had been done on their part towards Him, the victory would be with
God, and all the right on His side. And after showing this clearly from what was
said before, he next introduces the Prophet also as giving his approval to these
things, and saying, "that You might be justified in Your sayings, and clear when
You are judged." [Psalm 51:4] He then for His part did everything, but they were
nothing the better even for this. Then he brings forward after this another
objection that arises, and says,
Ver. 5. "But if our unrighteousness commend the righteousness of God,
what shall we say? Is God unrighteous Who takes vengeance? I speak as a
man."
Ver. 6. "God forbid."
He solves one perplexity by another again. Yet as this is not clear, we must
needs declare it more clearly. What is it then he means? God honored the Jews:
they did despite to Him. This gives Him the victory, and shows the greatness of
His love towards man, in that He honored them even such as they were. Since
then, he means, we did despite to Him and wronged Him, God by this very thing
became victorious, and His righteousness was shown to be clear. Why then (a
man may say) am I to be punished, who have been the cause of His victory by
the despite I did Him? Now how does he meet this? It is, as I was saying, by
another absurdity again. For if it were you, he says, that were the cause of the

victory, and after this are punished, the thing is an act of injustice. But if He is
not unjust, and yet you are punished, then you are no more the cause of the
victory. And note his apostolic reverence; (or caution: [εὐλάβεια]); for after
saying, "Is God unrighteous Who takes vengeance?" he adds, "I speak as a
man." As if, he means, any body were to argue in the way men reason. For what
things seem with us to be justice, these the just judgment of God far exceeds,
and has certain other unspeakable grounds for it. Next, since it was indistinct, he
says the same thing over again:
Ver. 7. "For if the truth of God has more abounded through my lie unto His
glory: why yet am I also judged as a sinner?"
For if God, he means is shown to be a Lover of man, and righteous, and
good, by your acts of disobedience, you ought not only to be exempt from
punishment but even to have good done unto you. But if so, that absurdity will
be found to result, which is in circulation with so many, that good comes of evil,
and that evil is the cause of good; and one of the two is necessary, either that He
be clearly unjust in punishing, or that if He punish not, it is from our vices that
He has the victory. And both of these are absurd to a degree. And himself
meaning to show this too, he introduces the Greeks (i.e. heathens) as the fathers
of these opinions, thinking it enough to allege against what he has mentioned the
character of the persons who say these things. For then they used to say in
ridicule of us, "let us do evil that good may come." And this is why he has stated
it clearly in the following language.
Ver. 8. "If not (as some affirm that we say,) Let us do evil that good may
come? Whose damnation is just."
For whereas Paul said, "where sin abounded grace did much more abound"
[Romans 5:20], in ridicule of him and perverting what he said to another
meaning, they said, We must cling to vice that we may get what is good. But
Paul said not so; however to correct this notion it is that he says, "What then?
Shall we continue in sin that grace may abound? God forbid!" (ib. 6:1, 2.) For I
said it, he means, of the times which are past, not that we should make this a