Reply to 6. Although the subjects of the other sciences are parts of being, which is the subject of
metaphysics, the other sciences are not necessarily parts of metaphysics. For each science treats
of one part of being in a special way distinct from that in which metaphysics treats of being. So
its subject is not properly speaking a part of the subject of metaphysics, for it is not a part of
being from the point of view from which being is the subject of metaphysics; from this
viewpoint it is a special science distinct from the others. However, the science treating of
potency, or that treating of act or unity or anything of this sort, could be called a part of
metaphysics because these are considered in the same manner as being, which is the subject of
metaphysics.

Reply to 7. These parts of being require the same manner of consideration as being-in-general
(ens commune) because they too are independent of matter. For this reason the science dealing
with them is not distinct from the science of being-in-general.

Reply to 8. The other diversities of things mentioned in the objection do not differentiate those
things essentially as objects of knowledge. So the sciences are not distinguished according to
them.

Reply to 9. Although divine science is by nature the first of all the sciences, with respect to us
the other sciences come before it. For as Avicenna says, the position Or this science is that it be
learned after the natural sciences, which explain many things used by metaphysics, such as
generation, corruption, motion, and the like. It should also be learned after mathematics, because
to know the separate substances metaphysics has to know the number and disposition of the
heavenly spheres, and this is impossible without astronomy, which presupposes the whole of
mathematics. Other sciences, such as music, ethics, and the like, contribute to its fullness of
perfection. Nor is there necessarily a vicious circle because metaphysics presupposes
conclusions proved in the other sciences while it itself proves their principles. For the principles
that another science (such as natural philosophy) takes from first philosophy do not prove the
points which the first philosopher takes from the natural philosopher, but they are proved
through other self-evident principles. Similarly the first philosopher does not prove the principles
he gives the natural philosopher by principles he receives from him, but by other self-evident
principles. So there is no vicious circle in their definitions. Moreover, the sensible effects on
which the demonstrations of natural science are based are more evident to us in the beginning.
But when we come to know the first causes through them, these causes will reveal to us the
reason for the effects, from which they were proved by a demonstration quia. In this way natural
science also contributes something to divine science, and nevertheless it is divine science that
explains its principles. That is why Boethius places divine science last, because it is the last
relative to us.