doubtless He will come, henceforth the events of the Resurrection are even at the
doors.
Whence [does] that [appear] (you say)? I do not say, from the prophets; for
neither do I now speak to Christians only; but even if a heathen be here, I am
perfectly confident, and bring forward my proofs, and will instruct him. How
(you say)?
Christ foretold many things. If those former things did not come to pass,
then do not believe them; but if they all came to pass, why doubt concerning
those that remain? And indeed, it were very unreasonable, nothing having come
to pass, to believe the one, or when all has come to pass, to disbelieve the others.
But I will make the matter more plain by an example. Christ said, that
Jerusalem should be taken, and should be so taken as no city ever was before,
and that it should never be raised up: and in fact this prediction came to pass. He
said, that there should be "great tribulation" [Matthew 24:21], and it came to
pass. He said that a grain of mustard seed is sown, so should the preaching [of
the Gospel] be extended: and every day we see this running over the world. He
said, that they who left father or mother, or brethren, or sisters, should have both
fathers and mothers; And this we see fulfilled by facts. He said, "in the world
you shall have tribulation, but be of good cheer, I have overcome the world"
[John 16:33], that is, no man shall get the better of you. And this we see by the
events has come to pass. He said that "the gates of hell shall not prevail against
the Church" [Matthew 16:18], even though persecuted, and that no one shall
quench the preaching [of the Gospel]: and the experience of events bears witness
to this prediction also: and yet when He said these things, it was very hard to
believe Him. Why? Because all these were words, and He had not as yet given
proof of the things spoken. So that they have now become far more credible. He
said that "when the Gospel should have been preached among all the nations,
then the end shall come" [Matthew 24:14]; lo! now you have arrived at the end:
for the greater part of the world has been preached to, therefore the end is now at
hand. Let us tremble, beloved.

6. But what, tell me? Are you anxious about the end? It indeed is itself near,
but each man's life and death is nearer. For it is said, "the days of our years are
seventy years; but if [one be] in strength, fourscore years." [Psalm 90:10] The
day of judgment is near. Let us fear. "A brother does not redeem; shall man
redeem?" [Psalm 49:7] There we shall repent much, "but in death no man shall
praise Him." [Psalm 6:5] Wherefore he says, "Let us come before His presence
with thanksgiving" [Psalm 93:2], that is, his coming. For here [in this life]
indeed, whatever we do has efficacy; but there, no longer. Tell me, if a man
placed us for a little while in a flaming furnace, should we not submit to
anything in order to escape, even were it necessary to part with our money, nay
to undergo slavery? How many have fallen into grievous diseases, and would
gladly give up all, to be delivered from them, if the choice were offered them? If
in this world then, a disease of short duration so afflicts us, what shall we do
yonder, when repentance will be of no avail?
7. Of how many evils are we now full, without being conscious of them?
We bite one another, we devour one another, in wronging, accusing,
calumniating, being vexed by the credit of our neighbors. [cf. ]
And see the difficulty. When a man wishes to undermine the reputation of a
neighbor, he says, 'Such an one said this of him; O God, forgive me, do not
examine me strictly, I must give account of what I have heard.' Why then do you
speak of it at all, if you dost not believe it? Why do you speak of it? Why do you
make it credible by much reporting? Why do you pass on the story which is not
true? Thou dost not believe it, and you entreat God not to call you to strict
account? Do not say it then, but keep silence, and free yourself from all fear.
But I know not from whence this disease has fallen upon men. We have
become tattlers, nothing remains in our mind. Hear the exhortation of a wise
man who says, "Have you heard a word? Let it die in you, be bold; it will not
burst you." [Sirach 19:10] And again, "A fool hears a word, and travails, as a
women in labor of a child." [Sirach 19:11] We are ready to make accusations,
prepared for condemning. Even if no other evil thing had been done by us, this