foolishness." [Psalm 38:5]
However, "this corruption" of the body "shall put on incorruption" [1
Corinthians 15:53], but the other of the soul, never; for where incorruption is,
there is no corruption. Thus is it a corruption which is incorruptible, which has
no end, a deathless death; which would have been, had the body remained
deathless. Now if we shall depart into the next world having not corruption, we
have that corruption incorruptible and endless; for to be ever burning, and not
burnt up, ever wasted by the worm, is corruption incorruptible; like as was the
case with the blessed Job. He was corrupted, and died not, and that through a
lengthened period, and "wasted continually, scraping the clods of dust from his
sore." Some such torment as this shall it undergo, when the worms surround and
devour it, not for two years nor for three, nor for ten, nor for ten thousand, but
for years without end; for "their worm," says He, "dies not."
Moral. Let us take the alarm then, I entreat you, let us dread the words, that
we meet not with the realities. Covetousness is corruption, corruption more
dangerous than any other, and leading on to idolatry. Let us shun the corruption,
let us choose the incorruption. Have you in covetousness overreached and
defrauded some one? The fruits of your covetousness perish, but the
covetousness remains; a corruption which is the foundation of incorruptible
corruption. The enjoyment indeed passes away, but the sin remains imperishable.
A fearful evil is it for us not to strip ourselves of everything in this present
world; a great calamity to depart into the next with loads of sins about us. "For
in Sheol," it is said "who shall give You thanks?" [Psalm 6:5] There is the place
of judgment; then is there no longer season for repentance. How many things did
the rich man bewail then? [Luke 16:23] And yet it availed him nothing. How
many things did they say who had neglected to feed Christ? [Matthew 25:41] Yet
were they led away notwithstanding into the everlasting fire. How many things
had they then to say: "that had wrought iniquity"; "Lord, did we not prophesy by
Your Name, and by Your Name cast out devils?" And yet notwithstanding, they
were not owned. All these things therefore will take place then; but it will be of

no avail, if they be not done now. Let us fear then, lest ever we should have to
say then, "Lord, when saw we You an hungered, and fed You not?" [Matthew
25:44] Let us feed Him now, not one day, nor two, nor three days. "For let not
mercy and truth," says the Wise Man, "forsake you." [Proverbs 3:3] He says not
"do it once, nor twice." The Virgins, we know, had oil, but not enough to last
out. [Matthew 25:3-8] And thus we need much oil, and thus should we be "like a
green olive tree in the house of God." [Psalm 52:8] Let us reflect then how many
burdens of sins each of us has about him, and let us make our acts of mercy
counterbalance them; nay rather, far exceed them, that not only the sins may be
quenched, but that the acts of righteousness may be also accounted unto us for
righteousness. For if the good deeds be not so many in number as to put aside
the crimes laid against us, and out of the remainder to be counted unto us for
righteousness, then shall no one rescue us from that punishment, from which
God grant that we may be all delivered, through the grace and lovingkindness of
our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom to the Father, etc.