Homilies on Hebrews (Argument and
Summary)
The blessed Paul, writing to the Romans, says, 'Inasmuch then as I am the
Apostle of the Gentiles, I magnify mine office: if by any means I may provoke to
emulation them that are my flesh': and again, in another place, 'For He that
wrought effectually in Peter to the apostleship of the circumcision, the same was
mighty in me toward the Gentiles.' If therefore he were the Apostle of the
Gentiles, (for also in the Acts, God said to him, 'Depart; for I will send you far
hence unto the Gentiles,' what had he to do with the Hebrews? And why did he
also write an Epistle to them?
And especially as besides, they were ill-disposed towards him, and this is to
be seen from many places. For hear what James says to him, 'Thou see, brother,
how many thousands of Jews there are which believe . . . and these all have been
informed of you that you teach men to forsake the law.' And oftentimes he had
many disputings concerning this.
Why therefore, one might ask, as he was so learned in the law (for he was
instructed in the law at the feet of Gamaliel, and had great zeal in the matter, and
was especially able to confound them in this respect)--why did not God send him
to the Jews? Because on this very account they were more vehement in their
enmity against him. 'For they will not endure you,' God says unto him; 'But
depart far hence to the Gentiles, for they will not receive your testimony
concerning me.' Whereupon he says, 'Yea, Lord, they know that I imprisoned
and beat in every synagogue them that believed on you; and when the blood of
your martyr Stephen was shed, I also was standing by and consenting unto his
death, and kept the raiment of them that slew him.'
And this he says is a sign and proof of their not believing him. For thus it is:
when a man goes away from any people, if he be one of the least and of those

who are nothing worth, he does not much vex those from whom he went; but if
he be among the distinguished and earnest partisans and those who care for these
things, he exceedingly grieves and vexes them beyond measure, in that he
especially overthrows their system with the multitude.
And besides this, there was something else. What now might this be? That
they who were about Peter were also with Christ, and saw signs and wonders;
but he [Paul] having had the benefit of none of these, but being with Jews,
suddenly deserted and became one of them. This especially promoted our cause.
For while they indeed, seemed to testify even from gratitude, and one might
have said that they bore witness to those things in love for their Master; he, on
the other hand, who testifies to the resurrection, this man was rather one who
heard a voice only. For this cause you see them waging war passionately with
him, and doing all things for this purpose, that they might slay him, and raising
seditions
The unbelievers, then, were hostile to him for this reason; but why were the
believers? Because in preaching to the Gentiles he was constrained to preach
Christianity purely; and if haply even in Judaea he were found [doing so], he
cared not. For Peter and they that were with him, because they preached in
Jerusalem, when there was great fierceness, of necessity enjoined the observance
of the law; but this man was quite at liberty. The [converts] too from the Gentiles
were more than the Jews because they were without. And this enfeebled the law,
and they had no such great reverence for it, although he preached all things
purely. Doubtless in this matter they think to shame him by numbers, saying,
'Thou see, brother, how many ten thousands of Jews there are which have come
together.' On this account they hated him and turned away from him, because
'They are informed of you, he says, that you teach men to forsake the law.'
Why, then, not being a teacher of the Jews, does he send an Epistle to them?
And where were those to whom he sent it? It seems to me in Jerusalem and
Palestine. How then does he send them an Epistle? Just as he baptized, though he
was not commanded to baptize. For, he says, 'I was not sent to baptize': not,