to gain the mastery through Him? Truly the contrary was natural for them to
expect; that even if they had been on the point of prevailing they were ruining
themselves by bringing forward the name of a deceiver. But if they wished to
throw into the shade former events, their line was to be silent; at any rate, to
contend for them earnestly was to excite more and more both of serious hostility
and of ridicule. From whence then did it enter their thoughts to invent such
things? I say, "invent:" for what they had heard, they had forgotten. But if, when
there was no fear, they forgot many things, and some did not even understand,
(as also the Evangelist himself says,) now that so great a danger came upon
them, how could it be otherwise than that all should fleet away from them? Why
speak I of words? When even their love towards their Master Himself began
gradually to fade away, through fear of what was coming: wherewith also He
upbraided them. For since, before this, they hung upon him, and were asking
continually, "Where are You going," but afterwards on His drawing out His
discourse to so great length, and declaring the terrors which at the very time of
the Cross, and after the Cross should befal them, they just continued speechless
and frozen through fear—hear how He alleges to them this very point saying,
"None of you asks Me, Where are You going? But because I have said these
things unto you, sorrow has filled your heart." [John 16:5-6] Now if the
expectation that He would die and rise again was such a grief to them, had they
failed to see Him after He was risen, how could it be less than annihilation? Yea,
they would have been fain to sink into the depths of the earth, what with
dejection at being so deceived, and what with dread of the future, feeling
themselves sorely straightened.
Again: from whence came their high doctrines? For the higher points, He
said, they should hear afterwards. For, says He, [John 16:12] "I have many
things to speak unto you, but you cannot bear them now." So that the things not
spoken were higher. And one of the disciples was not even willing to depart with
Him into Judea, when he heard of dangers, but said, "Let us also go that we may
die with Him," [John 11:16] taking it hardly because he expected that he should

die. Now if that disciple, while he was with Him, expected to die and shrunk
back on that account, what must he not have expected afterwards, when parted
from Him and the other disciples, and when the exposure of their shameless
conduct was so complete?
8. Besides, what had they to say when they went forth? For the passion
indeed all the world knew: for He had been hanged on high, upon the frame of
wood, ([ἰκρίου]) and in mid-day, and in a chief city, and at a principal feast and
that from which it was least permitted that any should be absent. But the
resurrection no man saw of those who were without: which was no small
impediment to them in working conviction. Again, that He was buried, was the
common talk of all: and that His disciples stole His body, the soldiers and all the
Jews declared: but that He had risen again, no one of them who were without
knew by sight. Upon what ground then did they expect to convince the world?
For if, while miracles were taking place, certain soldiers were persuaded to
testify the contrary, upon what ground did these expect without miracles to do
the work of preachers, and without having a farthing to convince land and sea
concerning the resurrection? Again, if through desire of glory they attempted
this, so much the rather would they have ascribed doctrines each one to himself,
and not to Him that was dead and gone. Will it be said, men would not have
believed them? And which of the two was the likelier, being preached, to win
their belief? He that was apprehended and crucified, or those who had escaped
the hands of the Jews?
9. Next, tell me with what view were they to take such a course? They did
not immediately, leaving Judæa, go into the Gentile cities, but went up and down
within its limit. But how, unless they worked miracles, did they convince? For if
such they really wrought, (and work them they did,) it was the result of God's
power. If on the other hand they wrought none and prevailed, much more
wonderful was the event. Knew they not the Jews— tell me— and their evil
practice, and their soul full of grudgings? For they stoned even Moses, [Numbers
14:10, comp. Exodus 17:4] after the sea which they had crossed on foot; after the