is something done between two others, the equality is set up in the
subject that has suffered an injustice. And since satisfaction
expresses equality in the agent, it denotes, properly speaking, an act
of justice of one man to another. Now a man may do justice to
another either in actions and passions or in external things; even as
one may do an injustice to another, either by taking something away,
or by a hurtful action. And since to give is to use an external thing,
the act of justice, in so far as it establishes equality between external
things, signifies, properly speaking, a giving back: but to make
satisfaction clearly points to equality between actions, although
sometimes one is put for the other. Now equalization concerns only
such things as are unequal, wherefore satisfaction presupposes
inequality among actions, which inequality constitutes an offense;
so that satisfaction regards a previous offense. But no part of justice
regards a previous offense, except vindictive justice, which
establishes equality indifferently, whether the patient be the same
subject as the agent, as when anyone punishes himself, or whether
they be distinct, as when a judge punishes another man, since
vindictive justice deals with both cases. The same applies to
penance, which implies equality in the agent only, since it is the
penitent who holds to the penance [poenam tenet], so that penance
is in a way a species of vindictive justice. This proves that
satisfaction, which implies equality in the agent with respect to a
previous offense, is a work of justice, as to that part which is called
penance.
Reply to Objection 1: Satisfaction, as appears from what has been
said, is compensation for injury inflicted. Wherefore as the injury
inflicted entailed of itself an inequality of justice, and consequently
an inequality opposed to friendship, so satisfaction brings back
directly equality of justice, and consequently equality of friendship.
And since an act is elicited by the habit to whose end it is
immediately directed, but is commanded by that habit to whose end
it is directed ultimately, hence satisfaction is elicited by justice but is
commanded by charity.
Reply to Objection 2: Although justice is chiefly about operations,
yet it is consequently about passions, in so far as they are the
causes of operations. Wherefore as justice curbs anger, lest it inflict
an unjust injury on another, and concupiscence from invading
another's marriage right, so satisfaction removes the causes of other
sins.

Reply to Objection 3: Each moral virtue shares in the act of
prudence, because this virtue completes in it the conditions
essential to virtue, since each moral virtue takes its mean according
to the ruling of prudence, as is evident from the definition of virtue
given in Ethic. ii, 6.