FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.97, C.4.

seems to proceed from a deliberate judgment of reason.
Accordingly, custom has the force of a law, abolishes law, and is the
interpreter of law.
Reply to Objection 1: The natural and Divine laws proceed from the
Divine will, as stated above. Wherefore they cannot be changed by a
custom proceeding from the will of man, but only by Divine
authority. Hence it is that no custom can prevail over the Divine or
natural laws: for Isidore says (Synon. ii, 16): "Let custom yield to
authority: evil customs should be eradicated by law and reason."
Reply to Objection 2: As stated above (Question 96, Article 6),
human laws fail in some cases: wherefore it is possible sometimes
to act beside the law; namely, in a case where the law fails; yet the
act will not be evil. And when such cases are multiplied, by reason of
some change in man, then custom shows that the law is no longer
useful: just as it might be declared by the verbal promulgation of a
law to the contrary. If, however, the same reason remains, for which
the law was useful hitherto, then it is not the custom that prevails
against the law, but the law that overcomes the custom: unless
perhaps the sole reason for the law seeming useless, be that it is not
"possible according to the custom of the country" [Question 95,
Article 3], which has been stated to be one of the conditions of law.
For it is not easy to set aside the custom of a whole people.
Reply to Objection 3: The people among whom a custom is
introduced may be of two conditions. For if they are free, and able to
make their own laws, the consent of the whole people expressed by
a custom counts far more in favor of a particular observance, that
does the authority of the sovereign, who has not the power to frame
laws, except as representing the people. Wherefore although each
individual cannot make laws, yet the whole people can. If however
the people have not the free power to make their own laws, or to
abolish a law made by a higher authority; nevertheless with such a
people a prevailing custom obtains force of law, in so far as it is
tolerated by those to whom it belongs to make laws for that people:
because by the very fact that they tolerate it they seem to approve of
that which is introduced by custom.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.97, C.4.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.97, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the rulers of the people can dispense

from human laws?
Objection 1: It would seem that the rulers of the people cannot
dispense from human laws. For the law is established for the
"common weal," as Isidore says (Etym. v, 21). But the common good
should not be set aside for the private convenience of an individual:
because, as the Philosopher says (Ethic. i, 2), "the good of the nation
is more godlike than the good of one man." Therefore it seems that a
man should not be dispensed from acting in compliance with the
general law.
Objection 2: Further, those who are placed over others are
commanded as follows (Dt. 1:17): "You shall hear the little as well as
the great; neither shall you respect any man's person, because it is
the judgment of God." But to allow one man to do that which is
equally forbidden to all, seems to be respect of persons. Therefore
the rulers of a community cannot grant such dispensations, since
this is against a precept of the Divine law.
Objection 3: Further, human law, in order to be just, should accord
with the natural and Divine laws: else it would not "foster religion,"
nor be "helpful to discipline," which is requisite to the nature of law,
as laid down by Isidore (Etym. v, 3). But no man can dispense from
the Divine and natural laws. Neither, therefore, can he dispense from
the human law.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (1 Cor. 9:17): "A dispensation is
committed to me."
I answer that, Dispensation, properly speaking, denotes a measuring
out to individuals of some common goods: thus the head of a
household is called a dispenser, because to each member of the
household he distributes work and necessaries of life in due weight
and measure. Accordingly in every community a man is said to
dispense, from the very fact that he directs how some general
precept is to be fulfilled by each individual. Now it happens at times
that a precept, which is conducive to the common weal as a general
rule, is not good for a particular individual, or in some particular
case, either because it would hinder some greater good, or because
it would be the occasion of some evil, as explained above (Question