the swine, and obeyest the devil. For indeed this wicked demon has devised this
unseemliness, to draw you off from that beauty. For this intent has he drawn you
this way; and God, showing Heaven, is outvied by a devil showing certain skins,
or rather not even skins (for indeed these too are God's works), but effeminacy
and a bad kind of skill.
And the young man goes about bending down towards the earth, he that is
required to seek wisdom concerning the things in Heaven; priding himself more
on these trifles than if he had accomplished some great and good work, and
walking on tiptoe in the forum, and hereby begetting to himself superfluous
sorrows and distresses, lest he should stain them with the mud when it is winter;
lest he should cover them with the dust, when summer has come.
What do you say, O man? Have you cast your whole soul into the mire
through this extravagance, and do you overlook it trailing on the ground, and are
you so anxious about a pair of shoes? Mark their use, and respect the verdict you
pass on them. For to tread on mud and mire, and all the spots on the pavement,
for this were your shoes made. Or if you can not bear this, take and hang them
from your neck, or put them on your head.
And ye indeed laugh at hearing this. But I am inclined to weep for these
men's madness, and their earnest care about these matters. For in truth they
would rather stain their body with mud, than those pieces of leather.
Triflers then they become in this way, and fond of money again in another
way. For he that has been used to be frantic and eager upon such matters,
requires also for his clothes and for all other things much expense, and a large
income.
And if he have a munificent father, his thraldom becomes worse, his absurd
fancy more intense; but if a parsimonious one, he is driven to other
unseemliness, by way of getting together a little money for such expenses.
Hence many young men have even sold their manhood, and have become
parasites to the rich, and have undertaken other servile offices, purchasing
thereby the fulfillment of such desires.

So then, that this man is sure to be at once fond of money, and a trifler, and
about important things the most indolent of all men, and that he will be forced to
commit many sins, is hereby evident. And that he is cruel and vainglorious,
neither this will any one gainsay: cruel, in that when he sees a poor man, through
the love of finery he makes as though he did not even see him, but while he is
decking out these things with gold, overlooks him perishing of hunger;
vainglorious, since even in such little matters he trains himself to hunt after the
admiration of the beholders. For I suppose no general prides himself so much on
his legions and trophies, as our profligate youths on the decking out of their
shoes, on their trailing garments, on the dressing of their hair; yet surely all these
are works of other persons, in their trades. But if men do not cease from vain
boasting in the works of others, when will they cease from it in their own?
8. Shall I mention yet other things more grievous than these? Or are even
these enough for you? Well then; I must end my speech here; since even this
have I said, because of the disputatious, who maintain the thing not to be so very
wrong.
And although I know that many of the young will not so much as attend to
what I have said, being once for all intoxicated with this fancy, I yet ought not
therefore to keep silence. For such fathers as have understanding, and are as yet
sound, will be able to force them, even against their will, to a becoming decency.
Say not then, "this is of no consequence, that is of no consequence;" for
this, this has ruined all. For even hereby ought you to train them, and by the
things which seem trifling to make them grave, great of soul, superior to outward
habiliments; so shall we find them approved in the great things also. For what is
more ordinary than the learning of letters? Nevertheless thereby do men become
rhetoricians, and sophists, and philosophers, and if they know not their letters,
neither will they ever have that knowledge.
And this we have spoken not to young men only, but to women also, and to
young damsels. For these too are liable to the like charges, and much more,
inasmuch as seemliness is a thing appropriate to a virgin.