SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.170, C.5.

each of them has to be manifested by itself, so that consequently
some of them may be known, and some not.
Now the principle of those things that are prophetically manifested
by the Divine light is the first truth, which the prophets do not see in
itself. Wherefore there is no need for their knowing all possible
matters of prophecy; but each one knows some of them according to
the special revelation of this or that matter.
Reply to Objection 1: The Lord reveals to the prophets all things that
are necessary for the instruction of the faithful; yet not all to every
one, but some to one, and some to another.
Reply to Objection 2: Prophecy is by way of being something
imperfect in the genus of Divine revelation: hence it is written (1 Cor.
13:8) that "prophecies shall be made void," and that "we prophesy in
part," i.e. imperfectly. The Divine revelation will be brought to its
perfection in heaven; wherefore the same text continues (1 Cor.
113:10): "When that which is perfect is come, that which is in part
shall be done away." Consequently it does not follow that nothing is
lacking to prophetic revelation, but that it lacks none of those things
to which prophecy is directed.
Reply to Objection 3: He who has a science knows the principles of
that science, whence whatever is pertinent to that science depends;
wherefore to have the habit of a science perfectly, is to know
whatever is pertinent to that science. But God Who is the principle of
prophetic knowledge is not known in Himself through prophecy;
wherefore the comparison fails.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.170, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether the prophet always distinguishes what

he says by his own spirit from what he says by the prophetic
spirit?
Objection 1: It would seem that the prophet always distinguishes
what he says by his own spirit from what he says by the prophetic
spirit. For Augustine states (Confess. vi, 13) that his mother said
"she could, through a certain feeling, which in words she could not
express, discern betwixt Divine revelations, and the dreams of her
own soul." Now prophecy is a Divine revelation, as stated above
(Article 3). Therefore the prophet always distinguishes what he says
by the spirit of prophecy, from what he says by his own spirit.
Objection 2: Further, God commands nothing impossible, as Jerome
[Pelagius. Ep. xvi] says. Now the prophets were commanded (Jer.
23:28): "The prophet that hath a dream, let him tell a dream; and he
that hath My word, let him speak My word with truth." Therefore the
prophet can distinguish what he has through the spirit of prophecy
from what he sees otherwise.
Objection 3: Further, the certitude resulting from a Divine light is
greater than that which results from the light of natural reason. Now
he that has science, by the light of natural reason knows for certain
that he has it. Therefore he that has prophecy by a Divine light is
much more certain that he has it.
On the contrary, Gregory says (Hom. i super Ezech.): "It must be
observed that sometimes the holy prophets, when consulted, utter
certain things by their own spirit, through being much accustomed
to prophesying, and think they are speaking by the prophetic spirit."
I answer that, The prophet's mind is instructed by God in two ways:
in one way by an express revelation, in another way by a most
mysterious instinct to "which the human mind is subjected without
knowing it," as Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. ii, 17). Accordingly the
prophet has the greatest certitude about those things which he
knows by an express revelation, and he has it for certain that they
are revealed to him by God; wherefore it is written (Jer. 26:15): "In
truth the Lord sent me to you, to speak all these words in your
hearing." Else, were he not certain about this, the faith which relies
on the utterances of the prophet would not be certain. A sign of the