Hebrews 12:1
3. [Hebrews 12:1] "Wherefore" (he says) "we also being compassed about
with so great a cloud of witnesses." In many places the Scripture derives its
consolation in evils from corresponding things. As when the prophet says,
"From burning heat, and from storm, and rain." [Isaiah 4:6] This at least he says
here also, that the memory of those holy men, reestablishes and recovers the soul
which had been weighed down by woes, as a cloud does him who is burnt by the
too hot rays [of the sun.]
And he did not say, "lifted on high above us," but, "compassing us about,"
which was more than the other; so that we are in greater security.
What sort of "cloud"? "A load of witnesses." With good reason he calls not
those in the New [Testament] only, but those in the Old also, "witnesses" [or
"martyrs"]. For they also were witnesses to the greatness of God, as for instance,
the Three Children, those with Elijah, all the prophets.
"Laying aside all things." "All": what? That is, slumber, indifference, mean
reasonings, all human things.
"And the sin which does [so] easily beset us"; [εὐπερίστατον], that is either,
"which easily circumvents us," or "what can easily be circumvented," but rather
this latter. For it is easy, if we will, to overcome sin.
"Let us run with patience" (he says) "the race that is set before us." He did
not say, Let us contend as boxers, nor, Let us wrestle, nor, Let us do battle: but,
what was lightest of all, the [contest] of the foot-race, this has he brought
forward. Nor yet did he say, Let us add to the length of the course; but, Let us
continue patiently in this, let us not faint. "Let us run" (he says) "the race that is
set before us."
4. In the next place as the sum and substance of his exhortation, which he
puts both first and last, even Christ. [Hebrews 12:2] "Looking" (he says) "unto

Jesus the Author and Finisher of our Faith"; The very thing which Christ
Himself also continually said to His disciples, "If they have called the Master of
the house Beelzebub, how much more them of His household?" [Matthew 10:25]
And again, "The disciple is not above his Master, nor the servant above his
Lord." [Matthew 10:24]

Hebrews 12:2
"Looking" (he says), that is, that we may learn to run. For as in all arts and
games, we impress the art upon our mind by looking to our masters, receiving
certain rules through our sight, so here also, if we wish to run, and to learn to run
well, let us look to Christ, even to Jesus "the author and finisher of our faith."
What is this? He has put the Faith within us. For He said to His disciples, "You
have not chosen Me, but I have chosen you" [John 15:16]; and Paul too says,
"But then shall I know, even as also I have been known." [1 Corinthians 13:12]
He put the Beginning into us, He will also put on the End.
"Who," he says, "for the joy that was set before Him, endured the Cross,
despising the shame." That is, it was in His power not to suffer at all, if He so
willed. For "He did no sin, neither was guile found in His mouth" [1 Peter 2:22];
as He also says in the Gospels, "The Prince of the world comes and has nothing
in Me." [John 14:30] It lay then in His power, if so He willed, not to come to the
Cross. For, "I have power," He says, "to lay down My life; and I have power to
take it again." [John 10:18] If then He who was under no necessity of being
crucified, was crucified for our sake, how much more is it right that we should
endure all things nobly!
"Who for the joy that was set before Him" (he says) "endured the cross,
despising the shame." But what is, "Despising the shame"? He chose, he means,
that ignominious death. For suppose that He died. Why [should He] also [die]
ignominiously? For no other reason, but to teach us to make no account of glory
from men. Therefore though under no obligation He chose it, teaching us to be
bold against it, and to set it at nought. Why did he say not "pain," but "shame"?
Because it was not with pain that He bore these things.
What then is the end? "He is set down at the right hand of the throne of
God." Do you see the prize which Paul also says in an epistle, "Wherefore God