King. For, "Your prayers," says he, "and your alms have come up before God."
[Acts 10:4] And the sweet savor which the sense perceives pierces not far into
the air, but this opened the very vault of heaven. And thou indeed art silent, but
your work speaks : and a sacrifice of praise is made, no heifer slain nor hide
burnt, but a spiritual soul presenting her proper offering. For such a sacrifice is
more acceptable than any loving-kindness. When then you see a poor believer,
think that you behold an altar: when you see such an one a beggar, not only
insult him not, but even reverence him, and if you see another insulting him,
prevent, repel it. For so shall you yourself be able both to have God propitious to
you, and to obtain the promised good things, whereunto may we all attain,
through the grace and love towards men of our Lord Jesus Christ, by Whom and
with Whom, to the Father and the Holy Ghost, be glory, might, honor, now and
forever, and world without end. Amen.

## Homily 21 on Second Corinthians

2 Corinthians 10:1-2
Now I Paul myself entreat you by the meekness and gentleness of Christ, I
who in your presence am lowly among you, but being absent am of good
courage toward you: yea, I beseech you, that I may not when present show
courage with the confidence, wherewith I count to be bold against some, which
count of us as if we walked according to the flesh.
Having completed, in such sort as behooved his discourse of almsgiving,
and having shown that he loves them more than he is loved, and having
recounted the circumstances of his patience and trials, he now opportunely enters
upon points involving more of reproof, making allusion to the false apostles, and
concluding his discourse with more disagreeable matter, and with
commendations of himself. For he makes this his business also throughout the
Epistle. Which also perceiving, he hence oftentimes corrects himself, saying in
so many words ; "Do we begin again to commend ourselves?" [2 Corinthians
3:1] and further on; "We commend not ourselves again, but give you occasion to
glory:" [2 Corinthians 5:12] and afterwards; "I have become a fool in glorying;
you have compelled me." [2 Corinthians 12:11] And many such correctives does
he use. And one would not be wrong in styling this Epistle an eulogium of Paul;
he makes such large mention both of his grace and his patience. For since there
were some among them who thought great things of themselves, and set
themselves above the Apostle, and accused him as a boaster, and as being
nothing, and teaching no sound doctrine; (now this was in itself the most certain
evidence of their own corruptness;) see how he begins his rebuke of them; "Now
I Paul myself." Do you see what severity, what dignity, is here? For what he
would say is this, 'I beseech you do not compel me, nor leave me to use my