[now], "If I come again, I will not spare." Now what he means is this: 'I will no
longer put off, if (which God forbid) I find you unamended; but will certainly
visit it, and make good what I have said.'
2. Then with much anger and vehement indignation against those who make
a mock of him as weak, and ridicule his presence, and say, "his presence is weak,
and his speech of no account;" [2 Corinthians 10:10] aiming his efforts at these
men, he says,

2 Corinthians 13:3-4
"Seeing that you seek a proof of Christ that speaks in me."
For he said this, dealing at once a blow at these, and at the same time
lashing those also. Now what he means is this; 'Since you are desirous of
proving whether Christ dwells in me, and call me to an account, and on this
score make a mock of me as mean and despicable, as if I were destitute of that
Power; you shall know that we are not destitute, if you give us occasion, which
God forbid.' What then? Tell me. Do you therefore punish, because they seek a
proof? 'No,' he says; for had he sought this, he would have punished them at the
first on their sinning, and would not have put off. But that he does not seek this,
he has shown more clearly as he proceeds, saying, "Now I pray that you do no
evil, not that we may appear approved, but that you may be approved, though we
be as reprobates." [2 Corinthians 13:7]
He does not employ those words then as assigning a reason, but rather in
indignation, rather as attacking those that despise him. 'For,' he says, 'I have no
desire indeed to give you such a proof, but if you yourselves should furnish
cause and should choose to challenge me, you shall know by very deeds.' And
observe how grievous he makes what he says. For he said not, 'Since ye seek a
proof of me,' but "of Christ that speakest in me, showing that it was against Him
they sinned." And he did not say merely, 'dwelling in me,' but "speaking in me,"
showing that his words are spiritual. But if he does not display His power nor
punish, (for thenceforward the Apostle transferred what he said from himself to
Christ, thus making his threat more fearful,) it is not from weakness; for He can
do it: but from long suffering. Let none then think His forbearance to be
weakness. For why do you marvel that He does not now proceed against sinners,
nor in his forbearance and long suffering exacts satisfaction, seeing that He
endured even to be crucified, and though suffering such things punished not?

Wherefore also he added,
"Who to you-ward is not weak, but is mighty in you. For though He was
crucified through weakness, yet He lives through the Power of God."
These words have much obscurity and give disturbance to the weaker sort.
Wherefore it is necessary to unfold them more clearly, and to explain the
signification of the expression as to which the obscurity exists, that no one may
be offended, even of the simpler sort. What then, at all, is that which is here said,
and what the term "weakness" designates, and in what signification it is used, it
is necessary to learn. For the term is indeed one, but it has many meanings. For
bodily sickness is termed 'weakness:' whence it is even said in the Gospel,
"Behold, he whom You love is weak," [John 11:3-4] concerning Lazarus; and He
Himself said, "This weakness is not unto death;" and Paul, speaking of
Epaphras, "For indeed he was weak near unto death, but God had mercy on
him;" [Philippians 2:57] and of Timothy, "Use a little wine for your stomach's
sake and your often weaknesses." [1 Timothy 5:23] For all these denote bodily
sickness. Again, the not being established firmly in the faith is called 'weakness;'
the not being perfect and complete. And denoting this Paul said, "Him that is
weak in the faith receive ye but not to doubtful disputations:" [Romans 14:1-2]
and again, "One believes that he may eat all things; another, who is weak, eats
herbs," denoting him who is weak in the faith. Here then are two significations
of the term 'weakness;' there is yet a third thing which is called 'weakness.' What
then is this? Persecutions, plottings, insults, trials, assaults. And denoting this
Paul said, "For this thing I besought the Lord thrice. And He said unto me, My
grace is sufficient for you: for My power is made perfect in weakness." [Chap.
12:8, 9] What is "in weakness?" In persecutions, in dangers, in trials, in
plottings, in deaths. And denoting this he said, Wherefore, I take pleasure in
weakness. Then showing what kind of weakness he means, he spoke not of
fever, nor of doubt about the faith; but what? "in injuries, in necessities, in
distresses, in stripes, in imprisonments, that the power of Christ may rest upon
me. For when I am weak, then am I strong." [2 Corinthians 12:10] That is to say