THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.30, C.5.

Secondly, he purposed to instruct her about the mystery of the
Incarnation, which was to be fulfilled in her. This he did by foretelling
the conception and birth, saying: "Behold, thou shalt conceive in thy
womb," etc.; and by declaring the dignity of the child conceived,
saying: "He shall be great"; and further, by making known the mode
of conception, when he said: "The Holy Ghost shall come upon
thee."
Thirdly, he purposed to lead her mind to consent. This he did by the
instance of Elizabeth, and by the argument from Divine omnipotence.
Reply to Objection 1: To a humble mind nothing is more astonishing
than to hear its own excellence. Now, wonder is most effective in
drawing the mind's attention. Therefore the angel, desirous of
drawing the Virgin's attention to the hearing of so great a mystery,
began by praising her.
Reply to Objection 2: Ambrose says explicitly on Lk. 1:34, that the
Blessed Virgin did not doubt the angel's words. For he says: "Mary's
answer is more temperate than the words of the priest. She says:
How shall this be? He replies: Whereby shall I know this? He denies
that he believes, since he denies that he knows this. She does not
doubt fulfilment when she asks how it shall be done."
Augustine, however, seems to assert that she doubted. For he says
(De Qq. Vet. et Nov. Test. qu. li): "To Mary, in doubt about the
conception, the angel declares the possibility thereof." But such a
doubt is one of wonder rather than of unbelief. And so the angel
adduces a proof, not as a cure for unbelief, but in order to remove
her astonishment.
Reply to Objection 3: As Ambrose says (Hexaemeron v): "For this
reason had many barren women borne children, that the virginal
birth might be credible."
The conception of the sterile Elizabeth is therefore adduced, not as a
sufficient argument, but as a kind of figurative example.:
consequently in support of this instance, the convincing argument is
added taken from the Divine omnipotence.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.30, C.5.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.31, C.1.

## QUESTION 31 — OF THE MATTER FROM WHICH THE SAVIOUR'S

BODY WAS CONCEIVED

Prologue
We have now to consider the Saviour's conception. First, as to the
matter from which His body was conceived; secondly, as to the
author of His conception; thirdly, as to the manner and order of His
conception.
Concerning the first there are eight points of inquiry:
(1) Whether the flesh of Christ was derived from Adam?
(2) Whether it was derived from David?
(3) Of the genealogy of Christ which is given in the Gospels;
(4) Whether it was fitting for Christ to be born of a woman?
(5) Whether His body was formed from the purest blood of the
Virgin?
(6) Whether the flesh of Christ was in the patriarchs as to something
signate?
(7) Whether the flesh of Christ in the patriarchs was subject to sin?
(8) Whether Christ paid tithes in the loins of Abraham?