SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.105, C.6.

Reply to Objection 1: Every moral act depends on the will. Hence a
kindly action, in so far as it is praiseworthy and is deserving of
gratitude, consists materially in the thing done, but formally and
chiefly in the will. Hence Seneca says (De Benef. i): "A kindly action
consists not in deed or gift, but in the disposition of the giver or
doer."
Reply to Objection 2: Gratitude is a part of justice, not indeed as a
species is part of a genus, but by a kind of reduction to the genus of
justice, as stated above (Question 80). Hence it does not follow that
we shall find the same kind of debt in both virtues.
Reply to Objection 3: God alone sees man's disposition in itself: but
in so far as it is shown by certain signs, man also can know it. It is
thus that a benefactor's disposition is known by the way in which he
does the kindly action, for instance through his doing it joyfully and
readily.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.105, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether the repayment of gratitude should

surpass the favor received?
Objection 1: It seems that there is no need for the repayment of
gratitude to surpass the favor received. For it is not possible to make
even equal repayment to some, for instance, one's parents, as the
Philosopher states (Ethic. viii, 14). Now virtue does not attempt the
impossible. Therefore gratitude for a favor does not tend to
something yet greater.
Objection 2: Further, if one person repays another more than he has
received by his favor, by that very fact he gives him something his
turn, as it were. But the latter owes him repayment for the favor
which in his turn the former has conferred on him. Therefore he that
first conferred a favor will be bound to a yet greater repayment, and
so on indefinitely. Now virtue does not strive at the indefinite, since
"the indefinite removes the nature of good" (Metaph. ii, text. 8).
Therefore repayment of gratitude should not surpass the favor
received.
Objection 3: Further, justice consists in equality. But "more" is
excess of equality. Since therefore excess is sinful in every virtue, it
seems that to repay more than the favor received is sinful and
opposed to justice.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. v, 5): "We should
repay those who are gracious to us, by being gracious to them
return," and this is done by repaying more than we have received.
Therefore gratitude should incline to do something greater.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 5), gratitude regards the favor
received according the intention of the benefactor; who seems be
deserving of praise, chiefly for having conferred the favor gratis
without being bound to do so. Wherefore the beneficiary is under a
moral obligation to bestow something gratis in return. Now he does
not seem to bestow something gratis, unless he exceeds the
quantity of the favor received: because so long as he repays less or
an equivalent, he would seem to do nothing gratis, but only to return
what he has received. Therefore gratitude always inclines, as far as
possible, to pay back something more.