Reply to Objection 2: Nothing prevents a thing being against nature
as to the first intention of nature, and yet not against nature as to its
second intention. Thus, as stated in De Coelo, ii, all corruption,
defect, and old age are contrary to nature, because nature intends
being and perfection, and yet they are not contrary to the second
intention of nature, because nature, through being unable to
preserve being in one thing, preserves it in another which is
engendered of the other's corruption. And when nature is unable to
bring a thing to a greater perfection it brings it to a lesser; thus when
it cannot produce a male it produces a female which is "a
misbegotten male" (De Gener. Animal. ii, 3). I say then in like manner
that slavery is contrary to the first intention of nature. Yet it is not
contrary to the second, because natural reason has this inclination,
and nature has this desire---that everyone should be good; but from
the fact that a person sins, nature has an inclination that he should
be punished for his sin, and thus slavery was brought in as a
punishment of sin. Nor is it unreasonable for a natural thing to be
hindered by that which is unnatural in this way; for thus is marriage
hindered by impotence of coition, which impotence is contrary to
nature in the way mentioned.
Reply to Objection 3: The natural law requires punishment to be
inflicted for guilt, and that no one should be punished who is not
guilty; but the appointing of the punishment according to the
circumstances of person and guilt belongs to positive law. Hence
slavery which is a definite punishment is of positive law, and arises
out of natural law, as the determinate from that which is
indeterminate. And it arises from the determination of the same
positive law that slavery if unknown is an impediment to matrimony,
lest one who is not guilty be punished; for it is a punishment to the
wife to have a slave for husband, and "vice versa."
Reply to Objection 4: Certain impediments render a marriage
unlawful; and since it is not our will that makes a thing lawful or
unlawful, but the law to which our will ought to be subject, it follows
that the validity or invalidity of a marriage is not affected either by
ignorance (such as destroys voluntariness) of the impediment or by
knowledge thereof; and such an impediment is affinity or a vow, and
others of the same kind. other impediments, however, render a
marriage ineffectual as to the payment of the debt; and since it is
within the competency of our will to remit a debt that is due to us, it
follows that such impediments, if known, do not invalidate a
marriage, but only when ignorance of them destroys voluntariness.

Such impediments are slavery and impotence of coition. And,
because they have of themselves the nature of an impediment, they
are reckoned as special impediments besides error; whereas a
change of person is not reckoned a special impediment besides
error, because the substitution of another person has not the nature
of an impediment except by reason of the intention of one of the
contracting parties.
Reply to Objection 5: Freedom does not hinder the marriage act,
wherefore ignorance of freedom is no impediment to matrimony.
Reply to Objection 6: Leprosy does not hinder marriage as to its first
act, since lepers can pay the debt freely; although they lay a burden
upon marriage as to its secondary effects; wherefore it is not an
impediment to marriage as slavery is.