head, so it may be brought under by our will. Did not our own choice cause it,
and will not the same choice avail to extinguish it? Only let us be willing. But
how shall that willingness be engendered? If we consider the vanity and the
unprofitableness of wealth, that it cannot depart hence with us, that even here it
forsakes us, and that while it remains behind, it inflicts upon us wounds that
depart along with us. If we see that there are riches There, compared to which
the wealth of this world is more despicable than dung. If we consider that it is
attended with numberless dangers, with pleasure that is temporary, pleasure
mingled with sorrow. If we contemplate aright the true riches of eternal life, we
shall be able to despise worldly wealth. If we remember that it profits nothing
either to glory, or health, or any other thing; but on the contrary drowns men in
destruction and perdition. If you consider that here you are rich, and hast many
under you, but that when you depart hence, you will go naked and solitary. If we
often represent these things to ourselves, and listen to them from others, there
will perhaps be a return to a sound mind, and a deliverance from this dreadful
punishment.
Is a pearl beautiful? Yet consider, it is but sea water, and was once cast
away in the bosom of the deep. Are gold and silver beautiful? Yet they were and
are but dust and ashes. Are silken vestments beautiful? Yet they are nothing but
the spinning of worms. This beauty is but in opinion, in human prejudice, not in
the nature of the things. For that which possesses beauty from nature, need not
any to point it out. If you see a coin of brass that is but gilded over, you admire it
at first, fancying that it is gold; but when the cheat is shown to you by one who
understands it, your wonder vanishes with the deceit. The beauty therefore was
not in the nature of the thing. Neither is it in silver; you may admire tin for
silver, as you admired brass for gold, and you need some one to inform you what
you should admire. Thus our eyes are not sufficient to discern the difference. It is
not so with flowers, which are much more beautiful. If you see a rose, you need
no one to inform you, you can of yourself distinguish an anemone, and a violet,
or a lily, and every other flower. It is nothing therefore but prejudice. And to

show, that this destructive passion is but a prejudice; tell me, if the Emperor
were pleased to ordain that silver should be of more value than gold, would you
not transfer your love and admiration to the former? Thus we are everywhere
under the influence of covetousness and opinion. And that it is so, and that a
thing is valued for its rarity, and not for its nature, appears hence. The fruits that
are held cheap among us are in high esteem among the Cappadocians, and
among the Serians even more valuable than the most precious among us, from
which country these garments are brought; and many such instances might be
given in Arabia and India, where spices are produced, and where precious stones
are found. Such preference therefore is nothing but prejudice, and human
opinion. We act not from judgment, but at random, and as accident determines.
But let us recover from this intoxication, let us fix our view upon that which is
truly beautiful, beautiful in its own nature, upon godliness and righteousness;
that we may obtain the promised blessings, through the grace and lovingkindness
of Jesus Christ our Lord, with whom, etc.