subjection and change. For the intelligence is subject to knowledge,
and is changed from ignorance to knowledge, by reason of its being
in potentiality with regard to the intelligible species.
Reply to Objection 3: The form causes matter to be, and so does the
agent; wherefore the agent causes matter to be, so far as it
actualizes it by transmuting it to the act of a form. A subsistent form,
however, does not owe its existence to some formal principle, nor
has it a cause transmuting it from potentiality to act. So after the
words quoted above, the Philosopher concludes, that in things
composed of matter and form "there is no other cause but that which
moves from potentiality to act; while whatsoever things have no
matter are simply beings at once."
Reply to Objection 4: Everything participated is compared to the
participator as its act. But whatever created form be supposed to
subsist "per se," must have existence by participation; for "even
life," or anything of that sort, "is a participator of existence," as
Dionysius says (Div. Nom. v). Now participated existence is limited
by the capacity of the participator; so that God alone, Who is His
own existence, is pure act and infinite. But in intellectual substances
there is composition of actuality and potentiality, not, indeed, of
matter and form, but of form and participated existence. Wherefore
some say that they are composed of that "whereby they are" and
that "which they are"; for existence itself is that by which a thing is.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether the human soul is incorruptible?

Objection 1: It would seem that the human soul is corruptible. For
those things that have a like beginning and process seemingly have
a like end. But the beginning, by generation, of men is like that of
animals, for they are made from the earth. And the process of life is
alike in both; because "all things breathe alike, and man hath
nothing more than the beast," as it is written (Eccles. 3:19).
Therefore, as the same text concludes, "the death of man and beast
is one, and the condition of both is equal." But the souls of brute
animals are corruptible. Therefore, also, the human soul is
corruptible.
Objection 2: Further, whatever is out of nothing can return to
nothingness; because the end should correspond to the beginning.
But as it is written (Wis. 2:2), "We are born of nothing"; which is true,
not only of the body, but also of the soul. Therefore, as is concluded
in the same passage, "After this we shall be as if we had not been,"
even as to our soul.
Objection 3: Further, nothing is without its own proper operation. But
the operation proper to the soul, which is to understand through a
phantasm, cannot be without the body. For the soul understands
nothing without a phantasm; and there is no phantasm without the
body as the Philosopher says (De Anima i, 1). Therefore the soul
cannot survive the dissolution of the body.
On the contrary, Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iv) that human souls owe
to Divine goodness that they are "intellectual," and that they have
"an incorruptible substantial life."
I answer that, We must assert that the intellectual principle which we
call the human soul is incorruptible. For a thing may be corrupted in
two ways---"per se," and accidentally. Now it is impossible for any
substance to be generated or corrupted accidentally, that is, by the
generation or corruption of something else. For generation and
corruption belong to a thing, just as existence belongs to it, which is
acquired by generation and lost by corruption. Therefore, whatever
has existence "per se" cannot be generated or corrupted except 'per
se'; while things which do not subsist, such as accidents and
material forms, acquire existence or lost it through the generation or