## Homily 5 on Romans

Rom. I. 28
"Even as they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, God gave them
over to a reprobate mind, to do those things which are not convenient."
Lest he should seem to be hinting at them by delaying in his discourse so
long over the unnatural sin, he next passes on to other kinds of sins also, and for
this cause he carries on the whole of his discourse as of other persons. And as he
always does when discoursing with believers about sins, and wishing to show
that they are to be avoided, he brings the Gentiles in, and says, "Not in the lust of
concupiscence, even as the other Gentiles which know not God." [1
Thessalonians 4:5] And again: "sorrow not, even as others which have no hope."
[1 Thessalonians 4:13] And so here too he shows that it was to them the sins
belonged, and deprives them of all excuse. For he says, that their daring deeds
came not of ignorance, but of practice. And this is why he did not say, "and as
they knew not God;" but "as they did not like to retain God in their knowledge;"
as much as to say, that the sin was one of a perverted determination of obstinacy,
more than of a sudden ravishment, and shows that it was not the flesh (as some
heretics say) but the mind, to the wicked lust whereof the sins belonged, and that
it was thence the fount of the evils flowed. For since the mind has become
undistinguishing, all else is then dragged out of course and overturned, when he
is corrupted that held the reins! (Plat. Phaedr. 246 A. B.)
Ver. 29. "Being filled with all unrighteousness, wickedness, covetousness,
maliciousness."
See how everything here is intensitive. For he says, "being filled," and "with
all," and having named maliciousness in general, he also further pursues the
particulars, and these too in excess, saying, "Full of envy, murder," for the latter
of these comes from the former, as was shown in Abel's case and Joseph's, and

then after saying, "debate, deceit, malignity;"
Ver. 30. "Whisperers, backbiters, haters of God, despiteful," and classing
things which to many seem indifferent among his charges, he further strengthens
his accusation, going up to the stronghold of their wickednesses, and styles them
"boasters." For even worse than sinning is it, even though sinning to be haughtyminded. Wherefore also he charges the Corinthians with it, saying, "You are
puffed up." [1 Corinthians 5:2] For if in a good action he that puffs himself up
loses all, if any one do so among his sins, what vengeance is there of which he is
not worthy, since such an one cannot repent any more? Next, he says, "inventors
of evil things;" showing that they were not content with those already existing,
but even invented others. And this again is like men that are full purposed and in
earnest, not those that are hurried away and forced out of their course; and after
mentioning the several kinds of maliciousness, and showing that here too they
stood against nature itself (for he says, "disobedient to parents"), he then goes on
to the root of the great pestilence, calling them,
Ver. 31. "Without natural affection, implacable."
For this Christ Himself also pronounces to be the cause of wickedness,
saying, "When iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold." [Matthew
24:12]. This too St. Paul here says, calling them "covenant-breakers, without
natural affection, implacable, unmerciful," and showing that they were traitors
even to the gift of nature. For we have a sort of family feeling even by nature
towards one another, which even beasts have got towards each other. "For every
beast," it says, "loves his like, and every man his neighbor." [Sirach 13:15] But
these became more ferocious even than they. The disorder then which resulted to
the world by evil doctrines, he proves to us by these witnesses, and clearly
shows that the malady in either case came of the negligence of them that were
disordered. He shows besides, what he did in the case of the doctrines, that they
were here also deprived of all excuse; and so he says,
Ver. 32. "Who knowing the judgment of God, that they which commit such
things are worthy of death, not only do the same, but have pleasure in them that