SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.143, C.2.

I answer that, Virtue is taken in two ways, in a strict sense and in a
broad sense. Taken strictly virtue is a perfection, as stated in Phys.
vii, 17,18. Wherefore anything that is inconsistent with perfection,
though it be good, falls short of the notion of virtue. Now
shamefacedness is inconsistent with perfection, because it is the
fear of something base, namely of that which is disgraceful. Hence
Damascene says (De Fide Orth. ii, 15) that "shamefacedness is fear
of a base action." Now just as hope is about a possible and difficult
good, so is fear about a possible and arduous evil, as stated above
(FS, Question 40, Article 1; FS, Question 41, Article 2; FS, Question
42, Article 3), when we were treating of the passions. But one who is
perfect as to a virtuous habit, does not apprehend that which would
be disgraceful and base to do, as being possible and arduous, that is
to say difficult for him to avoid; nor does he actually do anything
base, so as to be in fear of disgrace. Therefore shamefacedness,
properly speaking, is not a virtue, since it falls short of the perfection
of virtue.
Taken, however, in a broad sense virtue denotes whatever is good
and praiseworthy in human acts or passions; and in this way /
shamefacedness is sometimes called a virtue, since it is a
praiseworthy passion.
Reply to Objection 1: Observing the mean is not sufficient for the
notion of virtue, although it is one of the conditions included in
virtue's definition: but it is requisite, in addition to this, that it be "an
elective habit," that is to say, operating from choice. Now
shamefacedness denotes, not a habit but a passion, nor does its
movement result from choice, but from an impulse of passion. Hence
it falls short of the notion of virtue.
Reply to Objection 2: As stated above, shamefacedness is fear of
baseness and disgrace. Now it has been stated (Question 142,
Article 4) that the vice of intemperance is most base and disgraceful.
Wherefore shamefacedness pertains more to temperance than to any
other virtue, by reason of its motive cause, which is a base action
though not according to the species of the passion, namely fear.
Nevertheless in so far as the vices opposed to other virtues are base
and disgraceful, shamefacedness may also pertain to other virtues.
Reply to Objection 3: Shamefacedness fosters honesty, by removing
that which is contrary thereto, but not so as to attain to the

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.143, C.2.

perfection of honesty.
Reply to Objection 4: Every defect causes a vice, but not every good
is sufficient for the notion of virtue. Consequently it does not follow
that whatever is directly opposed to vice is a virtue, although every
vice is opposed to a virtue, as regards its origin. Hence
shamelessness, in so far as it results from excessive love of
disgraceful things, is opposed to temperance.
Reply to Objection 5: Being frequently ashamed causes the habit of
an acquired virtue whereby one avoids disgraceful things which are
the object of shamefacedness, without continuing to be ashamed in
their regard: although as a consequence of this acquired virtue, a
man would be more ashamed, if confronted with the matter of
shamefacedness.