sinner), thou dost but pretend to say it. Mourn, bewail the sinner, and I too will
give a loose to tears; I, more than thou, the greater the punishment to which he is
liable as such: I too will lament, with such an object. But not thou alone must
lament him that is such; the whole city must do the same, and all that meet you
on the way, as men bewail them that are led to be put to death. For this is a death
indeed, an evil death, the death of sinners. But (with you) all is clean reversed.
Such lamentation marks a lofty mind, and conveys much instruction; the other
marks a littleness of soul. If we all lamented with this sort of lamentation, we
should amend the persons themselves while yet living. For as, if it rested with
you to apply medicines which would prevent that bodily death, you would use
them, just so now, if this death were the death you lament, you would prevent its
taking place, both in yourself and in him. Whereas now our behavior is a perfect
riddle; that having it in our power to hinder its coming, we let it take place, and
mourn over it when it has come. Worthy indeed of lamentations are they (when
we consider), what time as they shall stand before the judgment seat of Christ,
what words they shall then hear, what they shall suffer! To no purpose have these
men lived: nay, not to no purpose, but to evil purpose! Of them too it may be
fitly said, "It were good for them had they never been born." [Mark 14:21] For
what profit is it, I ask, to have spent so much time to the hurt of his own person?
Had it been spent only to no purpose, were not that, I ask you, punishment
enough! If one who has been an hired servant twenty years were to find that he
has had all his labor in vain, would he not weep and lament, and think himself
the most miserable of men? Why, here is a man who has lost all the labor of a
whole life: not one day has he lived for himself, but to luxury, to debauchery, to
covetousness, to sin, to the devil. Then, say, shall we not bewail this man? Shall
we not try to snatch him from his perils? For it is, yes, it is possible, if we will,
to mitigate his punishment, if we make continual prayers for him, if for him we
give alms. However unworthy he may be, God will yield to our importunity. For
if Paul showed mercy on one (who had no claims on his mercy), and for the sake
of others spared one (whom he would not have spared), much more is it right for

us to do this. By means of his substance, by means of your own, by what means
you will, aid him: pour in oil, nay rather, water. Has he no almsdeeds of his own
to exhibit? Let him have at least those of his kindred. Has he none done by
himself? At least let him have those which are done for him, that his wife may
with confidence beg him off in that day, having paid down the ransom for him.
The more sins he has to answer for, the greater need has he of alms, not only for
this reason, but because the alms has not the same virtue now, but far less: for it
is not all one to have done it himself, and to have another do it for him;
therefore, the virtue being less, let us by quantity make it the greatest. Let us not
busy ourselves about monuments, not about memorials. This is the greatest
memorial: set widows to stand around him. Tell them his name: bid them all
make for him their prayers, their supplications: this will overcome God: though
it have not been done by the man himself, yet because of him another is the
author of the almsgiving. Even this pertains to the mercy of God: "widows
standing around and weeping" know how to rescue, not indeed from the present
death, but from that which is to come. Many have profited even by the alms
done by others on their behalf: for even if they have not got perfect
(deliverance), at least they have found some comfort thence. If it be not so, how
are children saved? And yet there, the children themselves contribute nothing,
but their parents do all: and often have women had their children given them,
though the children themselves contributed nothing. Many are the ways God
gives us to be saved, only let us not be negligent.
How then if one be poor? Say you. Again I say, the greatness of the alms is
not estimated by the quantity given, but by the purpose. Only give not less than
your ability, and you have paid all. How then, say you, if he be desolate and a
stranger, and have none to care for him? And why is it that he has none, I ask
you? In this very thing you suffer your desert, that you have none to be thus your
friend, thus virtuous. This is so ordered on purpose that, though we be not
ourselves virtuous, we may study to have virtuous companions and friends—
both wife, and son, and friend— as reaping some good even through them, a