FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.31, C.2.

designate its genus. By saying that it is "an establishing in keeping
with the thing's nature," i.e. with that which exists in the thing, we
assign the cause of delight, viz. the presence of a becoming good.
By saying that this establishing is "all at once," we mean that this
establishing is to be understood not as in the process of
establishment, but as in the fact of complete establishment, in the
term of the movement, as it were: for delight is not a "becoming" as
Plato [Phileb. 32,33] maintained, but a "complete fact," as stated in
Ethic. vii, 12. Lastly, by saying that this establishing is "sensible," we
exclude the perfections of insensible things wherein there is no
delight. It is therefore evident that, since delight is a movement of
the animal appetite arising from an apprehension of sense, it is a
passion of the soul.
Reply to Objection 1: Connatural operation, which is unhindered, is a
second perfection, as stated in De Anima ii, 1: and therefore when a
thing is established in its proper connatural and unhindered
operation, delight follows, which consists in a state of completion,
as observed above. Accordingly when we say that delight is an
operation, we designate, not its essence, but its cause.
Reply to Objection 2: A twofold movement is to be observed in an
animal: one, according to the intention of the end, and this belongs
to the appetite; the other, according to the execution, and this
belongs to the external operation. And so, although in him who has
already gained the good in which he delights, the movement of
execution ceases, by which the tends to the end; yet the movement
of the appetitive faculty does not cease, since, just as before it
desired that which it had not, so afterwards does it delight in that
which is possesses. For though delight is a certain repose of the
appetite, if we consider the presence of the pleasurable good that
satisfies the appetite, nevertheless there remains the impression
made on the appetite by its object, by reason of which delight is a
kind of movement.
Reply to Objection 3: Although the name of passion is more
appropriate to those passions which have a corruptive and evil
tendency, such as bodily ailments, as also sadness and fear in the
soul; yet some passions have a tendency to something good, as
stated above (Question 23, Articles 1,4): and in this sense delight is
called a passion.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.31, C.2.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.31, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether delight is in time?

Objection 1: It would seem that delight is in time. For "delight is a
kind of movement," as the Philosopher says (Rhet. i, 11). But all
movement is in time. Therefore delight is in time.
Objection 2: Further, a thing is said to last long and to be morose in
respect of time. But some pleasures are called morose. Therefore
pleasure is in time.
Objection 3: Further, the passions of the soul are of one same
genus. But some passions of the soul are in time. Therefore delight
is too.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. x, 4) that "no one takes
pleasure according to time."
I answer that, A thing may be in time in two ways: first, by itself;
secondly, by reason of something else, and accidentally as it were.
For since time is the measure of successive things, those things are
of themselves said to be in time, to which succession or something
pertaining to succession is essential: such are movement, repose,
speech and such like. On the other hand, those things are said to be
in time, by reason of something else and not of themselves, to which
succession is not essential, but which are subject to something
successive. Thus the fact of being a man is not essentially
something successive; since it is not a movement, but the term of a
movement or change, viz. of this being begotten: yet, because
human being is subject to changeable causes, in this respect, to be a
man is in time.
Accordingly, we must say that delight, of itself indeed, is not in time:
for it regards good already gained, which is, as it were, the term of
the movement. But if this good gained be subject to change, the
delight therein will be in time accidentally: whereas if it be altogether
unchangeable, the delight therein will not be in time, either by reason
of itself or accidentally.
Reply to Objection 1: As stated in De Anima iii, 7, movement is
twofold. One is "the act of something imperfect, i.e. of something
existing in potentiality, as such": this movement is successive and is