however, speak of creation in that way here, but as it is described
above.
Reply to Objection 2: Changes receive species and dignity, not from
the term "wherefrom," but from the term "whereto." Therefore a
change is more perfect and excellent when the term "whereto" of the
change is more noble and excellent, although the term "wherefrom,"
corresponding to the term "whereto," may be more imperfect: thus
generation is simply nobler and more excellent than alteration,
because the substantial form is nobler than the accidental form; and
yet the privation of the substantial form, which is the term
"wherefrom" in generation, is more imperfect than the contrary,
which is the term "wherefrom" in alteration. Similarly creation is
more perfect and excellent than generation and alteration, because
the term "whereto" is the whole substance of the thing; whereas
what is understood as the term "wherefrom" is simply not-being.
Reply to Objection 3: When anything is said to be made from
nothing, this preposition "from" [ex] does not signify the material
cause, but only order; as when we say, "from morning comes
midday"--i.e. after morning is midday. But we must understand that
this preposition "from" [ex] can comprise the negation implied when
I say the word "nothing," or can be included in it. If taken in the first
sense, then we affirm the order by stating the relation between what
is now and its previous non-existence. But if the negation includes
the preposition, then the order is denied, and the sense is, "It is
made from nothing---i.e. it is not made from anything"---as if we were
to say, "He speaks of nothing," because he does not speak of
anything. And this is verified in both ways, when it is said, that
anything is made from nothing. But in the first way this preposition
"from" [ex] implies order, as has been said in this reply. In the
second sense, it imports the material cause, which is denied.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether God can create anything?

Objection 1: It would seem that God cannot create anything,
because, according to the Philosopher (Phys. i, text 34), the ancient
philosophers considered it as a commonly received axiom that
"nothing is made from nothing." But the power of God does not
extend to the contraries of first principles; as, for instance, that God
could make the whole to be less than its part, or that affirmation and
negation are both true at the same time. Therefore God cannot make
anything from nothing, or create.
Objection 2: Further, if to create is to make something from nothing,
to be created is to be made. But to be made is to be changed.
Therefore creation is change. But every change occurs in some
subject, as appears by the definition of movement: for movement is
the act of what is in potentiality. Therefore it is impossible for
anything to be made out of nothing by God.
Objection 3: Further, what has been made must have at some time
been becoming. But it cannot be said that what is created, at the
same time, is becoming and has been made, because in permanent
things what is becoming, is not, and what has been made, already is:
and so it would follow that something would be, and not be, at the
same time. Therefore when anything is made, its becoming precedes
its having been made. But this is impossible, unless there is a
subject in which the becoming is sustained. Therefore it is
impossible that anything should be made from nothing.
Objection 4: Further, infinite distance cannot be crossed. But infinite
distance exists between being and nothing. Therefore it does not
happen that something is made from nothing.
On the contrary, It is said (Gn. 1:1): "In the beginning God created
heaven and earth."
I answer that, Not only is it impossible that anything should be
created by God, but it is necessary to say that all things were created
by God, as appears from what has been said (Question 44, Article 1).
For when anyone makes one thing from another, this latter thing
from which he makes is presupposed to his action, and is not
produced by his action; thus the craftsman works from natural