hangings; but he adorned it with an adorning suitable to Christ. What was this?
"The half of my goods I will give," he says, "to the poor; and whomsoever I have
robbed, I will restore fourfold." On this wise let us too adorn our houses, that
Christ may enter in unto us also. These are the fair curtains, these are wrought in
Heaven, they are woven there. Where these are, there is also the King of Heaven.
But if you adorn it in another way, you are inviting the devil and his company.
He came also into the house of the publican Matthew. What then did this
man also do? He first adorned himself by his readiness, and by his leaving all,
and following Christ.
So also Cornelius adorned his house with prayers and alms; wherefore even
unto this day it shines above the very palace. For the vile state of a house is not
in vessels lying in disorder, nor in an untidy bed, nor in walls covered with
smoke, but in the wickedness of them that dwell therein. And Christ shows it, for
into such a house, if the inhabitant be virtuous, He is not ashamed to enter; but
into that other, though it have a golden roof, He will never enter. So that while
this one is more gorgeous than the palace, receiving the Lord of all, that with its
golden roof and columns is like filthy drains and sewers, for it contains the
vessels of the devil.
But these things we have spoken not of those who are rich for a useful
purpose, but of the grasping, and the covetous. For neither is there among these,
diligence nor care about the things needful, but about pampering the belly, and
drunkenness, and other like unseemliness; but with the others about selfrestraint. Therefore nowhere did Christ enter into a gorgeous house, but into that
of the publican and chief publican, and fisherman, leaving the kings' palaces, and
them that are clothed with soft raiment.
If then thou also desirest to invite Him, deck your house with alms, with
prayers, with supplications, with vigils. These are the decorations of Christ the
King, but those of mammon, the enemy of Christ. Let no one be ashamed then of
a humble house, if it has this furniture; let no rich man pride himself on having a
costly house, but let him rather hide his face, and seek after this other, forsaking

that, that both here he may receive Christ, and there enjoy the eternal
tabernacles, by the grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to
whom be glory and might world without end. Amen.

## Homily 84 on Matthew

Matt. XXVI. 51-54.
"And, behold, one of them which were with Jesus stretched forth his hand,
and drew his sword, and struck a servant of the high priest's, and smote off his
ear."
Then said Jesus unto him, Put up again your sword unto his place, for all
they that take the sword, shall perish by the sword. Thinkest thou that I cannot
pray to the Father, and He shall presently give me more than twelve legions of
angels? How then should the Scriptures be fulfilled that thus it must be?
Who was this "one," who cut off the ear? John says that it was Peter.
[John 18:10] For the act was of his fervor.
But this other point is worth inquiry, wherefore they were bearing swords?
For that they bore them is evident not hence only, but from their saying when
asked, "here are two." But wherefore did Christ even permit them to have
swords? For Luke affirms this too, that He said unto them, "When I sent you
without purse, and scrip, and shoes, lacked ye anything?" And when they said,
"Nothing," He said unto them, "But now, he that has a purse, let him take it, and
a scrip, and he that has no sword, let him sell his garment, and buy one." And
when they said, "Here are two swords," He said unto them, "It is enough."
Wherefore then did He suffer them to have them? To assure them that He
was to be betrayed. Therefore He says unto them, "Let him buy a sword," not
that they should arm themselves, far from it; but by this, indicating His being
betrayed.
And wherefore does He mention a scrip also? He was teaching them
henceforth to be sober, and wakeful, and to use much diligence on their own
part. For at the beginning He cherished them (as being inexperienced) with much
putting forth of His power but afterwards bringing them forth as young birds out