FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.2.

said to be inordinate. Secondly, that which is done in view of the end
should be proportionate to the end. From this it follows that the
reason for whatever conduces to the end is taken from the end: thus
the reason for the disposition of a saw is taken from cutting, which is
its end, as stated in Phys. ii, 9. Now it is evident that the ceremonial
precepts, like all the other precepts of the Law, were institutions of
Divine wisdom: hence it is written (Dt. 4:6): "This is your wisdom and
understanding in the sight of nations." Consequently we must needs
say that the ceremonial precepts were ordained to a certain end,
wherefrom their reasonable causes can be gathered.
Reply to Objection 1. It may be said there was no reason for the
observances of the Old Law, in the sense that there was no reason in
the very nature of the thing done: for instance that a garment should
not be made of wool and linen. But there could be a reason for them
in relation to something else: namely, in so far as something was
signified or excluded thereby. On the other hand, the decrees of the
New Law, which refer chiefly to faith and the love of God, are
reasonable from the very nature of the act.
Reply to Objection 2. The reason for the prohibition concerning the
tree of knowledge of good and evil was not that this tree was
naturally evil: and yet this prohibition was reasonable in its relation
to something else, in as much as it signified something. And so also
the ceremonial precepts of the Old Law were reasonable on account
of their relation to something else.
Reply to Objection 3. The moral precepts in their very nature have
reasonable causes: as for instance, "Thou shalt not kill, Thou shalt
not steal." But the ceremonial precepts have a reasonable cause in
their relation to something else, as stated above.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the ceremonial precepts have a literal

cause or merely a figurative cause?
Objection 1. It would seem that the ceremonial precepts have not a
literal, but merely a figurative cause. For among the ceremonial
precepts, the chief was circumcision and the sacrifice of the paschal
lamb. But neither of these had any but a figurative cause: because
each was given as a sign. For it is written (Gn. 17:11): "You shall
circumcise the flesh of your foreskin, that it may be a sign of the
covenant between Me and you": and of the celebration of the
Passover it is written (Ex. 13:9): "It shall be as a sign in thy hand, and
as a memorial before thy eyes." Therefore much more did the other
ceremonial precepts have none but a figurative reason.
Objection 2. Further, an effect is proportionate to its cause. But all
the ceremonial precepts are figurative, as stated above (101, 2).
Therefore they have no other than a figurative cause.
Objection 3. Further, if it be a matter of indifference whether a certain
thing, considered in itself, be done in a particular way or not, it
seems that it has not a literal cause. Now there are certain points in
the ceremonial precepts, which appear to be a matter of indifference,
as to whether they be done in one way or in another: for instance,
the number of animals to be offered, and other such particular
circumstances. Therefore there is no literal cause for the precepts of
the Old Law.
On the contrary, Just as the ceremonial precepts foreshadowed
Christ, so did the stories of the Old Testament: for it is written (1 Cor.
10:11) that "all (these things) happened to them in figure." Now in the
stories of the Old Testament, besides the mystical or figurative, there
is the literal sense. Therefore the ceremonial precepts had also
literal, besides their figurative causes.
I answer that, As stated above (1), the reason for whatever conduces
to an end must be taken from that end. Now the end of the
ceremonial precepts was twofold: for they were ordained to the
Divine worship, for that particular time, and to the foreshadowing of
Christ; just as the words of the prophets regarded the time being in
such a way as to be utterances figurative of the time to come, as
Jerome says on Osee 1:3. Accordingly the reasons for the