the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, remains ever not only
invisible, but also unchangeable, and that hence it possesses true and real
immortality; let us, who deny that God, whether the Father, or the Son, or
the Holy Spirit, ever appeared to bodily eyes, unless through the
corporeal creature made subject to His own power; let us, I say—ready to
be corrected, if we are reproved in a fraternal and upright spirit, ready to
be so, even if carped at by an enemy, so that he speak the truth—in
catholic peace and with peaceful study inquire, whether God
indiscriminately appeared to our fathers before Christ came in the flesh,
or whether it was any one person of the Trinity, or whether severally, as it
were by turns.

### CHAP. 10—WHETHER GOD THE TRINITY INDISCRIMINATELY APPEARED TO THE FATHERS, OR ANY ONE PERSON OF THE TRINITY. THE APPEARING OF GOD TO ADAM. OF THE SAME APPEARANCE. THE VISION TO ABRAHAM.

17. And first, in that which is written in Genesis, viz., that God spake with
man whom He had formed out of the dust; if we set apart the figurative
meaning, and treat it so as to place faith in the narrative even in the
letter, it should appear that God then spake with man in the appearance
of a man. This is not indeed expressly laid down in the book, but the
general tenor of its reading sounds in this sense, especially in that which
is written, that Adam heard the voice of the Lord God, walking in the
garden in the cool of the evening, and hid himself among the trees of the
garden; and when God said, "Adam, where art thou?" replied, "I heard
Thy voice, and I was afraid because I was naked, and I hid myself from
Thy face." For I do not see how such a walking and conversation of God
can be understood literally, except He appeared as a man. For it can
neither be said that a voice only of God was framed, when God is said to
have walked, or that He who was walking in a place was not visible; while
Adam, too, says that he hid himself from the face of God. Who then was
He? Whether the Father, or the Son, or the Holy Spirit? Whether
altogether indiscriminately did God the Trinity Himself speak to man in
the form of man? The context, indeed, itself of the Scripture nowhere, it
should seem, indicates a change from person to person; but He seems
still to speak to the first man, who said, "Let there be light," and, "Let

there be a firmament," and so on through each of those days; whom we
usually take to be God the Father, making by a word whatever He willed
to make. For He made all things by His word, which Word we know, by
the right rule of faith, to be His only Son. If, therefore, God the Father
spake to the first man, and Himself was walking in the garden in the cool
of the evening, and if it was from His face that the sinner hid himself
amongst the trees of the garden, why are we not to go on to understand
that it was He also who appeared to Abraham and to Moses, and to whom
He would, and how He would, through the changeable and visible
creature, subjected to Himself, while He Himself remains in Himself and
in His own substance, in which He is unchangeable and invisible? But,
possibly, it might be that the Scripture passed over in a hidden way from
person to person, and while it had related that the Father said "Let there
be light," and the rest which it mentioned Him to have done by the Word,
went on to indicate the Son as speaking to the first man; not unfolding
this openly, but intimating it to be understood by those who could
understand it.
18. Let him, then, who has the strength whereby he can penetrate this
secret with his mind's eye, so that to him it appears clearly, either that the
Father also is able, or that only the Son and Holy Spirit are able, to
appear to human eyes through a visible creature; let him, I say, proceed
to examine these things if he can, or even to express and handle them in
words; but the thing itself, so far as concerns this testimony of Scripture,
where God spake with man, is, in my judgment, not discoverable, because
it does not evidently appear even whether Adam usually saw God with the
eyes of his body; especially as it is a great question what manner of eyes it
was that were opened when they tasted the forbidden fruit; for before
they had tasted, these eyes were closed. Yet I would not rashly assert,
even if that scripture implies Paradise to have been a material place, that
God could not have walked there in any way except in some bodily form.
For it might be said, that only words were framed for the man to hear,
without seeing any form. Neither, because it is written, "Adam hid
himself from the face of God," does it follow forthwith that he usually saw
His face. For what if he himself indeed could not see, but feared to be
himself seen by Him whose voice he had heard, and had felt His presence
as he walked? For Cain, too, said to God, "From Thy face I will hide