FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.69, C.4.

friends, nor thy brethren," etc . . . "but . . . call the poor, the maimed,"
etc.; which, properly, is to have mercy: hence the fifth beatitude is:
"Blessed are the merciful."
Those things which concern the contemplative life, are either final
beatitude itself, or some beginning thereof: wherefore they are
included in the beatitudes, not as merits, but as rewards. Yet the
effects of the active life, which dispose man for the contemplative
life, are included in the beatitudes. Now the effect of the active life,
as regards those virtues and gifts whereby man is perfected in
himself, is the cleansing of man's heart, so that it is not defiled by
the passions: hence the sixth beatitude is: "Blessed are the clean of
heart." But as regards the virtues and gifts whereby man is perfected
in relation to his neighbor, the effect of the active life is peace,
according to Is. 32:17: "The work of justice shall be peace": hence
the seventh beatitude is "Blessed are the peacemakers."
Reply to Objection 1: The acts of the gifts which belong to the active
life are indicated in the merits: but the acts of the gifts pertaining to
the contemplative life are indicated in the rewards, for the reason
given above. Because to "see God" corresponds to the gift of
understanding; and to be like God by being adoptive "children of
God," corresponds to the gift of wisdom.
Reply to Objection 2: In things pertaining to the active life,
knowledge is not sought for its own sake, but for the sake of
operation, as even the Philosopher states (Ethic. ii, 2). And therefore,
since beatitude implies something ultimate, the beatitudes do not
include the acts of those gifts which direct man in the active life,
such acts, to wit, as are elicited by those gifts, as, e.g. to counsel is
the act of counsel, and to judge, the act of knowledge: but, on the
other hand, they include those operative acts of which the gifts have
the direction, as, e.g. mourning in respect of knowledge, and mercy
in respect of counsel.
Reply to Objection 3: In applying the beatitudes to the gifts we may
consider two things. One is likeness of matter. In this way all the first
five beatitudes may be assigned to knowledge and counsel as to
their directing principles: whereas they must be distributed among
the executive gifts: so that, to wit, hunger and thirst for justice, and
mercy too, correspond to piety, which perfects man in his relations
to others; meekness to fortitude, for Ambrose says on Lk. 6:22: "It is
the business of fortitude to conquer anger, and to curb indignation,"

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.69, C.4.

fortitude being about the irascible passions: poverty and mourning
to the gift of fear, whereby man withdraws from the lusts and
pleasures of the world.
Secondly, we may consider the motives of the beatitudes: and, in
this way, some of them will have to be assigned differently. Because
the principal motive for meekness is reverence for God, which
belongs to piety. The chief motive for mourning is knowledge,
whereby man knows his failings and those of worldly things,
according to Eccles. 1:18: "He that addeth knowledge, addeth also
sorrow." The principal motive for hungering after the works of justice
is fortitude of the soul: and the chief motive for being merciful is
God's counsel, according to Dan. 4:24: "Let my counsel be
acceptable to the king: and redeem thou thy sins with alms, and thy
iniquities with works of mercy to the poor." It is thus that Augustine
assigns them (De Serm. Dom. in Monte i, 4).
Reply to Objection 4: All the beatitudes mentioned in Holy Writ must
be reduced to these, either as to the merits or as to the rewards:
because they must all belong either to the active or to the
contemplative life. Accordingly, when we read, "Blessed is the man
whom the Lord correcteth," we must refer this to the beatitude of
mourning: when we read, "Blessed is the man that hath not walked
in the counsel of the ungodly," we must refer it to cleanness of heart:
and when we read, "Blessed is the man that findeth wisdom," this
must be referred to the reward of the seventh beatitude. The same
applies to all others that can be adduced.
Reply to Objection 5: The eighth beatitude is a confirmation and
declaration of all those that precede. Because from the very fact that
a man is confirmed in poverty of spirit, meekness, and the rest, it
follows that no persecution will induce him to renounce them. Hence
the eighth beatitude corresponds, in a way, to all the preceding
seven.
Reply to Objection 6: Luke relates Our Lord's sermon as addressed
to the multitude (Lk. 6:17). Hence he sets down the beatitudes
according to the capacity of the multitude, who know no other
happiness than pleasure, temporal and earthly: wherefore by these
four beatitudes Our Lord excludes four things which seem to belong
to such happiness. The first of these is abundance of external
goods, which he sets aside by saying: "Blessed are ye poor." The
second is that man be well off as to his body, in food and drink, and