## Homily 29 on Romans

Rom. XV. 14
"And I myself also am persuaded of you, my brethren, that you also are full
of goodness, filled with all knowledge, able also to admonish one another." (So
most: S. Chrys. "others.")
He had said, "Inasmuch as I am the Apostle of the Gentiles, I magnify mine
office." [Romans 11:13] He had said, "Take heed lest He also spare not you."
[Romans 11:21] He had said, "Be not wise in your own conceits" [Romans
12:16]; and again, "Why do you judge your brother?" [Romans 14:10] And,
"Who are you that judgest another man's servant?" [Romans 14:4] And several
other like things besides. Since then he had often made his language somewhat
harsh, he now speaks kindly ([θεραπεύει] [)] . And what he said in the
beginning, that he does in the end also. At the beginning he said, "I thank my
God for you all, that your faith is spoken of throughout the whole world."
[Romans 1:8] But here he says, "I am persuaded that you also are full of
goodness, being able also to admonish others;" and this is more than the former.
And he does not say, I have heard, but, "I am persuaded," and have no need to
hear, from others. And, "I myself," that is, I that rebuke, that accuse you. That
"you are full of goodness," this applies to the exhortation lately given. As if he
said, It was not as if you were cruel, or haters of your brethren, that I gave you
that exhortation, to receive, and not to neglect, and not to destroy "the work of
God." For I am aware that "you are full of goodness." But he seems to me here to
be calling their virtue perfect. And he does not say you have, but "you are full
of." And the sequel is with the same intensitives: "filled with all knowledge." For
suppose they had been affectionate, but yet did not know how to treat those they
loved properly. This was why he added, "all knowledge. Able to admonish
others," not to learn only, but also to teach.

Ver. 15. "Nevertheless, I have written the more boldly unto you in some
sort."
Observe the lowly-mindedness of Paul, observe his wisdom, how he gave a
deep cut in the former part, and then when he had succeeded in what he wished,
how he uses much kindliness next. For even without what he has said, this very
confession of his having been bold were enough to unstring their vehemency.
And this he does in writing to the Hebrews also, speaking as follows, "But,
beloved, I am persuaded better things of you, and things which belong unto
salvation, though we thus speak." [Hebrews 6:9] And to the Corinthians again,
"Now I praise you, brethren, that you remember me in all things, and keep the
ordinances, as I delivered them to you." [1 Corinthians 11:2] And in writing to
the Galatians he says, "I have confidence in you, that you will be none otherwise
minded." [Galatians 5:10] And in all parts of his Epistles one may find this to be
frequently observed. But here even in a greater degree. For they were in a higher
rank, and there was need to bring down their fastidious spirit, not by astringents
only, but by laxatives also. For he does this in different ways. Wherefore he says
in this place too, "I have written the more boldly unto you," and with this even he
is not satisfied, but has added, "in some sort," that is, gently; and even here he
does not pause, but what does he say? "As putting you in mind." And he does not
say as teaching, nor simply putting in mind, ([ἀ] [ναμιμνήσκων]) but he uses a
word ([ἐ] [παναμιμνήσκων]) which means putting you in mind in a quiet way.
Observe the end falling in with the introduction. For as in that passage he said,
"that your faith is made known in all the world." [Romans 1:8] So in the end of
the Epistle also, "For your obedience has reached unto all." [Romans 16:19]
And as in the beginning he wrote, "For I long to see you, that I may impart unto
you some spiritual gift, to the end that you may be established; that is, that I may
be comforted together with you" (ib. 1:11, 12); so here also he said, "As putting
you in mind." And having come down from the seat of the master, both there and
here, he speaks to them as brethren and friends of equal rank. And this is quite a
Teacher's duty, to give his address that variety which is profitable to the hearers.