communicates His immutability.
Reply to Objection 2: From this appears the answer to the Second
Objection. For God is said to be before eternity, according as it is
shared by immaterial substances. Hence, also, in the same book, it is
said that "intelligence is equal to eternity." In the words of Exodus,
"The Lord shall reign for eternity, and beyond," eternity stands for
age, as another rendering has it. Thus it is said that the Lord will
reign beyond eternity, inasmuch as He endures beyond every age, i.
e. beyond every kind of duration. For age is nothing more than the
period of each thing, as is said in the book De Coelo i. Or to reign
beyond eternity can be taken to mean that if any other thing were
conceived to exist for ever, as the movement of the heavens
according to some philosophers, then God would still reign beyond,
inasmuch as His reign is simultaneously whole.
Reply to Objection 3: Eternity is nothing else but God Himself. Hence
God is not called eternal, as if He were in any way measured; but the
idea of measurement is there taken according to the apprehension of
our mind alone.
Reply to Objection 4: Words denoting different times are applied to
God, because His eternity includes all times; not as if He Himself
were altered through present, past and future.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether to be eternal belongs to God alone?

Objection 1: It seems that it does not belong to God alone to be
eternal. For it is written that "those who instruct many to justice,"
shall be "as stars unto perpetual eternities" (Dan. 12:3). Now if God
alone were eternal, there could not be many eternities. Therefore
God alone is not the only eternal.
Objection 2: Further, it is written "Depart, ye cursed into eternal
fire" (Mt. 25:41). Therefore God is not the only eternal.
Objection 3: Further, every necessary thing is eternal. But there are
many necessary things; as, for instance, all principles of
demonstration and all demonstrative propositions. Therefore God is
not the only eternal.
On the contrary, Jerome says (Ep. ad Damasum. xv) that "God is the
only one who has no beginning." Now whatever has a beginning, is
not eternal. Therefore God is the only one eternal.
I answer that, Eternity truly and properly so called is in God alone,
because eternity follows on immutability; as appears from the first
article. But God alone is altogether immutable, as was shown above
(Question 9, Article 1). Accordingly, however, as some receive
immutability from Him, they share in His eternity. Thus some receive
immutability from God in the way of never ceasing to exist; in that
sense it is said of the earth, "it standeth for ever" (Eccles. 1:4).
Again, some things are called eternal in Scripture because of the
length of their duration, although they are in nature corruptible; thus
(Ps. 75:5) the hills are called "eternal" and we read "of the fruits of
the eternal hills." (Dt. 33:15). Some again, share more fully than
others in the nature of eternity, inasmuch as they possess
unchangeableness either in being or further still in operation; like
the angels, and the blessed, who enjoy the Word, because "as
regards that vision of the Word, no changing thoughts exist in the
Saints," as Augustine says (De Trin. xv). Hence those who see God
are said to have eternal life; according to that text, "This is eternal
life, that they may know Thee the only true God," etc. (Jn. 17:3).
Reply to Objection 1: There are said to be many eternities,
accordingly as many share in eternity, by the contemplation of God.