5. They have also given names to [the several persons] in their system of falsehood, such as
the following: he who was the first descendant of the mother is called Ialdabaoth; he, again,
descended from him, is named Iao; he, from this one, is called Sabaoth; the fourth is named Adoneus;
the fifth, Eloeus; the sixth, Oreus; and the seventh and last of all, Astanphæus. Moreover, they
represent these heavens, potentates, powers, angels, and creators, as sitting in their proper order in
heaven, according to their generation, and as invisibly ruling over things celestial and terrestrial.
The first of them, namely Ialdabaoth, holds his mother in contempt, inasmuch as he produced sons
and grandsons without the permission of any one, yea, even angels, archangels, powers, potentates,
and dominions. After these things had been done, his sons turned to strive and quarrel with him
about the supreme power,—conduct which deeply grieved Ialdabaoth, and drove him to despair.
In these circumstances, he cast his eyes upon the subjacent dregs of matter, and fixed his desire
upon it, to which they declare his son owes his origin. This son is Nous himself, twisted into the
form of a serpent; and hence were derived the spirit, the soul, and all mundane things: from this
too were generated all oblivion, wickedness, emulation, envy, and death. They declare that the
father imparted still greater crookedness to this serpent-like and contorted Nous of theirs, when
he was with their father in heaven and Paradise.
6. On this account, Ialdabaoth, becoming uplifted in spirit, boasted himself over all those things
that were below him, and exclaimed, "I am father, and God, and above me there is no one." But
his mother, hearing him speak thus, cried out against him, "Do not lie, Ialdabaoth: for the father of
all, the first Anthropos (man), is above thee; and so is Anthropos the son of Anthropos." Then, as
all were disturbed by this new voice, and by the unexpected proclamation, and as they were inquiring
whence the noise proceeded, in order to lead them away and attract them to himself, they affirm
that Ialdabaoth exclaimed, "Come, let us make man after our image." The six powers, on hearing
this, and their mother furnishing them with the idea of a man (in order that by means of him she
might empty them of their original power), jointly formed a man of immense size, both in regard
to breadth and length. But as he could merely writhe along the ground, they carried him to their
father; Sophia so labouring in this matter, that she might empty him (Ialdabaoth) of the light with
which he had been sprinkled, so that he might no longer, though still powerful, be able to lift up
himself against the powers above. They declare, then, that by breathing into man the spirit of life,
he was secretly emptied of his power; that hence man became a possessor of nous (intelligence)
and enthymesis (thought); and they affirm that these are the faculties which partake in salvation.
Iao, Jehovah; Oreus, Light; Astanphæus, Crown; Sabaoth, of course, means Hosts; Adoneus, Lord; and Eloeus, God. All the
names are derived from the cabbalistic theology of the Jews.