THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.69, C.2.

shedding of blood there is no remission." Consequently no
movement of the human will suffices for the remission of sin, unless
there be faith in Christ's Passion, and the purpose of participating in
it, either by receiving Baptism, or by submitting to the keys of the
Church. Therefore when an adult approaches Baptism, he does
indeed receive the forgiveness of all his sins through his purpose of
being baptized, but more perfectly through the actual reception of
Baptism.
Reply to Objection 3: This argument is true of special remedies. But
Baptism operates by the power of Christ's Passion, which is the
universal remedy for all sins; and so by Baptism all sins are loosed.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.69, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether man is freed by Baptism from all debt of

punishment due to sin?
Objection 1: It seems that man is not freed by Baptism from all debt
of punishment due to sin. For the Apostle says (Rm. 13:1): "Those
things that are of God are well ordered ." But guilt is not set in order
save by punishment, as Augustine says (Ep. cxl). Therefore Baptism
does not take away the debt of punishment due to sins already
committed.
Objection 2: Further, the effect of a sacrament has a certain likeness
to the sacrament itself; since the sacraments of the New Law "effect
what they signify," as stated above (Question 62, Article 1, ad 1). But
the washing of Baptism has indeed a certain likeness with the
cleansing from the stain of sin, but none, seemingly, with the
remission of the debt of punishment. Therefore the debt of
punishment is not taken away by Baptism.
Objection 3: Further, when the debt of punishment has been
remitted, a man no longer deserves to be punished, and so it would
be unjust to punish him. If, therefore, the debt of punishment be
remitted by Baptism, it would be unjust, after Baptism, to hang a
thief who had committed murder before. Consequently the severity
of human legislation would be relaxed on account of Baptism; which
is undesirable. Therefore Baptism does not remit the debt of
punishment.
On the contrary, Ambrose, commenting on Rm. 11:29, "The gifts and
the calling of God ate without repentance," says: "The grace of God
in Baptism remits all, gratis."
I answer that, As stated above (Question 49, Article 3, ad 2; Question
68, Articles 1,4,5) by Baptism a man is incorporated in the Passion
and death of Christ, according to Rm. 6:8: "If we be dead with Christ,
we believe that we shall live also together with Christ." Hence it is
clear that the Passion of Christ is communicated to every baptized
person, so that he is healed just as if he himself had suffered and
died. Now Christ's Passion, as stated above (Question 68, Article 5),
is a sufficient satisfaction for all the sins of all men. Consequently he
who is baptized, is freed from the debt of all punishment due to him
for his sins, just as if he himself had offered sufficient satisfaction