prevail nothing, she made herself shameless with a goodly shamelessness.
For whereas before this she had not ventured so much as to come in sight
(for "she cries," it is said, "after us"), when one might expect that she should
rather depart further off in utter despair, at that very time she comes nearer, and
worships, saying, "Lord, help me." [Matthew 15:25]
What is this, O woman? Have you then greater confidence than the
apostles? More abundant strength? "Confidence and strength," says she, "by no
means; nay, I am even full of shame. Yet nevertheless my very shamelessness do I
put forward for entreaty; He will respect my confidence." And what is this?
Heardest thou not Him saying, "I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the house
of Israel?" "I heard," says she, "but He Himself is Lord." Wherefore neither did
she say, "Entreat and beseech," but, "Help me."
3. What then says Christ? Not even with all this was He satisfied, but He
makes her perplexity yet more intense again, saying,
"It is not meet to take the children's bread and to cast it to the dogs."
[Matthew 15:26]
And when He vouchsafed her a word, then He smote her more sharply than
by His silence. And no longer does He refer the cause to another, nor say, "I am
not sent," but the more urgent she makes her entreaty, so much the more does He
also urge His denial. And He calls them no longer "sheep," but "children," and
her "a dog."
What then says the woman? Out of His own very words she frames her
plea. "Why, though I be a dog," said she, "I am not an alien."
Justly did Christ say, "For judgment am I come." [John 9:32] The woman
practises high self-command, and shows forth all endurance and faith, and this,
receiving insult; but they, courted and honored, requite it with the contrary.
For, "that food is necessary for the children," says she, "I also know; yet
neither am I forbidden, being a dog. For were it unlawful to receive, neither
would it be lawful to partake of the crumbs; but if, though in scanty measure,
they ought to be partakers, neither am I forbidden, though I be a dog; nay,

rather on this ground am I most surely a partaker, if I am a dog."
With this intent did Christ put her off, for He knew she would say this; for
this did He deny the grant, that He might exhibit her high self-command.
For if He had not meant to give, neither would He have given afterwards,
nor would He have stopped her mouth again. But as He does in the case of the
centurion, saying, "I will come and heal him," [Matthew 8:7] that we might learn
the godly fear of that man, and might hear him say, "I am not worthy that You
should come under my roof;" [Matthew 8:8] and as He does in the case of her
that had the issue of blood, saying, "I perceive that virtue has gone out of me,"
[Luke 8:46] that He might make her faith manifest; and as in the case of the
Samaritan woman, that He might show how not even upon reproof she desists:
[John 4:18] so also here, He would not that so great virtue in the woman should
be hid. Not in insult then were His words spoken, but calling her forth, and
revealing the treasure laid up in her.
But do thou, I pray you, together with her faith see also her humility. For
He had called the Jews "children," but she was not satisfied with this, but even
called them "masters;" so far was she from grieving at the praises of others.
"Why, the dogs also," says she, "eat of the crumbs that fall from their
master's table." [Matthew 15:27]
Do you see the woman's wisdom, how she did not venture so much as to
say a word against it, nor was stung by other men's praises, nor was indignant at
the reproach? Do you see her constancy? He said, "It is not meet," and she said,
"Truth, Lord;" He called them "children," but she "masters;" He used the name
of a dog, but she added also the dog's act. Do you see this woman's humility?
Hear the proud language of the Jews. "We be Abraham's seed, and were
never in bondage to any man;" [John 8:33] and, "We be born of God."
[John 8:41] But not so this woman, rather she calls herself a dog, and them
masters; so for this she became a child. What then says Christ? "O woman, great
is your faith." [Matthew 15:28]
Yea, therefore did He put her off, that He might proclaim aloud this saying,