exhort, saying." [Acts 2:40] Observe how, throughout, the writer studies brevity,
and how free he is from ambition and display. "He testified and exhorted,
saying." This is the perfection of teaching, comprising something of fear and
something of love. "Save yourselves from this untoward generation." He says
nothing of the future, all is about the present, by which indeed men are chiefly
swayed; he shows that the Gospel releases from present evils as well. "Then they
that gladly received his word were baptized; and the same day there were added
unto them about three thousand souls." [Acts 2:41] Think you not this cheered
the Apostles more than the miracle? "And they continued steadfastly and with
one accord in the Apostles' doctrine and fellowship." [Acts 2:42] Here are two
virtues, perseverance and concord. "In the Apostles' doctrine," he says: for they
again taught them; "and fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayer." All
in common, all with perseverance. "And fear came upon every soul" [Acts 2:43]:
of those that believed. For they did not despise the Apostles, like common men,
nor did they fix their regard on that which was visible merely. Verily, their
thoughts were kindled into a glow. And as Peter had before spoken much, and
declared the promises, and the things to come, well might they be beside
themselves with fear. The wonders also bore witness to the words: "Many
wonders and signs were done by the Apostles." As was the case with Christ; first
there were signs, then teaching, then wonders; so was it now. "And all that
believed were together, and had all things common." [Acts 2:44] Consider what
an advance was here immediately! For the fellowship was not only in prayers,
nor in doctrine alone, but also in ([πολιτεία]) social relations. "And sold their
possessions and goods, and parted them to all men, as every man had need." See
what fear was wrought in them! "And they parted them," he says, showing the
([τὸ οἰκονομικὸν]) wise management: "As every man had need." Not recklessly,
like some philosophers among the Greeks, of whom some gave up their land,
others cast into the sea great quantities of money; but this was no contempt of
riches, but only folly and madness. For universally the devil has made it his
endeavor to disparage the creatures of God, as if it were impossible to make

good use of riches. "And continuing daily with one accord in the temple" [Acts
2:46], they enjoyed the benefit of teaching. Consider how these Jews did nothing
else great or small, than assiduously attend at the temple. For, as having become
more earnest, they had increased devotion also to the place. For the Apostles did
not for the present pluck them away from this object, for fear of injuring them.
"And breaking bread from house to house, did take their portion of food with
gladness and singleness of heart, praising God, and having favor with all the
people." [Acts 2:47] It seems to me that in mentioning "bread," he here signifies
fasting and hard life; for they "took their portion of food," not of dainty fare.
"With gladness," he says. Do you see that not the dainty fare, but the ([τροφἥς οὐ
τρυφἥς]) food made the enjoyment. For they that fare daintily are under
punishment and pain; but not so these. Do you see that the words of Peter
contain this also, namely, the regulation of life? ["And singleness of heart."] For
no gladness can exist where there is no simplicity. How had they "favor with all
the people?" On account of their alms deeds. For do not look to the fact, that the
chief priests for envy and spite rose up against them, but rather consider that
"they had favor with the people."— "And the Lord added to the Church daily
([ἐ] [πὶ τὸ αὐτό]) [together] such as should be saved.— And all that believed
were together." Once more, the unanimity, the charity, which is the cause of all
good things!
["Now when they heard this," etc. "Then Peter said unto them," etc.]
[Recapitulation, Acts 2:37] What had been said was not enough. For those
sayings indeed were sufficient to bring them to faith; but these are to show what
things the believer behooves to do. And he said not, In the Cross, but, "In the
name of Jesus Christ let every one of you be baptized." [Acts 2:38] And he does
not put them continually in mind of the Cross, that he may not seem to reproach
them, but he says simply, "Repent:" and why? That we may be punished? No:
"And let each of you be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of
sins." And yet quite other is the law; of this world's tribunals: but in the case of
the Gospel proclamation ([κηρύγματος]); when the delinquent has confessed,