SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.82, C.6.

those which are the object of beatitude and whereby we merit it: and
these the saints seek absolutely when they pray, as in Ps. 79:4,
"Show us Thy face, and we shall be saved," and again in Ps. 118:35,
"Lead me into the path of Thy commandments."
Reply to Objection 1: Although man cannot by himself know what he
ought to pray for, "the Spirit," as stated in the same passage,
"helpeth our infirmity," since by inspiring us with holy desires, He
makes us ask for what is right. Hence our Lord said (Jn. 4:24) that
true adorers "must adore . . . in spirit and in truth."
Reply to Objection 2: When in our prayers we ask for things
concerning our salvation, we conform our will to God's, of Whom it
is written (1 Tim. 2:4) that "He will have all men to be saved."
Reply to Objection 3: God so invites us to take good things, that we
may approach to them not by the steps of the body, but by pious
desires and devout prayers.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.82, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether man ought to ask God for temporal

things when he prays?
Objection 1: It would seem that man ought not to ask God for
temporal things when he prays. We seek what we ask for in prayer.
But we should not seek for temporal things, for it is written (Mt.
6:33): "Seek ye . . . first the kingdom of God, and His justice: and all
these things shall be added unto you," that is to say, temporal
things, which, says He, we are not to seek, but they will be added to
what we seek. Therefore temporal things are not to be asked of God
in prayer.
Objection 2: Further, no one asks save for that which he is solicitous
about. Now we ought not to have solicitude for temporal things,
according to the saying of Mt. 6:25, "Be not solicitous for your life,
what you shall eat." Therefore we ought not to ask for temporal
things when we pray.
Objection 3: Further, by prayer our mind should be raised up to God.
But by asking for temporal things, it descends to things beneath it,
against the saying of the Apostle (2 Cor. 4:18), "While we look not at
the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen. For
the things which are seen are temporal, but the things which are not
seen are eternal." Therefore man ought not to ask God for temporal
things when he prays.
Objection 4: Further, man ought not to ask of God other than good
and useful things. But sometimes temporal things, when we have
them, are harmful, not only in a spiritual sense, but also in a material
sense. Therefore we should not ask God for them in our prayers.
On the contrary, It is written (Prov. 30:8): "Give me only the
necessaries of life."
I answer that, As Augustine says (ad Probam, de orando Deum, Ep.
cxxx, 12): "It is lawful to pray for what it is lawful to desire." Now it is
lawful to desire temporal things, not indeed principally, by placing
our end therein, but as helps whereby we are assisted in tending
towards beatitude, in so far, to wit, as they are the means of
supporting the life of the body, and are of service to us as
instruments in performing acts of virtue, as also the Philosopher