5. In the fifth place, because of numerous occupations with,which men are busied, it would be
impossible for all of them to discover, by way of reason, necessary truth in regard to God, and
on this account the way of faith has been established, both as regards things that might in some
way be known and as regards those that required revelation in order that they be believed.

But in the case of certain divine truths, for a complete understanding of them the human mind in
no way suffices, but full knowledge of them is to be awaited in that future life when there will be
complete beatitude: such is the truth of the Trinity and the unity of one God; and man is led to
knowledge of this, not in accordance with anything due his nature, but by divine grace alone.
Therefore it is necessary that, for a perfection of knowledge of this kind, certain suppositions be
proposed which must be believed at first, and from these one is directed into full cognition of
those truths which at the outset he held on faith, even as in other sciences also, as has been said.
Hence in Is. 7:9 it is said, according to one translation: "Unless thou hadst believed, thou
wouldst not understand." And suppositions of this sort are those that must be believed by all,
since in this life they are neither known nor understood by, any one.

#### Answers to objections

1. It may be said: Although matters of faith considered according to man's natural powers are
above him, they are not above man when he is illuminated by divine light; hence it is not
necessary for man that he seek out such truths by his own power, but it is necessary for him to

know them by divine revelation.

2. It may be said: God, in the first creation of things, established man as perfect in accordance
with the perfection of his nature, and this consisted in the fact that man had all things due to his
nature. But over and above that due to nature there were added afterward to the human race
certain other perfections owing their source to divine grace alone, and among these was faith, as
is evident from Eph. 2:8, where it is said of faith that it is "the gift of God."

3. It may be said: For anyone striving to attain beatitude it is necessary to know in what he ought
to seek this beatitude, and in what way. But this, indeed, can be done in no easier way than
through faith, since investigation by reason cannot attain to such knowledge except after a
previous knowledge of many other things, things not easy to know. Nor can one attain to such
knowledge without danger, since human investigation, because of the weakness of our intellect,
is prone to error; and this is clearly shown by reference to those philosophers who, in attempting
to find out the purpose of human life by way of reason, did not find in themselves the true
method, and so fell into many and shameful errors; and so greatly did they differ among
themselves that scarcely two or three among them all were in agreement on any one question; yet,
on the other hand, we see that by faith many peoples are brought to the acceptance of one
common belief.