Reply to 4. In that place the Philosopher considers the reasoning and deliberative parts of the
soul to be identical: so it is clear that they are related to the second mode of rational procedure
mentioned above. In the same place, moreover, because of their contingency he assigns human
actions, which are the objects of moral science, to the reasoning or deliberative part of the soul.
From what has been said, then, we can gather that the first mode of rationality is most
characteristic of rational science, the second of moral science, and the third of natural science.

To the second question (b) I reply that mathematical science is said to proceed according to the
mode of learning, not because it alone does so, but because this is especially characteristic of it.
For, since learning is nothing else than the taking of knowledge from another, we are said to
proceed according to the mode of learning when our procedure leads to certain knowledge,
which is called science. Now this occurs particularly in the mathematical sciences. Because
mathematics is situated between natural and divine science, it is more certain than either.

It is more certain than natural science because its investigation is not bound up with motion and
matter, while the investigation of natural science centers upon matter and motion. Now from the
very fact that natural science deals with matter, its knowledge depends upon many factors, upon
the consideration of matter itself, of form, and of the material dispositions and properties
accompanying form in matter. And whenever there are many factors to be considered in order to
know something, knowledge is more difficult. Thus the Posterior Analytics says that a science is
less certain that results from adding on some item, as geometry adds something to arithmetic. If
the inquiry in a science is about things that are mobile and lack uniformity, its knowledge is less
exact because its demonstrations are often valid only in the majority of cases, owing to the fact
that things sometimes happen differently. So, too, the more a science draws close to particulars
(as do practical sciences like medicine, alchemy, and ethics), the less certain they can be because
of the many factors to be taken into account in these sciences, the omission of any one of which
will lead to error, and also because of their variability.

The method of mathematics is also more certain than the method of divine science, because the
objects of divine science are further removed from sensible things, from which our knowledge
takes its origin. This is true both in the case of the separate substances (to which our knowledge
of the sense world gives us inadequate access), and also in the case of the principles common to
all things (which are most universal and therefore furthest removed from the particular things
falling under the senses). But mathematical entities do fall under the senses and they are objects
of our imagination; for example, figures, lines, numbers, and the like. So the human intellect,
which takes its knowledge from images, knows these things with greater ease and certainty than
it does a separate Intelligence, or even the nature of substance, act, potency, and the like.