THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.19, C.4.

merit; so that as man merits by the act of the soul which he performs
in the body, so he may be rewarded by the glory of the soul
overflowing to the body. And hence not only the glory of the soul,
but also the glory of the body falls under merit, according to Rm.
8:11: "He . . . shall quicken also our mortal bodies, because of His
Spirit that dwelleth in us." And thus it could fall under Christ's merit.
Reply to Objection 4: The manifestation of Christ's excellence is His
good as regards the being which it has in the knowledge of others;
although in regard to the being which they have in themselves it
chiefly belongs to the good of those who know Him. Yet even this is
referred to Christ inasmuch as they are His members.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.19, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether Christ could merit for others?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ could not merit for others. For
it is written (Ezech. 18:4): "The soul that sinneth, the same shall die."
Hence, for a like reason, the soul that meriteth, the same shall be
recompensed. Therefore it is not possible that Christ merited for
others.
Objection 2: Further, of the fulness of Christ's grace we all receive,
as is written Jn. 1:16. Now other men having Christ's grace cannot
merit for others. For it is written (Ezech. 14:20) that if "Noe and
Daniel and Job be in the city . . . they shall deliver neither son nor
daughter; but they shall only deliver their own souls by their justice."
Hence Christ could not merit anything for us.
Objection 3: Further, the "reward" that we merit is due "according to
justice and not according to grace," as is clear from Rm. 4:4.
Therefore if Christ merited our salvation it follows that our salvation
is not by God's grace but by justice, and that He acts unjustly with
those whom He does not save, since Christ's merit extends to all.
On the contrary, It is written (Rm. 5:18): "As by the offense of one,
unto all men to condemnation; so also by the justice of one, unto all
men to justification of life." But Adam's demerits reached to the
condemnation of others. Much more, therefore, does the merit of
Christ reach others.
I answer that, As stated above (Question 8, Articles 1,5), grace was in
Christ not merely as in an individual, but also as in the Head of the
whole Church, to Whom all are united, as members to a head, who
constitute one mystical person. And hence it is that Christ's merit
extends to others inasmuch as they are His members; even as in a
man the action of the head reaches in a manner to all his members,
since it perceives not merely for itself alone, but for all the members.
Reply to Objection 1: The sin of an individual harms himself alone;
but the sin of Adam, who was appointed by God to be the principle of
the whole nature, is transmitted to others by carnal propagation. So,
too, the merit of Christ, Who has been appointed by God to be the
head of all men in regard to grace, extends to all His members.