when they are not occupied in any private concerns, nor caring for their own, but
rather consider their masters' concerns as their own. For he who makes what is
his own his master's, does not really give up his own to his master, but makes his
interest his own; he commands even as himself in his affairs, and rules equally
with him. He is often as much feared by the domestics, and whatever he says his
master says too, and he is henceforth dreaded by all his enemies.
And if he who in worldly concerns prefers his masters interests to his own,
does not really neglect his own interest, but rather advance it the more; much
more is this the case in spiritual matters. Despise your own concerns, and you
will receive those of God. This He Himself wills. Despise each, and seize upon
the kingdom of heaven. Dwell there, not here. Be formidable there, not here. If
you are formidable there you will be formidable not to men, but to demons, and
even to the devil himself. But if your dependence is on worldly wealth, you will
be contemptible to them, and often to men too. Whatever be your riches, you
will be rich in servile things. But if you despise these, you will be radiant in the
house of the King.
Such were the Apostles, despising a servile house and worldly wealth! And
see how they commanded in the affairs of their Master. "Let one," they said, "be
delivered from disease, another from the possession of devils: bind this man, and
loose that." This was done by them on earth, but it was fulfilled as in Heaven.
For, "whatever you shall bind on earth," said He, "shall be bound in Heaven."
[Matthew 18:18] And greater power than His own did He give them. And that I
lie not, appears from His own words. "He that believes in Me, greater works
shall he do than these which I do." [John 14:12] Why so? Because this honor is
reflected upon the Master. As in our own affairs, if the servant has great power,
the master is the more admired, for if the servant is so powerful, much more is
he who commands him. But if any man, neglecting his master's service thinks
only of his wife, his son, or his servant, and seeks to be rich, and to lay up
treasure there, by stealing and robbing his master of his possessions, he is
presently ruined, and his wealth perishes with him.

Wherefore having these examples, I beseech you, let us not regard our
possessions, that we may regard ourselves: nay, let us despise them, that we may
obtain them. If we despise them, He will take care of them; if we take care of
them, God will despise them. Let us labor in the concerns of God, not in our
own, or rather really in our own, for His are our own. I speak not of heaven, nor
of earth, nor of the things of this world: these are unworthy of Him. And they
belong alike to the faithful and the unbelievers. What then do I speak of as His?
His glory and His kingdom. These are His, and ours for His sake. How? "If we
be dead with Him," He says, "we shall also live with Him. If we suffer, we shall
also reign with Him." [2 Timothy 2:11] We have become "joint heirs," and are
called His "brethren." Why do we sink below, when He is drawing us upward
towards Himself? How long shall we be poor, and beggarly? Heaven is set
before us; and do we linger on earth? Is His kingdom opened to us, and do we
choose such poverty as is here? Is life immortal offered us, and do we spend
ourselves for lands, for wood and stones? Be truly rich. I would wish you to be
so. Be covetous and rapacious, I blame you not for it. Here it is a fault not to be
covetous, here it is blameworthy not to be grasping. What then is this? "The
kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force." [Matthew
11:12] There be thou violent! Be grasping! It is not diminished by being seized
upon. For neither is virtue divided, nor piety lessened, nor the kingdom of
Heaven. Virtue is increased when you seize upon it, while temporal goods are
lessened when they are seized upon. And this appears from hence: Let there be
ten thousand men in a city; if all seize on virtue, it is multiplied, for they become
righteous in ten thousand things. If no one seizes upon it, it is diminished, for it
is nowhere to be found.
You see then that good things are multiplied on being possessed by many,
but earthly goods are rather diminished by seizing. Let us not therefore sit down
content with poverty, but let us choose riches. God is then rich, when those who
enjoy His kingdom are many. "For He is rich," it is said, "unto all that call upon
Him." [Romans 10:12] Increase then His substance; and you will increase it by