quick and the dead, let us wait for Him, and let us be patient. But wherever he
speaks of patience, he of course implies affliction. For this is to love God; to
endure, and not to be troubled.
Ver. 6. "Now we command you, brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that you withdraw yourselves from every brother that walks disorderly
and not after the tradition which they received of us."
That is, it is not we that say these things, but Christ, for that is the meaning
of "in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ"; equivalent to "through Christ."
Showing the fearfulness of the message, he says, through Christ. Christ therefore
commanded us in no case to be idle. "That ye withdraw yourselves," he says,
"from every brother." Tell me not of the rich, tell me not of the poor, tell me not
of the holy. This is disorder. "That walks," he says, that is, lives. "And not after
the tradition which they received from me." Tradition, he says, which is through
works. And this he always calls properly tradition.
Ver. 7, 8. "For yourselves know how ye ought to imitate us: for we behaved
not ourselves disorderly among you; neither did we eat bread for nought at any
man's hand."
And yet even if they had eaten, it would not have been for nought. "For the
laborer," he says, "is worthy of his hire." [Luke 10:7]
"But in labor and travail, working night and day, that we might not burden
any of you. Not because we have not the right, but to make ourselves an
ensample unto you that you should imitate us. For even when we were with you,
this we commanded you, If any will not work, neither let him eat."
See how in the former Epistle indeed he discourses somewhat more mildly
concerning these things; as when he says, "We beseech you, brethren,— that you
would abound more and more— and that you study" [1 Thessalonians 4:1-11]—
and nowhere does he say, "we command," nor "in the Name of our Lord Jesus
Christ," which was fearful and implied danger, but that "ye abound," he says,
and "study," which are the words of one exhorting to virtue; "that you may walk
honestly" (becomingly), he says. [1 Thessalonians 4:12] But here is nothing of

this kind, but "if any one will not work," says he, "neither let him eat." For if
Paul, not being under a necessity, and having a right to be idle, and having
undertaken so great a work, did nevertheless work, and not merely work, but
"night and day," so that he was able even to assist others—much more ought
others to do this.
Ver. 11. "For we hear of some that walk among you disorderly, that work
not at all, but are busybodies."
This indeed he says here; but there, in the first Epistle, he says, "that you
may walk honestly towards them that are without." On what account? Perhaps
there was as yet no such thing. For upon another occasion also admonishing, he
says, "It is more blessed to give than to receive." [Acts 20:35] But the
expression, "walk honestly" has no reference to disorder; wherefore he added,
"that you may have need of nothing." [1 Thessalonians 4:12] And here he sets
down another necessity, for thus doing what was honorable and good towards
all. (For as he proceeds, he says, "be not weary in well doing.") For certainly he
that is idle and yet able to work must needs be a busybody. But alms are given to
those only who are not able to support themselves by the work of their own
hands, or who teach, and are wholly occupied in the business of teaching. "For
you shall not muzzle the ox," he says, "when he treads out the grain."
[Deuteronomy 25:4] "And the laborer is worthy of his hire." [1 Timothy 5:18,
and Luke 10:7] So that neither is he idle, but receives the reward of work and
great work too. But to pray and fast, being idle, is not the work of the hands. For
the work that he is here speaking of is the work of the hands. And that you may
not suspect any such thing, he has added,
"That work not at all, but are busybodies. Now them that are such we
command and exhort through our Lord Jesus Christ."
Because he had touched them severely, wishing to render his discourse
more mild, he adds, "through the Lord," again what is authoritivate and fearful.
"That with quietness," he says, "they work, and eat their own bread."
For why has he not said, But if they are not disorderly let them be