FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.3.

ceremonial precepts of the Old Law can be taken in two ways. First,
in respect of the Divine worship which was to be observed for that
particular time: and these reasons are literal: whether they refer to
the shunning of idolatry; or recall certain Divine benefits; or remind
men of the Divine excellence; or point out the disposition of mind
which was then required in those who worshipped God. Secondly,
their reasons can be gathered from the point of view of their being
ordained to foreshadow Christ: and thus their reasons are figurative
and mystical: whether they be taken from Christ Himself and the
Church, which pertains to the allegorical sense; or to the morals of
the Christian people, which pertains to the moral sense; or to the
state of future glory, in as much as we are brought thereto by Christ,
which refers to the anagogical sense.
Reply to Objection 1. Just as the use of metaphorical expressions in
Scripture belongs to the literal sense, because the words are
employed in order to convey that particular meaning; so also the
meaning of those legal ceremonies which commemorated certain
Divine benefits, on account of which they were instituted, and of
others similar which belonged to that time, does not go beyond the
order of literal causes. Consequently when we assert that the cause
of the celebration of the Passover was its signification of the delivery
from Egypt, or that circumcision was a sign of God's covenant with
Abraham, we assign the literal cause.
Reply to Objection 2. This argument would avail if the ceremonial
precepts had been given merely as figures of things to come, and
not for the purpose of worshipping God then and there.
Reply to Objection 3. As we have stated when speaking of human
laws (96, A1,6), there is a reason for them in the abstract, but not in
regard to particular conditions, which depend on the judgment of
those who frame them; so also many particular determinations in the
ceremonies of the Old Law have no literal cause, but only a figurative
cause; whereas in the abstract they have a literal cause.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether a suitable cause can be assigned for the

ceremonies which pertained to sacrifices?
Objection 1. It would seem that no suitable cause can be assigned
for the ceremonies pertaining to sacrifices. For those things which
were offered in sacrifice, are those which are necessary for
sustaining human life: such as certain animals and certain loaves.
But God needs no such sustenance; according to Ps. 49:13: "Shall I
eat the flesh of bullocks? Or shall I drink the blood of goats?"
Therefore such sacrifices were unfittingly offered to God.
Objection 2. Further, only three kinds of quadrupeds were offered in
sacrifice to God, viz. oxen, sheep and goats; of birds, generally the
turtledove and the dove; but specially, in the cleansing of a leper, an
offering was made of sparrows. Now many other animals are more
noble than these. Since therefore whatever is best should be offered
to God, it seems that not only of these three should sacrifices have
been offered to Him.
Objection 3. Further, just as man has received from God the
dominion over birds and beasts, so also has he received dominion
over fishes. Consequently it was unfitting for fishes to be excluded
from the divine sacrifices.
Objection 4. Further, turtledoves and doves indifferently are
commanded to be offered up. Since then the young of the dove are
commanded to be offered, so also should the young of the
turtledove.
Objection 5. Further, God is the Author of life, not only of men, but
also of animals, as is clear from Gn. 1:20, seqq. Now death is
opposed to life. Therefore it was fitting that living animals rather than
slain animals should be offered to God, especially as the Apostle
admonishes us (Rm. 12:1), to present our bodies "a living sacrifice,
holy, pleasing unto God."
Objection 6. Further, if none but slain animals were offered in
sacrifice to God, it seems that it mattered not how they were slain.
Therefore it was unfitting that the manner of immolation should be
determined, especially as regards birds (Lev. 1:15, seqq.).