relations; or rather dive not into them merely, but take them wholly to you; keep
them in your mind.
This is the cause of all evils, the not knowing the Scriptures. We go into
battle without arms, and how ought we to come off safe? Well contented should
we be if we can be safe with them, let alone without them. Throw not the whole
upon us! Sheep you are, still not without reason, but rational; Paul commits
much to you also. They that are under instruction, are not for ever learning; for
then they are not taught. If you are for ever learning, you will never learn. Do
not so come as meaning to be always learning; (for so you will never know;) but
so as to finish learning, and to teach others. In the arts do not all persons
continue for set times, in the sciences, and in a word, in all the arts? Thus we all
fix definitely a certain known time; but if you are ever learning, it is a certain
proof that you have learned nothing.
This reproach God spoke against the Jews. "Borne from the belly, and
instructed even to old age." [Isaiah 46:3-4, Septuagint] If you had not always
been expecting this, all things would not have gone backward in this way. Had it
been so, that some had finished learning, and others were about to have finished,
our work would have been forward; you would both have given place to others,
and would have helped us as well. Tell me, were some to go to a grammarian
and continue always learning their letters, would they not give their teacher
much trouble? How long shall I have to discourse to you concerning life? In the
Apostles' times it was not thus, but they continually leaped from place to place,
appointing those who first learned to be the teachers of any others that were
under instruction. Thus they were enabled to circle the world, through not being
bound to one place. How much instruction, do you think, do your brethren in the
country stand in need of, [they] and their teachers? But you hold me riveted fast
here. For, before the head is set right, it is superfluous to proceed to the rest of
the body. You throw everything upon us. You alone ought to learn from us, and
your wives from you, your children from you; but you leave all to us. Therefore
our toil is excessive.

"Teaching," he says, "and admonishing one another with psalms and hymns
and spiritual songs." Mark also the considerateness of Paul. Seeing that reading
is toilsome, and its irksomeness great, he led them not to histories, but to psalms,
that you might at once delight your soul with singing, and gently beguile your
labors. "Hymns," he says, "and spiritual songs." But now your children will utter
songs and dances of Satan, like cooks, and caterers, and musicians; no one
knows any psalm, but it seems a thing to be ashamed of even, and a mockery,
and a joke. There is the treasury house of all these evils. For whatsoever soil the
plant stands in, such is the fruit it bears; if in a sandy and salty soil, of like nature
is its fruit; if in a sweet and rich one, it is again similar. So the matter of
instruction is a sort of fountain. Teach him to sing those psalms which are so full
of the love of wisdom; as at once concerning chastity, or rather, before all, of not
companying with the wicked, immediately with the very beginning of the book;
(for therefore also it was that the prophet began on this wise, "Blessed is the man
that has not walked in the counsel of the ungodly"; [Psalm 1:1], and again, "I
have not sat in the council of vanity"; [Psalm 26:4, Septuagint], and again, "in
his sight a wicked doer is contemned, but he honors those that fear the Lord,"
[Psalm 15:4, Septuagint] of companying with the good, (and these subjects you
will find there in abundance,) of restraining the belly, of restraining the hand, of
refraining from excess, of not overreaching; that money is nothing, nor glory,
and other things such like.
When in these you have led him on from childhood, little by little you will
lead him forward even to the higher things. The Psalms contain all things, but
the Hymns again have nothing human. When he has been instructed out of the
Psalms, he will then know hymns also, as a diviner thing. For the Powers above
chant hymns, not psalms. For "a hymn," says one, "is not comely in the mouth of
a sinner" [Sirach 15:9]; and again, "My eyes shall be upon the faithful of the
land, that they sit together with me" [Psalm 101:6-7, Septuagint]; and again, "he
that works haughtiness has not dwelt in the midst of my house"; and again, "He
that walks in a blameless way, he ministered unto me." [Psalm 101:6,