there is no other way of mortifying save through the Spirit. For by killing
yourself you may put an end to the others. And this you have no right to do. But
to these (you can put an end) by the Spirit only. For if This be present, all the
billows are laid low, and the passions cower under It, and nothing can exalt itself
against us. So you see how it is on things to come, as I said before, that he
grounds his exhortations to us, and shows that we are debtors not owing to what
has been already done only. For the advantage of the Spirit is not this only, that
He has set us free from our former sins, but that He renders us impregnable
against future ones, and counts us worthy of the immortal life. Then, to state
another reward also, he proceeds:
Ver. 14. "For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of
God."
Now this is again a much greater honor than the first. And this is why he
does not say merely, As many as live by the Spirit of God, but, "as many as are
led by the Spirit of God," to show that he would have Him use such power over
our life as a pilot does over a ship, or a charioteer over a pair of horses. And it is
not the body only, but the soul itself too, that he is for setting under reins of this
sort. For he would not have even that independent, but place its authority also
under the power of the Spirit. For lest through a confidence in the Gift of the
Font they should turn negligent of their conversation after it, he would say, that
even supposing you receive baptism, yet if you are not minded to be "led by the
Spirit" afterwards, you lose the dignity bestowed upon you, and the preeminence of your adoption. This is why he does not say, As many as have
received the Spirit, but, "as many as are led by the Spirit," that is, as many as
live up to this all their life long, "they are the sons of God." Then since this
dignity was given to the Jews also, for it says, "I said you are Gods, and all of
you children of the Most High" [Psalm 82:6]; and again, "I have nourished and
brought up children" [Isaiah 1:2]; and so, "Israel is My first-born" [Exodus
4:22]; and Paul too says, "Whose is the adoption" [Romans 9:4]— he next
asserts the great difference between the latter and the former honor. For though

the names are the same, he means, still, the things are not the same. And of these
points he gives a clear demonstration, by introducing a comparison drawn both
from the persons so advanced ([κατορθούντων]) and from what was given them,
and from what was to come. And first he shows what they of old had given
them. What then was this? "A spirit of bondage:" and so he thus proceeds,
Ver. 15. "For you have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear."
Then not staying to mention that which stands in contradistinction to
bondage, that is, the spirit of freedom, he has named what is far greater, that of
adoption, through which he at the same time brings in the other, saying, "But you
have received the Spirit of adoption."
But this is plain. But what the spirit of bondage may be, is not so plain, and
there is need of making it clearer. Now what he says is so far from being clear,
that it is in fact very perplexing. For the people of the Jews did not receive the
Spirit. What then is his meaning here? It is the letter he gives this name to, for
spiritual it was, and so he called the Law spiritual also, and the water from the
Rock, and the Manna. "For they did eat," he says, "of the same spiritual meat,
and all drank of the same spiritual drink." [1 Corinthians 10:3-4] And to the
Rock he gives this name, when he says, "For they drank of that spiritual Rock
which followed them." Now it is because all the rites then wrought were above
nature that he calls them spiritual, and not because those who then partook of
them received the Spirit. And in what sense were those letters, letters of
bondage? Set before yourself the whole dispensation, and then you will have a
clear view of this also. For recompenses were with them close at hand, and the
reward followed immediately, being at once proportionate, and like a kind of
daily ration given to domestic servants, and terrors in abundance came to their
height before their eyes, and their purifications concerned their bodies, and their
continency extended but to their actions. But with us it is not so, since the
imagination even and the conscience gets purged out. For He does not say, "You
shall do no murder," only, but even you shall not be angry: so too, it is not, "You
shall not commit adultery," but you shall not look unchastely. So that it is not to