right hand of his father Ialdabaoth, that he may receive to himself the souls of those who have
known them, after they have laid aside their mundane flesh, thus enriching himself without the
knowledge or perception of his father; so that, in proportion as Jesus enriches himself with holy
souls, to such an extent does his father suffer loss and is diminished, being emptied of his own
power by these souls. For he will not now possess holy souls to send them down again into the
world, except those only which are of his substance, that is, those into which he has breathed. But
the consummation [of all things] will take place, when the whole besprinkling of the spirit of light
is gathered together, and is carried off to form an incorruptible Æon.
15. Such are the opinions which prevail among these persons, by whom, like the Lernæan hydra,
a many-headed beast has been generated from the school of Valentinus. For some of them assert
that Sophia herself became the serpent; on which account she was hostile to the creator of Adam,
and implanted knowledge in men, for which reason the serpent was called wiser than all others.
Moreover, by the position of our intestines, through which the food is conveyed, and by the fact
that they possess such a figure, our internal configuration in the form of a serpent reveals our
hidden generatrix.

### Chapter XXXI.—Doctrines of the Cainites.
1. Others again declare that Cain derived his being from the Power above, and acknowledge
that Esau, Korah, the Sodomites, and all such persons, are related to themselves. On this account,
they add, they have been assailed by the Creator, yet no one of them has suffered injury. For Sophia
was in the habit of carrying off that which belonged to her from them to herself. They declare that
Judas the traitor was thoroughly acquainted with these things, and that he alone, knowing the truth
as no others did, accomplished the mystery of the betrayal; by him all things, both earthly and
heavenly, were thus thrown into confusion. They produce a fictitious history of this kind, which
they style the Gospel of Judas.
2. I have also made a collection of their writings in which they advocate the abolition of the
doings of Hystera. Moreover, they call this Hystera the creator of heaven and earth. They also
hold, like Carpocrates, that men cannot be saved until they have gone through all kinds of experience.
An angel, they maintain, attends them in every one of their sinful and abominable actions, and
urges them to venture on audacity and incur pollution. Whatever may be the nature of the action,

they declare that they do it in the name of the angel, saying, "O thou angel, I use thy work; O thou
power, I accomplish thy operation!" And they maintain that this is "perfect knowledge," without
shrinking to rush into such actions as it is not lawful even to name.
3. It was necessary clearly to prove, that, as their very opinions and regulations exhibit them,
those who are of the school of Valentinus derive their origin from such mothers, fathers, and
ancestors, and also to bring forward their doctrines, with the hope that perchance some of them,
exercising repentance and returning to the only Creator, and God the Former of the universe, may
obtain salvation, and that others may not henceforth be drawn away by their wicked, although
plausible, persuasions, imagining that they will obtain from them the knowledge of some greater
and more sublime mysteries. But let them rather, learning to good effect from us the wicked tenets
of these men, look with contempt upon their doctrines, while at the same time they pity those who,
still cleaving to these miserable and baseless fables, have reached such a pitch of arrogance as to
reckon themselves superior to all others on account of such knowledge, or, as it should rather be
called, ignorance. They have now been fully exposed; and simply to exhibit their sentiments, is to
obtain a victory over them.
4. Wherefore I have laboured to bring forward, and make clearly manifest, the utterly
ill-conditioned carcase of this miserable little fox. For there will not now be need of many words
to overturn their system of doctrine, when it has been made manifest to all. It is as when, on a beast
hiding itself in a wood, and by rushing forth from it is in the habit of destroying multitudes, one
who beats round the wood and thoroughly explores it, so as to compel the animal to break cover,
does not strive to capture it, seeing that it is truly a ferocious beast; but those present can then watch
and avoid its assaults, and can cast darts at it from all sides, and wound it, and finally slay that
destructive brute. So, in our case, since we have brought their hidden mysteries, which they keep
in silence among themselves, to the light, it will not now be necessary to use many words in
destroying their system of opinions. For it is now in thy power, and in the power of all thy associates,
to familiarize yourselves with what has been said, to overthrow their wicked and undigested
doctrines, and to set forth doctrines agreeable to the truth. Since then the case is so, I shall, according
to promise, and as my ability serves, labour to overthrow them, by refuting them all in the following
book. Even to give an account of them is a tedious affair, as thou seest. But I shall furnish means
for overthrowing them, by meeting all their opinions in the order in which they have been described,
that I may not only expose the wild beast to view, but may inflict wounds upon it from every side.
that some of the faults of the work are not chargeable to Irenæus.]