SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.11, C.2.

apostasy does not imply a special kind of unbelief, but an
aggravating circumstance thereof, according to 2 Pt. 2:21: "It had
been better for them not to know the truth, than after they had known
it, to turn back."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.11, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether a prince forfeits his dominion over his

subjects, on account of apostasy from the faith, so that they
no longer owe him allegiance?
Objection 1: It would seem that a prince does not so forfeit his
dominion over his subjects, on account of apostasy from the faith,
that they no longer owe him allegiance. For Ambrose [St. Augustine,
Super Ps. 124:3] says that the Emperor Julian, though an apostate,
nevertheless had under him Christian soldiers, who when he said to
them, "Fall into line for the defense of the republic," were bound to
obey. Therefore subjects are not absolved from their allegiance to
their prince on account of his apostasy.
Objection 2: Further, an apostate from the faith is an unbeliever. Now
we find that certain holy men served unbelieving masters; thus
Joseph served Pharaoh, Daniel served Nabuchodonosor, and
Mardochai served Assuerus. Therefore apostasy from the faith does
not release subjects from allegiance to their sovereign.
Objection 3: Further, just as by apostasy from the faith, a man turns
away from God, so does every sin. Consequently if, on account of
apostasy from the faith, princes were to lose their right to command
those of their subjects who are believers, they would equally lose it
on account of other sins: which is evidently not the case. Therefore
we ought not to refuse allegiance to a sovereign on account of his
apostatizing from the faith.
On the contrary, Gregory VII says (Council, Roman V): "Holding to
the institutions of our holy predecessors, we, by our apostolic
authority, absolve from their oath those who through loyalty or
through the sacred bond of an oath owe allegiance to
excommunicated persons: and we absolutely forbid them to
continue their allegiance to such persons, until these shall have
made amends." Now apostates from the faith, like heretics, are
excommunicated, according to the Decretal [Extra, De Haereticis,
cap. Ad abolendam]. Therefore princes should not be obeyed when
they have apostatized from the faith.
I answer that, As stated above (Question 10, Article 10), unbelief, in
itself, is not inconsistent with dominion, since dominion is a device
of the law of nations which is a human law: whereas the distinction

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.11, C.3.

between believers and unbelievers is of Divine right, which does not
annul human right. Nevertheless a man who sins by unbelief may be
sentenced to the loss of his right of dominion, as also, sometimes,
on account of other sins.
Now it is not within the competency of the Church to punish unbelief
in those who have never received the faith, according to the saying
of the Apostle (1 Cor. 5:12): "What have I to do to judge them that are
without?" She can, however, pass sentence of punishment on the
unbelief of those who have received the faith: and it is fitting that
they should be punished by being deprived of the allegiance of their
subjects: for this same allegiance might conduce to great corruption
of the faith, since, as was stated above (Article 1, Objection 2), "a
man that is an apostate . . . with a wicked heart deviseth evil, and . . .
soweth discord," in order to sever others from the faith.
Consequently, as soon as sentence of excommunication is passed
on a man on account of apostasy from the faith, his subjects are
"ipso facto" absolved from his authority and from the oath of
allegiance whereby they were bound to him.
Reply to Objection 1: At that time the Church was but recently
instituted, and had not, as yet, the power of curbing earthly princes;
and so she allowed the faithful to obey Julian the apostate, in
matters that were not contrary to the faith, in order to avoid incurring
a yet greater danger.
Reply to Objection 2: As stated in the article, it is not a question of
those unbelievers who have never received the faith.
Reply to Objection 3: Apostasy from the faith severs man from God
altogether, as stated above (Article 1), which is not the case in any
other sin.