afterwards, viz. that this proof might become indisputable. For seeing that even
those who are admired among us in their life, when they are gone, are apt to be
forgotten by us; how was it that they, who made light of this Man living,
afterwards thought Him to be God, if He was but one of the many? How was it
that they consented even to be slain for His sake, unless they received His
resurrection on clear proof?
7. And these things we tell you, that you may not hear only, but imitate also
his manly severity, his plainness of speech, his righteousness in all things; that
no one may despair of himself, though hitherto he have been careless, that he
may set his hopes on nothing else, after God's mercy, but on his own virtue. For
if these were nothing the better for such a kindred, though they were of the same
house and lineage with Christ, until they gave proof of virtue; what favor can we
possibly receive, when we plead righteous kinsmen and brethren, unless we be
exceeding dutiful, and have lived in virtue? As the prophet too said, intimating
the selfsame thing, "A brother redeems not, shall a man redeem?" No, not
although it were Moses, Samuel, Jeremiah. Hear, for example, what God says
unto this last, "Pray not thou for this people, for I will not hear you."
[Jeremiah 11:14] And why do you marvel if I hear not you? "Though Moses
himself and Samuel stood before me," [Jeremiah 15:1] I would not receive their
supplication for these men. Yea, if it be Ezekiel who entreats, he will be told,
"Though Noah stand forth, and Job, and Daniel, they shall deliver neither sons
nor daughters." Though the patriarch Abraham be supplicating for them that are
most incurably diseased, and change not, God will leave him and go His way,
[Genesis 18:33] that he may not receive his cry in their behalf. Though again it
be Samuel who is doing this, He says unto him, "Mourn not thou for Saul."
[1 Samuel 16:1] Though for his own sister one entreat, when it is not fitting, he
again shall have the same sort of answer as Moses, "If her father had but spit in
her face." [Numbers 12:14]
Let us not then be looking open-mouthed towards others. For it is true, the
prayers of the saints have the greatest power; on condition however of our

repentance and amendment. Since even Moses, who had rescued his own brother
and six hundred thousand men from the wrath that was then coming upon them
from God, had no power to deliver his sister; and yet the sin was not equal; for
whereas she had done despite but to Moses, in that other case it was plain
impiety, what they ventured on. But this difficulty I leave for you; while that
which is yet harder, I will try to explain.
For why should we speak of his sister? Since he who stood forth the
advocate of so great a people had not power to prevail for himself, but after his
countless toils, and sufferings, and his assiduity for forty years, was prohibited
from setting foot on that land, touching which there had been so many
declarations and promises. What then was the cause? To grant this favor would
not be profitable, but would, on the contrary, bring with it much harm, and
would be sure to prove a stumbling-block to many of the Jews. For if when they
were merely delivered from Egypt, they forsook God, and sought after Moses,
and imputed all to him; had they seen him also lead them into the land of
promise, to what extent of impiety might they not have been cast away? And for
this reason also, let me add, neither was his tomb made known.
And Samuel again was not able to save Saul from the wrath from above, yet
he oftentimes preserved the Israelites. And Jeremiah prevailed not for the Jews,
but some one else he did haply cover from evil by his prophecy. And Daniel
saved the barbarians from slaughter, [Daniel 2:24] but he did not deliver the
Jews from their captivity.
And in the Gospels too we shall see both these events come to pass, not in
the case of different persons, but of the same; and the same man now prevailing
for himself and now given up. For he who owed the ten thousand talents, though
he had delivered himself from the danger by entreaty, yet again he prevailed not,
[Matthew 18:26-34] and another on the contrary, who had before thrown himself
away, afterwards had power to help himself in the greatest degree. [Luke 15:1320] But who is this? He that devoured his Father's substance.
So that on the one hand, if we be careless, we shall not be able to obtain