John 14:4
"And whither I go ye know, and the way ye know."
Do you see that He gives them proof that these things were not said without
a meaning? And He used these words, because He knew in Himself that their
souls now desired to learn this. For Peter said what he said, not in order to learn,
but that he might follow. But when Peter had been rebuked, and Christ had
declared that to be possible which for the time seemed impossible, and when the
apparent impossibility led him to desire to know the matter exactly, therefore He
says to the others, "And the way ye know." For as when He has said, "You shall
deny Me," before any one spoke a word, searching into their hearts, He said, "Be
not troubled," so here also by saying "You know," He disclosed the desire which
was in their heart, and Himself gives them an excuse for questioning. Now the,
"Where are You going?" Peter used from a very loving affection, Thomas from
cowardice.

John 14:5
"Lord, we know not whither You go."
"The place," he says, "we know not, and how shall we know the way leading
there?" And observe with what submissiveness he speaks; he says not, "tell us
the place," but, "we know not whither You go"; for all had long yearned to hear
this. If the Jews questioned among themselves when they heard (of His
departure), although desirous to be rid of Him, much more would those desire to
learn, who wished never to be separated from Him. They feared therefore to ask
Him, but yet they asked Him, from their great love and anxiety. What then says
Christ?

John 14:6
"I am the Way, and the Truth, and the Life; no man comes unto the Father, but by
Me."
"Why then, when He was asked by Peter, 'Where are You going,' did He not
say directly, 'I go to the Father, but you cannot come now'? Why did He put in a
circuit of so many words, placing together questions and answers? With good
reason He told not this to the Jews; but why not to these?" He had indeed said
both to these and to the Jews, that He came forth from God, and was going to
God, now He says the same thing more clearly than before. Besides, to the Jews
He spoke not so clearly; for had He said, "You cannot come to the Father but by
Me," they would straightway have deemed the matter mere boasting; but now by
concealing this, He threw them into perplexity. "But why," says some one, "did
He speak thus both to the disciples and to Peter?" He knew his great
forwardness, and that he would by reason of this the more press on and trouble
Him; in order therefore to lead him away, He hides the matter. Having then
succeeded in what He wished by the obscurity and by veiling His speech, He
again discloses the matter. After saying, "Where I am, no man can come," He
adds, "In My Father's house are many mansions"; and again, "No man comes to
the Father but by Me." This He would not tell them at first, in order not to throw
them into greater despondency, but, now that He has soothed them, He tells
them. For by Peter's rebuke He cast out much of their despondency; and
dreading lest they should be addressed in the same way, they were the more
restrained. "I am the Way." This is the proof of the, "No man comes to the Father
but by Me"; and, "the Truth, and the Life," of this, "that these things shall surely
be." "There is then no falsehood with Me, if I am 'the Truth'; if I am 'Life' also,
not even death shall be able to hinder you from coming to Me. Besides; if I am
'the Way,' you will need none to lead you by the hand; if I am also 'the Truth,' My
words are no falsehoods; if I am also 'Life,' though ye die you shall obtain what I