THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.67, C.7.

The point to be observed, however, is this, that by this form, "We
baptize thee," the intention expressed is that several concur in
conferring one Baptism: and this seems contrary to the notion of a
minister; for a man does not baptize save as a minister of Christ, and
as standing in His place; wherefore just as there is one Christ, so
should there be one minister to represent Christ. Hence the Apostle
says pointedly (Eph. 4:5): "one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism."
Consequently, an intention which is in opposition to this seems to
annul the sacrament of Baptism.
On the other hand, if each were to say: "I baptize thee in the name of
the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost," each would signify
his intention as though he were conferring Baptism independently of
the other. This might occur in the case where both were striving to
baptize someone; and then it is clear that whichever pronounced the
words first would confer the sacrament of Baptism; while the other,
however great his right to baptize, if he presume to utter the words,
would be liable to be punished as a rebaptizer. If, however, they were
to pronounce the words absolutely at the same time, and dipped or
sprinkled the man together, they should be punished for baptizing in
an improper manner, but not for rebaptizing: because each would
intend to baptize an unbaptized person, and each, so far as he is
concerned, would baptize. Nor would they confer several
sacraments: but the one Christ baptizing inwardly would confer one
sacrament by means of both together.
Reply to Objection 1: This argument avails in those agents that act
by their own power. But men do not baptize by their own, but by
Christ's power, Who, since He is one, perfects His work by means of
one minister.
Reply to Objection 2: In a case of necessity one could baptize
several at the same time under this form: "I baptize ye": for instance,
if they were threatened by a falling house, or by the sword or
something of the kind, so as not to allow of the delay involved by
baptizing them singly. Nor would this cause a change in the
Church's form, since the plural is nothing but the singular doubled:
especially as we find the plural expressed in Mt. 28:19: "Baptizing
them," etc. Nor is there parity between the baptizer and the baptized;
since Christ, the baptizer in chief, is one: while many are made one
in Christ by Baptism.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.67, C.7.

Reply to Objection 3: As stated above (Question 66, Article 1), the
integrity of Baptism consists in the form of words and the use of the
matter. Consequently, neither he who only pronounces the words,
baptizes, nor he who dips. Where fore if one pronounces the words
and the other dips, no form of words can be fitting. For neither could
he say: "I baptize thee": since he dips not, and therefore baptizes
not. Nor could they say: "We baptize thee": since neither baptizes.
For if of two men, one write one part of a book, and the other write
the other, it would not be a proper form of speech to say: "We wrote
this book," but the figure of synecdoche in which the whole is put for
the part.