to all other things pertaining to the burial; but now in this case, as one deserted,
and deprived of a protector, she will obtain none of these offices from her
brother; of him whom she especially desired to obtain them; but when she gives
up the ghost, she will not see him whom she loved more to have with her than all
others? And will not this be heavier to her than dying many times over? Yes,
although I were far away, would it not be right to come with speed, and do, and
suffer any thing, for the purpose of showing her this kindness? And now when I
am near, shall I leave her, and taking my departure abandon her? And how then
will she sustain the remainder of her days?"
4. Yet, so far was he from saying any of these things, that he did not even
think of them; but esteeming the fear of God above all the ties of kindred, he
recognized the fact, that as tempests display the pilot, and dangers the general, so
also a time of trial makes the Priest to become manifest. "All men," says he, "are
eagerly looking on us; the Jews as well as the Greeks; let us not confound the
expectations which these have of us; let us not overlook so great a shipwreck;
but having committed to God all things that pertain to ourselves, let us venture
our life itself too!" Consider, moreover, the magnanimity of the Priest, and the
lovingkindness of God! All those things which he disregarded, all those he
enjoyed; in order that he might both receive the reward of his readiness, and that
he might obtain a greater pleasure by enjoying them contrary to expectation! He
preferred to celebrate the festival in a foreign place, and far from his own people,
for the sake of the city's safety. But God restored him to us before the Paschal
feast, so as to take a common part with us in the conduct of the festival; in order
that he might have the reward of his choice, and enjoy the greater gladness! He
feared not the season of the year; and there was summer during the whole period
he was travelling. He took not his age into account; and he dispatched this long
journey with just as much ease as if he had been young and sprightly! He
thought not of his sister's decease nor was enervated by it, and when he returned
he found her still alive, and all things which were disregarded by him, were all
obtained!

5. Thus, the priest has indeed won renown both with God and man! This
transaction has also adorned the Emperor with a splendour beyond the diadem!
First, in that it was then made apparent that he would grant that to the priests
which he would not to any other; secondly, that he granted the favour without
delay, and quelled his resentment. But that you may more clearly understand the
magnanimity of the Emperor, and the wisdom of the priest, and more than both
these, the lovingkindness of God; allow me to relate to you a few particulars of
the conference which took place. But what I am now about to relate I learned
from one of those who were within the palace; for the Father has told us neither
much nor little on the affair; but ever imitating the magnanimity of Paul, he
hides his own good deeds; and to those who on all sides were asking him
questions as to what he said to the Emperor; and how he prevailed upon him;
and how he turned away his wrath entirely, he replied, "We contributed nothing
to the matter, but the Emperor himself (God having softened his heart), even
before we had spoken, dismissed his anger, and quelled his resentment; and
discoursing of the events that had taken place as if some other person had been
insulted, he thus went over all the events that had happened without anger." But
those things which he concealed from humility, God has brought to light.
6. And what were these? I will proceed to relate them to you by going a
little farther back in the story. When he went forth from the city, leaving all in
such great despondency, he endured what was far more grievous than we
ourselves suffered, who were in the midst of these calamities. For, in the first
place, meeting in the midst of his journey with those who had been sent by the
Emperor to make inquisition upon the events which had happened; and learning
from them, on what terms they were sent; and reflecting upon the dreadful
events that were in store for the city, the tumults, the confusion, the flight, the
terror, the agony, the perils, he wept a flood of tears, and his bowels were rent
with compassion; for with fathers, it is usual to grieve much more, when they are
not able to be present with their suffering children; which was just what this
most tender-hearted man now endured; not only lamenting the calamities which