2. For this cause yourselves too kept silence on those former days, because
the whole city was empty, and all had migrated to the deserts, and because those
who were left behind were overshadowed by the cloud of despondency. For the
soul when once it is filled with despondency, is not apt to hear anything that may
be said. For this cause, when the friends of Job came, and saw that tragedy of his
house, and the just man sitting down upon the dunghill, and covered with sores,
they rent their garments, and groaned and sat down by him in silence; making it
manifest that nothing is so suitable to the afflicted at first, as quiet and silence.
For the calamity was too great for consolation. Therefore also the Jews, while
they were in bondage to work in clay and the brick-making, when they saw
Moses come to them, were not able to give heed to his words, by reason of their
failure of spirit, and their affliction. And what marvel is it that faint-hearted men
have felt this, when we find that the Disciples also fell into the same infirmity.
For after that mystic Supper, when Christ took them apart and discoursed with
them, the disciples at first asked Him more than once, "Where are You going?"
But when He had told them what evils they should in a little while afterwards
encounter, the wars, and the persecutions, and the universal enmity, the stripes,
the prisons, the tribunals, the appearance before magistrates; then, their souls
oppressed as by a heavy burden with the dread of the things He had spoken, and
with the sadness of these approaching events, remained henceforth in a state of
stupor. Christ, therefore, perceiving their consternation, reproved it by saying, "I
go to My Father, and no one among you asks Me, Where are You going? But
because I have said these things unto you, sorrow has filled your hearts." For
this reason also we were silent for some time past, awaiting the present
opportunity. For if a person who is about to ask a favour of any one, though the
request be a reasonable one, waits a fitting occasion to propose it, that he may
find him who is to grant the petition in a mild and well-disposed frame of mind;
and that receiving assistance from the favourable opportunity, he may obtain the
benefit; how much rather is it necessary that the speaker should seek a fit season,
so that he may address his discourse to an auditor well affected, and free from all

care and despondency; which accordingly we have done.
3. Inasmuch, then, as you have now shaken off despondency, we are
desirous to recall you to the recollection of former matters; so that our discourse
may be rendered the clearer to you. For what we said of the creation, that God
not only made it beautiful, and wonderful, and vast, but also weak and
corruptible; and moreover that He has established various proofs of this;
ordering both these circumstances for our advantage; leading us on by its beauty
to admiration of Him who framed it: and by its weakness leading us away from
the worship of the creature; this we may see, take place also in the case of the
body. For with respect to this too there are many among the enemies to the truth,
as well as among those who belong to our own ranks, who make it a subject of
enquiry, why it was created corruptible and frail? Many also of the Greeks and
heretics affirm, that it was not even created by God. For they declare it to be
unworthy of God's creative art, and enlarge upon its impurities, its sweat, its
tears, its labours, and sufferings, and all the other incidents of the body. But, for
my part, when such things are talked of, I would first make this reply. Tell me
not of man, fallen, degraded and condemned. But if you would learn what
manner of body God formed us with at the first, let us go to Paradise, and survey
the Man that was created at the beginning. For that body was not thus corruptible
and mortal; but like as some statue of gold just brought from the furnace, that
shines splendidly, so that frame was free from all corruption. Labour did not
trouble it, nor sweat deface it. Cares did not conspire against it; nor sorrows
besiege it; nor was there any other affection of that kind to distress it. But when
man did not bear his felicity with moderation, but threw contempt upon his
Benefactor, and thought a deceiving demon more worthy of credit than God who
cared for him, and who had raised him to honour, and when he expected to
become himself a god, and conceived thoughts above his proper dignity, then—
then indeed it was that God, to humble him by decisive acts, made him mortal,
as well as corruptible; and fettered him with such varied necessities; not from
hatred or aversion, but in care for him, and to repress at the very outset that evil