and of that air, that it may extinguish the fire, and scatter the smoke, and give
wings to our thoughts. For it cannot, it cannot be that one weighed down with so
great evils should soar up to heaven; it is well if being without impediment we
can cleave our way there; or rather it is not possible even so, unless we obtain
the wing of the Spirit.
Now if there be need both of an unencumbered mind, and of spiritual grace,
that we may mount up to that height; what if there be none of these things, but
we draw to ourselves whatever is opposite to them, even a satanical weight?
How shall we be able to soar upwards, when dragged down by so great a load?
For indeed, should any one attempt to weigh our words as it were in just
balances; in ten thousand talents of worldly talk he will scarcely find an hundred
pence of spiritual words, or rather, I should say, not even ten farthings. Is it not
then a disgrace, and an extreme mockery, that if we have a servant, we make use
of him for the most part in things necessary, but being possessed of a tongue, we
do not deal with our member so well even as with a slave, but on the contrary
make use of it for things unprofitable, and mere makeweights? And would it
were only for makeweights: but now it is for what are contrary and hurtful and in
no respect advantageous to us. For if the things that we spoke were profitable to
us, they would assuredly be also pleasing to God. But as it is, whatever the devil
may suggest, we speak it all, now laughing, and now speaking wittily; now
cursing and insulting, and now swearing, lying, and taking false oaths; now
murmuring, and now making vain babblings, and talking trifles more than old
wives; uttering all things that are of no concern to us.
For, tell me, who of you that stand here, if he were required, could repeat
one Psalm, or any other portion of the divine Scriptures? There is not one.
And it is not this only that is the grievous thing, but that while you have
become so backward with respect to things spiritual, yet in regard of what
belongs to Satan you are more vehement than fire. Thus should any one be
minded to ask of you songs of devils and impure effeminate melodies, he will
find many that know these perfectly, and repeat them with much pleasure.

10. But what is the answer to these charges? "I am not," you will say, "one
of the monks, but I have both a wife and children, and the care of a household."
Why, this is what has ruined all, your supposing that the reading of the divine
Scriptures appertains to those only, when you need it much more than they. For
they that dwell in the world, and each day receive wounds, these have most need
of medicines. So that it is far worse than not reading, to account the thing even
"superfluous:" for these are the words of diabolical invention. Hear ye not Paul
saying, "that all these things are written for our admonition"?
[1 Corinthians 10:11]
And you, if you had to take up a Gospel, would not choose to do so with
hands unwashed; but the things that are laid up within it, do you not think to be
highly necessary? It is because of this, that all things are turned upside down.
For if you would learn how great is the profit of the Scriptures, examine
yourself, what you become by hearing Psalms, and what by listening to a song of
Satan; and how you are disposed when staying in a Church, and how when
sitting in a theatre; and you will see that great is the difference between this soul
and that, although both be one. Therefore Paul said, "Evil communications
corrupt good manners." [1 Corinthians 15:33] For this cause we have need
continually of those songs, which serve as charms from the Spirit. Yes, for this it
is whereby we excel the irrational creatures, since with respect to all other
things, we are even exceedingly inferior to them.
This is a soul's food, this its ornament, this its security; even as not to hear
is famine and wasting; for "I will give them," says He, "not a famine of bread,
nor a thirst of water, but a famine of hearing the word of the Lord." [Amos 8:11]
What then can be more wretched? When the very evil, which God threatens
in the way of punishment, this you are drawing upon your head of your own
accord, bringing into your soul a sort of grievous famine, and making it the
feeblest thing in the world? For it is its nature both to be wasted and to be saved
by words. Yea, this leads it on to anger; and the same kind of thing again makes
it meek: a filthy expression is wont to kindle it to lust, and it is trained to