John 12:35
"Yet a little while is the light with you."
Signifying that His death was a removal; for the light of the sun is not
destroyed, but having retired for a while appears again.
"Walk while you have the light."
Of what season does He here speak? Of the whole present life, or of the
time before the Crucifixion? I for my part think of both, for on account of His
unspeakable lovingkindness, many even after the Crucifixion believed. And He
speaks these things to urge them on to the faith, as He also did before, saying,
"Yet a little while I am with you." [John 7:33]
"He that walks in darkness knows not whither he goes."
How many things, for instance, even now do the Jews, without knowing
what they do, but walking as though they were in darkness? They think that they
are going the right way, when they are taking the contrary; keeping the Sabbath,
respecting the Law and the observances about meats, yet knowing not whither
they walk. Wherefore He said,

John 12:36
"Walk in the light, that you may become children of the light."
That is, "My children." Yet in the beginning the Evangelist says, "Were
born, not of bloods, nor of the will of the flesh, but of God" [John 1:13]; that is,
of the Father; while here Himself is said to beget them; that you may understand
that the operation of the Father and the Son is One. "Jesus having spoken these
things," departed from them, and did hide Himself.
Why does He now "hide Himself"? They took not up stones against Him,
nor did they blaspheme Him in any such manner as before; why then did He hide
Himself? Walking in men's hearts, He knew that their wrath was fierce, though
they said nothing; He knew it boiling and murderous, and waited not till it issued
into action, but hid Himself, to allay their ill-will. Observe how the Evangelist
has alluded to this feeling; he has immediately added,

John 12:37
"Though He had done so many miracles, they believed not on Him."
2. What "so many"? So many as the Evangelist has omitted. And this is
clear also from what follows. For when He had retired, and given in, and had
come to them again, He speaks with them in a lowly manner, saying, "He that
believes in Me, believes not on Me, but on Him that sent Me." [John 12:44]
Observe what He does. He begins with humble and modest expressions, and
betakes Himself to the Father; then again He raises His language, and when He
sees that they are exasperated, He retires; then He comes to them again, and
again begins with words of humility. And where has He done this? Nay, where
has He not done it? See, for instance, what He says at the beginning, "As I hear, I
judge." [John 5:30] Then in a loftier tone, "As the Father raises up the dead, and
quickens them, so also the Son quickens whom He will" [John 5:21]; again, "I
judge you not, there is another that judges." Then again He retires. Then coming
to Galilee, "Labor not," He says, "for the meat that perishes" [John 6:27]; and
after having said great things of Himself, that He came down from Heaven, that
He gives eternal life, He again withdraws Himself. And He comes in the Feast of
Tabernacles also, and does the same. And one may see Him continually thus
varying His teaching, by His presence, by His absence, by lowly, by high
discourses. Which He also did here. "Though He had done so many miracles," it
says, "they believed not on Him."