the comic poet, all other things were set in order) they have brought forward the Word; while for
the primary and greatest gods they have formed the Æons; and in place of the secondary gods, they
tell us of that creation by their mother which is outside of the Pleroma, calling it the second Ogdoad.
They proclaim to us, like the writer referred to, that from this (Ogdoad) came the creation of the
world and the formation of man, maintaining that they alone are acquainted with these ineffable
and unknown mysteries. Those things which are everywhere acted in the theatres by comedians
with the clearest voices they transfer to their own system, teaching them undoubtedly through
means of the same arguments, and merely changing the names.
2. And not only are they convicted of bringing forward, as if their own [original ideas], those
things which are to be found among the comic poets, but they also bring together the things which
have been said by all those who were ignorant of God, and who are termed philosophers; and sewing
together, as it were, a motley garment out of a heap of miserable rags, they have, by their subtle
manner of expression, furnished themselves with a cloak which is really not their own. They do,
it is true, introduce a new kind of doctrine, inasmuch as by a new sort of art it has been substituted
[for the old]. Yet it is in reality both old and useless, since these very opinions have been sewed
together out of ancient dogmas redolent of ignorance and irreligion. For instance, Thales of
Miletus affirmed that water was the generative and initial principle of all things. Now it is just the
same thing whether we say water or Bythus. The poet Homer, again, held the opinion that
Oceanus, along with mother Tethys, was the origin of the gods: this idea these men have transferred
to Bythus and Sige. Anaximander laid it down that infinitude is the first principle of all things,
having seminally in itself the generation of them all, and from this he declares the immense worlds
[which exist] were formed: this, too, they have dressed up anew, and referred to Bythus and their
Æons. Anaxagoras, again, who has also been surnamed "Atheist," gave it as his opinion that animals
were formed from seeds falling down from heaven upon earth. This thought, too, these men have
transferred to "the seed" of their Mother, which they maintain to be themselves; thus acknowledging
at once, in the judgment of such as are possessed of sense, that they themselves are the offspring
of the irreligious Anaxagoras.
3. Again, adopting the [ideas of] shade and vacuity from Democritus and Epicurus, they have
fitted these to their own views, following upon those [teachers] who had already talked a great deal
about a vacuum and atoms, the one of which they called that which is, and the other that which is
not. In like manner, these men call those things which are within the Pleroma real existences, just
as those philosophers did the atoms; while they maintain that those which are without the Pleroma
have no true existence, even as those did respecting the vacuum. They have thus banished themselves
in this world (since they are here outside of the Pleroma) into a place which has no existence. Again,
when they maintain that these things [below] are images of those which have a true existence
[above], they again most manifestly rehearse the doctrine of Democritus and Plato. For Democritus