SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.188, C.10.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.188, C.11.

### ARTICLE 10. Whether it is praiseworthy to enter religion

without taking counsel of many, and previously deliberating
for a long time?
Objection 1: It would not seem praiseworthy to enter religion without
taking counsel of many, and previously deliberating for a long time.
For it is written (1 Jn. 4:1): "Believe not every spirit, but try the spirits
if they be of God." Now sometimes a man's purpose of entering
religion is not of God, since it often comes to naught through his
leaving the religious life; for it is written (Acts 5:38,39): "If this
counsel or this work be of God, you cannot overthrow it." Therefore
it would seem that one ought to make a searching inquiry before
entering religion.
Objection 2: Further, it is written (Prov. 25:9): "Treat thy cause with
thy friend." Now a man's cause would seem to be especially one that
concerns a change in his state of life. Therefore seemingly one
ought not to enter religion without discussing the matter with one's
friends.
Objection 3: Further, our Lord (Lk. 14:28) in making a comparison
with a man who has a mind to build a tower, says that he doth "first
sit down and reckon the charges that are necessary, whether he
have wherewithal to finish it," lest he become an object of mockery,
for that "this man began to build and was not able to finish." Now the
wherewithal to build the tower, as Augustine says (Ep. ad Laetum
ccxliii), is nothing less than that "each one should renounce all his
possessions." Yet it happens sometimes that many cannot do this,
nor keep other religious observances; and in signification of this it is
stated (1 Kgs. 17:39) that David could not walk in Saul's armor, for he
was not used to it. Therefore it would seem that one ought not to
enter religion without long deliberation beforehand and taking
counsel of many.
On the contrary, It is stated (Mt. 4:20) that upon our Lord's calling
them, Peter and Andrew "immediately leaving their nets, followed
Him." Here Chrysostom says (Hom. xiv in Matth.): "Such obedience
as this does Christ require of us, that we delay not even for a
moment."
I answer that, Long deliberation and the advice of many are required

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.188, C.11.

in great matters of doubt, as the Philosopher says (Ethic. iii, 3); while
advice is unnecessary in matters that are certain and fixed. Now with
regard to entering religion three points may be considered. First, the
entrance itself into religion, considered by itself; and thus it is
certain that entrance into religion is a greater good, and to doubt
about this is to disparage Christ Who gave this counsel. Hence
Augustine says (De Verb. Dom., Serm. c, 2): "The East," that is
Christ, "calleth thee, and thou turnest to the West," namely mortal
and fallible man. Secondly, the entrance into religion may be
considered in relation to the strength of the person who intends to
enter. And here again there is no room for doubt about the entrance
to religion, since those who enter religion trust not to be able to stay
by their own power, but by the assistance of the divine power,
according to Is. 40:31, "They that hope in the Lord shall renew their
strength, they shall take wings as eagles, they shall run and not be
weary, they shall walk and not faint." Yet if there be some special
obstacle (such as bodily weakness, a burden of debts, or the like) in
such cases a man must deliberate and take counsel with such as are
likely to help and not hinder him. Hence it is written (Ecclus. 37:12):
"Treat with a man without religion concerning holiness, with an
unjust man concerning justice," meaning that one should not do so,
wherefore the text goes on (Ecclus. 37:14,15), "Give no heed to these
in any matter of counsel, but be continually with a holy man." In
these matters, however, one should not take long deliberation.
Wherefore Jerome says (Ep. and Paulin. liii): "Hasten, I pray thee, cut
off rather than loosen the rope that holds the boat to the shore."
Thirdly, we may consider the way of entering religion, and which
order one ought to enter, and about such matters also one may take
counsel of those who will not stand in one's way.
Reply to Objection 1: The saying: "Try the spirits, if they be of God,"
applies to matters admitting of doubt whether the spirits be of God;
thus those who are already in religion may doubt whether he who
offers himself to religion be led by the spirit of God, or be moved by
hypocrisy. Wherefore they must try the postulant whether he be
moved by the divine spirit. But for him who seeks to enter religion
there can be no doubt but that the purpose of entering religion to
which his heart has given birth is from the spirit of God, for it is His
spirit "that leads" man "into the land of uprightness" (Ps. 142:10).
Nor does this prove that it is not of God that some turn back; since
not all that is of God is incorruptible: else corruptible creatures
would not be of God, as the Manicheans hold, nor could some who