of heart. Let us make an end of this war, let us overthrow these enemies, let us
set up these trophies, let us establish peace in our own city. We have within us a
city and a civil polity, and citizens and aliens many: but let us banish the aliens,
that our own people may not be ruined. Let no foreign nor spurious doctrine
enter in, no carnal desire. See we not that, if any enemy has been caught in a city,
he is judged as a spy? Then let us not only banish aliens, but let us drive out
enemies also. If we see one, let us deliver up to the ruler, (that is), to conscience
([τᾥ νᾥ]), that imagination which is indeed an alien, a barbarian, albeit tricked
out with the garb of a citizen. For there are within us many imaginations of this
kind, which are by nature indeed enemies, but are clad in sheep's skins. Just as
the Persians, when they have put off the tiara, and the drawers, and the barbarian
shoes, and put on the other dress which is usual with us, and have shorn
themselves close, and converse in our own tongue, conceal war under their
outward garb: but once apply the tortures ([βασάνους] or "tests"), and you bring
to light what is hidden: so here, examine (or "put to the test,") by torture again
and again such an imagination as this, and you will quickly see that its spirit is
that of a stranger. But to show you also by way of example the sort of spies
which the devil sends into us to spy out what is in us, come let us strip one of
them, and examine it strictly at the tribunal: and if you please, let us bring
forward some of those which were detected by Paul. "Which things," he says,
"have indeed a show of wisdom in will-worship, and humility, and neglecting of
the body: not in any honor to the satisfying of the flesh." [Colossians 2:23] The
devil wished to bring in Judaism: now if he had introduced it in its own form, he
would not have carried his point. Accordingly, mark how he brought it about.
"You must neglect the body," he says: "this is (the true) philosophy, not to admit
of meats, but to guard against them: this is humility." And now again in our own
times, in the case of the heretics, he wished to bring us down to the creature. See
then how he dressed up his deceit. Had he said, "Worship a creature," he would
have been detected: but what says he? "God" (viz. the Son and the Holy Ghost),
he says, "is a created being." But let us lay bare for the decision of the judges the

meaning of the Apostolic writings: there let us bring him: themselves will
acknowledge both the preaching and the language. Many make gains "that they
may have wherewith to give to the poor," unjust gains: this too is a wicked
imagination. But let us undress it, let us convict it, that we may not be taken by
it, but that having escaped all the devices of the devil, and holding to the sound
doctrines with strictness, we may be able both to pass in safety through this life
present, and to obtain the good things promised, through the grace and mercy of
our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father, together with the Holy Ghost,
be glory, might, honor, now and ever, world without end. Amen.