before all, evincing a superfluous vanity, and wishing to make it appear, that
with much authority they enjoin Him. And this too the evangelist shows that he
is blaming, for with this very allusion did he thus express himself, "While He yet
talked to the people;" as if he should say, What? Was there no other opportunity?
Why, was it not possible to speak with Him in private?
And what was it they wished to say? For if it were touching the doctrines of
the truth, they ought to have propounded these things publicly, and stated them
before all, that the rest also might have the benefit: but if about other matters that
concerned themselves, they ought not to have been so urgent. For if He suffered
not the burial of a father, lest the attendance on Him should be interrupted, much
less ought they to have stopped His discourse to the people, for things that were
of no importance. Whence it is clear, that nothing but vainglory led them to do
this; which John too declares, by saying, "Neither did His brethren believe in
Him;" [John 7:5] and some sayings too of theirs he reports, full of great folly;
telling us that they were for dragging Him to Jerusalem, for no other purpose,
but that they themselves might reap glory from His miracles. "For if you do
these things," it is said, "show Yourself to the world. For there is no man that
does anything in secret, and seeks himself to be manifest;" when also He Himself
rebuked them, attributing it to their carnal mind. That is, because the Jews were
reproaching Him, and saying, "Is not this the carpenter's son, whose father and
mother we know? And His brethren, are not they with us?" they, willing to throw
off the disparagement caused by His birth, were calling Him to the display of His
miracles.
For this cause He quite repels them, being minded to heal their infirmity;
since surely, had it been His will to deny His mother, He would have denied her
then, when the Jews were reproaching Him. But as it is, we see that He takes so
great care of her, as even at the very cross to commit her to the disciple whom
He loved most of all, and to give him a great charge concerning her.
But now He does not so, out of care for her, and for His brethren. I mean,
because their regard for Him was as towards a mere man, and they were

vainglorious, He casts out the disease, not insulting, but correcting them.
But do thou, I pray, examine not the words only, which contain a moderate
reproof, but also the unbecoming conduct of His brethren, and the boldness
wherewith they had been bold and who was the person reproving it, no mere
man, but the only-begotten Son of God; and with what purpose He reproved; that
it was not with intent to drive them to perplexity, but to deliver them from the
most tyrannical passion and to lead them on little by little to the right idea
concerning Himself, and to convince her that He was not her Son only, but also
her Lord: so will you perceive that the reproof is in the highest degree both
becoming Him and profitable to her, and withal having in it much gentleness.
For He said not, "Go your way, tell my mother, you are not my mother," but He
addresses Himself to the person that told Him; saying, "Who is my mother?"
together with the things that have been mentioned providing for another object
also. What then is that? That neither they nor others confiding in their kindred,
should neglect virtue. For if she is nothing profited by being His mother, were it
not for that quality in her, hardly will any one else be saved by his kindred. For
there is one only nobleness, to do the will of God. This kind of noble birth is
better than the other, and more real.
2. Knowing therefore these things, let us neither pride ourselves on children
that are of good report, unless we have their virtue; nor upon noble fathers,
unless we be like them in disposition. For it is possible, both that he who begot a
man should not be his father, and that he who did not beget him should be.
Therefore in another place also, when some woman had said, "Blessed is the
womb that bare You, and the paps which You have sucked;" He said not, "The
womb bare me not, neither did I suck the paps," but this, "Yea rather, blessed are
they that do the will of my Father." Do you see how on every occasion He denies
not the affinity by nature, but adds that by virtue? And His forerunner too, in
saying, "O generation of vipers, think not to say, We have Abraham to our
father," [Matthew 3:7, 9] means not this, that they were not naturally of
Abraham, but that it profits them nothing to be of Abraham, unless they had the