Ex. xxxiii. 20.

Some read "in filium" instead of "in filio," as above.

6. Men therefore shall see God, that they may live, being made immortal by that sight, and
attaining even unto God; which, as I have already said, was declared figuratively by the prophets,
that God should be seen by men who bear His Spirit [in them], and do always wait patiently for
His coming. As also Moses says in Deuteronomy, "We shall see in that day that God will talk to
man, and he shall live." For certain of these men used to see the prophetic Spirit and His active
influences poured forth for all kinds of gifts; others, again, [beheld] the advent of the Lord, and
that dispensation which obtained from the beginning, by which He accomplished the will of the
Father with regard to things both celestial and terrestrial; and others [beheld] paternal glories adapted
to the times, and to those who saw and who heard them then, and to all who were subsequently to
hear them. Thus, therefore, was God revealed; for God the Father is shown forth through all these
[operations], the Spirit indeed working, and the Son ministering, while the Father was approving,
and man's salvation being accomplished. As He also declares through Hosea the prophet: "I," He
says, "have multiplied visions, and have used similitudes by the ministry (in manibus) of the
prophets." But the apostle expounded this very passage, when he said, "Now there are diversities
of gifts, but the same Spirit; and there are differences of ministrations, but the same Lord; and there
are diversities of operations, but it is the same God which worketh all in all. But the manifestation
of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal." But as He who worketh all things in all is
God, [as to the points] of what nature and how great He is, [God] is invisible and indescribable to
all things which have been made by Him, but He is by no means unknown: for all things learn
through His Word that there is one God the Father, who contains all things, and who grants existence
to all, as is written in the Gospel: "No man hath seen God at any time, except the only-begotten
Son, who is in the bosom of the Father; He has declared [Him]."
7. Therefore the Son of the Father declares [Him] from the beginning, inasmuch as He was with
the Father from the beginning, who did also show to the human race prophetic visions, and diversities
of gifts, and His own ministrations, and the glory of the Father, in regular order and connection, at
the fitting time for the benefit [of mankind]. For where there is a regular succession, there is also
fixedness; and where fixedness, there suitability to the period; and where suitability, there also
utility. And for this reason did the Word become the dispenser of the paternal grace for the benefit
of men, for whom He made such great dispensations, revealing God indeed to men, but presenting
man to God, and preserving at the same time the invisibility of the Father, lest man should at any
time become a despiser of God, and that he should always possess something towards which he
might advance; but, on the other hand, revealing God to men through many dispensations, lest man,
falling away from God altogether, should cease to exist. For the glory of God is a living man; and
the life of man consists in beholding God. For if the manifestation of God which is made by means