## Homily 27 on Second Corinthians

2 Corinthians 12:11
I have become foolish in glorying; ye compelled me: for I ought to have
been commended of you.
Having fully completed what he had to say about his own praises, he did
not stay at this; but again excuses himself and asks pardon for what he said,
declaring that his doing so was of necessity and not of choice. Still nevertheless,
although there was necessity, he calls himself "a fool." And when he began
indeed, he said, "As foolish receive me," and "as in foolishness;" but now,
leaving out the 'as,' he calls himself "foolish." For after he had established the
point he wished by saying what he did, he afterwards boldly and unsparingly
grapples with all failing of the sort, teaching all persons that none should ever
praise himself where there is no necessity, seeing that even where a reason for it
existed, Paul termed himself a fool [for so doing]. Then he turns the blame also
of his so speaking not upon the false Apostles, but wholly upon the disciples. For
"ye," he says, "compelled me." 'For if they gloried, but were not by doing so
leading you astray nor causing your destruction, I should not have been thus led
on to descend unto this discussion: but because they were corrupting the whole
Church, with a view to your advantage I was compelled to become foolish.' And
he did not say, 'For I feared lest if they obtained the highest estimation with you,
they should sow their doctrines,' yet this indeed he set down above when he said,
"I fear, lest by any means, as the serpent deceived Eve, so your minds should be
corrupted." [2 Corinthians 11:3] Here however he does not so express himself,
but in a more commanding manner and with more authority, having gained
boldness from what he had said, "For I ought to have been commended of you."
Then he also assigns the reason; and again he mentions not his revelations nor

his miracles only, but his temptations also.
"For in nothing was I behind the chiefest Apostles." See how he here too
again speaks out with greater authoritativeness. For, before indeed he said, "I
reckon I am not a whit behind," but here, after those proofs, he now boldly
speaks out asserting the fact, as I said, thus absolutely. Not that even thus he
departs from the mean, nor from his proper character. For as though he had
uttered something great and exceeding his deserts, in that he numbered himself
with the Apostles, he thus again speaks modestly, and adds,

2 Corinthians 12:12
"Although I be nothing, the signs of an Apostle were wrought among you."
'Look not thou at this,' he says, 'whether I be mean and little, but whether
you have not enjoyed those things which from an Apostle it was meet you
should enjoy.' Yet he did not say 'mean,' but what was lower, "nothing." For
where is the good of being great, and of use to nobody? Even as there is no
advantage in a skilful physician if he heals none of those that be sick. 'Do not
then,' he says, 'scrutinize this that I am nothing, but consider that, that wherein
ye ought to have been benefitted, I have failed in nothing, but have given proof
of mine Apostleship. There ought then to have been no need for me to say
anything.' Now he thus spoke, not as wanting to be commended, (for how should
he, he who counted heaven itself to be a small thing in comparison with his
longing after Christ?) but as desiring their salvation. Then lest they should say,
'And what is it to us, even though you were not a whit behind the very chiefest
Apostles?' he therefore added,
"The signs of an Apostle were wrought among you in all patience, and by
signs and wonders." Amazing! What a sea of good works has he traversed in a
few words! And observe what it is he puts first, "patience." For this is the note of
an Apostle, bearing all things nobly. This then he expressed shortly by a single
word; but upon the miracles, which were not of his own achieving, he employs
more. For consider how many prisons, how many stripes, how many dangers,
how many conspiracies, how many sleet-showers of temptations, how many
civil, how many foreign wars, how many pains, how many attacks he has
implied here in that word, "patience!" And by "signs" again, how many dead
raised, how many blind healed, how many lepers cleansed, how many devils cast
out! Hearing these things, let us learn if we happen upon a necessity for such
recitals to cut our good deeds short, as he too did.