separated, if any one who was not present were to ask you, what had been our
discourse, some could not tell: others would know merely the subject we had
spoken of, and answer that there had been a Homily upon the subject of
forgiving injuries, and praying for our enemies, but would omit all that had been
said, as they could not remember: others remember a little, but still somewhat. If
therefore you gain nothing by what you hear, I entreat you not even to attend at
the discourse. For of what use is it? The condemnation is greater, the punishment
more severe, if after so many exhortations, we continue in the same course. For
this reason God has given us a definite form of prayer, that we might ask for
nothing human, nothing worldly. And you that are faithful know what you ought
to pray for, how the whole Prayer is common. But one says, "It is not
commanded there to pray for unbelievers." This you would not say, if you
understood the force, the depth, the hidden treasure of that Prayer. Only unfold
it, and you find this also comprised within it. For it is implied, when one says in
prayer, "Your will be done on earth, as it is in Heaven." Now, because in heaven
there is no unbeliever nor offender; if therefore it was for the faithful alone, there
would be no reason in that expression. If the faithful were to do the will of God
and the unbelievers not to do it, His will were not done in earth as it is in heaven.
But it means; As there is none wicked in heaven, so let there be none on earth;
but draw all men to the fear of You, make all men angels, even those who hate
us, and are our enemies. Do you not see how God is daily blasphemed and
mocked by believers and unbelievers, both in word and in deed? What then? Has
He for this extinguished the sun? Or stayed the course of the moon? Has He
crushed the heavens and uprooted the earth? Has He dried up the sea? Has He
shut up the fountains of waters? Or confounded the air? Nay, on the contrary, He
makes His sun to rise, His rain to descend, gives the fruits of the earth in their
seasons, and thus supplies yearly nourishment to the blasphemers, to the
insensible, to the polluted, to persecutors; not for one day or two, but for their
whole life. Imitate Him then, emulate Him as far as human powers admit. Can
you not make the sun arise? Abstain from evil speaking. Can you not send rain?

Forbear reviling. Can you not give food? Refrain from insolence. Such gifts
from you are sufficient. The goodness of God to His enemies is shown by His
works. Do thou so at least by words: pray for your enemies, so will you be like
your Father who is in heaven. How many times have we discoursed upon this
subject! nor shall we cease to discourse; only let something come of it. It is not
that we are drowsy, and weary of speaking; only do not you that hear be
annoyed. Now a person seems to be annoyed, when he will not do what one
says. For he who practices, loves often to hear the same thing, and is not
annoyed by it; for it is his own commendation. But annoyance arises simply
from not doing what is prescribed. Hence the speaker is troublesome. If a man
practices almsgiving, and hears another speak of almsgiving, he is not wearied,
but pleased, for he hears his own good actions recommended and proclaimed. So
that when we are displeased at hearing a discourse upon the forgiveness of
injuries, it is because we have no interest in forbearance, it is not practiced by us;
for if we had the reality, we should not be pained at its being named. If therefore
you would not have us wearisome or annoying, practice as we preach, exhibit in
your actions the subject of our discourses. For we shall never cease discoursing
upon these things till your conduct is agreeable to them. And this we do more
especially from our concern and affection for you. For the trumpeter must sound
his trumpet, though no one should go out to war; he must fulfill his part. We do
it, not as wishing to bring heavier condemnation upon you, but to avert it from
ourselves. And besides this, love for you constrains us, for it would tear and
torture our hearts if that should befall you, which God avert! It is not any costly
process that we recommend to you: it does not require the spoiling of goods, nor
a long and toilsome journey. It is only to will. It is a word, it is a purpose of the
mind. Let us only set a guard on our tongues, a door and a bar upon our lips, that
we may utter nothing offensive to God. It is for our own advantage, not for theirs
for whom we pray, to act thus. For let us ever consider, that he who blesses his
enemy, blesses himself, he who curses his enemy, curses himself, and he who
prays for his enemy, prays not for him, but for himself. If we thus act, we shall