loved and admired by others, inasmuch as a man thus becomes
aware of his own goodness or greatness, through their giving
pleasure to others. Thirdly, from the fact that another's actions, if
they be good, are reckoned as one's own good, by reason of the
power of love, which makes a man to regard his friend as one with
himself. And on account of hatred, which makes one to reckon
another's good as being in opposition to oneself, the evil action of
an enemy becomes an object of pleasure: whence it is written (1 Cor.
13:6) that charity "rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth with the
truth."
Reply to Objection 1: Another's action may be conjoined to me,
either by its effect, as in the first way, or by knowledge, as in the
second way; or by affection, as in the third way.
Reply to Objection 2: This argument avails for the third mode, but
not for the first two.
Reply to Objection 3: Although the actions of another do not proceed
from habits that are in me, yet they either produce in me something
that gives pleasure; or they make me appreciate or know a habit of
mind; or they proceed from the habit of one who is united to me by
love.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.32, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether doing good to another is a cause of

pleasure?
Objection 1: It would seem that doing good to another is not a cause
of pleasure. Because pleasure is caused by one's obtaining one's
proper good, as stated above (Articles 1,5; Question 31, Article 1).
But doing good pertains not to the obtaining but to the spending of
one's proper good. Therefore it seems to be the cause of sadness
rather than of pleasure.
Objection 2: Further, the Philosopher says (Ethic. iv, 1) that
"illiberality is more connatural to man than prodigality." Now it is a
mark of prodigality to do good to others; while it is a mark of
illiberality to desist from doing good. Since therefore everyone takes
pleasure in a connatural operation, as stated in Ethic. vii, 14 and x, 4,
it seems that doing good to others is not a cause of pleasure.
Objection 3: Further, contrary effects proceed from contrary causes.
But man takes a natural pleasure in certain kinds of ill-doing, such
as overcoming, contradicting or scolding others, or, if he be angry,
in punishing them, as the Philosopher says (Rhet. i, 11). Therefore
doing good to others is a cause of sadness rather than pleasure.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Polit. ii, 2) that "it is most
pleasant to give presents or assistance to friends and strangers."
I answer that, Doing good to another may give pleasure in three
ways. First, in consideration of the effect, which is the good
conferred on another. In this respect, inasmuch as through being
united to others by love, we look upon their good as being our own,
we take pleasure in the good we do to others, especially to our
friends, as in our own good. Secondly, in consideration of the end;
as when a man, from doing good to another, hopes to get some good
for himself, either from God or from man: for hope is a cause of
pleasure. Thirdly, in consideration of the principle: and thus, doing
good to another, can give pleasure in respect of a threefold principle.
One is the faculty of doing good: and in this regard, doing good to
another becomes pleasant, in so far as it arouses in man an
imagination of abundant good existing in him, whereof he is able to
give others a share. Wherefore men take pleasure in their children,
and in their own works, as being things on which they bestow a