For "behold, certain of the scribes," it says, "said within themselves, This
man blasphemes. And Jesus knowing their thoughts, said, Wherefore think ye
evil in your hearts?" [Matthew 9:3-4]
But that it belongs to God only to know men's secrets, hear what says the
prophet, "Thou most entirely alone know the hearts;" [2 Chronicles 6:30] and
again, "God tries the hearts and reins; " and Jeremiah too says, "The heart is
deep above all things, and it is man, and who shall know him?" and, "Man shall
look on the face, but God on the heart." [1 Samuel 16:7] And by many things
one may see, that to know what is in the mind belongs to God alone.
Implying therefore that He is God, equal to Him that begot Him; what
things they were reasoning in themselves (for through fear of the multitude, they
dared not utter their mind), this their opinion He unveils and makes manifest,
evincing herein also His great gentleness.
"For wherefore," says He, "think ye evil in your hearts?" [Matthew 9:4]
And yet if there were cause for displeasure, it was the sick man who should
have been displeased, as being altogether deceived, and should have said "One
thing I came to have healed, and amendest Thou another? Why, whence is it
manifest that my sins are forgiven?"
But now he for his part utters no such word, but gives himself up to the
power of the healer; but these being curious and envious, plot against the good
deeds of others. Wherefore He rebukes them indeed, but with all gentleness.
"Why, if you disbelieve," says He, "what went before, and account my saying a
boast; behold I add to it also another, the uncovering of your secrets; and after
that again another." What then is this? The giving tone to the body of the
paralyzed.
And whereas, when He spoke unto the sick of the palsy, He spoke without
clearly manifesting His own authority: for He said not, "I forgive you your sins,"
but, "your sins be forgiven you:" upon their constraining, He discloses His
authority more clearly, saying, "But that you may know that the Son of Man has
power on earth to forgive sins."

Do you see, how far He was from unwillingness to be thought equal to the
Father? For He said not at all, "The Son of Man has need of another;" or, "He
has given Him authority," but, "He has authority." Neither does He say it for
love of honor, but "to convince you," so He speaks, "that I do not blaspheme in
making myself equal with God."
Thus everywhere His will is to offer proofs clear and indisputable; as when
He says, "Go your way, show yourself to the priest;" [Matthew 8:4] and when He
points to Peter's wife's mother ministering, and permits the swine to cast
themselves down headlong. And in the same manner here also; first, for a certain
token of the forgiveness of his sins, He provides the giving tone to his body: and
of that again, his carrying his bed; to hinder the fact from being thought a mere
fancy. And He does not this, before He had asked them a question. "For whether
is easier," says He, "to say, Your sins be forgiven you? Or to say, Take up your
bed, and go unto your house?" [Matthew 9:5-6] Now what He says is like this,
"Which seems to you easier, to bind up a disorganized body, or to undo the sins
of a soul? It is quite manifest; to bind up a body. For by how much a soul is
better than a body, by so much is the doing away sins a greater work than this;
but because the one is unseen, the other in sight, I throw in that, which although
an inferior thing, is yet more open to sense; that the greater also and the unseen
may thereby receive its proof;" thus by His works anticipating even now the
revelation of what had been said by John, that "He takes away the sins of the
world."
Well then, having raised him up, He sends him to his house; here again
signifying His unboastfulness, and that the event was not a mere imagination; for
He makes the same persons witnesses of his infirmity, and also of his health. For
I indeed had desired, says He, through your calamity to heal those also, that
seem to be in health, but are diseased in mind; but since they will not, depart
thou home, to heal them that are there.
Do you see how He indicates Him to be Creator both of souls and bodies?
He heals therefore the palsy in each of the two substances, and makes the