a mirror darkly; but then face to face."
4. For this cause he says, "We speak wisdom in a mystery, the hidden
wisdom which God fore-ordained before the worlds unto our glory. Hidden:"
that is, that no one of the powers above has learned it before us; neither do the
many know it now.
"Which he fore-ordained unto our glory" and yet, elsewhere he says, "unto
his own glory," for he considers our salvation to be His own glory: even as also
He calls it His own riches, [vid. Ephesians 3:8] though He be Himself rich in
good and need nothing in order that He may be rich.
"Fore-ordained," he says, pointing out the care had of us. For so those are
accounted most both to honor and to love us, whosoever shall have laid
themselves out to do us good from the very beginning: which indeed is what
fathers do in the case of children. For although they give not their goods until
afterwards, yet at first and from the beginning they had predetermined this. And
this is what Paul is earnest to point out now; that God always loved us even from
the beginning and when as yet we were not. For unless He had loved us, He
would not have fore-ordained our riches. Consider not then the enmity which has
come between; for more ancient than that was the friendship.
As to the words, "before the worlds," ([πρὸ τῶν αἰώνων]) they mean
eternal. For in another place also He says thus, "Who is before the worlds." The
Son also, if you mark it, will be found to be eternal in the same sense. For
concerning Him he says, [Hebrews 1:2] "By Him He made the worlds;" which is
equivalent to subsistence before the worlds; for it is plain that the maker is
before the things which are made.

1 Corinthians 2:8
5. "Which none of the rulers of this world knew; for had they known, they
would not have crucified the Lord of Glory."
Now if they knew not, how said He unto them, [John 7:28] "You both know
Me, and you know whence I am?" Indeed, concerning Pilate the Scripture says,
he knew not. [see John 19:9] It is likely also that neither did Herod know. These,
one might say, are called rulers of this world: but if a man were to say that this is
spoken concerning the Jews also and the Priests, he would not err. For to these
also He says, [John 8:19] "You know neither Me nor My Father." How then says
He a little before, "You both know Me, and you know whence I am?" However,
the manner of this way of knowledge and of that has already been declared in the
Gospel; (Hom. 49. on St. John,) and, not to be continually handling the same
topic, there do we refer our readers.
What then? Was their sin in the matter of the Cross forgiven them? For He
surely did say, "Forgive them." [Luke 23:34] If they repented, it was forgiven.
For even he who set countless assailants on Stephen and persecuted the Church,
even Paul, became the champion of the Church. Just so then, those others also
who chose to repent, had forgiveness: and this indeed Paul himself meant, when
he exclaims, [Romans 11:1-2]. "I say then, have they stumbled that they should
fall? God forbid." "I say then, has God cast away His people whom He
foreknew? God forbid." Then, to show that their repentance was not precluded,
he brought forward as a decisive proof his own conversion, saying, "For I also
am an Israelite."
As to the words, "They knew not;" they seem to me to be said here not
concerning Christ's Person, but only concerning the dispensation hidden in that
event: ([περὶ αὐτῆς τοῦ πράγματος τῆς οἰκονομὶας]) as if he had said, what
meant "the death," and the "Cross," they knew not. For in that passage also He