country. But observe, I pray you, how far it is from being the case that
everything is done by (miraculous) grace; how, on the contrary, God does in
many things leave them to manage for themselves by their own wisdom and in a
human way; so to cut off the excuse of idle people: for if it was so in the case of
Paul, much more in theirs. Then, it says, "the Church throughout all Judea and
Galilee and Samaria had peace (they), being edified, and walking in the fear of
the Lord, and abounded in the comfort of the Holy Ghost." [Acts 9:31] He is
about to relate that Peter goes down (from Jerusalem), therefore that you may
not impute this to fear, he first says this. For while there was persecution, he was
in Jerusalem, but when the affairs of the Church are everywhere in security, then
it is that he leaves Jerusalem. See how fervent and energetic he is! For he did not
think, because there was peace, therefore there was no need of his presence. Paul
departed, and there was peace: there is no war nor disturbance. Them, they
respected most, as having often stood by them, and as being held in admiration
by the multitude: but him, they despised, and were more savage against him.
See, how great a war, and immediately, peace! See what that war effected. It
dispersed the peace-makers. In Samaria, Simon was put to shame: in Judea, the
affair of Sapphira took place. Not that, because there was peace, therefore
matters became relaxed, but such was the peace as also to need exhortation.
"And it came to pass, as Peter passed throughout all quarters, he came down
also to the saints which dwelt at Lydda." [Acts 9:32] Like the commander of an
army, he went about, inspecting the ranks, what part was compact, what in good
order, what needed his presence. See how on all occasions he goes about,
foremost. When an Apostle was to be chosen, he was the foremost: when the
Jews were to be told, that these were "not drunken," when the lame man was to
be healed, when harangues to be made, he is before the rest: when the rulers
were to be spoken to, he was the man; when Ananias, he [ch. 1:15; 2:15; 3:4-12;
4:8; 5:3-15]: when healings were wrought by the shadow, still it was he. And
look: where there was danger, he was the man, and where good management
(was needed); but where all is calm, there they act all in common, and he

demands no greater honor (than the others). When need was to work miracles, he
starts forward, and here again he is the man to labor and toil. "And there he
found a certain man named Æneas, which had kept his bed eight years, and was
sick of the palsy. And Peter said unto him, Æneas, Jesus Christ makes you
whole: arise, and make your bed. And he arose immediately." (v. 33, 34.) And
why did he not wait for the man's faith, and ask if he wished to be healed? In the
first place, the miracle served for exhortation to many: hear then how great the
gain. "And all that dwelt at Lydda and Saron saw him, and turned to the Lord."
[Acts 9:35] For the man was notable. "Arise, and make your bed:" he does well
to give a proof of the miracle: for they not only released men of their diseases,
but in giving the health they gave the strength also. Moreover, at that time they
had given no proofs of their power, so that the man could not reasonably have
been required to show his faith, as neither in the case of the lame man did they
demand it. [Acts 3:6] As therefore Christ in the beginning of His miracles did
not demand faith, so neither did these. For in Jerusalem indeed, as was but
reasonable, the faith of the parties was first shown; "they brought out their sick
into the streets, but as Peter passed by, his shadow at least might fall upon some
of them" [Acts 5:15]; for many miracles had been wrought there; but here this is
the first that occurs. For of the miracles, some were wrought for the purpose of
drawing others (to faith); some for the comfort of them that believed. "Now there
was at Joppa a certain disciple named Tabitha, which by interpretation is called
Dorcas: this woman was full of good works and almsdeeds which she did. And it
came to pass in those days, that she was sick, and died: whom when they had
washed, they laid her in an upper chamber. And forasmuch as Lydda was near to
Joppa, and the disciples had heard that Peter was there, they sent unto him two
men, desiring him that he would not delay to come to them." [Acts 9:36-38].
Why did they wait till she was dead? Why was not Peter solicited ([ἐ] [σκύλη])
before this? So right-minded ([φιλοσοφοὕντες]) were they, they did not think it
proper to trouble ([σκύλλειν]) the Disciples about such matters, and to take them
away from the preaching: as indeed this is why it mentions that the place was