and the frequent and successive showers, which return at their proper season.
The nature of the clouds is one, but the things which are produced out of them
are different. For the rain, indeed, becomes wine in the grape, but oil in the olive.
And in other plants is changed into their juices; and the womb of the earth is
one, and yet bears different fruits. The heat, too, of the sun-beams is one, but it
ripens all things differently; bringing some to maturity more slowly, and others
more quickly. Who then but must feel astonishment and admiration at these
things?
5. Nay, this is not the only wonder, that He has formed it with this great
variety and diversity; but farther, that He has spread it before all in common; the
rich and the poor, sinners as well as the righteous. Even as Christ also declared:
"He makes His sun to rise upon the evil and the good, and sends His rain upon
the just and unjust." [Matthew 5:45] Moreover, when He stocked the world with
various animals, and implanted various dispositions in the creatures, He
commanded us to imitate some of these, and to avoid others. For example; the
ant is industrious, and performs a laborious task. By giving heed then, you will
receive the strongest admonition from this animal not to indulge in sloth, nor to
shun labour and toil. Therefore also the Scripture has sent the sluggard to the ant,
saying, "Go to the ant, thou sluggard, emulate his ways, and be wiser than he."
[Proverbs 6:6] Are you unwilling, he means, to learn from the Scriptures, that it
is good to labour, and that he who will not work, neither ought he to eat?
[2 Thessalonians 3:10] learn it from the irrationals! This also we do in our
families, when those who are older, and who are considered superior, have done
amiss, we bid them to attend to thoughtful children. We say, "Mark such an one,
who is less than you, how earnest and watchful he is." Do thou then likewise
receive from this animal the best exhortation to industry; and marvel at your
Lord, not only because He has made heaven and the sun, but because He has
also made the ant. For although the animal be small, it affords much proof of the
greatness of God's wisdom. Consider then how prudent the ant is, and consider
how God has implanted in so small a body, such an unceasing desire of working!

But while from this animal you learn industry; take from the bee at once a lesson
of neatness, industry, and social concord! For it is not more for herself than for
us, that the bee labours, and toils every day; which is indeed a thing especially
proper for a Christian; not to seek his own things, but the things of others. As
then she traverses all the meadows that she may prepare a banquet for another,
so also, O man, do thou likewise; and if you have accumulated wealth, expend it
upon others; if you have the faculty of teaching, do not bury the talent, but bring
it out publicly for the sake of those who need it! Or if you have any other
advantage, become useful to those who require the benefit of your labours! Do
you see not that for this reason, especially, the bee is more honoured than the
other animals; not because she labours, but because she labours for others? For
the spider also labours, and toils, and spreads out his fine textures over the walls,
surpassing the utmost skill of woman; but the creature is without estimation,
since his work is in no way profitable to us; such are they that labour and toil,
but for themselves! Imitate too the simplicity of the dove! Imitate the ass in his
love to his master, and the ox also! Imitate the birds in their freedom from
anxiety! For great, great indeed is the advantage that may be gained from
irrational creatures for the correction of manners.
6. From these animals Christ also instructs us, when He says, "Be wise as
serpents, and harmless as doves." [Matthew 10:16] And again; "Behold the
fowls of the air, for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather into barns; yet
your heavenly Father feeds them." [Matthew 6:26] The prophet also, to shame
the ungrateful Jews, thus speaks; "The ox knows his owner, and the ass his
master's crib; but Israel does not know me." [Isaiah 1:3] And again; "The turtle
and the swallow and the crane observe the time of their coming, but my people
knows not the judgment of the Lord his God." [Jeremiah 8:7] From these
animals, and such as these, learn to achieve virtue, and be instructed to avoid
wickedness by the contrary ones. For as the bee follows good, so the asp is
destructive. Therefore shun wickedness, lest you hear it said, "The poison of asps
is under their lips." Again, the dog is devoid of shame. Hate, therefore, this kind