shall be called least in the kingdom of Heaven."
And there are places where He puts down the sin itself by way of
punishment, leaving to the hearer to infer the grievousness of the punishment: as
when He says, "he has committed adultery with her in his heart;" and, "he that
puts away causes her to commit adultery;" and, "That which is more than these
is of the evil one." For to them that have understanding, instead of the mention of
the punishment, the very greatness of the sin is sufficient for correction.
Wherefore also He here brings forward the heathens and the publicans, by
the quality of the person putting the disciple to shame. Which Paul too did,
saying, "Sorrow not, even as the rest which have no hope;"
[1 Thessalonians 4:13] and, "Even as the Gentiles which know not God."
[1 Thessalonians 4:5]
And to signify that He requires nothing very overpowering, but a little more
than was accustomed, He says,
"Do not even the Gentiles the same?" [Matthew 5:47] Yet nevertheless He
stops not the discourse at this, but makes it end with His rewards, and those good
hopes, saying,
"Be therefore perfect, as your Heavenly Father."
And He intersperses everywhere abundantly the name of the heavens, by
the very place thoroughly elevating their minds. For as yet, I know not how, they
were somewhat weak and dull.
10. Let us then, bearing in mind all the things which have been said, show
forth great love even towards our enemies; and let us cast away that ridiculous
custom, to which many of the more thoughtless give way, waiting for those that
meet them to address them first. Towards that which has a great blessing, they
have no zeal; but what is ridiculous, that they follow after.
Wherefore now do you not address him first? "Because he is waiting for
this," is the reply. Nay, for this very reason most of all you should have sprung
forward to him, that you might win the crown. "No," says he, "since this was his
object." And what can be worse than this folly? That is, "Because this," says he,

"was his object—to become procurer of a reward for me—I will not put my hand
to what he has thus suggested." Now if he first address you, you gain nothing,
even though you accost him. But if you be first to spring forward and speak to
him, you have made yourself profit of his pride, and hast gathered in a manner
abundant fruit from his obstinacy. What is it then but the utmost folly, when we
are to reap so large fruit from bare words, to give up the gain; and condemning
him, to stumble at the very same thing? For if you blame him for this, that he
first waits to be addressed by another, wherefore do you emulate that same thing
which you accuse. That which you said was evil, why are you to imitate the
same as good? Do you see how that nothing is more senseless than a man who
associates with wickedness? Wherefore, I entreat, let us flee this evil and
ridiculous practice. Yea, for ten thousand friendships has this pestilence
overthrown, many enmities has it wrought.
For this cause then let us anticipate them. Since we who are commanded to
take blows, and be compelled to journey, and to be stripped by enemies, and to
bear it; what kind of indulgence should we deserve, exhibiting so great
contentiousness in a mere formal address?
11. "Why," says one, "we are despised and spit upon, the moment we have
given him up this." And in order that man may not despise you, do you offend
God? And in order that your frenzied fellow servant may not despise you, do
you despise the Lord, who has bestowed on you benefits so great? Nay, if it be
amiss that your equal should despise you, how much more that you should
despise the God that made you?
And together with this, consider that other point also; that when he despises
you, he is at that very moment employed in procuring to you a greater reward.
Since for God's sake you submit to it, because you have hearkened to His laws.
And this, to what kind of honor is it not equal? To how many diadems? Be it my
portion both to be insulted and despised for God's sake, rather than to be honored
by all kings; for nothing, nothing is equal to this glory.
This then let us pursue, in such wise as Himself commanded, and making