THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.13, C.2.

kind of knowledge belongs to an infinite power; yet there are things
which can be done only by an infinite power, as creation and the like,
as is plain from what has been said in the FP, Question 45. Hence
Christ's soul which, being a creature, is finite in might, can know,
indeed, all things, but not in every way; yet it cannot do all things,
which pertains to the nature of omnipotence; and, amongst other
things, it is clear it cannot create itself.
Reply to Objection 3: Christ's soul has practical and speculative
knowledge; yet it is not necessary that it should have practical
knowledge of those things of which it has speculative knowledge.
Because for speculative knowledge a mere conformity or
assimilation of the knower to the thing known suffices; whereas for
practical knowledge it is required that the forms of the things in the
intellect should be operative. Now to have a form and to impress this
form upon something else is more than merely to have the form; as
to be lightsome and to enlighten is more than merely to be
lightsome. Hence the soul of Christ has a speculative knowledge of
creation (for it knows the mode of God's creation), but it has no
practical knowledge of this mode, since it has no knowledge
operative of creation.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.13, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the soul of Christ had omnipotence with

regard to the transmutation of creatures?
Objection 1: It would seem that the soul of Christ had omnipotence
with regard to the transmutation of creatures. For He Himself says
(Mt. 28:18): "All power is given to Me in heaven and on earth." Now
by the words "heaven and earth" are meant all creatures, as is plain
from Gn. 1:1: "In the beginning God created heaven and earth."
Therefore it seems that the soul of Christ had omnipotence with
regard to the transmutation of creatures.
Objection 2: Further, the soul of Christ is the most perfect of all
creatures. But every creature can be moved by another creature; for
Augustine says (De Trin. iii, 4) that "even as the denser and lower
bodies are ruled in a fixed way by the subtler and stronger bodies;
so are all bodies by the spirit of life, and the irrational spirit of life by
the rational spirit of life, and the truant and sinful rational spirit of life
by the rational, loyal, and righteous spirit of life." But the soul of
Christ moves even the highest spirits, enlightening them, as
Dionysius says (Coel. Hier. vii). Therefore it seems that the soul of
Christ has omnipotence with regard to the transmutation of
creatures.
Objection 3: Further, Christ's soul had in its highest degree the
"grace of miracles" or works of might. But every transmutation of the
creature can belong to the grace of miracles; since even the
heavenly bodies were miraculously changed from their course, as
Dionysius proves (Ep. ad Polycarp). Therefore Christ's soul had
omnipotence with regard to the transmutation of creatures.
On the contrary, To transmute creatures belongs to Him Who
preserves them. Now this belongs to God alone, according to Heb.
1:3: "Upholding all things by the word of His power." Therefore God
alone has omnipotence with regard to the transmutation of
creatures. Therefore this does not belong to Christ's soul.
I answer that, Two distinctions are here needed. of these the first is
with respect to the transmutation of creatures, which is three-fold.
The first is natural, being brought about by the proper agent
naturally; the second is miraculous, being brought about by a
supernatural agent above the wonted order and course of nature, as