FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.109, C.2.

perfectly fire has heat, it would not bring about alteration, except by
the motion of the heavenly body. But it is clear that as all corporeal
movements are reduced to the motion of the heavenly body as to the
first corporeal mover, so all movements, both corporeal and
spiritual, are reduced to the simple First Mover, Who is God. And
hence no matter how perfect a corporeal or spiritual nature is
supposed to be, it cannot proceed to its act unless it be moved by
God; but this motion is according to the plan of His providence, and
not by necessity of nature, as the motion of the heavenly body. Now
not only is every motion from God as from the First Mover, but all
formal perfection is from Him as from the First Act. And thus the act
of the intellect or of any created being whatsoever depends upon
God in two ways: first, inasmuch as it is from Him that it has the
form whereby it acts; secondly, inasmuch as it is moved by Him to
act.
Now every form bestowed on created things by God has power for a
determined act, which it can bring about in proportion to its own
proper endowment; and beyond which it is powerless, except by a
superadded form, as water can only heat when heated by the fire.
And thus the human understanding has a form, viz. intelligible light,
which of itself is sufficient for knowing certain intelligible things, viz.
those we can come to know through the senses. Higher intelligible
things of the human intellect cannot know, unless it be perfected by
a stronger light, viz. the light of faith or prophecy which is called the
"light of grace," inasmuch as it is added to nature.
Hence we must say that for the knowledge of any truth whatsoever
man needs Divine help, that the intellect may be moved by God to its
act. But he does not need a new light added to his natural light, in
order to know the truth in all things, but only in some that surpass
his natural knowledge. And yet at times God miraculously instructs
some by His grace in things that can be known by natural reason,
even as He sometimes brings about miraculously what nature can
do.
Reply to Objection 1: Every truth by whomsoever spoken is from the
Holy Ghost as bestowing the natural light, and moving us to
understand and speak the truth, but not as dwelling in us by
sanctifying grace, or as bestowing any habitual gift superadded to
nature. For this only takes place with regard to certain truths that are
known and spoken, and especially in regard to such as pertain to
faith, of which the Apostle speaks.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.109, C.2.

Reply to Objection 2: The material sun sheds its light outside us; but
the intelligible Sun, Who is God, shines within us. Hence the natural
light bestowed upon the soul is God's enlightenment, whereby we
are enlightened to see what pertains to natural knowledge; and for
this there is required no further knowledge, but only for such things
as surpass natural knowledge.
Reply to Objection 3: We always need God's help for every thought,
inasmuch as He moves the understanding to act; for actually to
understand anything is to think, as is clear from Augustine (De Trin.
xiv, 7).