appearance he is rebuking the stronger, but he pours forth all he has to say
against the other in his address to these. For the kind of correction most likely to
be less grating is, when a person addresses some one else, while he is striking a
blow at a different person, since this does not permit the person rebuked to fly
into a passion, and introduces the medicine of correction unperceived. See now
with what judgment he does this, and how well-timed he is with it. For after
saying, "make not provision for the flesh to fulfil the lusts thereof," then he
proceeds to the discussion of these points, that he might not seem to be speaking
in defence of those who were the rebukers, and were for eating of anything. For
the weaker part ever requires more forethought. Wherefore he aims his blow
against the strong, immediately saying as follows, "Him that is weak in the
faith." You see one blow immediately given to him. For by calling him weak ([ἀ]
[σθενοὕντα]), he points out that he is not healthy ([ἄ] [ρρωστον]). Then he adds
next, "receive," and point out again that he requires much attention. And this is a
sign of extreme debility. "Not to doubtful disputations." See, he has laid on a
third stripe. For here he makes it appear that his error is of such a nature, that
even those who do not transgress in the same manner, and who nevertheless
admit him to their affection, and are earnestly bent upon curing him, are at
doubt. You see how in appearance he is conversing with these, but is rebuking
others secretly and without giving offense. Then by placing them beside each
other, one he gives encomiums, the other accusations. For he goes on to say,
"One believes that he may eat all things," commending him on the score of his
faith. "Another who is weak, eats herbs," disparaging this one again, on the score
of his weakness. Then since the blow he had given was deadly ([καιρίαν], used
hyperbolically), he comforts him again in these words,
Ver. 3. "Let not him that eats, despise him that eats not."
He does not say, let him alone, nor does he say, do not blame him, nor yet,
do not set him right; but do not reproach him, do not "despise" him, to show they
were doing a thing perfectly ridiculous. But of this he speaks in other words.
"Let not him which eats not, judge him that eats." For as the more advanced

made light of these, as of little faith, and falsely healed, and spurious, and still
Judaizers, so they too judged these as law-breakers, or as given to gluttony. And
of these it is likely that many were of the Gentiles too. Wherefore he proceeds,
for God has received him. But in the other's case he does not say this. And yet to
be despised was the eater's share, as a glutton, but to be judged, his that did not
eat, as of little faith. But he has made them change places, to show that he not
only does not deserve to be despised, but that he can even despise. But do I
condemn him? He means. By no means. For this is why he proceeds, "for God
has received him." Why then do you speak to him of the law, as to a
transgressor? "For God has received him:" that is, has shown His unspeakable
grace about him, and has freed him from all charges against him; then again he
turns to the strong.
Ver. 4. "Who are you that judgest another man's servant?"
Whence it appears that they too judged, and did not despise only. "To his
own Master he stands or falls." See here is another stroke. And the indignation
seems to be against the strong man, and he attacks him. When he says, "Yea, he
shall be holden up," he shows that he is still wavering, and requires so much
attention as to call in God as a physician for this, "for God," he says, "is able to
make him stand." And this we say of things we are quite in despair about. Then,
that he may not despair he both gives him the name of a servant when he says,
"Who are you that judgest another man's servant?" And here again he secretly
attacks him. For it is not because he does things worthy to exempt him from
being judged, that I bid you not judge him, but because he is Another's servant,
that is, not yours, but God's. Then to solace him again he does not say, "falls,"
but what? "stands or falls." But whether it be the latter or the former, either of
these is the Master's concernment, since the loss also goes to Him, if he does fall,
as the riches too, if he stand. And this again if we do not attend to Paul's aim in
not wishing them to be rebuked before a fitting opportunity, is very unworthy of
the mutual care becoming for Christians. But (as I am always saying) we must
examine the mind with which it is spoken, and the subject on which it is said and