about matters in which formerly they firmly believed, and those whom they used
to approach with unswerving confidence, they are unable to hold to any longer
steadfastly, but in consequence of their leader's defeat, so great a storm settles
down upon their souls, that the mischief ends in their shipwreck altogether. But
how dire is the destruction, and how terrible the fire which such a leader brings
upon his own wretched head for every soul which is thus lost, you will not need
to learn from me, as you know all this perfectly. Is this then pride, is this
vainglory in me, to be unwilling to be the cause of the destruction of so many
souls? And of procuring for myself greater punishment in the world to come,
than that which now awaits me there? Who would say so? Surely no one, unless
he should wish to find fault where there is none, and to moralize over other
men's calamities.

## On the Priesthood — Book V
1. How great is the skill required for the teacher in contending earnestly for
the truth, has been sufficiently set forth by us. But I have to mention one more
matter beside this, which is a cause of numberless dangers, though for my own
part I should rather say that the thing itself is not the cause, but they who know
not how to use it rightly, since it is of itself a help to salvation and to much good
besides, whenever you find that earnest and good men have the management of
it. What then, do I mean by this? The expenditure of great labor upon the
preparation of discourses to be delivered in public. For to begin with, the
majority of those who are under the preachers' charge are not minded to behave
towards them as towards teachers, but disdaining the part of learners, they
assume instead the attitude of those who sit and look on at the public games; and
just as the multitude there is separated into parties, and some attach themselves
to one, and some to another, so here also men are divided, and become the
partisans now of this teacher, now of that, listening to them with a view to favor
or spite. And not only is there this hardship, but another quite as great. For if it
has occurred to any preacher to weave into his sermons any part of other men's
works, he is exposed to greater disgrace than those who steal money. Nay, often
where he has not even borrowed anything from any one, but is only suspected,
he has suffered the fate of a thief. And why do I speak of the works of others
when it is not permitted to him to use his own resources without variety? For the
public are accustomed to listen not for profit, but for pleasure, sitting like critics
of tragedies, and of musical entertainments, and that facility of speech against
which we declaimed just now, in this case becomes desirable, even more than in
the case of barristers, where they are obliged to contend one against the other. A
preacher then should have loftiness of mind, far exceeding my own littleness of
spirit, that he may correct this disorderly and unprofitable pleasure on the part of