2. According to Sirach 4:28, "Hide not thy wisdom in her beauty," and Prov. 11:26, "He that
hideth up corn (the gloss says that preaching is here meant) shall be cursed among the people."
Therefore the words of sacred doctrine ought not to be hidden.

3. The text of Matt. 10:27, "That which I tell you in the dark (gloss, in mystery) speak ye in the
light (gloss, openly)." Therefore the obscure truths of faith ought to be made more manifest,
rather than hidden by the difficulties of words.

4. The doctors of truths of faith are debtors to wise and unwise, as is evident from Rom. 1:14:
therefore they ought so to speak that they may be understood by great and small, that is, without
obscurity of words.

5. Wis. 7:13, "Which I have learned without guile, and communicate without envy"; but those
who hide do not, communicate; therefore they seem guilty of envy.

6. Augustine in IV De doctrina Christiana says: "Those explaining sacred Scripture ought not to
speak in such a way that they themselves need explanation as of the same authority; but in all
their sermons they ought to strive primarily and especially to be understood, and to declare these
truths with as much clarity as possible so that he would be very dull who would not comprehend
them."

#### Sed contra

But on the contrary is that which is said in Matt, 7:6, "Give not that which is holy to dogs," on
which the gloss comments: "A hidden thing is more eagerly sought for, a thing concealed
appears more worthy of veneration, that which is a long time sought for is held more dear."
Since, therefore, sacred writings ought to be regarded with the greatest veneration, it seems that it
is expedient they be discussed with obscurity of speech.

Again, Dionysius (I Eccles. hier.) says: "Do not reveal to another every holy thing in praise of
God, except those forms of praise generally ordained; that is, those divine rites by which all the
sacraments are surrounded should not be revealed except to those like yourself"; but if they were
written in conspicuous words, they would be apparent to all; therefore the secrets of faith are to
be concealed by obscuring words.

Also it is said in Luke 8:10, "To you it is given to know the mystery of the kingdom of
God" (that is, to have understanding of the Scriptures, as is evident from the gloss); "but to the
rest in parables." Therefore one ought by obscurity in speech conceal"We sacred truths from the
multitude.

Response. I answer that the words of a teacher ought to be so moderated that they result to the

profit and not to the detriment of the one hearing him. Now, there are certain things which on
being heard harm no one, as are the truths which all are held responsible to know: and such
ought not to be hidden but openly proposed to all. But there are others which, if openly
presented, cause harm in those hearing them; and this can occur for two reasons: in one way, if
the secret truths of faith are revealed to infidels who oppose the faith and so come to be derided
by them. On this account it is said in Matt. 7:6, "Give not that which is holy to dogs." And
Dionysius (II Coel. hierar.) says, "Listen reverently to these words, to this doctrine given for
our instruction by the divinity of divinities, and hide these holy teachings in your minds,
shielding them from the unclean multitude so that you may keep them as uniform as possible."