beneath a roof like this, enjoying shade and comfort, yet cannot endure to hear
anything that is said, but are wearied by it. Not such was that woman; so
occupied was she by Jesus' words, that she even called others to hear them. The
Jews, on the contrary, not only did not call, but even hindered and impeded those
who desired to come to Him, saying, "See, have any of the rulers believed on
him? But this people, which knows not the Law, are cursed." Let us then imitate
this woman of Samaria; let us commune with Christ. For even now He stands in
the midst of us, speaking to us by the Prophets and Disciples; let us hear and
obey. How long shall we live uselessly and in vain? Because, not to do what is
well-pleasing to God is to live uselessly, or rather not merely uselessly, but to
our own hurt; for when we have spent the time which has been given us on no
good purpose, we shall depart this life to suffer severest punishment for our
unseasonable extravagance. For it can never be that a man who has received
money to trade with, and then has eaten it up, shall have it required at his hands
by the man who entrusted it to him; and that one who has spent such a life as
ours to no purpose shall escape punishment. It was not for this that God brought
us into this present life, and breathed into us a soul, that we should make use of
the present time only, but that we should do all our business with a regard to the
life which is to come. Things irrational only are useful for the present life; but
we have an immortal soul, that we may use every means to prepare ourselves for
that other life. For if one enquire the use of horses and asses and oxen, and other
such-like animals, we shall tell him that it is nothing else but only to minister to
the present life; but this cannot be said of us; our best condition is that which
follows on our departure hence; and we must do all that we may shine there, that
we may join the choir of Angels, and stand before the King continually, through
endless ages. And therefore the soul is immortal, and the body shall be immortal
too, that we may enjoy the never-ending blessings. But if, when heavenly things
are proffered you, you remain nailed to earth, consider what an insult is offered
to your Benefactor, when He holds forth to you things above, and thou, making
no great account of them choosest earth instead. And therefore, as despised by

you, He has threatened you with hell; that you may learn hence of what great
blessings you deprive yourself. God grant that none make trial of that
punishment, but that having been well-pleasing to Christ, we may obtain
everlasting blessings, through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus
Christ; to whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost be glory, now and ever, and
world without end. Amen.