THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.7, C.5.

Reply to Objection 1: This is said of Christ with reference to hope,
not as a theological virtue, but inasmuch as He hoped for some other
things not yet possessed, as was said above.
Reply to Objection 2: The glory of the body does not pertain to
beatitude as being that in which beatitude principally consists, but
by a certain outpouring from the soul's glory, as was said above (FS,
Question 4, Article 6). Hence hope, as a theological virtue, does not
regard the bliss of the body but the soul's bliss, which consists in
the Divine fruition.
Reply to Objection 3: The building up of the church by the
conversion of the faithful does not pertain to the perfection of Christ,
whereby He is perfect in Himself, but inasmuch as it leads others to
a share of His perfection. And because hope properly regards what
is expected by him who hopes, the virtue of hope cannot properly be
said to be in Christ, because of the aforesaid reason.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.7, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether in Christ there were the gifts?

Objection 1: It would seem that the gifts were not in Christ. For, as is
commonly said, the gifts are given to help the virtues. But what is
perfect in itself does not need an exterior help. Therefore, since the
virtues of Christ were perfect, it seems there were no gifts in Him.
Objection 2: Further, to give and to receive gifts would not seem to
belong to the same; since to give pertains to one who has, and to
receive pertains to one who has not. But it belongs to Christ to give
gifts according to Ps. 67:19. "Thou hast given gifts to men ."
Therefore it was not becoming that Christ should receive gifts of the
Holy Ghost.
Objection 3: Further, four gifts would seem to pertain to the
contemplation of earth, viz. wisdom, knowledge, understanding, and
counsel which pertains to prudence; hence the Philosopher (Ethic.
vi, 3) enumerates these with the intellectual virtues. But Christ had
the contemplation of heaven. Therefore He had not these gifts.
On the contrary, It is written (Is. 4:1): "Seven women shall take hold
of one man": on which a gloss says: "That is, the seven gifts of the
Holy Ghost shall take hold of Christ."
I answer that, As was said above (FS, Question 68, Article 1), the
gifts, properly, are certain perfections of the soul's powers,
inasmuch as these have a natural aptitude to be moved by the Holy
Ghost, according to Luke 4:1: "And Jesus, being full of the Holy
Ghost, returned from the Jordan, and was led by the Spirit into the
desert." Hence it is manifest that in Christ the gifts were in a preeminent degree.
Reply to Objection 1: What is perfect in the order of its nature needs
to be helped by something of a higher nature; as man, however
perfect, needs to be helped by God. And in this way the virtues,
which perfect the powers of the soul, as they are controlled by
reason, no matter how perfect they are, need to be helped by the
gifts, which perfect the soul's powers, inasmuch as these are moved
by the Holy Ghost.
Reply to Objection 2: Christ is not a recipient and a giver of the gifts