Entreat your brother. But, "Go your way. Be reconciled." [Matthew 5:24] So that,
although you may have made many entreaties, yet you must not desist until you
have persuaded. God entreats us every day, and we do not hear; and yet He does
not cease entreating. And do you then disdain to entreat your fellow-servant.
How is it then possible for you ever to be saved? Suppose that you have often
pleaded and been repulsed; for this, however, you will obtain a larger reward.
For in proportion as he is contentious, and you persevere in entreating, so much
the more is your recompense increased. In proportion as the good work is
accomplished with greater difficulty, and the reconciliation is one of much
labour, so much the greater will be the judgment on him, and so much the
brighter will be the crowns of victory for your forbearance. Let us not merely
applaud all this, but exemplify it too in our deeds; and never recede from the
work, until we are restored to our former state of friendship. For it is not enough
merely to avoid grieving an enemy, or doing him an injury, or being in our minds
unkindly disposed towards him; but it is necessary that we should prepare him to
be kindly affected towards ourselves. For I hear many saying, "I have no
hostility; I am not annoyed; neither have I any thing to do with him." But this is
not what God commands, that you should have nothing to do with him; but that
you should have much to do with him. For this reason he is your "brother." For
this reason He said not, Forgive your brother what you have against him. But
what then? "Go your way. First be reconciled to him;" and should he have "any
thing against you," yet desist not, before you have reunited the member in
friendly concord. But you, who in order that you may obtain a useful servant,
tellest out the gold, and discoursest with many merchants, and often undertakest
long journeys, tell me, are you not up and doing to the utmost, in order that you
may convert an enemy into a friend? And how then will you be able to call upon
God, while you are thus neglecting His laws? Assuredly, the possession of a
servant will be of no great profit to us; but the making an enemy a friend, will
render God propitious and favourable toward us; and will easily set us free from
our sins; and gain us praise with men, as well as great security in our life; for

nothing can be more unsafe than he who has even only a single enemy. For our
earthly reputation is injured, while such a man is saying a thousand evil things of
us to every body. Our minds are also in a state of fermentation, and our
conscience disturbed; and we are exposed to a continual tempest of anxious
thoughts.
19. Now since we are conscious of the truth of all this, let us set ourselves
free from chastisement and vengeance; and let us show our reverence for the
present feast, by doing all that has been said; and those same favours which we
think to obtain from the Emperor on account of the feast, let us ourselves enable
others to enjoy. For I hear, indeed, many saying, that the Emperor, out of his
reverence for the Holy Passover, will be reconciled to the city and will pardon all
its offenses. How absurd then is it, that when we have to depend for our safety
upon others, we bring forward the feast, and its claims; but that when we are
commanded to be reconciled one with another, we treat this same feast with
disdain, and think nothing of it. No one, truly, so pollutes this holy feast, as he
does, who, while he is keeping it, cherishes malignity. Or rather, I might say, that
such a person cannot possibly keep it, though he should remain without food ten
days successively. For where there is enmity and strife, there can be neither fast
nor festival. You would not dare to touch the holy Sacrifice with unwashed
hands, however pressing the necessity might be. Approach not then with an
unwashed soul! For this is far worse than the other and brings a heavier
punishment. For nothing so fills the mind with impurity, as anger remaining
constantly within it. The spirit of meekness settles not where wrath or passion
exists; and when a man is destitute of the Holy Spirit, what hope of salvation
shall he have, and how shall he walk aright? Do not then, O beloved, while you
are desirous to be revenged of your enemy, cast yourself down headlong; nor
cause yourself to be left alone without the guardianship of God! For, in truth, if
the duty were a difficult one, yet the greatness of the punishment, which results
from this action of disobedience, were sufficient to arouse the most slothful and
supine, and to persuade them to undergo every degree of labour. But now our