life, the third by the fruition of the life to come. Hence we must say
that if we take the whole time of the world in general, Christ is the
Head of all men, but diversely. For, first and principally, He is the
Head of such as are united to Him by glory; secondly, of those who
are actually united to Him by charity; thirdly, of those who are
actually united to Him by faith; fourthly, of those who are united to
Him merely in potentiality, which is not yet reduced to act, yet will be
reduced to act according to Divine predestination; fifthly, of those
who are united to Him in potentiality, which will never be reduced to
act; such are those men existing in the world, who are not
predestined, who, however, on their departure from this world,
wholly cease to be members of Christ, as being no longer in
potentiality to be united to Christ.
Reply to Objection 1: Those who are unbaptized, though not actually
in the Church, are in the Church potentially. And this potentiality is
rooted in two things---first and principally, in the power of Christ,
which is sufficient for the salvation of the whole human race;
secondly, in free-will.
Reply to Objection 2: To be "a glorious Church not having spot or
wrinkle" is the ultimate end to which we are brought by the Passion
of Christ. Hence this will be in heaven, and not on earth, in which "if
we say we have no sin, we deceive ourselves," as is written (1 Jn.
1:8). Nevertheless, there are some, viz. mortal, sins from which they
are free who are members of Christ by the actual union of charity;
but such as are tainted with these sins are not members of Christ
actually, but potentially; except, perhaps, imperfectly, by formless
faith, which unites to God, relatively but not simply, viz. so that man
partake of the life of grace. For, as is written (James 2:20): "Faith
without works is dead." Yet such as these receive from Christ a
certain vital act, i.e. to believe, as if a lifeless limb were moved by a
man to some extent.
Reply to Objection 3: The holy Fathers made use of the legal
sacraments, not as realities, but as images and shadows of what was
to come. Now it is the same motion to an image as image, and to the
reality, as is clear from the Philosopher (De Memor. et Remin. ii).
Hence the ancient Fathers, by observing the legal sacraments, were
borne to Christ by the same faith and love whereby we also are
borne to Him, and hence the ancient Fathers belong to the same
Church as we.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.8, C.4.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.8, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether Christ is the Head of the angels?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ as man is not the head of the
angels. For the head and members are of one nature. But Christ as
man is not of the same nature with the angels, but only with men,
since, as is written (Heb. 2:16): "For nowhere doth He take hold of
the angels, but of the seed of Abraham He taketh hold." Therefore
Christ as man is not the head of the angels.
Objection 2: Further, Christ is the head of such as belong to the
Church, which is His Body, as is written (Eph. 1:23). But the angels
do not belong to the Church. For the Church is the congregation of
the faithful: and in the angels there is no faith, for they do not "walk
by faith" but "by sight," otherwise they would be "absent from the
Lord," as the Apostle argues (2 Cor. 5:6,7). Therefore Christ as man
is not head of the angels.
Objection 3: Further, Augustine says (Tract. xix; xxiii in Joan.), that
as "the Word" which "was in the beginning with the Father" quickens
souls, so the "Word made flesh" quickens bodies, which angels lack.
But the Word made flesh is Christ as man. Therefore Christ as man
does not give life to angels, and hence as man He is not the head of
the angels.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (Col. 2:10), "Who is the head of all
Principality and Power," and the same reason holds good with the
other orders of angels. Therefore Christ is the Head of the angels.
I answer that, As was said above (Article 1, ad 2), where there is one
body we must allow that there is one head. Now a multitude ordained
to one end, with distinct acts and duties, may be metaphorically
called one body. But it is manifest that both men and angels are
ordained to one end, which is the glory of the Divine fruition. Hence
the mystical body of the Church consists not only of men but of
angels. Now of all this multitude Christ is the Head, since He is
nearer God, and shares His gifts more fully, not only than man, but
even than angels; and of His influence not only men but even angels
partake, since it is written (Eph. 1:20-22): that God the Father set
"Him," namely Christ, "on His right hand in the heavenly places,
above all Principality and Power and Virtue and Dominion and every
name that is named not only in this world, but also in that which is to