8. Hear also what he says in his charge to his disciple: [1 Timothy 4:13]
"Give heed to reading, to exhortation, to teaching," and he goes on to show the
usefulness of this by adding, "For in doing this you shall save both yourself and
them that hear you." [1 Timothy 4:16] And again he says, "The Lord's servant
must not strive, but be gentle towards all, apt to teach, forbearing;"
[2 Timothy 2:24] and he proceeds to say, "But abide thou in the things which you
have learned, and hast been assured of, knowing of whom you have learned
them, and that from a babe you have known the sacred writings which are able
to make you wise unto salvation," [2 Timothy 3:14-15] and again, "Every
Scripture is inspired of God, and also profitable for teaching, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction which is in righteousness, that the man of God may be
complete." Hear what he adds further in his directions to Titus about the
appointment of bishops. "The bishop," he says, "must be holding to the faithful
word which is according to the teaching, that he may be able to convict the
gainsayers." But how shall any one who is unskillful as these men pretend, be
able to convict the gainsayers and stop their mouths? Or what need is there to
give attention to reading and to the Holy Scriptures, if such a state of
unskillfulness is to be welcome among us? Such arguments are mere makeshifts
and pretexts, the marks of idleness and sloth. But some one will say, "it is to the
priests that these charges are given:"— certainly, for they are the subjects of our
discourse. But that the apostle gives the same charge to the laity, hear what he
says in another epistle to other than the priesthood: "Let the word of Christ dwell
in you richly in all wisdom," [Colossians 3:16] and again, "Let your speech be
always with grace seasoned with salt, that you may know how ye ought to
answer each one," [Colossians 4:6] and there is a general charge to all that they
"be ready to" [1 Peter 3:15] render an account of their faith, and to the
Thessalonians, he gives the following command: "Build each other up, even as
also ye do." [1 Thessalonians 5:11] But when he speaks of priests he says, "Let
the elders that rule well be counted worthy of double honor, especially those who
labor in the word, and in teaching." [1 Timothy 5:17] For this is the perfection

of teaching when the teachers both by what they do, and by what they say as
well, bring their disciples to that blessed state of life which Christ appointed for
them. For example alone is not enough to instruct others. Nor do I say this of
myself; it is our Saviour's own word. For whosoever shall do and teach them, he
shall be called great. [Matthew 5:19] Now if doing were the same as teaching,
the second word here would be superfluous; and it had been enough to have said
"whosoever shall do" simply. But now by distinguishing the two, he shows that
practice is one thing, and doctrine another, and that each needs the help of the
others in order to complete edification. You hear too what the chosen vessel of
Christ says to the Ephesian elders: "Wherefore watch ye, remembering that for
the space of three years, I ceased not to admonish every one, night and day, with
tears." [Acts 20:31] But what need was there for his tears or for admonition by
word of mouth, while his life as an apostle was so illustrious? His holy life might
be a great inducement to men to keep the commandments, yet I dare not say that
it alone could accomplish everything.
9. But when a dispute arises concerning matters of doctrine, and all take
their weapons from the same Scriptures, of what weight will any one's life be
able to prove? What then will be the good of his many austerities, when after
such painful exercises, any one from the Priest's great unskillfulness in argument
fall into heresy, and be cut off from the body of the Church, a misfortune which I
have myself seen many suffering. Of what profit then will his patience be to
him? None; no more than there will be in a sound faith if the life is corrupt.
Wherefore, for this reason more than for all others, it concerns him whose office
it is to teach others, to be experienced in disputations of this kind. For though he
himself stands safely, and is unhurt by the gainsayers, yet the simple multitude
under his direction, when they see their leader defeated, and without any answer
for the gainsayers, will be apt to lay the blame of his discomfiture not on his own
weakness, but on the doctrines themselves, as though they were faulty; and so by
reason of the inexperience of one, great numbers are brought to extreme ruin; for
though they do not entirely go over to the adversary, yet they are forced to doubt