established for the study of letters.
Reply to Objection 1: This commentary of the gloss is an exposition
of the Old Law of which the Apostle says (2 Cor. 3:6): "The letter
killeth." Hence not to know letters is to disapprove of the
circumcision of the "letter" and other carnal observances.
Reply to Objection 2: Study is directed to knowledge which, without
charity, "puffeth up," and consequently leads to dissent, according
to Prov. 13:10, "Among the proud there are always dissensions":
whereas, with charity, it "edifieth and begets concord." Hence the
Apostle after saying (1 Cor. 1:5): "You are made rich . . . in all
utterance and in all knowledge," adds (1 Cor. 1:10): "That you all
speak the same thing, and that there be no schisms among you." But
Jerome is not speaking here of the study of letters, but of the study
of dissensions which heretics and schismatics have brought into the
Christian religion.
Reply to Objection 3: The philosophers professed the study of letters
in the matter of secular learning: whereas it becomes religious to
devote themselves chiefly to the study of letters in reference to the
doctrine that is "according to godliness" (Titus 1:1). It becomes not
religious, whose whole life is devoted to the service of God, to seek
for other learning, save in so far as it is referred to the sacred
doctrine. Hence Augustine says at the end of De Musica vi, 17:
"Whilst we think that we should not overlook those whom heretics
delude by the deceitful assurance of reason and knowledge, we are
slow to advance in the consideration of their methods. Yet we should
not be praised for doing this, were it not that many holy sons of their
most loving mother the Catholic Church had done the same under
the necessity of confounding heretics."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.187, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether a religious order that is devoted to the

contemplative life is more excellent than on that is given to
the active life?
Objection 1: It would seem that a religious order which is devoted to
the contemplative life is not more excellent than one which is given
to the active life. For it is said (Extra, de Regular. et Transeunt. ad
Relig., cap. Licet), quoting the words of Innocent III: "Even as a
greater good is preferred to a lesser, so the common profit takes
precedence of private profit: and in this case teaching is rightly
preferred to silence, responsibility to contemplation, work to rest."
Now the religious order which is directed to the greater good is
better. Therefore it would seem that those religious orders that are
directed to the active life are more excellent than those which are
directed to the contemplative life.
Objection 2: Further, every religious order is directed to the
perfection of charity, as stated above (Articles 1,2). Now a gloss on
Heb. 12:4, "For you have not yet resisted unto blood," says: "In this
life there is no more perfect love than that to which the holy martyrs
attained, who fought against sin unto blood." Now to fight unto
blood is becoming those religious who are directed to military
service, and yet this pertains to the active life. Therefore it would
seem that religious orders of this kind are the most excellent.
Objection 3: Further, seemingly the stricter a religious order is, the
more excellent it is. But there is no reason why certain religious
orders directed to the active life should not be of stricter observance
than those directed to the contemplative life. Therefore they are
more excellent.
On the contrary, our Lord said (Lk. 10:42) that the "best part" was
Mary's, by whom the contemplative life is signified.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), the difference between one
religious order and another depends chiefly on the end, and
secondarily on the exercise. And since one thing cannot be said to
be more excellent than another save in respect of that in which it
differs therefrom, it follows that the excellence of one religious order
over another depends chiefly on their ends, and secondarily on their
respective exercises. Nevertheless each of these comparisons is