while still only the lion, as such, or the fig, as such, is the strict matter of science:
nevertheless this scientific knowledge is only obtainable by observation and experiment
upon actual lions, or figs; and scientific men busy themselves accordingly about the
vicissitudes that do actually overtake such existing things. The most thorough
comprehension of the specific essence of a fig could not instruct a man, -- no, nor an
angel either, -- on the fact whether there will be a plentiful or a poor crop of figs in
Palestine in the year 1910. This fact, and indeed the whole course of natural history, -apart from the free acts of God and man, and the effect of those acts upon material
things, is absolutely deducible from a knowledge of the `universal nature' of physical
agents, joined to a knowledge (not contained in the `universal') of the primitive
collocation of materials. But could even angelic intellect make this stupendous
deduction of the whole history of the physical universe from its primary data? We judge
of angels from the analogy of the human mind. The human mind knows what is called at
Oxford `the manifold' of individual material things through the senses. To the intellect of
man, away from sensation, this `manifold' of individuals is unintelligible, as St Thomas
also says it is unintelligible, because intellect always universalises. How then shall pure
intelligence, apart from all faculty of sensation, know the individual? The analogy, which
has been our guide, here breaks down. We cannot deny to the angel the cognition of
individual things: not, I think, even with St Thomas for our guide, can we give a
satisfactory account of how he has that cognition. If the schoolmen had a fault, it was
that of explaining too much: though, I dare say, they considered many of their
explanations merely hypothetical and tentative. See B. I, Chapp.VIII,IX. In
the Summa Theologica, I, q. 55, art. 2, St Thomas more clearly faces the difficulty of
attributing to angels any knowledge of the actual facts of creation. He acknowledges
(art. 1) that the mere consciousness of themselves in their own essential nature would
be insufficient to afford them such knowledge. Therefore he supposes that, over and
above their essential nature, there was stamped upon them at their creation a multitude
of intelligible impressions, innate ideas in fact, corresponding to the facts of creation;
and that by knowing themselves, as thus impressed, they know the world. Scotus
disagrees with St Thomas on this point: indeed it remains a very open question. St
Thomas's words are (l.c.): "The impressions whereby angels understand are not
gathered from things but are connatural to the said angels. . . . Angels are wholly free
from bodies, subsisting immaterially in intellectual being: and therefore they gain their
intellectual perfection by an intellectual efflux, whereby they received from God
presentations of known things along with their intellectual nature. . . . In the mind of an
angel there are likenesses of creatures, not from the creatures themselves, but from
God, who is the cause of creatures." But from this it would seem that angels ought to
know all future events, a corollary rejected by St Thomas, q. 57, art. 3.