says---what wonder is there that they should work miracles by that
power?"
Reply to Objection 2: Avicenna assigns the cause of bewitchment to
the fact that corporeal matter has a natural tendency to obey
spiritual substance rather than natural contrary agents. Therefore
when the soul is of strong imagination, it can change corporeal
matter. This he says is the cause of the "evil eye."
But it has been shown above (Question 110, Article 2) that corporeal
matter does not obey spiritual substances at will, but the Creator
alone. Therefore it is better to say, that by a strong imagination the
(corporeal) spirits of the body united to that soul are changed, which
change in the spirits takes place especially in the eyes, to which the
more subtle spirits can reach. And the eyes infect the air which is in
contact with them to a certain distance: in the same way as a new
and clear mirror contracts a tarnish from the look of a "menstruata,"
as Aristotle says (De Somn. et Vigil.; [De Insomniis ii]).
Hence then when a soul is vehemently moved to wickedness, as
occurs mostly in little old women, according to the above
explanation, the countenance becomes venomous and hurtful,
especially to children, who have a tender and most impressionable
body. It is also possible that by God's permission, or from some
hidden deed, the spiteful demons co-operate in this, as the witches
may have some compact with them.
Reply to Objection 3: The soul is united to the body as its form; and
the sensitive appetite, which obeys the reason in a certain way, as
stated above (Question 81, Article 3), it is the act of a corporeal
organ. Therefore at the apprehension of the human soul, the
sensitive appetite must needs be moved with an accompanying
corporeal operation. But the apprehension of the human soul does
not suffice to work a change in exterior bodies, except by means of a
change in the body united to it, as stated above (ad 2).

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the separate human soul can move

bodies at least locally?
Objection 1: It seems that the separate human soul can move bodies
at least locally. For a body naturally obeys a spiritual substance as
to local motion, as stated above (Question 110, Article 5). But the
separate soul is a spiritual substance. Therefore it can move exterior
bodies by its command.
Objection 2: Further, in the Itinerary of Clement it is said in the
narrative of Nicetas to Peter, that Simon Magus, by sorcery retained
power over the soul of a child that he had slain, and that through this
soul he worked magical wonders. But this could not have been
without some corporeal change at least as to place. Therefore, the
separate soul has the power to move bodies locally.
On the contrary, the Philosopher says (De Anima i, 3) that the soul
cannot move any other body whatsoever but its own.
I answer that, The separate soul cannot by its natural power move a
body. For it is manifest that, even while the soul is united to the
body, it does not move the body except as endowed with life: so that
if one of the members become lifeless, it does not obey the soul as
to local motion. Now it is also manifest that no body is quickened by
the separate soul. Therefore within the limits of its natural power the
separate soul cannot command the obedience of a body; though, by
the power of God, it can exceed those limits.
Reply to Objection 1: There are certain spiritual substances whose
powers are not determinate to certain bodies; such are the angels
who are naturally unfettered by a body; consequently various bodies
may obey them as to movement. But if the motive power of a
separate substance is naturally determinate to move a certain body,
that substance will not be able to move a body of higher degree, but
only one of lower degree: thus according to philosophers the mover
of the lower heaven cannot move the higher heaven. Wherefore,
since the soul is by its nature determinate to move the body of which
it is the form, it cannot by its natural power move any other body.
Reply to Objection 2: As Augustine (De Civ. Dei x, 11) and
Chrysostom (Hom. xxviii in Matt.) say, the demons often pretend to