there is need of a moderating and restraining moral virtue, while for
those which are a kind of recoil, there is need, on the part of the
appetite, of a moral virtue to strengthen it and urge it on. Wherefore
a twofold virtue is necessary with regard to the difficult good: one, to
temper and restrain the mind, lest it tend to high things
immoderately; and this belongs to the virtue of humility: and another
to strengthen the mind against despair, and urge it on to the pursuit
of great things according to right reason; and this is magnanimity.
Therefore it is evident that humility is a virtue.
Reply to Objection 1: As Isidore observes (Etym. x), "a humble man
is so called because he is, as it were, 'humo acclinis'", i.e. inclined to
the lowest place. This may happen in two ways. First, through an
extrinsic principle, for instance when one is cast down by another,
and thus humility is a punishment. Secondly, through an intrinsic
principle: and this may be done sometimes well, for instance when a
man, considering his own failings, assumes the lowest place
according to his mode: thus Abraham said to the Lord (Gn. 18:27), "I
will speak to my Lord, whereas I am dust and ashes." In this way
humility is a virtue. Sometimes, however, this may be ill-done, for
instance when man, "not understanding his honor, compares himself
to senseless beasts, and becomes like to them" (Ps. 48:13).
Reply to Objection 2: As stated (ad 1), humility, in so far as it is a
virtue, conveys the notion of a praiseworthy self-abasement to the
lowest place. Now this is sometimes done merely as to outward
signs and pretense: wherefore this is "false humility," of which
Augustine says in a letter (Ep. cxlix) that it is "grievous pride," since
to wit, it would seem to aim at excellence of glory. Sometimes,
however, this is done by an inward movement of the soul, and in this
way, properly speaking, humility is reckoned a virtue, because virtue
does not consist externals, but chiefly in the inward choice of the
mind, as the Philosopher states (Ethic. ii, 5).
Reply to Objection 3: Humility restrains the appetite from aiming at
great things against right reason: while magnanimity urges the mind
to great things in accord with right reason. Hence it is clear that
magnanimity is not opposed to humility: indeed they concur in this,
that each is according to right reason.
Reply to Objection 4: A thing is said to be perfect in two ways. First
absolutely; such a thing contains no defect, neither in its nature nor
in respect of anything else, and thus God alone is perfect. To Him

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.160, C.2.

humility is fitting, not as regards His Divine nature, but only as
regards His assumed nature. Secondly, a thing may be said to be
perfect in a restricted sense, for instance in respect of its nature or
state or time. Thus a virtuous man is perfect: although in
comparison with God his perfection is found wanting, according to
the word of Is. 40:17, "All nations are before Him as if they had no
being at all." In this way humility may be competent to every man.
Reply to Objection 5: The Philosopher intended to treat of virtues as
directed to civic life, wherein the subjection of one man to another is
defined according to the ordinance of the law, and consequently is a
matter of legal justice. But humility, considered as a special virtue,
regards chiefly the subjection of man to God, for Whose sake he
humbles himself by subjecting himself to others.