that trinity of corporeal vision, the form of the bodily object that is seen,
and the corresponding form wrought in the vision of the beholder, are
combined by the purpose of the will. Suppose, then, that this bodily
object which was beheld was dissolved and had perished, and that
nothing at all of it remained anywhere, to the vision of which the gaze
might have recourse; are we then to say, that because the image of the
bodily object thus now past and done with remains in the memory,
whence to form the conception in recollecting, and to have the two united
by will as a third, therefore it is the same trinity as that former one, when
the appearance of the bodily object posited in place was seen? Certainly
not, but altogether a different one: for, not to say that that was from
without, while this is from within; the former certainly was produced by
the appearance of a present bodily object, the latter by the image of that
object now past. So, too, in the case of which we are now treating, to
illustrate which we have thought good to adduce this example, the faith
which is even now in our mind, as that bodily object was in place, while
held, looked at, loved, produces a sort of trinity; but that trinity will exist
no more, when this faith in the mind, like that bodily object in place, shall
no longer exist. But that which will then exist, when we shall remember it
to have been, but not now to be, in us, will doubtless be a different one.
For that which now is, is wrought by the thing itself, actually present and
attached to the mind of one who believes; but that which shall then be,
will be wrought by the imagination of a past thing left in the memory of
one who recollects.

### CHAP. 4.—THE IMAGE OF GOD IS TO BE SOUGHT IN THE IMMORTALITY OF THE RATIONAL SOUL, HOW A TRINITY IS DEMONSTRATED IN THE MIND.

6. Therefore neither is that trinity an image of God, which is not now, nor
is that other an image of God, which then will not be; but we must find in
the soul of man, i.e., the rational or intellectual soul, that image of the
Creator which is immortally implanted in its immortality. For as the
immortality itself of the soul is spoken with a qualification; since the soul
too has its proper death, when it lacks a blessed life, which is to be called
the true life of the soul; but it is therefore called immortal, because it
never ceases to live with some life or other, even when it is most

miserable;—so, although reason or intellect is at one time torpid in it, at
another appears small, and at another great, yet the human soul is never
anything save rational or intellectual; and hence, if it is made after the
image of God in respect to this, that it is able to use reason and intellect
in order to understand and behold God, then from the moment when that
nature so marvellous and so great began to be, whether this image be so
worn out as to be almost none at all, or whether it be obscure and
defaced, or bright and beautiful, certainly it always is. Further, too,
pitying the defaced condition of its dignity, divine Scripture tells us, that
"although man walks in an image, yet he disquieteth himself in vain; he
heapeth up riches, and cannot tell who shall gather them." It would not
therefore attribute vanity to the image of God, unless it perceived it to
have been defaced. Yet it sufficiently shows that such defacing does not
extend to the taking away its being an image, by saying, "Although man
walks in an image." Wherefore in both ways that sentence can be truly
enunciated; in that, as it is said, "Although man walketh in an image, yet
he disquieteth himself in vain," so it may be said, "Although man
disquieteth himself in vain, yet he walketh in an image." For although the
nature of the soul is great, yet it can be corrupted, because it is not the
highest; and although it can be corrupted, because it is not the highest,
yet because it is capable and can be partaker of the highest nature, it is a
great nature. Let us seek, then, in this image of God a certain trinity of a
special kind, with the aid of Him who Himself made us after His own
image. For no otherwise can we healthfully investigate this subject, or
arrive at any result according to the wisdom which is from Him. But if the
reader will either hold in remembrance and recollect what we have said of
the human soul or mind in former books, and especially in the tenth, or
will carefully re-peruse it in the passages wherein it is contained, he will
not require here any more lengthy discourse respecting the inquiry into
so great a thing.
7. We said, then, among other things in the tenth book, that the mind of
man knows itself. For the mind knows nothing so much as that which is
close to itself; and nothing is more close to the mind than itself. We
adduced also other evidences, as much as seemed sufficient, whereby this
might be most certainly proved.