Now there are principles common to all beings not only in the first way (in this sense the
Philosopher says that all beings have proportionately the same principles), but also in the second
way, so that there are certain beings, each numerically one, which are the principles of all things.
Thus the principles of accidents are reducible to the principles of substance, and the principles of
perishable substances are reducible to imperishable ones, with the result that all beings are
reducible to certain principles in a definite graded order.

And since the principle of the being of all things must be being in the highest degree as the
Metaphysics says, these principles must be most perfect and therefore supremely in act, so that
they have no potentiality whatsoever, or the least possible, because actuality is prior to, and more
excellent than potentiality, as the Metaphysics says. For this reason they must be free from
matter, which is in potency, and free from motion, which is actuality of that which exists in
potency. Divine beings are of this sort, "because if the divine exists anywhere, it exists especially
in such a nature" (that is to say, in a nature that is immaterial and immutable), as is sad in the
Metaphysics.

Accordingly, because these divine beings are the principles of all things and nevertheless they are
complete natures in themselves, they can be studied in two ways: (1) first, insofar as they are the
common principles of all things, and (2) second insofar as they are beings in their own right.
But even though these first principles are most evident in themselves, our intellect regards them
as the eye of an owl does the light of the sun, as the Metaphysics says. We can reach them by the
light of natural reason only to the extent that their effects reveal them to us. It was in this way that
the philosophers came to know them as is clear from the Epistle to the Romans: "The invisible
things of God... are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made." Philosophers,
then, study these divine beings only insofar as they are the principles of all things. Consequently,
they are the objects of the science that investigates what is common to all beings, which has for
its subject being as being. The philosophers call this divine science.

There is, however, another way of knowing beings of this kind, (a) not as their effects reveal
them, but (b) as they reveal themselves. The Apostle mentions this way in his First Epistle to the
Corinthians: "So the things also that are of God no man knows, but the Spirit of God. Now we
have received not the spirit of this world, but the Spirit that is of God, that we may understand."
And again, "But to us God has revealed them by his Spirit." In this way we consider divine
beings as they subsist in themselves and not only inasmuch as they are the principles of things.