not follow, if one person's debt be paid, that the debt of others is
paid likewise.
Reply to Objection 2: Such a merit is conditional, for in this way they
merited that suffrages would profit them if offered for them, and this
was merely to render themselves fit recipients of those suffrages. It
is therefore clear that they did not directly merit the assistance of
those suffrages, but made themselves fit by their preceding merits to
receive the fruit of suffrages. Hence it does not follow that their merit
is rendered unavailing.
Reply to Objection 3: Nothing hinders the rich from being in some
respects better off than the poor, for instance as regards the
expiation of their punishment. But this is as nothing in comparison
with the kingdom of heaven, where the poor are shown to be better
off by the authority quoted.

### ARTICLE 13. Whether suffrages offered for several are of as

much value to each one as if they had been offered for each in
particular?
Objection 1: It would seem that suffrages offered for several are of
as much value to each one as if they had been offered for each in
particular. For it is clear that if one person receives a lesson he loses
nothing if others receive the lesson with him. Therefore in like
manner a person for whom a suffrage is offered loses nothing if
some one else is reckoned together with him: and consequently if it
be offered for several, it is of as much value to each one as if it were
offered for each in particular.
Objection 2: Further, it is to be observed that according to the
common practice of the Church, when Mass is said for one deceased
person, other prayers are added for other deceased persons. Now
this would not be done, if the dead person for whom the Mass is said
were to lose something thereby. Therefore the same conclusion
follows as above.
Objection 3: Further, suffrages, especially of prayers, rely on the
Divine power. But with God, just as it makes no difference whether
He helps by means of many or by means of a few, so it differs not
whether He assists many or a few. Therefore if the one same prayer
be said for many, each one of them will receive as much assistance
as one person would if that same prayer were said for him alone.
On the contrary, It is better to assist many than one. If therefore a
suffrage offered for several is of as much value to each one as if it
were offered for one alone, it would seem that the Church ought not
to have appointed a Mass and prayer to be said for one person in
particular, but that Mass ought always to be said for all the faithful
departed: and this is evidently false.
Further, a suffrage has a finite efficiency. Therefore if it be divided
among many it avails less for each one than if it were offered for one
only.
I answer that, If the value of suffrages be considered according as it
is derived from the virtue of charity uniting the members of the
Church together, suffrages offered for several persons avail each