SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.27, C.4.

rest, not only our desire for God, but all our desires: so that the joy
of the blessed is full to perfection---indeed over-full, since they will
obtain more than they were capable of desiring: for "neither hath it
entered into the heart of man, what things God hath prepared for
them that love Him" (1 Cor. 2:9). This is what is meant by the words
of Lk. 6:38: "Good measure and pressed down, and shaken together,
and running over shall they give into your bosom." Yet, since no
creature is capable of the joy condignly due to God, it follows that
this perfectly full joy is not taken into man, but, on the contrary, man
enters into it, according to Mt. 25:21: "Enter into the joy of thy Lord."
Reply to Objection 1: This argument takes the fulness of joy in
reference to the thing in which we rejoice.
Reply to Objection 2: When each one attains to happiness he will
reach the term appointed to him by Divine predestination, and
nothing further will remain to which he may tend, although by
reaching that term, some will approach nearer to God than others.
Hence each one's joy will be full with regard to himself, because his
desire will be fully set at rest; yet one's joy will be greater than
another's, on account of a fuller participation of the Divine
happiness.
Reply to Objection 3: Comprehension denotes fulness of knowledge
in respect of the thing known, so that it is known as much as it can
be. There is however a fulness of knowledge in respect of the
knower, just as we have said of joy. Wherefore the Apostle says (Col.
1:9): "That you may be filled with the knowledge of His will, in all
wisdom and spiritual understanding."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.27, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether joy is a virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that joy is a virtue. For vice is contrary to
virtue. Now sorrow is set down as a vice, as in the case of sloth and
envy. Therefore joy also should be accounted a virtue.
Objection 2: Further, as love and hope are passions, the object of
which is "good," so also is joy. Now love and hope are reckoned to
be virtues. Therefore joy also should be reckoned a virtue.
Objection 3: Further, the precepts of the Law are about acts of virtue.
But we are commanded to rejoice in the Lord, according to Phil. 4:4:
"Rejoice in the Lord always." Therefore joy is a virtue.
On the contrary, It is not numbered among the theological virtues,
nor among the moral, nor among the intellectual virtues, as is
evident from what has been said above (FS, Questions 57,60,62).
I answer that, As stated above (FS, Question 55, Articles 2,4), virtue
is an operative habit, wherefore by its very nature it has an
inclination to a certain act. Now it may happen that from the same
habit there proceed several ordinate and homogeneous acts, each of
which follows from another. And since the subsequent acts do not
proceed from the virtuous habit except through the preceding act,
hence it is that the virtue is defined and named in reference to that
preceding act, although those other acts also proceed from the
virtue. Now it is evident from what we have said about the passions
(FS, Question 25, Articles 2,4) that love is the first affection of the
appetitive power, and that desire and joy follow from it. Hence the
same virtuous habit inclines us to love and desire the beloved good,
and to rejoice in it. But in as much as love is the first of these acts,
that virtue takes its name, not from joy, nor from desire, but from
love, and is called charity. Hence joy is not a virtue distinct from
charity, but an act, or effect, of charity: for which reason it is
numbered among the Fruits (Gal. 5:22).
Reply to Objection 1: The sorrow which is a vice is caused by
inordinate self-love, and this is not a special vice, but a general
source of the vices, as stated above (FS, Question 77, Article 4); so
that it was necessary to account certain particular sorrows as
special vices, because they do not arise from a special, but from a