It is to be noted, however, that although these works of demons
which appear marvelous to us are not real miracles, they are
sometimes nevertheless something real. Thus the magicians of
Pharaoh by the demons' power produced real serpents and frogs.
And "when fire came down from heaven and at one blow consumed
Job's servants and sheep; when the storm struck down his house
and with it his children---these were the work of Satan, not
phantoms"; as Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xx, 19).
Reply to Objection 1: As Augustine says in the same place, the
works of Antichrist may be called lying wonders, "either because he
will deceive men's senses by means of phantoms, so that he will not
really do what he will seem to do; or because, if he work real
prodigies, they will lead those into falsehood who believe in him."
Reply to Objection 2: As we have said above (Question 110, Article
2), corporeal matter does not obey either good or bad angels at their
will, so that demons be able by their power to transmute matter from
one form to another; but they can employ certain seeds that exist in
the elements of the world, in order to produce these effects, as
Augustine says (De Trin. iii, 8,9). Therefore it must be admitted that
all the transformation of corporeal things which can be produced by
certain natural powers, to which we must assign the seeds above
mentioned, can alike be produced by the operation of the demons,
by the employment of these seeds; such as the transformation of
certain things into serpents or frogs, which can be produced by
putrefaction. On the contrary, those transformations which cannot
be produced by the power of nature, cannot in reality be effected by
the operation of the demons; for instance, that the human body be
changed into the body of a beast, or that the body of a dead man
return to life. And if at times something of this sort seems to be
effected by the operation of demons, it is not real but a mere
semblance of reality.
Now this may happen in two ways. Firstly, from within; in this way a
demon can work on man's imagination and even on his corporeal
senses, so that something seems otherwise that it is, as explained
above (Question 111, Articles 3,4). It is said indeed that this can be
done sometimes by the power of certain bodies. Secondly, from
without: for just as he can from the air form a body of any form and
shape, and assume it so as to appear in it visibly: so, in the same
way he can clothe any corporeal thing with any corporeal form, so as
to appear therein. This is what Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xviii, 18):

"Man's imagination, which whether thinking or dreaming, takes the
forms of an innumerable number of things, appears to other men's
senses, as it were embodied in the semblance of some animal." This
not to be understood as though the imagination itself or the images
formed therein were identified with that which appears embodied to
the senses of another man: but that the demon, who forms an image
in a man's imagination, can offer the same picture to another man's
senses.
Reply to Objection 3: As Augustine says (Questions. 83, qu. 79):
"When magicians do what holy men do, they do it for a different end
and by a different right. The former do it for their own glory; the
latter, for the glory of God: the former, by certain private compacts;
the latter by the evident assistance and command of God, to Whom
every creature is subject."