THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.26, C.2.

mediators, in some respect, between God and man, forasmuch as
they cooperate in uniting men to God, dispositively or ministerially.
Reply to Objection 1: The prophets and priests of the Old Law were
called mediators between God and man, dispositively and
ministerially: inasmuch as they foretold and foreshadowed the true
and perfect Mediator of God and men. As to the priests of the New
Law, they may be called mediators of God and men, inasmuch as
they are the ministers of the true Mediator by administering, in His
stead, the saving sacraments to men.
Reply to Objection 2: The good angels, as Augustine says (De Civ.
Dei ix, 13), cannot rightly be called mediators between God and men.
"For since, in common with God, they have both beatitude and
immortality, and none of these things in common with unhappy and
mortal man, how much rather are they not aloof from men and akin
to God, than established between them?" Dionysius, however, says
that they do occupy a middle place, because, in the order of nature,
they are established below God and above man. Moreover, they fulfill
the office of mediator, not indeed principally and
perfectively, but ministerially and dispositively: whence (Mt. 4:11) it
is said that "angels came and ministered unto Him"---namely, Christ.
As to the demons, it is true that they have immortality in common
with God, and unhappiness in common with men. "Hence for this
purpose does the immortal and unhappy demon intervene, in order
that he may hinder men from passing to a happy immortality," and
may allure them to an unhappy immortality. Whence he is like "an
evil mediator, who separates friends" [Augustine, De Civ. Dei xv].
But Christ had beatitude in common with God, mortality in common
with men. Hence "for this purpose did He intervene, that having
fulfilled the span of His mortality, He might from dead men make
immortal---which He showed in Himself by rising again; and that He
might confer beatitude on those who were deprived of it---for which
reason He never forsook us." Wherefore He is "the good Mediator,
Who reconciles enemies" (De Civ. Dei xv).
Reply to Objection 3: Since the Holy Ghost is in everything equal to
God, He cannot be said to be between, or a Mediator of, God and
men: but Christ alone, Who, though equal to the Father in His
Godhead, yet is less than the Father in His human nature, as stated

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.26, C.2.

above (Question 20, Article 1). Hence on Gal. 3:20, "Christ is a
Mediator," the gloss says: "Not the Father nor the Holy Ghost." The
Holy Ghost, however, is said "to ask for us," because He makes us
ask.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.26, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether Christ, is the Mediator of God and men?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ is not, as man, the Mediator of
God and men. For Augustine says (Contra Felic. x): "One is the
Person of Christ: lest there be not one Christ, not one substance;
lest, the office of Mediator being denied, He be called the Son either
of God alone, or merely the Son of a man." But He is the Son of God
and man, not as man, but as at the same time God and man.
Therefore neither should we say that, as man alone, He is Mediator
of God and man.
Objection 2: Further, just as Christ, as God, has a common nature
with the Father and the Holy Ghost; so, as man, He has a common
nature with men. But for the reason that, as God, He has the same
nature as the Father and the Holy Ghost, He cannot be called
Mediator, as God: for on 1 Tim. 2:5, "Mediator of God and man," a
gloss says: "As the Word, He is not a Mediator, because He is equal
to God, and God 'with God,' and at the same time one God."
Therefore neither, as man, can He be called Mediator, on account of
His having the same nature as men.
Objection 3: Further, Christ is called Mediator, inasmuch as He
reconciled us to God: and this He did by taking away sin, which
separated us from God. But to take away sin belongs to Christ, not
as man, but as God. Therefore Christ is our Mediator, not as man,
but as God.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Civ. Dei ix, 15): "Not because He
is the Word, is Christ Mediator, since He Who is supremely immortal
and supremely happy is far from us unhappy mortals; but He is
Mediator, as man."
I answer that, We may consider two things in a mediator: first, that
he is a mean; secondly, that he unites others. Now it is of the nature
of a mean to be distant from each extreme: while it unites by
communicating to one that which belongs to the other. Now neither
of these can be applied to Christ as God, but only as man. For, as
God, He does not differ from the Father and the Holy Ghost in nature
and power of dominion: nor have the Father and the Holy Ghost
anything that the Son has not, so that He be able to communicate to
others something belonging to the Father or the Holy Ghost, as