SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.131, C.4.

received, why dost thou glory, as if thou hadst not received it?" Or
again when a man prefers to God the temporal good in which he
glories: for this is forbidden (Jer. 9:23,24): "Let not the wise man
glory in his wisdom, and let not the strong man glory in his strength,
and let not the rich man glory in his riches. But let him that glorieth
glory in this, that he understandeth and knoweth Me." Or again when
a man prefers the testimony of man to God's; thus it is written in
reproval of certain people (Jn. 12:43): "For they loved the glory of
men more than the glory of God."
In another way vainglory may be contrary to charity, on the part of
the one who glories, in that he refers his intention to glory as his last
end: so that he directs even virtuous deeds thereto, and, in order to
obtain it, forbears not from doing even that which is against God. In
this way it is a mortal sin. Wherefore Augustine says (De Civ. Dei v,
14) that "this vice," namely the love of human praise, "is so hostile to
a godly faith, if the heart desires glory more than it fears or loves
God, that our Lord said (Jn. 5:44): How can you believe, who receive
glory one from another, and the glory which is from God alone, you
do not seek?"
If, however, the love of human glory, though it be vain, be not
inconsistent with charity, neither as regards the matter gloried in,
nor as to the intention of him that seeks glory, it is not a mortal but a
venial sin.
Reply to Objection 1: No man, by sinning, merits eternal life:
wherefore a virtuous deed loses its power to merit eternal life, if it be
done for the sake of vainglory, even though that vainglory be not a
mortal sin. On the other hand when a man loses the eternal reward
simply through vainglory, and not merely in respect of one act,
vainglory is a mortal sin.
Reply to Objection 2: Not every man that is desirous of vainglory,
desires the excellence which belongs to God alone. For the glory
due to God alone differs from the glory due to a virtuous or rich man.
Reply to Objection 3: Vainglory is stated to be a dangerous sin, not
only on account of its gravity, but also because it is a disposition to
grave sins, in so far as it renders man presumptuous and too selfconfident: and so it gradually disposes a man to lose his inward
goods.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.131, C.4.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.131, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether vainglory is a capital vice?

Objection 1: It seems that vainglory is not a capital vice. For a vice
that always arises from another vice is seemingly not capital. But
vainglory always arises from pride. Therefore vainglory is not a
capital vice.
Objection 2: Further, honor would seem to take precedence of glory,
for this is its effect. Now ambition which is inordinate desire of honor
is not a capital vice. Neither therefore is the desire of vainglory.
Objection 3: Further, a capital vice has a certain prominence. But
vainglory seems to have no prominence, neither as a sin, because it
is not always a mortal sin, nor considered as an appetible good,
since human glory is apparently a frail thing, and is something
outside man himself. Therefore vainglory is not a capital vice.
On the contrary, Gregory (Moral. xxxi) numbers vainglory among the
seven capital vices.
I answer that, The capital vices are enumerated in two ways. For
some reckon pride as one of their number: and these do not place
vainglory among the capital vices. Gregory, however (Moral. xxxi),
reckons pride to be the queen of all the vices, and vainglory, which
is the immediate offspring of pride, he reckons to be a capital vice:
and not without reason. For pride, as we shall state farther on
(Question 152, Articles 1,2), denotes inordinate desire of excellence.
But whatever good one may desire, one desires a certain perfection
and excellence therefrom: wherefore the end of every vice is directed
to the end of pride, so that this vice seems to exercise a kind of
causality over the other vices, and ought not to be reckoned among
the special sources of vice, known as the capital vices. Now among
the goods that are the means whereby man acquires honor, glory
seems to be the most conducive to that effect, inasmuch as it
denotes the manifestation of a man's goodness: since good is
naturally loved and honored by all. Wherefore, just as by the glory
which is in God's sight man acquires honor in Divine things, so too
by the glory which is in the sight of man he acquires excellence in
human things. Hence on account of its close connection with
excellence, which men desire above all, it follows that it is most
desirable. And since many vices arise from the inordinate desire