FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.70, C.4.

Accordingly man's mind is well disposed in regard to itself when it
has a good disposition towards good things and towards evil things.
Now the first disposition of the human mind towards the good is
effected by love, which is the first of our emotions and the root of
them all, as stated above (Question 27, Article 4). Wherefore among
the fruits of the Holy Ghost, we reckon "charity," wherein the Holy
Ghost is given in a special manner, as in His own likeness, since He
Himself is love. Hence it is written (Rm. 5:5): "The charity of God is
poured forth in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, Who is given to us."
The necessary result of the love of charity is joy: because every
lover rejoices at being united to the beloved. Now charity has always
actual presence in God Whom it loves, according to 1 Jn. 4:16: "He
that abideth in charity, abideth in God, and God in Him": wherefore
the sequel of charity is "joy." Now the perfection of joy is peace in
two respects. First, as regards freedom from outward disturbance;
for it is impossible to rejoice perfectly in the beloved good, if one is
disturbed in the enjoyment thereof; and again, if a man's heart is
perfectly set at peace in one object, he cannot be disquieted by any
other, since he accounts all others as nothing; hence it is written
(Ps. 118:165): "Much peace have they that love Thy Law, and to them
there is no stumbling-block," because, to wit, external things do not
disturb them in their enjoyment of God. Secondly, as regards the
calm of the restless desire: for he does not perfectly rejoice, who is
not satisfied with the object of his joy. Now peace implies these two
things, namely, that we be not disturbed by external things, and that
our desires rest altogether in one object. Wherefore after charity and
joy, "peace" is given the third place. In evil things the mind has a
good disposition, in respect of two things. First, by not being
disturbed whenever evil threatens: which pertains to "patience";
secondly, by not being disturbed, whenever good things are
delayed; which belongs to "long suffering," since "to lack good is a
kind of evil" (Ethic. v, 3).
Man's mind is well disposed as regards what is near him, viz. his
neighbor, first, as to the will to do good; and to this belongs
"goodness." Secondly, as to the execution of well-doing; and to this
belongs "benignity," for the benign are those in whom the salutary
flame [bonus ignis] of love has enkindled the desire to be kind to
their neighbor. Thirdly, as to his suffering with equanimity the evils
his neighbor inflicts on him. To this belongs "meekness," which
curbs anger. Fourthly, in the point of our refraining from doing harm
to our neighbor not only through anger, but also through fraud or
deceit. To this pertains "faith," if we take it as denoting fidelity. But if