1 Corinthians 15:10
7. "But by the grace of God I am what I am."
Do you see again another excess of humility? In that the defects he imputes
to himself, but of the good deeds nothing; rather he refers all to God. Next, lest
he might hereby render his hearer supine, he says, "And His grace which was
bestowed upon me was not found vain." And this again with reserve: in that he
said not, "I have displayed a diligence worthy of His grace," but, "it was not
found vain."
"But I labored more abundantly than they all." He said not, "I was
honored," but, "I labored;" and when he had perils and deaths to speak of, by the
name of labor he again abates his expression.
Then again practicing his wonted humility, this also he speedily passes by
and refers the whole to God, saying, "Yet not I, but the grace of God which was
with me." What can be more admirable than such a soul? Who having in so
many ways depressed himself and uttered but one lofty word, not even this does
he call his own; on every side finding ways, both from the former things and
from them that follow after, to contract this lofty expression, and that because it
was of necessity that he came to it.
But consider how he abounds in the expressions of humility. For so, "to me
last of all He appeared," says he. Wherefore neither does he with himself
mention any other, and says, "as of one born out of due time," and that himself is
"the least of the apostles," and not even worthy of this appellation. And he was
not content even with these, but that he might not seem in mere words to be
humble-minded, he states both reasons and proofs: of his being "one born out of
due time," his seeing Jesus last; and of his being unworthy even of the name of
an apostle, "his persecuting the Church." For he that is simply humble-minded
does not this: but he that also sets down the reasons utters all from a contrite

mind. Wherefore also he elsewhere makes mention of these same things, saying,
"And I thank him that enabled me; even Christ Jesus our Lord, for that He
counted me faithful, appointing the to his service, though I was before a
blasphemer, and a persecutor, and injurious." [1 Timothy 1:12-13]
But wherefore did he utter at all that same lofty expression, "I labored more
abundantly than they?" He saw that the occasion compelled him. For had he not
said this, had he only depreciated himself, how could he with boldness call
himself to witness, and number himself with the rest, and say,

1 Corinthians 15:11
"Whether then it be I or they, so we preach."
For the witness ought to be trustworthy, and a great man. But how he
"labored more abundantly than they," he indicated above, saying, "Have we no
right to eat and to drink, as also the other Apostles?" And again, "to them that
are without law as without law." Thus, both where exactness was to be
displayed, he overshot all: and where there was need to condescend, he
displayed again the same great superiority.
But some cite his being sent to the Gentiles and his overrunning the larger
part of the world. Whence it is evident that he enjoyed more grace. For if he
labored more, the grace was also more: but he enjoyed more grace, because he
displayed also more diligence. Do you see how by those particulars whereby he
contends and strives to throw into shade the things concerning himself, he is
shown to be first of all?
8. And these things when we hear, let us also make open show of our
defects, but of our excellencies let us say nothing. Or if the opportunity force it
upon us, let us speak of them with reserve and impute the whole to God's grace:
which accordingly the Apostle also does, ever and anon putting a bad mark upon
his former life, but his after-state imputing to grace, that he might signify the
mercy of God from every circumstance: from His having saved him such as he
was and when saved making him again such as he is. Let none accordingly of
those who are in sin despair, let none of those in virtue be confident, but let the
one be exceeding fearful and the other forward. For neither shall any slothful
man be able to abide in virtue, nor one that is diligent be weak to escape from
evil. And of both these the blessed David is an example, who after he slumbered
a little, had a great downfall: and when he was pricked in his heart, again
hastened up to his former height. Since in fact both are alike evils, both despair