of human nature and to show forth its natural power.
Reply to Objection 3: Just as the elements are in the course of
generation in relation to mixed bodies, because they are their matter,
yet not so as to be always in transition when in the mixed body, so
too are the humors in relation to the members. And for this reason
as the elements in the parts of the universe have definite forms, by
reason of which they, like mixed bodies, belong to the perfection of
the universe, so too the humors belong to the perfection of the
human body, just as the other parts do, although they do not reach
its entire perfection, as the other parts do, and although the
elements have not perfect forms as mixed bodies have. But as all the
parts of the universe receive their perfection from God, not equally,
but each one according to its mode, so too the humors are in some
way perfected by the rational soul, yet not in the same measure as
the more perfect parts.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether whatever in the body belonged to the

truth of human nature will rise again in it?
Objection 1: It would seem that what was in the body, belonging to
the truth of human nature, will not all rise again in it. For food is
changed into the truth of human nature. Now sometimes the flesh of
the ox or of other animals is taken as food. Therefore if whatever
belonged to the truth of human nature will rise again, the flesh of the
ox or of other animals will also rise again: which is inadmissible.
Objection 2: Further, Adam's rib belonged to the truth of human
nature in him, as ours does in us. But Adam's rib will rise again not
in Adam but in Eve, else Eve would not rise again at all since she
was made from that rib. Therefore whatever belonged in man to the
truth of human nature will not all rise again in him.
Objection 3: Further, it is impossible for the same thing from
different men to rise again. Yet it is possible for something in
different men to belong to the truth of human nature, for instance if a
man were to partake of human flesh which would be changed into
his substance. Therefore there will not rise again in man whatever
belonged in him to the truth of human nature.
Objection 4: Further, if it be said that not all the flesh partaken of
belongs to the truth of human nature and that consequently some of
it may possibly rise again in the one man and some in the other---on
the contrary: That which is derived from one's parents would
especially seem to belong to the truth of human nature. But if one
who partook of nothing but human flesh were to beget children that
which his child derives from him must needs be of the flesh of other
men partaken of by his father, since the seed is from the surplus of
food, as the Philosopher proves (De Gen. Animal. i). Therefore what
belongs to the truth of human nature in that child belonged also to
the truth of human nature in other men of whose flesh his father had
partaken.
Objection 5: Further, if it be said that what was changed into seed
was not that which belong to the truth of human nature in the flesh of
the men eaten, but something not belonging to the truth of human
nature---on the contrary: Let us suppose that some one is fed
entirely on embryos in which seemingly there is nothing but what