none but a bishop: so that in this sacrament also, the priest's power
is shown to be derived from the bishop's, as Dionysius observes
(Eccl. Hier. iii). The reason why a priest can perform that
consecration of matter which is a sacrament by itself, and not that
which, as a sacramental, is directed to a sacrament consisting in
something used by the faithful, is that in respect of Christ's true
body no order is above the priesthood, whereas, in respect of
Christ's mystic body the episcopate is above the priesthood, as we
shall state further on (Question 40, Article 4).
Reply to Objection 2: The sacramental matter is not one that is made
into something else by him that uses it, as occurs in the mechanical
arts: it is one, in virtue of which something is done, so that it
partakes somewhat of the nature of an efficient cause, in so far as it
is the instrument of a Divine operation. Hence the matter needs to
acquire this virtue from a higher art or power, since among efficient
causes, the more prior the cause the more perfect it is, whereas in
material causes, the more prior the matter, the more imperfect it is.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether this sacrament has a form?

Objection 1: It would seem that this sacrament has no form.
Because, since the efficacy of the sacraments is derived from their
institution, as also from their form, the latter must needs be
appointed by the institutor of the sacrament. But there is no account
of the form of this sacrament being instituted either by Christ or by
the apostles. Therefore this sacrament has no form.
Objection 2: Further, whatever is essential to a sacrament is
observed everywhere in the same way. Now nothing is so essential
to a sacrament that has a form, as that very form. Therefore, as in
this sacrament there is no form commonly used by all, since various
words are in use, it seems that this sacrament has no form.
Objection 3: Further, in Baptism no form is needed except for the
sanctification of the matter, because the water is "sanctified by the
word of life so as to wash sin away," as Hugh states (De Sacram. ii).
Now the matter of this sacrament is already consecrated. Therefore it
needs no form of words.
On the contrary, The Master says (Sent. iv, D, 1) that every
sacrament of the New Law consists in things and words. Now the
words are the sacramental form. Therefore, since this is a sacrament
of the New Law, it seems that it has a form.
Further, this is confirmed by the rite of the Universal Church, who
uses certain words in the bestowal of this sacrament.
I answer that, Some have held that no farm is essential to this
sacrament. This, however, seems derogatory to the effect of this
sacrament, since every sacrament signifies its effect. Now the matter
is indifferent as regards its effect, and consequently cannot be
determined to any particular effect save by the form of words. Hence
in all the sacraments of the New Law, since they effect what they
signify, there must needs be things and words. Moreover James
(5:14,15) seems to ascribe the whole force of this sacrament to
prayer, which is the form thereof, as we shall state further on (ad 2:
Articles 8,9). Wherefore the foregoing opinion seems presumptuous
and erroneous; and for that reason we should hold with the common
opinion that this, like all the other sacraments, has a fixed form.