with desire. For this cause the blessed Job [Job 31:1] also laid down this law
from the beginning, blocking out from himself on all sides this kind of gazing.
For in truth greater is the struggle on beholding, and not possessing the
object of fondness: nor is the pleasure so great which we reap from the sight, as
the mischief we undergo from increasing this desire; thus making our opponent
strong, and giving more scope to the devil, and no longer able to repulse him,
now that we have brought him into our inmost parts, and have thrown our mind
open unto him. Therefore He says, "commit no adultery with your eyes, and you
will commit none with your mind."
For one may indeed behold in another way, such as are the looks of the
chaste; wherefore he did not altogether prohibit our seeing, but that seeing which
is accompanied with desire. And if He had not meant this, He would have said
simply, "He who looks on a woman." But now He said not thus, but, "He who
looks to lust," "he who looks to please his sight."
For not at all to this end did God make you eyes, that you should thereby
introduce adultery, but that, beholding His creatures, you should admire the
Artificer.
Just then as one may feel wrath at random, so may one cast looks at
random; that is, when you do it for lust. Rather, if you desire to look and find
pleasure, look at your own wife, and love her continually; no law forbids that.
But if you are to be curious about the beauties that belong to another, you are
injuring both your wife by letting your eyes wander elsewhere, and her on whom
you have looked, by touching her unlawfully. Since, although you have not
touched her with the hand, yet have you caressed her with your eyes; for which
cause this also is accounted adultery, and before that great penalty draws after it
no slight one of its own. For then all within him is filled with disquiet and
turmoil, and great is the tempest, and most grievous the pain, and no captive nor
person in chains can be worse off than a man in this state of mind. And
oftentimes she who has shot the dart is flown away, while the wound even so
remains. Or rather, it is not she who has shot the dart, but you gave yourself the

fatal wound, by your unchaste look. And this I say to free modest women from
the charge: since assuredly, should one deck herself out, and invite towards
herself the eyes of such as fall in her way; even though she smite not him that
meets with her, she incurs the utmost penalty: for she mixed the poison, she
prepared the hemlock, even though she did not offer the cup. Or rather, she did
also offer the cup, though no one were found to drink it.
3. "Why then does He not discourse with them also?" it may be said.
Because the laws which He appoints are in every case common, although He
seem to address Himself unto men only. For in discoursing with the head, He
makes His admonition common to the whole body also. For woman and man He
knows as one living creature, and nowhere distinguishes their kind.
But if you desire to hear also His rebuke for them in particular, listen to
Isaiah, [Isaiah 3:16] in many words inveighing against them, and deriding their
habit, their aspect, their gait, their trailing garments, their tripping feet, their
drooping necks. Hear with him the blessed Paul also, setting many laws for
them; and both about garments, and ornaments of gold, and plaiting of hair, and
luxurious living, and all other such things, vehemently rebuking this sex. And
Christ too, by what follows next, obscurely intimated this very same; for when
He says, "pluck out and cut off the eye that offends you," He speaks as indicating
His anger against them.
3. Wherefore also He subjoins,
"If your right eye offend you, pluck it out, and cast it from you."
Thus, lest you should say, "But what if she be akin to me? What if in any
other way she belong to me?" therefore He has given these injunctions; not
discoursing about our limbs—far from it—for nowhere does He say that our
flesh is to be blamed for things, but everywhere it is the evil mind that is
accused. For it is not the eye that sees, but the mind and the thought. Often, for
instance, we being wholly turned elsewhere, our eye sees not those who are
present. So that the matter does not entirely depend upon its working. Again, had
He been speaking of members of the body, He would not have said it of one eye,