John 15:23
"He that hates Me, hates My Father also."
From this also proclaiming beforehand no small punishment against them.
For, since they continually pretended that they persecuted Him on account of the
Father, to deprive them of this excuse He spoke these words. "They have no
excuse. I gave them the teaching which is by words, that by works I added,
according to the Law of Moses, who bade all men obey one speaking and doing
such things, when he should both lead to piety, and exhibit the greatest
miracles." And He spoke not simply of "signs," but,

John 15:24
"Which none other man did."
And of this they themselves are witnesses, speaking in this way; "It was
never so seen in Israel" [Matthew 9:33]; and, "Since the world began was it not
heard that any man opened the eyes of one that was born blind" [John 9:32]; and
the matter of Lazarus was of the same kind, and all the other acts the same, and
the mode of wonder-working new, and all beyond thought. "Why then," says one,
"do they persecute both You and us?" "Because you are not of the world. If you
were of the world, the world would love its own." [John 15:19] He first reminds
them of the words which He spoke also to His own brethren [John 7:7]; but there
he spoke more by way of a reflection, lest He should offend them, while here, on
the contrary, He revealed all. "And how is it clear that it is on this account that
we are hated?" "From what was done to Me. For, tell Me, which of My words or
deeds could they lay hold on, that they would not receive Me?" Then since the
thing would be astounding to us, He tells the cause; that is, their wickedness.
And He stays not here either, but introduces the Prophet [Psalm 35:19; 69:4],
showing him proclaiming before of old time, and saying, that,

John 15:25
"They hated Me without a cause."
3. Which Paul does also. For when many wondered how that the Jews
believed not, he brings in Prophets foretelling it of old, and declaring the cause;
that their wickedness and pride were the cause of their unbelief. "Well then; if
they kept not Your saying, neither will they keep ours; if they persecuted You,
therefore they will persecute us also; if they saw signs, such as none other man
wrought; if they heard words such as none other spoke, and profited nothing; if
they hate Your Father and You with Him, wherefore," says one, "have You sent us
in among them? How after this shall we be worthy of belief? Which of our
kindred will give-heed to us?" That they may not therefore be troubled by such
thoughts, see what sort of comfort he adds.

John 15:26-27
"When the Comforter has come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, even
the Spirit of Truth, which proceeds from the Father, He shall testify of Me. And
ye also shall bear witness, because you have been with Me from the beginning."
"He shall be worthy of belief, for He is the Spirit of Truth." On this account
He called It not "Holy Spirit," but "Spirit of Truth." But the, "proceeds from the
Father," shows that He knows all things exactly, as Christ also says of Himself,
that "I know whence come and whither I go" [John 8:14], speaking in that place
also concerning truth. "Whom will send." Behold, it is no longer the Father
alone, but the Son also who sends. "And ye too," He says, "have a right to be
believed, who have been with Me, who have not heard from others." Indeed, the
Apostles confidently rely on this circumstance, saying, "We who ate and drank
with Him." [Acts 10:41] And to show that this was not merely said to please, the
Spirit bears witness to the words spoken. [Acts 10:44]