should be bound, and scourged, and put to death, that He might not hereby also
confound their minds; but for the present He announces before what should
happen to themselves.
Then, that they might learn that this system of war is new, and the manner
of the array unwonted; as He sends them bare, and with one coat, and unshod,
and without staff, and without girdle or scrip, and bids them be maintained by
such as receive them; so neither here did He stay His speech, but to signify His
unspeakable power, He says, Even thus setting out, exhibit the gentleness of
"sheep," and this, though you are to go unto "wolves;" and not simply unto
wolves, but "into the midst of wolves."
And He bids them have not only gentleness as sheep, but also the
harmlessness of the dove. "For thus shall I best show forth my might, when
sheep get the better of wolves, and being in the midst of wolves, and receiving a
thousand bites, so far from being consumed, do even work a change on them a
thing far greater and more marvellous than killing them, to alter their spirit, and
to reform their mind; and this, being only twelve, while the whole world is filled
with the wolves."
Let us then be ashamed, who do the contrary, who set like wolves upon our
enemies. For so long as we are sheep, we conquer: though ten thousand wolves
prowl around, we overcome and prevail. But if we become wolves, we are
worsted, for the help of our Shepherd departs from us: for He feeds not wolves,
but sheep: and He forsakes you, and retires, for neither do you allow His might
to be shown. Because, as He accounts the whole triumph His own, if you being
ill used, show forth gentleness; so if you follow it up and give blows, you
obscure His victory.
2. But do thou consider, I pray you, who they are that hear these
injunctions, so hard and laborious: the timid and ignorant; the unlettered and
uninstructed; such as are in every respect obscure, who have never been trained
up in the Gentile laws, who do not readily present themselves in the public
places; the fishermen, the publicans, men full of innumerable deficiencies. For if

these things were enough to confound even the lofty and great, how were they
not enough to cast down and dismay them that were in all respects untried, and
had never entertained any noble imagination? But they did not cast them down.
"And very naturally," some one may perhaps say; "because He gave them
power to cleanse lepers, to drive out devils." I would answer as follows: Nay,
this very thing was enough especially to perplex them, that for all their raising
the dead, they were to undergo these intolerable evils, both judgments, and
executions, and the wars which all would wage on them, and the common hatred
of the world; and that such terrors await them, while themselves are working
miracles.
3. What then is their consolation for all these things? The power of Him
that sends them. Wherefore also He puts this before all, saying, "Behold, I send
you." This suffices for your encouragement, this for confidence, and fearing
none of your assailants.
Do you see authority? Do you see prerogative? Do you see invincible
might? Now His meaning is like this: "Be not troubled" (so He speaks), "that
sending you among wolves, I command you to be like sheep and like doves. For I
might indeed have done the contrary, and have suffered you to undergo nothing
terrible, nor as sheep to be exposed to wolves; I might have rendered you more
formidable than lions; but it is expedient that so it should be. This makes you
also more glorious; this proclaims also my power."
This He said also unto Paul: "My grace is sufficient for you, for my strength
is made perfect in weakness." [2 Corinthians 12:9] "It is I, now mark it, who
have caused you so to be." For in saying, "I send you forth as sheep," He
intimates this. "Do not therefore despond, for I know, I know certainly, that in
this way more than any other ye will be invincible to all."
After this, that they may contribute something on their own part also, and
that all might not seem to be of His grace, nor they supposed to be crowned at
random, and vainly, He says, "Be therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as
doves." "But what," it might be said, "will our wisdom avail in so great dangers?