FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.113, C.8.

Reply to Objection 2: As stated above (FP, Question 85, Article 5),
there is nothing to prevent two things being understood at once, in
so far as they are somehow one; thus we understand the subject and
predicate together, inasmuch as they are united in the order of one
affirmation. And in the same manner can the free-will be moved to
two things at once in so far as one is ordained to the other. Now the
free-will's movement towards sin is ordained to the free-will's
movement towards God, since a man detests sin, as contrary to God,
to Whom he wishes to cling. Hence in the justification of the ungodly
the free-will simultaneously detests sin and turns to God, even as a
body approaches one point and withdraws from another
simultaneously.
Reply to Objection 3: The reason why a form is not received
instantaneously in the matter is not the fact that it can inhere more
or less; for thus the light would not be suddenly received in the air,
which can be illumined more or less. But the reason is to be sought
on the part of the disposition of the matter or subject, as stated
above.
Reply to Objection 4: The same instant the form is acquired, the
thing begins to operate with the form; as fire, the instant it is
generated moves upwards, and if its movement was instantaneous,
it would be terminated in the same instant. Now to will and not to
will---the movements of the free-will---are not successive, but
instantaneous. Hence the justification of the ungodly must not be
successive.
Reply to Objection 5: The succession of opposites in the same
subject must be looked at differently in the things that are subject to
time and in those that are above time. For in those that are in time,
there is no last instant in which the previous form inheres in the
subject; but there is the last time, and the first instant that the
subsequent form inheres in the matter or subject; and this for the
reason, that in time we are not to consider one instant, since neither
do instants succeed each other immediately in time, nor points in a
line, as is proved in Physic. vi, 1. But time is terminated by an
instant. Hence in the whole of the previous time wherein anything is
moving towards its form, it is under the opposite form; but in the last
instant of this time, which is the first instant of the subsequent time,
it has the form which is the term of the movement.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.113, C.8.

But in those that are above time, it is otherwise. For if there be any
succession of affections or intellectual conceptions in them (as in
the angels), such succession is not measured by continuous time,
but by discrete time, even as the things measured are not
continuous, as stated above (FP, Question 53, Articles 2,3). In these,
therefore, there is a last instant in which the preceding is, and a first
instant in which the subsequent is. Nor must there be time in
between, since there is no continuity of time, which this would
necessitate.
Now the human mind, which is justified, is, in itself, above time, but
is subject to time accidentally, inasmuch as it understands with
continuity and time, with respect to the phantasms in which it
considers the intelligible species, as stated above (FP, Question 85,
Articles 1,2). We must, therefore, decide from this about its change
as regards the condition of temporal movements, i.e. we must say
that there is no last instant that sin inheres, but a last time; whereas
there is a first instant that grace inheres; and in all the time previous
sin inhered.