just as in the beginning he showed what He does to His friends, what to his
enemies. And again, as to the act of subjugation, not to provoke unbelief, he
ascribes it to the Father. Since then these are great things that he has uttered, he
again brings his discourse down to lowly matters. "Let therefore," he says, the
whole house of Israel know assuredly: i.e. question ye not, nor doubt ye: then
also in the tone of command it follows; "that God has made Him both Lord"—
this he says from David— "and Christ," [Acts 2:36], this from the Psalm: For
when it would have been rightly concluded, "Let therefore the whole house of
Israel know assuredly that" He sits on the right hand of God, this, which would
have been great, he forbears, and brings in a different matter which is much
more humble, and the expression "Hath made;" i.e. has ordained: so that there is
nothing about ([οὐσίωσις]) communication of substance here, but the expression
relates to this which has been mentioned. "Even this Jesus, Whom you crucified."
He does well to end with this, thereby agitating their minds. For when he has
shown how great it is, he has then exposed their daring deed, so as to show it to
be greater, and to possess them with terror. For men are not so much attracted by
benefits as they are chastened by fear.
But the admirable and great ones, and beloved of God, need none of these
motives: men, such as was Paul: not of the kingdom, not of hell, made he
account. For this is indeed to love Christ, this to be no hireling, nor to reckon it a
matter of trafficking and trading, but to be indeed virtuous, and to do all for the
love of God. [Romans 9:3] Then what tears does it not deserve, when, owing so
large a measure, we do not even like traders seek the kingdom of heaven! He
promises us so great things, and not even so is He worthy to be heard? What can
come up to this enmity! And yet, they are mad after money-making, though it be
with enemies, though it be with slaves, though it be with persons most hostile to
them, that they come in contact, though it be with persons utterly evil, if only
they expect that they shall be enabled by their means to make money, they will
do everything, will flatter, and be obsequious, and make themselves slaves, and
will esteem them more to be revered than all men, to get some advantage out of

them: for the hope of money does not allow them to give a thought to any such
considerations as these. But the Kingdom is not so powerful as money is; nay,
rather, not in the smallest proportion as powerful. For it is no ordinary Being that
promises: but this is greater than even the Kingdom itself that we receive it from
such a Giver! But now the case is the same as if a king, wishing, after ten
thousand other benefits, to make us his heirs and coheirs with his son [should be
despised]: while some captain of a band of robbers, who has done ten thousand
wrongs to us and to our parents, and is himself fraught with ten thousand
wickednesses, and has utterly marred our honor and our welfare, should, on
presenting a single penny, receive our worship. God promises a Kingdom, and is
despised: the Devil helps us to hell, and he is honored! Here God, there Devil.
But let us see the difference of the tasks enjoined. For if there were none of these
considerations in the case: if it were not, here God, there Devil; not, here one
helping to a kingdom, there to a hell: the nature itself of the tasks enjoined were
sufficient to induce us to comply with the former. For what does each enjoin?
The one, the things which make glorious; the other the things which put to
shame: one, the things which involve in ten thousand calamities and disgraces;
the other, the things which have with them abundant refreshment. For look: the
one says, "Learn ye of Me, for I am meek and lowly of heart, and you shall find
rest unto your souls." [Matthew 11:29]: the other says, Be thou savage, and
ungentle, and passionate, and wrathful, and more a wild beast than a man. Let us
see which is more useful, which, I pray you, more profitable. "Speak not of this,"
say you. * * * But consider that he is the devil: above all indeed, if that be
shown: there is need also to undergo toils, and, on the other hand, the prize of
victory will be greater. For not he that enjoins easy tasks is the kind ([κηδεμὼν])
benefactor, but he that enjoins what is for our good. Since fathers also enjoin
disagreeable tasks; but for this they are fathers: and so again do masters to
slaves: but kidnappers and destroyers ([λυμεὥνες]) on the other hand, do just the
reverse. And yet that the commands of Christ are attended with a pleasure, is
manifest from that saying. For to what sort do you take the passionate man to