slaughter." But here the expression "all the day long" is put for all this time during which we
suffer persecution, and are killed as sheep. As then this day does not signify one which consists of
twelve hours, but the whole time during which believers in Christ suffer and are put to death for
His sake, so also the year there mentioned does not denote one which consists of twelve months,
but the whole time of faith during which men hear and believe the preaching of the Gospel, and
those become acceptable to God who unite themselves to Him.
3. But it is greatly to be wondered at, how it has come to pass that, while affirming that they
have found out the mysteries of God, they have not examined the Gospels to ascertain how often
after His baptism the Lord went up, at the time of the passover, to Jerusalem, in accordance with
what was the practice of the Jews from every land, and every year, that they should assemble at
this period in Jerusalem, and there celebrate the feast of the passover. First of all, after He had made
the water wine at Cana of Galilee, He went up to the festival day of the passover, on which occasion
it is written, "For many believed in Him, when they saw the signs which He did," as John the
disciple of the Lord records. Then, again, withdrawing Himself [from Judæa], He is found in
Samaria; on which occasion, too, He conversed with the Samaritan woman, and while at a distance,
cured the son of the centurion by a word, saying, "Go thy way, thy son liveth." Afterwards He
went up, the second time, to observe the festival day of the passover in Jerusalem; on which
occasion He cured the paralytic man, who had lain beside the pool thirty-eight years, bidding him
rise, take up his couch, and depart. Again, withdrawing from thence to the other side of the sea of
Tiberias, He there seeing a great crowd had followed Him, fed all that multitude with five loaves
of bread, and twelve baskets of fragments remained over and above. Then, when He had raised
Lazarus from the dead, and plots were formed against Him by the Pharisees, He withdrew to a city
called Ephraim; and from that place, as it is written "He came to Bethany six days before the
passover," and going up from Bethany to Jerusalem, He there ate the passover, and suffered on
the day following. Now, that these three occasions of the passover are not included within one year,
every person whatever must acknowledge. And that the special month in which the passover was
celebrated, and in which also the Lord suffered, was not the twelfth, but the first, those men who
boast that they know all things, if they know not this, may learn it from Moses. Their explanation,

Rom. viii. 36.
Evangelist; but, upon the whole, the current of opinion that has always prevailed in the Church has been in favour of the statement
here made by Irenæus. Christ would therefore be present at four passovers after His baptism: (1) John ii. 13; (2) John v. 1; (3)
John vi. 4; (4) John xiii. 1.