SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.49, C.4.

Philosopher speaks of riches as the end of political prudence, by
way of example and in accordance with the opinion of many.
Reply to Objection 2: Some sinners may be provident in certain
matters of detail concerning the disposition of their household, but
not in regard to "a good life in general" as regards the conduct of the
household, for which above all a virtuous life is required.
Reply to Objection 3: The father has in his household an authority
like that of a king, as stated in Ethic. viii, 10, but he has not the full
power of a king, wherefore paternal government is not reckoned a
distinct species of prudence, like regnative prudence.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.49, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether military prudence should be reckoned a

part of prudence?
Objection 1: It would seem that military prudence should not be
reckoned a part of prudence. For prudence is distinct from art,
according to Ethic. vi, 3. Now military prudence seems to be the art
of warfare, according to the Philosopher (Ethic. iii, 8). Therefore
military prudence should not be accounted a species of prudence.
Objection 2: Further, just as military business is contained under
political affairs, so too are many other matters, such as those of
tradesmen, craftsmen, and so forth. But there are no species of
prudence corresponding to other affairs in the state. Neither
therefore should any be assigned to military business.
Objection 3: Further, the soldiers' bravery counts for a great deal in
warfare. Therefore military prudence pertains to fortitude rather than
to prudence.
On the contrary, It is written (Prov. 24:6): "War is managed by due
ordering, and there shall be safety where there are many counsels."
Now it belongs to prudence to take counsel. Therefore there is great
need in warfare for that species of prudence which is called
"military."
I answer that, Whatever things are done according to art or reason,
should be made to conform to those which are in accordance with
nature, and are established by the Divine Reason. Now nature has a
twofold tendency: first, to govern each thing in itself, secondly, to
withstand outward assailants and corruptives: and for this reason
she has provided animals not only with the concupiscible faculty,
whereby they are moved to that which is conducive to their wellbeing, but also with the irascible power, whereby the animal
withstands an assailant. Therefore in those things also which are in
accordance with reason, there should be not only "political"
prudence, which disposes in a suitable manner such things as
belong to the common good, but also a "military" prudence, whereby
hostile attacks are repelled.
Reply to Objection 1: Military prudence may be an art, in so far as it
has certain rules for the right use of certain external things, such as