FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.35, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether there is any sorrow contrary to the

pleasure of contemplation?
Objection 1: It would seem that there is a sorrow that is contrary to
the pleasure of contemplation. For the Apostle says (2 Cor. 7:10):
"The sorrow that is according to God, worketh penance steadfast
unto salvation." Now to look at God belongs to the higher reason,
whose act is to give itself to contemplation, according to Augustine
(De Trin. xii, 3,4). Therefore there is a sorrow contrary to the pleasure
of contemplation.
Objection 2: Further, contrary things have contrary effects. If
therefore the contemplation of one contrary gives pleasure, the other
contrary will give sorrow: and so there will be a sorrow contrary to
the pleasure of contemplation.
Objection 3: Further, as the object of pleasure is good, so the object
of sorrow is evil. But contemplation can be an evil: since the
Philosopher says (Metaph. xii, 9) that "it is unfitting to think of
certain things." Therefore sorrow can be contrary to the pleasure of
contemplation.
Objection 4: Further, any work, so far as it is unhindered, can be a
cause of pleasure, as stated in Ethic. vii, 12,13; x, 4. But the work of
contemplation can be hindered in many ways, either so as to destroy
it altogether, or as to make it difficult. Therefore in contemplation
there can be a sorrow contrary to the pleasure.
Objection 5: Further, affliction of the flesh is a cause of sorrow. But,
as it is written (Eccles. 12:12) "much study is an affliction of the
flesh." Therefore contemplation admits of sorrow contrary to its
pleasure.
On the contrary, It is written (Wis. 8:16): "Her," i.e. wisdom's,
"conversation hath no bitterness nor her company any tediousness;
but joy and gladness." Now the conversation and company of
wisdom are found in contemplation. Therefore there is no sorrow
contrary to the pleasure of contemplation.
I answer that, The pleasure of contemplation can be understood in
two ways. In one way, so that contemplation is the cause, but not the

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.35, C.6.

object of pleasure: and then pleasure is taken not in contemplating
but in the thing contemplated. Now it is possible to contemplate
something harmful and sorrowful, just as to contemplate something
suitable and pleasant. Consequently if the pleasure of contemplation
be taken in this way, nothing hinders some sorrow being contrary to
the pleasure of contemplation.
In another way, the pleasure of contemplation is understood, so that
contemplation is its object and cause; as when one takes pleasure in
the very act of contemplating. And thus, according to Gregory of
Nyssa [Nemesius, De Nat. Hom. xviii.], "no sorrow is contrary to that
pleasure which is about contemplation": and the Philosopher says
the same (Topic. i, 13; Ethic. x, 3). This, however, is to be understood
as being the case properly speaking. The reason is because sorrow
is of itself contrary to pleasure in a contrary object: thus pleasure in
heat is contrary to sorrow caused by cold. But there is no contrary to
the object of contemplation: because contraries, as apprehended by
the mind, are not contrary, but one is the means of knowing the
other. Wherefore, properly speaking, there cannot be a sorrow
contrary to the pleasure of contemplation. Nor has it any sorrow
annexed to it, as bodily pleasures have, which are like remedies
against certain annoyances; thus a man takes pleasure in drinking
through being troubled with thirst, but when the thirst is quite driven
out, the pleasure of drinking ceases also. Because the pleasure of
contemplation is not caused by one's being quit of an annoyance,
but by the fact that contemplation is pleasant in itself: for pleasure is
not a "becoming" but a perfect operation, as stated above (Question
31, Article 1).
Accidentally, however, sorrow is mingled with the pleasure of
contemplation; and this in two ways: first, on the part of an organ,
secondly, through some impediment in the apprehension. On the
part of an organ, sorrow or pain is mingled with apprehension,
directly, as regards the apprehensive powers of the sensitive part,
which have a bodily organ; either from the sensible object
disagreeing with the normal condition of the organ, as the taste of
something bitter, and the smell of something foul; or from the
sensible object, though agreeable, being so continuous in its action
on the sense, that it exceeds the normal condition of the organ, as
stated above (Question 33, Article 2), the result being that an
apprehension which at first was pleasant becomes tedious. But
these two things cannot occur directly in the contemplation of the
mind; because the mind has no corporeal organ: wherefore it was