SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.0, C.9.

seems that there is not a sufficient number of articles.
On the contrary stands the authority of the Church who formulates
the articles thus.
I answer that, As stated above (Articles 4,6), to faith those things in
themselves belong, the sight of which we shall enjoy in eternal life,
and by which we are brought to eternal life. Now two things are
proposed to us to be seen in eternal life: viz. the secret of the
Godhead, to see which is to possess happiness; and the mystery of
Christ's Incarnation, "by Whom we have access" to the glory of the
sons of God, according to Rm. 5:2. Hence it is written (Jn. 17:3):
"This is eternal life: that they may know Thee, the . . . true God, and
Jesus Christ Whom Thou hast sent." Wherefore the first distinction
in matters of faith is that some concern the majesty of the Godhead,
while others pertain to the mystery of Christ's human nature, which
is the "mystery of godliness" (1 Tim. 3:16).
Now with regard to the majesty of the Godhead, three things are
proposed to our belief: first, the unity of the Godhead, to which the
first article refers; secondly, the trinity of the Persons, to which three
articles refer, corresponding to the three Persons; and thirdly, the
works proper to the Godhead, the first of which refers to the order of
nature, in relation to which the article about the creation is proposed
to us; the second refers to the order of grace, in relation to which all
matters concerning the sanctification of man are included in one
article; while the third refers to the order of glory, and in relation to
this another article is proposed to us concerning the resurrection of
the dead and life everlasting. Thus there are seven articles referring
to the Godhead.
In like manner, with regard to Christ's human nature, there are seven
articles, the first of which refers to Christ's incarnation or
conception; the second, to His virginal birth; the third, to His
Passion, death and burial; the fourth, to His descent into hell; the
fifth, to His resurrection; the sixth, to His ascension; the seventh, to
His coming for the judgment, so that in all there are fourteen articles.
Some, however, distinguish twelve articles, six pertaining to the
Godhead, and six to the humanity. For they include in one article the
three about the three Persons; because we have one knowledge of
the three Persons: while they divide the article referring to the work

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.0, C.9.

of glorification into two, viz. the resurrection of the body, and the
glory of the soul. Likewise they unite the conception and nativity into
one article.
Reply to Objection 1: By faith we hold many truths about God, which
the philosophers were unable to discover by natural reason, for
instance His providence and omnipotence, and that He alone is to be
worshiped, all of which are contained in the one article of the unity of
God.
Reply to Objection 2: The very name of the Godhead implies a kind
of watching over things, as stated in the FP, Question 13, Article 8.
Now in beings having an intellect, power does not work save by the
will and knowledge. Hence God's omnipotence includes, in a way,
universal knowledge and providence. For He would not be able to do
all He wills in things here below, unless He knew them, and
exercised His providence over them.
Reply to Objection 3: We have but one knowledge of the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, as to the unity of the Essence, to which the first
article refers: but, as to the distinction of the Persons, which is by
the relations of origin, knowledge of the Father does indeed, in a
way, include knowledge of the Son, for He would not be Father, had
He not a Son; the bond whereof being the Holy Ghost. From this
point of view, there was a sufficient motive for those who referred
one article to the three Persons. Since, however, with regard to each
Person, certain points have to be observed, about which some
happen to fall into error, looking at it in this way, we may distinguish
three articles about the three Persons. For Arius believed in the
omnipotence and eternity of the Father, but did not believe the Son
to be co-equal and consubstantial with the Father; hence the need
for an article about the Person of the Son in order to settle this point.
In like manner it was necessary to appoint a third article about the
Person of the Holy Ghost, against Macedonius. In the same way
Christ's conception and birth, just as the resurrection and life
everlasting, can from one point of view be united together in one
article, in so far as they are ordained to one end; while, from another
point of view, they can be distinct articles, in as much as each one
separately presents a special difficulty.
Reply to Objection 4: It belongs to the Son and Holy Ghost to be sent
to sanctify the creature; and about this several things have to be
believed. Hence it is that there are more articles about the Persons of