THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.6, C.2.

man and God; secondly, as regards the idea of causality, as we say a
cause is midway between the first cause and the last effect. And this
second order follows the first to some extent; for as Dionysius says
(Coel. Hier. xiii), God acts upon the more remote substances through
the less remote. Hence if we consider the rank of dignity, the soul is
found to be midway between God and flesh; and in this way it may
be said that the Son of God united flesh to Himself, through the
medium of the soul. But even as regards the second order of
causality the soul is to some extent the cause of flesh being united
to the Son of God. For the flesh would not have been assumable,
except by its relation to the rational soul, through which it becomes
human flesh. For it was said above (Question 4, Article 1) that human
nature was assumable before all others.
Reply to Objection 1: We may consider a twofold order between
creatures and God: the first is by reason of creatures being caused
by God and depending on Him as on the principle of their being; and
thus on account of the infinitude of His power God touches each
thing immediately, by causing and preserving it, and so it is that God
is in all things by essence, presence and power. But the second
order is by reason of things being directed to God as to their end;
and it is here that there is a medium between the creature and God,
since lower creatures are directed to God by higher, as Dionysius
says (Eccl. Hier. v); and to this order pertains the assumption of
human nature by the Word of God, Who is the term of the
assumption; and hence it is united to flesh through the soul.
Reply to Objection 2: If the hypostasis of the Word of God were
constituted simply by human nature, it would follow that the body
was nearest to it, since it is matter which is the principle of
individuation; even as the soul, being the specific form, would be
nearer the human nature. But because the hypostasis of the Word is
prior to and more exalted than the human nature, the more exalted
any part of the human nature is, the nearer it is to the hypostasis of
the Word. And hence the soul is nearer the Word of God than the
body is.
Reply to Objection 3: Nothing prevents one thing being the cause of
the aptitude and congruity of another, and yet if it be taken away the
other remains; because although a thing's becoming may depend on
another, yet when it is in being it no longer depends on it, just as a
friendship brought about by some other may endure when the latter
has gone; or as a woman is taken in marriage on account of her

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.6, C.2.

beauty, which makes a woman's fittingness for the marriage tie, yet
when her beauty passes away, the marriage tie still remains. So
likewise, when the soul was separated, the union of the Word with
flesh still endured.