THE CHURCH

Prologue
We must now consider the grace of Christ as the Head of the
Church; and under this head there are eight points of inquiry:
(1) Whether Christ is the Head of the Church?
(2) Whether He is the Head of men as regards their bodies or only as
regards their souls?
(3) Whether He is the Head of all men?
(4) Whether He is the Head of the angels?
(5) Whether the grace of Christ as Head of the Church is the same as
His habitual grace as an individual man?
(6) Whether to be Head of the Church is proper to Christ?
(7) Whether the devil is the head of all the wicked?
(8) Whether Anti-christ can be called the head of all the wicked?

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.8, C.2.

### ARTICLE 1. Whether Christ is the Head of the Church?

Objection 1: It would seem that it does not belong to Christ as man
to be Head of the Church. For the head imparts sense and motion to
the members. Now spiritual sense and motion which are by grace,
are not imparted to us by the Man Christ, because, as Augustine
says (De Trin. i, 12; xv, 24), "not even Christ, as man, but only as
God, bestows the Holy Ghost." Therefore it does not belong to Him
as man to be Head of the Church.
Objection 2: Further, it is not fitting for the head to have a head. But
God is the Head of Christ, as man, according to 1 Cor. 11:3, "The
Head of Christ is God." Therefore Christ Himself is not a head.
Objection 3: Furthermore, the head of a man is a particular member,
receiving an influx from the heart. But Christ is the universal
principle of the whole Church. Therefore He is not the Head of the
Church.
On the contrary, It is written (Eph. 1:22): "And He . . . hath made Him
head over all the Church."
I answer that, As the whole Church is termed one mystic body from
its likeness to the natural body of a man, which in divers members
has divers acts, as the Apostle teaches (Rm. 12; 1 Cor. 12), so
likewise Christ is called the Head of the Church from a likeness with
the human head, in which we may consider three things, viz. order,
perfection, and power: "Order," indeed; for the head is the first part
of man, beginning from the higher part; and hence it is that every
principle is usually called a head according to Ezech. 16:25: "At
every head of the way, thou hast set up a sign of thy
prostitution"---"Perfection," inasmuch as in the head dwell all the
senses, both interior and exterior, whereas in the other members
there is only touch, and hence it is said (Is. 9:15): "The aged and
honorable, he is the head"---"Power," because the power and
movement of the other members, together with the direction of them
in their acts, is from the head, by reason of the sensitive and motive
power there ruling; hence the ruler is called the head of a people,
according to 1 Kgs. 15:17: "When thou wast a little one in thy own
eyes, wast thou not made the head of the tribes of Israel?" Now
these three things belong spiritually to Christ. First, on account of