Hereunto are we set, to be laughed at and mocked, to suffer all things. We are
"the offscouring" [1 Corinthians 4:13] or the world, as blessed Paul says. If any
man refuse to conform to this order, that man I, by my word, as with a trumpet's
blast, do prohibit to set foot over the Church's threshold, be he prince, be he even
the crowned head. Either depose me from this station, or if I am to remain,
expose me not to danger. I cannot bear to ascend this throne, without effecting
some great reformation. For if this be impossible, it is better to stand below.
Nothing more wretched than a ruler who does his people no good. Do exert
yourselves, and attend to this, I entreat you; and let us strive, and of a surety
more will come of it. Fast, entreat God (and we will do the same with you) that
this pernicious habit may be eradicated. It is no great matter, to become teachers
to the world; no small honor to have it said everywhere, that really in this city
there is not a man that swears. If this come to pass, you will receive the reward
not only of your own good works; indeed what I am to you, this you will become
to the world. Assuredly others also will emulate you; assuredly you will be a
candle set upon a candlestick.
And is this, you will say, the whole matter? No, this is not all, but this is a
beginning of other virtues. He who swears not, will certainly attain unto piety in
other respects, whether he will or not, by dint of self-respect and awe. But you
will urge that most men do not keep to it, but fall away. Well, better one man that
does the will of the Lord, than ten thousand transgressors. In fact, hereby is
everything subverted, everything turned upside down, I mean, because after the
fashion of the Theatre we desire numbers not a select number. For what indeed
will a multitude be able to profit? Would you learn that it is the saints, not the
numbers, which make the multitude? Lead out to war ten hundred thousand men,
and one saint, and let us see who achieves the most? Joshua the son of Nun went
out to war, and alone achieved all; the rest were of no use. Would you see,
beloved, that the great multitude, when it does not the will of God, is no better
than a thing of naught? I wish indeed, and desire, and with pleasure would be
torn in pieces, to adorn the Church with a multitude, yea, but a select multitude;

yet if this be impossible, that the few should be select, is my desire. Do you not
see, that it is better to possess one precious stone, than ten thousand farthing
pieces? Do you not see that it is better to have the eye sound, than to be loaded
with flesh, and yet deprived of sight? Do you not see that it is better to have one
healthy sheep, than ten thousand with the murrain; that fine children, though few,
are better than many children diseased withal; that in the Kingdom there will be
few, but in hell many? What have I to do with a multitude? What profit therein?
None. Rather they are a plague to the rest. It is as if one who had the option of
ten healthy persons or ten thousand sick folks, should take to himself the latter in
addition to the ten. The many who do nothing well, will avail us only for
punishment hereafter, and disgrace for the time being. For no one will urge it as
a point in our favor that we are many; we shall be blamed for being unprofitable.
In fact, this is what men always tell us, when we say, We are many; "aye, but
bad," they answer.
Behold again: I give warning, and proclaim with a loud voice, let no one
think it a laughing matter: I will exclude and prohibit the disobedient; and as
long as I sit on this throne, I will give up not one of its rights. If any one depose
me from it, then I am no longer responsible; as long as I am responsible, I cannot
disregard them; on account not of my own punishment, but of your salvation.
For I do exceedingly long for your salvation. To advance it, I endure pain and
vexation. But yield your obedience, that both here and hereafter you may receive
a plentiful reward, and that we may in common reap eternal blessings; through
the grace and mercy of the only-begotten Son of God; to Whom with the Father
and the Holy Ghost be glory, power, and honor, now and ever, world without
end. Amen.