about Cæsar, being just what they did in Christ's case. For that they had recourse
to this is manifest by the fact, that Paul defends himself on the score of offenses
against Cæsar. "And when he had come, the Jews which came down from
Jerusalem stood round about, and laid many and grievous complaints against
Paul, which they could not prove. While he answered for himself, Neither against
the law of the Jews, neither against the temple, nor yet against Cæsar, have I
offended anything at all. But Festus, willing to do the Jews a pleasure, answered
Paul, and said, Will you go up to Jerusalem, and there be judged of these things
before me"? [Acts 25:7-9] Wherefore he too gratifies the Jews, the whole people,
and the city. Such being the case, Paul terrifies him also, using a human weapon
for his defence. "Then said Paul, I stand at Cæsar's judgment seat, where I ought
to be judged; to the Jews have I done no wrong, as you very well know. For if I
be an offender, or have committed anything worthy of death, I refuse not to die:
but if there be none of these things whereof these accuse me, no man may deliver
me unto them. I appeal unto Cæsar." (v. 10, 11.) Some one might say, How is it,
that having been told, "You must also bear witness of Me in Rome," [Acts 23:11],
he, as if unbelieving, did this? God forbid: nay, he did it, because he so strongly
believed. For it would have been a tempting of God to be bold on account of that
declaration, and to cast himself into numberless dangers, and to say: "Let us see
if God is able even thus to deliver me." But not so does Paul; no, he does his
part, all that in him lies, committing the whole to God. Quietly also he reproves
the governor: for, "If, says he, I am an offender, you do well: but if not, why do
you give me up?" "No man," he says, "may sacrifice me." He put him in fear, so
that even if he wished, he could not sacrifice him to them; while also as an
excuse to them he had Paul's appeal to allege. "Then Festus, when he had
conferred with the council, answered, Have you appealed unto Cæsar? Unto
Cæsar shall you go. And after certain days king Agrippa and Bernice came unto
Cæsarea to salute Festus." (v. 12, 13.) Observe, he communicates the matter to
Agrippa, so that there should be other hearers once more, both the king, and the
army, and Bernice. Thereupon a speech in his exculpation. "And when they had

been there many days, Festus declared Paul's cause unto the king, saying, There
is a certain man left in bonds by Felix: about whom, when I was at Jerusalem,
the chief priests and the elders of the Jews informed me, desiring to have
judgment against him. To whom I answered, It is not the manner of the Romans
to deliver any man to die, before that he which is accused have the accusers face
to face, and have license to answer for himself concerning the crime laid against
him. Therefore, when they had come hither, without any delay on the morrow I
sat on the judgment seat, and commanded the man to be brought forth. Against
whom when the accusers stood up, they brought none accusation of such things
as I supposed: but had certain questions against him of their own superstition,
and of one Jesus, which was dead, whom Paul affirmed to be alive. And because
I doubted of such manner of questions, I asked him whether he would go to
Jerusalem, and there be judged of these matters. But when Paul had appealed to
be reserved unto the hearing of Augustus, I commanded him to be kept till I
might send him to Cæsar. Then Agrippa said unto Festus, I would also hear the
man myself. Tomorrow, said he, you shall hear him." [Acts 25:14-22] And
observe a crimination of the Jews, not from Paul, but also from the governor.
"Desiring," he says, "to have judgment against him." To whom I said, to their
shame, that "it is not the manner of the Romans," before giving an opportunity to
speak for himself, "to sacrifice a man." But I did give him (such opportunity),
and I found no fault in him. "Because I doubted," says he, of "such manner of
questions:" he casts a veil also over his own wrong. Then the other desires to see
him. (b) But let us look again at what has been said.
(Recapitulation.) "And when Felix," etc. [Acts 24:22] Observe on all
occasions how the governors try to keep off from themselves the annoyance of
the Jews, and are often compelled to act contrary to justice, and seek pretexts for
deferring: for of course it was not from ignorance that he deferred the cause, but
knowing it. And his wife also hears, together with the governor. [Acts 24:24]
This seems to me to show great honor. For he would not have brought his wife to
be present with him at the hearing, but that he thought great things of him. It