desire even to take him for a slave when he is free, and encompass him with ten
thousand evils; but the demoniacs do no such thing, but toss their disease to and
for within themselves. And while these overturn many houses, and cause the
name of God to be blasphemed, and are a pest to the city and to the whole earth;
they that are troubled by evil spirits, deserve rather our pity and our tears. And
the one for the more part act in insensibility, but the others are frantic while they
reason, keeping their orgies in the midst of cities, and maddened with some new
kind of madness. For what do all the demoniacs so bad, as what Judas dared to
do, when he showed forth that extremity of wickedness? And all too that imitate
him, like fierce wild beasts escaped from their cage, trouble their cities, no man
restraining them. For these also have bonds upon them on every side; such as the
fears of the judges, the threatening of the laws, the condemnation of the
multitude, and other things more than these; yet bursting asunder even these,
they turn all things upside down. And should any one remove these altogether
from them, then would he know assuredly the demon that is in them to be far
fiercer, and more frantic than he who is just now gone forth.
But since this may not be, let us for the time suppose it for argument's sake:
and let us take off from him all his chains, and then shall we clearly know his
manifest madness. But be not afraid of the monster, when we uncover it; for it is
the representation in word, not the thing in truth. Let there be then some man,
darting fire from his eyes, black, having from either shoulder serpents hanging
down instead of hands; and let him have also a mouth, with sharp swords set in it
instead of teeth, and for a tongue a gushing fountain of poison and some baneful
drug; and a belly more consuming than any furnace, devouring all that is cast
unto it, and a sort of winged feet more vehement than any flame; and let his face
be made up of a dog and of a wolf; and let him utter nothing human, but
something discordant, and unpleasing, and terrible; and let him have also in his
hands a firebrand. Perhaps what we have said seems to you to be terrible, but we
have not even yet fashioned him worthily; for together with these things we must
add others besides. I mean, that he is also to slay them that meet with him, to

devour them, to fasten upon their flesh.
Yet is the covetous man much more fierce even than this, assailing all like
hell, swallowing all up, going about a common enemy to the race of men. Why,
he would have no man exist, that he may possess all things. And he stops not
even at this, but when in his longing he shall have destroyed all men, he longs
also to mar the substance of the earth, and to see it all become gold; nay, not the
earth only, but hills also, and woods, and fountains, and in a word all things that
appear.
And to convince you that not even yet have we set forth his madness, let
there be no man to accuse and frighten him, but take away the terror of the laws
in supposition awhile, and you will see him snatching up a sword, laying violent
hands on all, and sparing none; neither friend, nor kinsman, nor brother, nor even
his very parent. Nay rather, in this case there is not even need of supposing, but
let us ask him, if he is not for ever framing to himself such imaginations, and if
he does not in thought range among all men to destroy them; both friends and
kinsmen, and even his very parents. Nay rather there is no need even to ask,
because in truth all men know that they who are under the power of this disease
are wearied even of their father's old age; and that which is sweet, and
universally desirable, the having children, they esteem grievous and unwelcome:
many at least with this view have even paid money to be childless, and have
maimed their nature, not only by slaying their children after birth, but by not
suffering them even to be born at all.
6. Marvel not, therefore, if we have thus sketched the covetous man (for in
truth he is far worse than what we have said); but let us consider how we shall
deliver him from the demon. How then shall we deliver him? If he may be
clearly made aware, that his love of money stands very much in his way in
respect of this very object, the gaining of money; for they that wish to gain in
little things undergo great losses; whence accordingly a proverb has been put
forth to this same effect. Many, for instance, on many occasions, wishing to lend
at large usury, and through the expectation of gain not having inquired about