SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.128, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether magnanimity is a virtue?

Objection 1: It seems that magnanimity is not a virtue. For every
moral virtue observes the mean. But magnanimity observes not the
mean but the greater extreme: because the "magnanimous man
deems himself worthy of the greatest things" (Ethic. iv, 3). Therefore
magnanimity is not a virtue.
Objection 2: Further, he that has one virtue has them all, as stated
above (FS, Question 65, Article 1). But one may have a virtue without
having magnanimity: since the Philosopher says (Ethic. iv, 3) that
"whosoever is worthy of little things and deems himself worthy of
them, is temperate, but he is not magnanimous." Therefore
magnanimity is not a virtue.
Objection 3: Further, "Virtue is a good quality of the mind," as stated
above (FS, Question 55, Article 4). But magnanimity implies certain
dispositions of the body: for the Philosopher says (Ethic. iv, 3) of "a
magnanimous man that his gait is slow, his voice deep, and his
utterance calm." Therefore magnanimity is not a virtue.
Objection 4: Further, no virtue is opposed to another virtue. But
magnanimity is opposed to humility, since "the magnanimous deems
himself worthy of great things, and despises others," according to
Ethic. iv, 3. Therefore magnanimity is not a virtue.
Objection 5: Further, the properties of every virtue are praiseworthy.
But magnanimity has certain properties that call for blame. For, in
the first place, the magnanimous is unmindful of favors; secondly,
he is remiss and slow of action; thirdly, he employs irony [Question
113] towards many; fourthly, he is unable to associate with others;
fifthly, because he holds to the barren things rather than to those
that are fruitful. Therefore magnanimity is not a virtue.
On the contrary, It is written in praise of certain men (2 Macc. 15:18):
"Nicanor hearing of the valor of Judas' companions, and the
greatness of courage [animi magnitudinem] with which they fought
for their country, was afraid to try the matter by the sword." Now,
only deeds of virtue are worthy of praise. Therefore magnanimity
which consists in greatness of courage is a virtue.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.128, C.4.

I answer that, The essence of human virtue consists in safeguarding
the good of reason in human affairs, for this is man's proper good.
Now among external human things honors take precedence of all
others, as stated above (Article 1; FS, Question 11, Article 2,
Objection 3). Therefore magnanimity, which observes the mode of
reason in great honors, is a virtue.
Reply to Objection 1: As the Philosopher again says (Ethic. iv, 3),
"the magnanimous in point of quantity goes to extremes," in so far
as he tends to what is greatest, "but in the matter of becomingness,
he follows the mean," because he tends to the greatest things
according to reason, for "he deems himself worthy in accordance
with his worth" (Ethic. iv, 3), since his aims do not surpass his
deserts.
Reply to Objection 2: The mutual connection of the virtues does not
apply to their acts, as though every one were competent to practice
the acts of all the virtues. Wherefore the act of magnanimity is not
becoming to every virtuous man, but only to great men. on the other
hand, as regards the principles of virtue, namely prudence and
grace, all virtues are connected together, since their habits reside
together in the soul, either in act or by way of a proximate
disposition thereto. Thus it is possible for one to whom the act of
magnanimity is not competent, to have the habit of magnanimity,
whereby he is disposed to practice that act if it were competent to
him according to his state.
Reply to Objection 3: The movements of the body are differentiated
according to the different apprehensions and emotions of the soul.
And so it happens that to magnanimity there accrue certain fixed
accidents by way of bodily movements. For quickness of movement
results from a man being intent on many things which he is in a
hurry to accomplish, whereas the magnanimous is intent only on
great things; these are few and require great attention, wherefore
they call for slow movement. Likewise shrill and rapid speaking is
chiefly competent to those who are quick to quarrel about anything,
and this becomes not the magnanimous who are busy only about
great things. And just as these dispositions of bodily movements are
competent to the magnanimous man according to the mode of his
emotions, so too in those who are naturally disposed to
magnanimity these conditions are found naturally.
Reply to Objection 4: There is in man something great which he