be able to keep your eyes too, and your hearing safe. For is it not monstrous,
after this mystic voice is borne from heaven— I mean the voice of the Cherubim
— to defile your hearing with lewd songs, and dissolute melodies? And does it
not deserve the utmost punishment if, with the same eyes with which you look
upon the unspeakable and dread mysteries, you look upon harlots, and dost
commit adultery in your heart. You are called to a marriage, beloved: enter not in
clad in sordid raiment, but take a robe suitable to the marriage. For if when men
are called to a material marriage, though they be poorer than all others, they
often possess themselves of or buy clean raiment, and so go to meet those who
called them. Do thou too who hast been called to a spiritual marriage, and to a
royal banquet, consider what kind of raiment it would be right for you to buy,
but rather there is not even need to purchase, yea he himself who calls you gives
it you gratis, in order that you may not be able to plead poverty in excuse. Keep,
therefore, the raiment which you received. For if you lose it, you will not be able
to use it henceforth, or to buy it. For this kind of raiment is nowhere sold. Have
you heard how those who were initiated, in old time, groaned, and beat their
breasts, their conscience thereupon exciting them? Beware then, beloved, that
you do not at any time suffer like this. But how will you not suffer, if you dost
not cast off the wicked habit of evil men? For this reason I said before, and speak
now and will not cease speaking, if any has not rectified the defects in his
morals, nor furnished himself with easily acquired virtue, let him not be
baptized. For the laver is able to remit former sins, but there is no little fear, and
no ordinary danger lest we return to them, and our remedy become a wound. For
by how much greater the grace is, by so much is the punishment more for those
who sin after these things.
3. In order, therefore, that we return not to our former vomit, let us
henceforward discipline ourselves. For that we must repent beforehand, and
desist from our former evil, and so come forward for grace, hear what John says,
and what the leader of the apostles says to those who are about to be baptized.
For the one says, "Bring forth fruit worthy of repentance, and begin not to say

within yourselves, we have Abraham to our Father;" [Luke 3:8] and the other
says again to those who question him, "Repent ye and be baptized every one of
you in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ." [Acts 2:38] Now he who repents, no
longer touches the same matters of which he repented. On this account, also, we
are bidden to say, "I renounce you, Satan," in order that we may never more
return to him. As therefore happens in the case of painters from life, so let it
happen in your case. For they, arranging their boards, and tracing white lines
upon them, and sketching the royal likeness in outline, before they apply the
actual colors, rub out some lines, and change some for others, rectifying
mistakes, and altering what is amiss with all freedom. But when they put on the
coloring for good, it is no longer in their power to rub out again, and to change
one thing for another, since they injure the beauty of the portrait, and the result
becomes an eyesore. Consider that your soul is the portrait; before therefore the
true coloring of the spirit comes, wipe out habits which have wrongly been
implanted in you, whether swearing, or falsehood, or insolence, or base talking,
or jesting, or whatever else you have a habit of doing of things unlawful. Away
with the habit, in order that you may not return to it, after baptism. The laver
causes the sins to disappear. Correct your habits, so that when the colors are
applied, and the royal likeness is brought out, you may no more wipe them out in
the future; and add damage and scars to the beauty which has been given you by
God. Restrain therefore anger, extinguish passion. Be not thou vexed, be
sympathizing, be not exasperated, nor say, "I have been injured in regard to my
soul." No one is injured in regard to the soul if we do not injure ourselves in
regard to the soul; and how this is, I now say. Has any one taken away your
substance? He has not injured you in regard to your soul, but your money. But if
you cherish ill-will against him, you have injured yourself in regard to your soul.
For the money taken away has wrought you no damage, nay has even been
profitable, but thou by not dismissing your anger will give account in the other
world for this cherishing of ill-will. Has any one reviled you and insulted you.
He has in no way injured your soul, and not even your body. Have you reviled in