The peace of Christ.

My dear Brother Bartolomeo: From your letters and the letters of others, but especially from yours, we have some understanding of your state of mind. We are all the more disappointed in this, since we have such great desires of your spiritual good and eternal salvation. You are mistaken in thinking that the cause of your disquiet, or little progress in the Lord, is due to the place, or your superiors, or your brethren. This disquiet comes from within and not from without. I mean from your lack of humility, obedience, prayer, and your slight mortification, in a word, your little fervor in advancing in the way of perfection. You could change residence, superiors, and brethren, but if you do not change the interior man, you will never do good. And you will everywhere be the same, unless you succeed in being humble, obedient, devout, and mortified in your self-love. This is the only change you should seek. I mean that you should try to change the interior man and lead him back like a servant to God. Do not think of any mere external change, because if you are not good there in Ferrara, you will not be good in any college. We are all the more certain of this, for we know you can be helped more in Ferrara than elsewhere. I will give you one bit of advice: humble yourself sincerely before your superior, ask his help, open your heart to him in confession, or however you like, and accept with devotion the remedy he offers. Occupy yourself in beholding and bewailing your own imperfections rather than contemplating the imperfections of others. Try to give more edification in the future, and do not, I beg you, try the patience of those who love you in Jesus Christ our Lord, and who would like to see you His good and perfect servant. Write me a few lines every month on how you are getting on with your humility, obedience, prayer, and the desire for perfection. Also let me know what progress you are making in your studies. May Christ our Lord have you in His blessing.

From Rome, January 26.

1 Bartolomeo's family name is unknown, but he was called Romano after the city of his birth. He joined the Jesuits in 1553, probably in Rome, but then left the Society in March 1556.

# 38. TO FATHER PONCE COGORDAN

Norms or Reforming Convents of Nuns

Rome, February 12, 1555

Ponce Cogordan was treasurer of the Roman community where Ignatius lived. When Cardinal Marcello Cervini, the future Pope Marcellus II, was looking for someone to undertake the task of reforming a community of Benedictine nuns at the Monastery of Arta Cella in Auvergne, France, he chose Cogordan. Cogordan was not only equal to the task but, since he was a native of that part of France, he would know how to deal with the nuns and people, and would not appear to them as a total stranger. Cogordan's appointment came in December 1554, and he left Rome on February 13, 1555. Before his departure Ignatius prepared this instruction in which he explains the prudence and tact needed for the mission. What Ignatius offers are broad principles and general norms; these principles will serve to regulate this new ministry that was soon to become frequent in the Society. Ignatius composed this instruction in Spanish [ Ep . 8:395-397].