invited to a palace should walk through narrow ways painful and precipitous,
and another led to death should be dragged through the midst of the marketplace, which shall we call happy? Which shall we commiserate? Him, shall we
not, who walks through the broad road? So also now, let us think happy, not
those who are luxurious, but those who are not luxurious. These are hastening to
heaven, those to hell.
And perhaps indeed many of them will even laugh at the things that are said
by us. But I most of all lament and bewail them on this account, that they do not
even know what they ought to laugh at, and for what they ought especially to
mourn, but they confound and disturb and disorder everything. On this account I
bewail them. What do you say, O man, when you are to rise again, and to give an
account of your actions, and to undergo the last sentence, do you pay no regard
indeed to these, but give thought to gratifying your belly, and being drunken?
And do you laugh at these things? But I bewail you, knowing the evils that await
you, the punishment that is about to overtake you. And this I most especially
bewail, that you dost laugh! Mourn with me, bewail with me your own evils. Tell
me, if one of your friends perishes, do you not turn from those who laugh at his
end, and think them enemies, but love those who weep and sympathize with
you? Then indeed if the dead body of your wife were laid out, you turn from him
that laughs: but when your soul is done to death, do you turn from him that
weeps, and laugh yourself? Do you see how the devil has disposed us to be
enemies and adversaries to ourselves? For once let us be sober, let us open our
eyes, let us watch, let us lay hold on eternal life, let us shake off this long sleep.
There is a Judgment, there is a Punishment, there is a Resurrection, there is an
Inquisition into what we have done! The Lord comes in the clouds "Before
Him," he says, "a fire will be kindled, and round about Him a mighty tempest"
[Psalm 50:3, Septuagint] A river of fire rolls before him, the undying worm,
unquenchable fire, outer darkness, gnashing of teeth. Although you should be
angry with me ten thousand times for mentioning these things, I shall not cease
from mentioning them. For if the prophets, though stoned, did not keep silence,

much more ought we to bear with enmities, and not to discourse to you with a
view to please, that we may not, for having deceived you, be ourselves cut in
sunder. There is punishment, deathless, unallayed, and no one to stand up for us.
"Who will pity," he says, "the charmer that is bitten by a serpent?" [Sirach
12:13] When we pity not our own selves, tell me, who will pity us? If you see a
man piercing himself with a sword, will you be able to spare his life? By no
means. Much more, when having it in our power to do well we do not do well,
who will spare us? No one! Let us pity ourselves. When we pray to God, saying,
"Lord, have mercy upon me," let us say it to ourselves, and have mercy upon
ourselves. We are the arbiters of God's having mercy upon us. This grace He has
bestowed upon us. If we do things worthy of mercy, worthy of His lovingkindness towards us, God will have mercy upon us. But if we have not mercy on
ourselves, who will spare us? Have mercy on your neighbor, and you shall find
mercy of God Himself. How many every day come to you, saying, "Have pity on
me," and thou dost not turn towards them; how many naked, how many maimed,
and we do not bend toward them, but dismiss their supplications. How then do
you claim to obtain mercy, when you yourself dost nothing worthy of mercy?
Let us become compassionate, let us become pitiful, that so we may be wellpleasing to God, and obtain the good things promised to those that love Him, by
the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom, etc.