common matters, and whose mouths were stopped a thousand times, yet they did
not withdraw from Him; how should they but have inquired of Him, and
besought Him touching the indispensable things, had they indeed been desirous
to learn? For if concerning the matters of the law they asked, "Which is the first
commandment," and all such questions, although there was of course no need of
His telling them that; how should they but ask the meaning of what He Himself
said, for which also He was bound to give account in His answers? And
especially when it was He Himself that was encouraging and drawing them on to
do this. For by saying, "The violent take it by force," He stirs them up to
earnestness of mind; and by saying, "He that has ears to hear, let him hear," He
does just the same thing.
5. "But whereunto shall I liken this generation?" says He, "It is like children
sitting in the market place, and saying, We have piped unto you, and you have
not danced; we have mourned unto you, and you have not lamented." This again
seems to be unconnected with what came before, but it is the most natural
consequence thereof. Yea, He still keeps to the same point, the showing that John
is acting in harmony with Himself, although the results were opposite; as indeed
with respect to his inquiry also. And He implies that there was nothing that
ought to have been done for their salvation, and was omitted; which thing the
prophet says of the vineyard; "What ought I to have done to this vineyard, and
have not done it? For whereunto," says He, "shall I liken this generation? It is
like children sitting in the market, and saying, We have piped unto you, and you
have not danced, we have mourned unto you, and you have not lamented. For
John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say, He has a devil. The Son of
Man came eating and drinking, and they say, Behold a man gluttonous, and a
winebibber, a friend of publicans and sinners."
Now what He says is like this: We have come each of us an opposite way, I
and John; and we have done just as if it were some hunters with a wild beast that
was hard to catch, and which might by two ways fall into the toils; as if each of
the two were to cut it off his several way, and drive it, taking his stand opposite

to the other; so that it must needs fall into one of the two snares. Mark, for
instance, the whole race of man, how it is astonished at the wonder of men's
fasting, and at this hard and self-denying life. For this reason it had been so
ordered, that John should be thus brought up from his earliest youth, so that
hereby (among other things) his sayings might obtain credit.
But wherefore, it may be asked, did not He Himself choose that way? In the
first place He did also Himself proceed by it, when He fasted the forty days, and
went about teaching, and not having where to lay His head. Nevertheless He did
also in another mode accomplish this same object, and provide for the advantage
thence accruing. For to be testified of by him that came this way was the same
thing, or even a much greater thing than to have come this way Himself.
And besides, John indeed exhibited no more than his life and conversation;
for "John," it is said, "did no sign," [John 10:41] but He Himself had the
testimony also from signs and from miracles. Leaving therefore John to be
illustrious by his fasting, He Himself came the opposite way, both coming unto
publicans' tables, and eating and drinking.
Let us ask the Jews then, "Is fasting a good thing, and to be admired? You
should then have obeyed John, and received him, and believed his sayings. For
so would those sayings have led you towards Jesus. Is fasting, on the other hand,
a thing grievous, and burdensome? Then should you have obeyed Jesus, and
have believed in Him that came the opposite way. Thus, either way, you would
have found yourselves in the kingdom." But, like an intractable wild beast, they
were speaking evil of both. The fault is not then theirs who were not believed,
but they are to be blamed who did not believe. For no man would ever choose to
speak evil of opposite things, any more than he would on the other hand
commend them. I mean thus: he that approves the cheerful and free character,
will not approve him that is sad and grave; he that commends the man of a sad
countenance will not commend the cheerful man. For it is a thing impossible to
give your vote both ways at once. Therefore also He says, "We have piped unto
you, and you have not danced;" that is, "I have exhibited the freer kind of life,