John 21:17
"You know all things."
"You know all things," means, "things present, and things to come." Do you
see how he had become better and more sober, being no more self-willed, or
contradicting? For on this account he was troubled, "lest perchance I think that I
love, and love not, as before when I thought and affirmed much, yet I was
convicted at last." But Jesus asks him the third time, and the third time gives him
the same injunction, to show at what a price He sets the care of His own sheep,
and that this especially is a sign of love towards Him. And having spoken to him
concerning the love towards Himself, He foretells to him the martyrdom which
he should undergo, showing that He said not to Him what he said as distrusting,
but as greatly trusting him; wishing besides to point out a proof of love towards
Him, and to instruct us in what manner especially we ought to love Him.
Wherefore He says,

John 21:18
"When you were young, you girded yourself, and walked whither you would, but
when you are old, others shall gird you, and carry you whither you will not."
And yet this he did will, and desired; on which account also He has
revealed it to him. For since Peter had continually said, "I will lay down my life
for You" [John 13:37], and, "Though I should die with You, yet will I not deny
You" [Matthew 26:35]: He has given him back his desire. What then is the,
"Whither you will not"? He speaks of natural feeling, and the necessity of the
flesh, and that the soul is unwillingly torn away from the body. So that even
though the will were firm, yet still even then nature would be found in fault. For
no one lays aside the body without feeling, God, as I said before, having suitably
ordained this, that violent deaths might not be many. For if, as things are, the
devil has been able to effect this, and has led ten thousand to precipices and pits;
had not the soul felt such a desire for the body, the many would have rushed to
this under any common discouragement. The, "whither you will not," is then the
expression of one signifying natural feeling.
But how after having said, "When you were young," does He again say,
"When you are old"? For this is the expression of one declaring that he was not
then young; (nor was he; nor yet old, but a man of middle age. ) Wherefore then
did He recall to his memory his former life? Signifying, that this is the nature of
what belongs to Him. In things of this life the young man is useful, the old
useless; "but in Mine," He says, "not so; but when old age has come on, then is
excellence brighter, then is manliness more illustrious, being nothing hindered
by the time of life." This He said not to terrify, but to rouse Him; for He knew his
love, and that he long had yearned for this blessing. At the same time He
declares the kind of death. For since Peter ever desired to be in the dangers
which were for His sake, "Be of good cheer," He says, "I will so satisfy your
desire, that, what you suffered not when young, you must suffer when you are