serpent by angelical power; but although that power is wanting to man,
yet a stone was taken also by man for a similar sign.4 There is a wide
difference between the deed of the angel and the deed of the man. The
former is both to be wondered at and to be understood, the latter only to
be understood. That which is understood from both, is perhaps one and
the same; but those things from which it is understood, are different. Just
as if the name of God were written both in gold and in ink; the former
would be the more precious, the latter the more worthless; yet that which
is signified in both is one and the same. And although the serpent that
came from Moses' rod signified the same thing as Jacob's stone, yet
Jacob's stone signified something better than did the serpents of the
magicians. For as the anointing of the stone signified Christ in the flesh,
in which He was anointed with the oil of gladness above His fellows; so
the rod of Moses, turned into a serpent, signified Christ Himself made
obedient unto death, even the death of the cross.6 Whence it is said, "And
as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of
man be lifted up, that whosoever believeth in Him should not perish, but
have everlasting life;" just as by gazing on that serpent which was lifted
up in the wilderness, they did not perish by the bites of the serpents. For
"our old man is crucified with Him, that the body of sin might be
destroyed." For by the serpent death is understood, which was wrought
by the serpent in paradise, the mode of speech expressing the effect by
the efficient. Therefore the rod passed into the serpent, Christ into death;
and the serpent again into the rod, whole Christ with His body into the
resurrection; which body is the Church;10 and this shall be in the end of
time, signified by the tail, which Moses held, in order that it might return
into a rod. But the serpents of the magicians, like those who are dead in
the world, unless by believing in Christ they shall have been as it were
swallowed up by,12 and have entered into, His body, will not be able to
rise again in Him. Jacob's stone, therefore, as I said, signified something
better than did the serpents of the magicians; yet the deed of the
magicians was much more wonderful. But these things in this way are no
hindrance to the understanding of the matter; just as if the name of a
man were written in gold, and that of God in ink.
21. What man, again, knows how the angels made or took those clouds
and fires in order to signify the message they were bearing, even if we

supposed that the Lord or the Holy Spirit was manifested in those
corporeal forms? Just as infants do not know of that which is placed upon
the altar and consumed after the performance of the holy celebration,
whence or in what manner it is made, or whence it is taken for religious
use. And if they were never to learn from their own experience or that of
others, and never to see that species of thing except during the
celebration of the sacrament, when it is being offered and given; and if it
were told them by the most weighty authority whose body and blood it is;
they will believe nothing else, except that the Lord absolutely appeared in
this form to the eyes of mortals, and that that liquid actually flowed from
the piercing of a side, which resembled this. But it is certainly a useful
caution to myself, that I should remember what my own powers are, and
admonish my brethren that they also remember what theirs are, lest
human infirmity pass on beyond what is safe. For how the angels do these
things, or rather, how God does these things by His angels, and how far
He wills them to be done even by the bad angels, whether by permitting,
or commanding, or compelling, from the hidden seat of His own supreme
power; this I can neither penetrate by the sight of the eyes, nor make
clear by assurance of reason, nor be carried on to comprehend it by reach
of intellect, so as to speak thereupon to all questions that may be asked
respecting these matters, as certainly as if I were an angel, or a prophet,
or an apostle. "For the thoughts of mortal men are miserable, and our
devices are but uncertain. For the corruptible body presseth down the
soul, and the earthly tabernacle weigheth down the mind, that museth
upon many things. And hardly do we guess aright at things that are upon
earth, and with labor do we find the things that are before us; but the
things that are in heaven, who hath searched out?" But because it goes on
to say, "And Thy counsel who hath known, except Thou give wisdom, and
send Thy Holy Spirit from above;" therefore we refrain indeed from
searching out the things which are in heaven, under which kind are
contained I both angelical bodies according to their proper dignity, and
any corporeal action of those bodies; yet, according to the Spirit of God
sent to us from above, and to His grace imparted to our minds, I dare to
say confidently, that neither God the Father, nor His Word, nor His
Spirit, which is the one God, is in any way changeable in regard to that
which He is, and whereby He is that which He is; and much less is in this
regard visible. Since there are no doubt some things changeable, yet not