reality; 'for I have oft been delivered into mortal dangers. '

2 Corinthians 11:24
"Of the Jews five times received I forty stripes save one."
Why, "save one?" There was an ancient law that he who had received more
than the forty should be held disgraced among them. Lest then the vehemence
and impetuosity of the executioner by inflicting more than the number should
cause a man to be disgraced, they decreed that they should be inflicted, "save
one," that even if the executioner should exceed, he might not overpass the forty,
but remaining within the prescribed number might not bring degradation on him
that was scourged.

2 Corinthians 11:25
"Thrice was I beaten with rods, once was I stoned, thrice I suffered
shipwreck."
And what has this to do with the Gospel? Because he went forth on long
journeys; and those by sea.
"A night and a day I have been in the deep." Some say this means out on
the open sea, others, swimming upon it, which is also the truer interpretation.
There is nothing wonderful, at least, about the former, nor would he have placed
it as greater than his shipwrecks.

2 Corinthians 11:26
"In perils of rivers."
For he was compelled also to cross rivers. "In perils of robbers, in perils in
the city, in perils in the wilderness." 'Everywhere were contests set before me, in
places, in countries, in cities, in deserts.'
"In perils from the Gentiles, in perils among false brethren."
Behold another kind of warfare. For not only did such as were enemies
strike at him, but those also who played the hypocrite; and he had need of much
firmness, much prudence.

2 Corinthians 11:27-28
2. "In labor and travail."
Perils succeed to labors, labors to perils, one upon other and unintermitted,
and allowed him not to take breath even for a little.
"In journeyings often, in hunger and thirst and nakedness, besides those
things that are without."
What is left out is more than what is enumerated. Yea rather, one cannot
count the number of those even which are enumerated; for he has not set them
down specifically, but has mentioned those the number of which was small and
easily comprehended, saying, "thrice" and "thrice," [2 Corinthians 11:25] and
[again] "once;" but of the others he does not mention the number because he had
endured them often. And he recounts not their results as that he had converted so
many and so many, but only what he suffered on behalf of the Preaching; at once
out of modesty, and as showing that even should nothing have been gained but
labor, even so his title to wages has been fulfilled.
"That which presses upon me daily." The tumults, the disturbances, the
assaults of mobs, onsets of cities. For the Jews waged war against this man most
of all because he most of all confounded them, and his changing sides all at once
was the greatest refutation of their madness. And there breathed a mighty war
against him, from his own people, from strangers, from false brethren; and every
where were billows and precipices, in the inhabited world, in the uninhabited, by
land, by sea, without, within. And he had not even a full supply of necessary
food, nor even of thin clothing, but the champion of the world wrestled in
nakedness and fought in hunger; so far was he from enriching himself. Yet he
murmured not, but was grateful for these things to the Judge of the combat.
"Anxiety for all the Churches." This was the chief thing of all, that his soul
too was distracted, and his thoughts divided. For even if nothing from without