punishment for your sins, be steadfast for the future." But now He spoke not so,
but how? "Behold, you are made whole; sin no more." Let us continually repeat
these words to ourselves, and if after having been chastised we have been
delivered, let each say to himself, "Behold, you are made whole; sin no more."
But if we suffer not punishment though continuing in the same courses, let us
use for our charm that word of the Apostle, "The goodness of God leads [us] to
repentance, but after [our] hardness and impenitent heart, [we] treasure up unto
[ourselves] wrath." [Romans 2:4-5]
And not only by strengthening the sick man's body, but also in another way,
did He afford him a strong proof of His Divinity; for by saying, "Sin no more,"
He showed that He knew all the transgressions that had formerly been
committed by him; and by this He would gain his belief as to the future.

John 5:15
"The man departed, and told the Jews that it was Jesus that had made him
whole."
Again observe him continuing in the same right feeling. He says not, "This
is he who said, Take up your bed," but when they continually advanced this
seeming charge, he continually puts forward the defense, again declaring his
Healer, and seeking to attract and attach others to Him. For he was not so
unfeeling as after such a benefit and charge to betray his Benefactor, and to
speak as he did with an evil intention. Had he been a wild beast, had he been
something unlike a man and of stone, the benefit and the fear would have been
enough to restrain him, since, having the threat lodged within, he would have
dreaded lest he should suffer "a worse thing," having already received the
greatest pledges of the power of his Physician. Besides, had he wished to slander
Him, he would have said nothing about his own cure, but would have mentioned
and urged against Him the breach of the Sabbath. But this is not the case, surely
it is not; the words are words of great boldness and candor; he pro claims his
Benefactor no less than the blind man did. For what said he? "He made clay, and
anointed my eyes" [John 9:6]; and so this man of whom we now speak, "It is
Jesus who made me whole."

John 5:16
"Therefore did the Jews persecute Jesus, and sought to slay Him, because He
had done these things on the Sabbath day."
What then says Christ?

John 5:17
"My Father works hitherto, and I work."
When there was need to make excuse for the Disciples, He brought forward
David their fellow-servant, saying, "Have ye not read what David did when he
was an hungered?" [Matthew 12:2] But when excuse was to be made for
Himself, He betook Himself to the Father, showing in two ways His Equality, by
calling God His Father peculiarly, and by doing the same things which He did.
"And wherefore did He not mention what took place at Jericho ?" Because He
wished to raise them up from earth that they might no longer attend to Him as to
a man, but as to God, and as to one who ought to legislate: since had He not been
The Very Son and of the same Essence, the defense would have been worse than
the charge. For if a viceroy who had altered a royal law should, when charged
with so doing, excuse himself in this manner, and say, "Yea, for the king also has
annulled laws," he would not be able to escape, but would thus increase the
weight of the charge. But in this instance, since the dignity is equal, the defense
is made perfect on most secure grounds. "From the charges," says He, "from
which you absolve God, absolve Me also." And therefore He said first, "My
Father," that He might persuade them even against their will to allow to Him the
same, through reverence of His clearly asserted Sonship.
If any one say, "And how does the Father 'work,' who ceased on the seventh
day from all His works?" let him learn the manner in which He "works." What
then is the manner of His working? He cares for, He holds together all that has
been made. Therefore when you behold the sun rising and the moon running in
her path, the lakes, and fountains, and rivers, and rains, the course of nature in
the seeds and in our own bodies and those of irrational beings, and all the rest by
means of which this universe is made up, then learn the ceaseless working of the
Father. "For He makes His sun to rise upon the evil and the good, and sends rain
on the just and on the unjust." [Matthew 5:45] And again; "If God so clothe the