send them to the Gentiles; in order therefore that they might not think that this
was an innovation, because He had said, "I am not sent, save unto the lost sheep
of the house of Israel" [Matthew 15:24], He shows that this seems good to the
Father also. And if He says this with great meanness of circumstance, it is not
wonderful. For so He edified both those at that time, and those who came
afterwards; and as I have before said, He always by the excess of meanness
firmly persuaded them that the words were those of condescension.
2. But what is, "Of all flesh"? For certainly not all believed. Yet, for His
part, all believed; and if men gave no heed to His words, the fault was not in the
teacher, but in those who received them not.
"That He should give eternal life to as many as You have given Him."
If here also He speaks in a more human manner, wonder not. For He does
so both on account of the reasons I have given, and to avoid the saying anything
great concerning Himself; since this was a stumblingblock to the hearers because
as yet they imagined nothing great concerning Him. John, for example, when He
speaks in his own person, does not so, but leads up his language to greater
sublimity, saying, "All things were made by Him, and without Him was not
anything made" [c. i. 3, 4, 9, 11]; and that He was "Life"; and that He was
"Light"; and that "He came to His own": he says not, that He would not have had
power, had He not received it, but that He gave to others also "power to become
sons of God." And Paul in like manner calls Him equal with God. But He
Himself asks in a more human way, saying thus, "That He should give eternal
life to as many as You have given Him." [Philippians 2:6]

John 17:3
"And this is life eternal, that they might know You the only true God, and Jesus
Christ whom You have sent."
"The only true God," He says, by way of distinction from those which are
not gods; for He was about to send them to the Gentiles. But if they will not
allow this, but on account of this word "only" reject the Son from being true
God, in this way as they proceed they reject Him from being God at all. For He
also says, "You seek not the glory which is from the only God." [John 5:44] Well
then; shall not the Son be God? But if the Son be God, and the Son of the Father
who is called the Only God, it is clear that He also is true, and the Son of Him
who is called the Only true God. Why, when Paul says, "Or I only and
Barnabas" [1 Corinthians 9:6], does he exclude Barnabas? Not at all; for the
"only" is put by way of distinction from others. And, if He be not true God, how
is He "Truth"? For truth far surpasses what is true. What shall we call the not
being a "true" man, tell me? Shall we not call it the not being a man at all? So if
the Son is not true God, how is He God? And how makes He us gods and sons, if
He is not true? But on these matters we have spoken more particularly in another
place; wherefore let us apply ourselves to what follows.