SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.61, C.6.

succor his parents, or those from whom he has received greater
benefits; but he ought not to compensate a benefactor out of what
belongs to others; and he would be doing this if he were to
compensate one with what is due to another. Exception must be
made in cases of extreme need, for then he could and should even
take what belongs to another in order to succor a parent.
Reply to Objection 5: There are three ways in which a prelate can rob
the Church of her property. First by laying hands on Church property
which is committed, not to him but to another; for instance, if a
bishop appropriates the property of the chapter. In such a case it is
clear that he is bound to restitution, by handing it over to those who
are its lawful owners. Secondly by transferring to another person (for
instance a relative or a friend) Church property committed to
himself: in which case he must make restitution to the Church, and
have it under his own care, so as to hand it over to his successor.
Thirdly, a prelate may lay hands on Church property, merely in
intention, when, to wit, he begins to have a mind to hold it as his own
and not in the name of the Church: in which case he must make
restitution by renouncing his intention.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.61, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether he that has taken a thing is always bound

to restitution?
Objection 1: It would seem that he who has taken a thing is not
always bound to restore it. Restitution re-establishes the equality of
justice, by taking away from him that has more and giving to him that
has less. Now it happens sometimes that he who has taken that
which belongs to another, no longer has it, through its having
passed into another's hands. Therefore it should be restored, not by
the person that took it, but by the one that has it.
Objection 2: Further, no man is bound to reveal his own crime. But
by making restitution a man would sometimes reveal his crime, as in
the case of theft. Therefore he that has taken a thing is not always
bound to restitution.
Objection 3: Further, the same thing should not be restored several
times. Now sometimes several persons take a thing at the same time,
and one of them restores it in its entirety. Therefore he that takes a
thing is not always bound to restitution.
On the contrary, He that has sinned is bound to satisfaction. Now
restitution belongs to satisfaction. Therefore he that has taken a
thing is bound to restore it.
I answer that, With regard to a man who has taken another's
property, two points must be considered: the thing taken, and the
taking. By reason of the thing taken, he is bound to restore it as long
as he has it in his possession, since the thing that he has in addition
to what is his, should be taken away from him, and given to him who
lacks it according to the form of commutative justice. On the other
hand, the taking of the thing that is another's property, may be
threefold. For sometimes it is injurious, i.e. against the will of the
owner, as in theft and robbery: in which case the thief is bound to
restitution not only by reason of the thing, but also by reason of the
injurious action, even though the thing is no longer in his
possession. For just as a man who strikes another, though he gain
nothing thereby, is bound to compensate the injured person, so too
he that is guilty of theft or robbery, is bound to make compensation
for the loss incurred, although he be no better off; and in addition he
must be punished for the injustice committed. Secondly, a man takes