office; "We are ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech by us;" i.e.
in Christ's stead. "Separated to the Gospel of God." [2 Corinthians 5:20] For as
in a house, each one is set apart for various works; thus also in the Church, there
be various distributions of ministrations. And herein he seems to me to hint, that
he was not appointed by lot only, but that of old and from the first he was
ordained to this office; which also Jeremy says, that God spoke concerning
himself, "Before you came forth out of the womb, I sanctified you, I ordained you
a prophet unto the nations." [Jeremiah 1:5] For in that he was writing to a
vainglorious city, and one every way puffed up, he therefore uses every mode of
showing that his election was of God. For he Himself called him, and Himself
separated him. And he does this, that he may make the Epistle deserve credit,
and meet an easy reception. "To the Gospel of God." Not Matthew then alone is
an Evangelist, nor Mark, as neither was this man alone an Apostle, but they also;
even if he be said prëeminently to be this, and they that. And he calls it the
Gospel, not for those good things only which have been brought to pass, but also
for those which are to come. And how comes he to say, that the Gospel "of God"
is preached by himself? For he says, "separated to the Gospel of God"— for the
Father was manifest, even before the Gospels. Yet even if He were manifest, it
was to the Jews only, and not even to all of these as were fitting. For neither did
they know Him to be a Father, and many things did they conceive unworthily of
Him. Wherefore also Christ says, "The true worshippers" shall come, and that
"the Father seeks such to worship Him." [John 4:23] But it was afterwards that
He Himself with the Son was unveiled to the whole world, which Christ also
spoke of beforehand, and said, "that they might know You the only true God, and
Jesus Christ Whom You have sent." [John 17:3] But he calls it the "Gospel" of
God, to cheer the hearer at the outstart. For he came not with tidings to make the
countenance sad, as did the prophets with their accusations, and charges, and
reproofs, but with glad tidings, even the "Gospel of God;" countless treasures of
abiding and unchangeable blessings.
Ver. 2. "Which He promised afore by His Prophets in the Holy Scriptures."

For the Lord, says he, "shall give the word to them that proclaim glad
tidings with great power" [Psalm 68:12, Septuagint]; and again, "How beautiful
are the feet of them that preach the Gospel of peace." [Isaiah 52:7; Romans
10:15] See here both the name of the Gospel expressly and the temper of it, laid
down in the Old Testament. For, we do not proclaim it by words only, he means,
but also by acts done; since neither was it human, but both divine and
unspeakable, and transcending all nature. Now since they have laid against it the
charge of novelty also, He shows it to be older than the Greeks, and described
aforetime in the Prophets. And if He gave it not from the beginning because of
those that were unwilling to receive it, still, they that were willing did hear it.
"Your father Abraham," He says, "rejoiced to see My day, and he saw it, and was
glad." [John 8:56] How then comes He to say, "Many prophets desired to see the
things which you see, and have not seen them?" [Matthew 13:17] He means not
so, as you see and hear, the Flesh itself, and the very miracles before your eyes.
But let me beg you to look and see what a very long time ago these things were
foretold. For when God is about to do openly some great things, He announces
them of a long time before, to practise men's hearing for the reception of them
when they come.
"In the Holy Scriptures." Because the Prophets not only spoke, but also writ
what they spoke; nor did they write only, but also shadowed them forth by
actions, as Abraham when he led up Isaac, and Moses when he lifted up the
Serpent, and when he spread out his hands against Amalek, and when he offered
the Paschal Lamb.
Ver. 3. "Concerning His Son which was made of the seed of David,
according to the flesh."
What dost, you, O Paul, that after lifting up our souls so, and elevating
them, and causing great and unutterable things to pass in show before them, and
speaking of the Gospel, and that too the Gospel of God, and bringing in the
chorus of the Prophets, and showing the whole of them heralding forth many
years before those things which were to come: why do you again bring us down