expect, enter upon the vengeance, but turns his discourse to what was sweeter, to
the recompense of good actions, saying as follows,
Ver. 7. "To them who by patient continuance in well doing seek for glory
and honor and immortality, eternal life."
Here also he awakens those who had drawn back during the trials, and
shows that it is not right to trust in faith only. For it is deeds also into which that
tribunal will enquire. But observe, how when he is discoursing about the things
to come, he is unable to tell clearly the blessings, but speaks of glory and honor.
For in that they transcend all that man has, he has no image of them taken from
this to show, but by those things which have a semblance of brightness among
us, even by them he sets them before us as far as may be, by glory, by honor, by
life. For these be what men earnestly strive after, yet are those things not these,
but much better than these, inasmuch as they are incorruptible and immortal. See
how he has opened to us the doors toward the resurrection of the body by
speaking of incorruptibility. For incorruptibility belongs to the corruptible body.
Then, since this sufficed not, he added glory and honor. For all of us are to rise
incorruptible, but not all to glory, but some to punishment, and some to life.
Ver. 8. "But unto them that are contentious," he says. Again, he deprives of
excuse those that live in wickedness, and shows that it is from a kind of
disputatiousness and carelessness that they fall into unrighteousness.
"And do not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness." See, here is another
accusation again. For what defence can he set up, who flees from the light and
chooses the dark? And he does not say, who are "compelled by," "lorded over
by," but who "obey unrighteousness," that one may learn that the fall is one of
free choice, the crime not of necessity.
Ver. 9. "Indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish, upon every soul of
man that does evil."
That is, if a man be rich, if a consul, if a very sovereign (so Field: several
manuscripts and Edd. "the emperor himself"), by none of them is the account of
the judgment out-faced. Since in this dignities have no place. Having then shown

the exceeding greatness of the disease, and having added the cause, that it was
from the carelessness of the disordered, and finally, that destruction awaits them
and that amendment is easy, in the punishment also he again gives the Jew the
heavier lot. For he that had enjoyed a larger share of instruction would also
deserve to undergo a larger share of vengeance if doing lawlessly. And so the
wiser or mightier men we are, the more are we punished if we sin. For if you are
rich, you will have more money demanded of you than of the poor; and if wiser
than others, a stricter obedience; and if you have been invested with authority,
more shining acts of goodness; and so in the case of all the other things, you will
have to bring in measures proportioned to your power.
Ver. 10. "But glory, honor, and peace to every man that works good, to the
Jew first, and also to the Gentile."
What Jew does he here mean? Or about what Gentiles is he discoursing? It
is of those before Christ's coming. For his discourse had not hitherto come to the
times of grace, but he was still dwelling upon the earlier times, so breaking down
first from afar off and clearing away the separation between the Greek and the
Jew, that when he should do this in the matter of grace, he might no more seem
to be devising some new and degrading view. For if in the earlier times when
this Grace had not shone forth in such greatness, when the estate of the Jews was
solemn and renowned and glorious before all men, there was no difference, what
could they say for themselves ([τίνα ἂν ἔχοιεν λόγον εἰπεἵν];) now after so great
a display of grace? And this is why he establishes it with so great earnestness.
For when the hearer has been informed that this held in the earlier times, much
more will he receive it after the faith. But by Greeks he here means not them that
worshipped idols, but them that adored God, that obeyed the law of nature, that
strictly kept all things, save the Jewish observances, which contribute to piety,
such as were Melchizedek and his ([οἱ περὶ]), such as was Job, such as were the
Ninevites, such as was Cornelius. Here then he is first breaking through the
partition between the circumcision and the uncircumcision: and at a distance
dissipates this distinction beforehand, so as to do it without being suspected, and