6 As he says in the Preamble to the Constitutions: 'what helps most on our own part toward this end must be, more than any exterior constitution, the interior law of charity and love which the holy Spirit writes and engraves upon hearts'. e Cf the letter, dated early in 1544, from Fr Domenech to all the Society in which he mentions that Ignatius among other occupations is busy with the writing of the Constitutions. MHSI, 02, p. 290. In the Spring of 154i, after a commission (consisting of Ignatius himself and Codure) had examined the point, the first companions agreed that the sacristies of churches belonging to professed houses should be allowed to possess income. This decision will now be revoked by Ignatius as a result of his 40-day 'election'; and in the Constitutions he forbids the possession of such income. Cf Ganss, pp 253-4. s The first part of the Diary, covering the 40-day election period from February 2 to

9 It was once thought that the peculiarities of the saint's style were relics of his basque infancy (el P. Mugica, 'Reminiscencias de la lengua vasca en el Diario de San Ignacio' in Revue Internationale des etudes Basques, 1936, pp 57-6I). Against this view, S. Sala ('En torno al castellano de S. Ignacio', in Razon y Fe, ~956, pp 243-274) has argued that all the saint's peculiarities are typical of'pre-classical' spanish style and are to be found, for example, in the letters of Cardinal Cisneros. For a restatement of the basque argument cf G. de Germaro: 'La expresion literaria mistica del Diario espiritual ignaciano' in Manresa (i963), pp 25-46. lo CfAutobiography, Ch 2, nos I4-I6. To find the raison d'etre of the Diary, we must turn in quite a different direction. Indeed, once the new orientation has been adopted, it will be found to lead to the solution of most of the Diary's problems. In 1522, barely one year after his being wounded at Pamplona (May 20, 1521), Ignatius was living the life of a recluse at Manresa. He then began the composition of the series of 'meditation notes' which formed the nucleus of his first and best known book, the Spiritual Exercises. (This received papal approbation from Paul III in 1548, at the request of Francis Borgia; in the same year the first

11 Cf the entry in the Diary for February 6: 'Later I realized with abundant clearness (en asaz claridad)'.

12 Exx 176. 1~ Cf the article on 'Consolation', in Dictionnaire de Spiritualitd, II, cols 1620-1626. as E.g., Exx 3z6. satisfaction. They range from the quiet peace of increased faith, hope and charity, through internal joy and gladness, which can unexpectedly flood the soul, through the tears of love and sympathy for Christ, up to the 'interior movement' which sets the soul ablaze with such love for God the creator that no other love can exist except as part of that conflagration. It is interesting to find the words mocidn interior in the Exercises. The Diary, too, is full of references, some very mysterious, to the 'inner life' ('internal joy', 'internal tears', etc.). When he comes to give rules concerning the remedies to be taken against desolation, he provides precisely those which are to be found used in the Diary: firmness, increased exercise of prayer and self-examination, a recognition that one may be at fault and that God may be providing a period of trial, both for increased self-knowledge and greater appreciation 'that it does not lie in our power to cause or retain great devotion, intense love, tears nor any other spiritual consolation, but that everything is gift and grace of God our Lord'. is However, even consolations require keen self-analysis, or rather a constant sensitivity to the slightest change. We find this a preoccupation in the Diary, as explained in the Exercises: It is characteristic of the evil angel, who presents himself under the guise of an 'angel of light' (sub angelo lucis), to make his entry on the side of the soul's devotion but his exit for his own profit; that is to say, he brings good and holy thoughts that are in full accord with such a virtuous soul; but later, little by little, he tries to make off with what is his own, dragging the soul towards his concealed treachery and perverse intentions. 16 Two inter-related passages from the Diary may be quoted: they illustrate admirably the perception of a false consolation: February I8: After mass I quietened down, comparing my own worth with the wisdom and greatness of God. I continued for some hours until the thought came to me that I should not trouble to say more masses - I felt angry with the blessed Trinity; I had no desire to prolong the deliberation into the future...