"they had waxed wanton against Christ" [1 Timothy 5:11], he then says, "I will
that the younger women marry, bear children." [1 Timothy 5:14] So in this place
also it was not His leading will that the sacrifices should be offered. For, as He
says, "I wish not the death of the sinner, as that he should turn unto [Me] and
live" [Ezekiel 33:11]: and in another place He says that He not only wished, but
even desired this: and yet these are contrary to each other: for intense wishing is
desire. How then dost Thou "not wish"? How dost Thou in another place
"desire," which is a sign of vehement wishing? So is it in this case also.
"By the which will we are sanctified," he says. How sanctified? "by the
offering of the Body of Jesus Christ once for all."
3. "And every priest stands daily ministering and offering oftentimes the
same sacrifice." (To stand therefore is a sign of ministering; accordingly to sit, is
a sign of being ministered unto.)

Hebrews 10:14-15
"But this [man] after He had offered one sacrifice for sins for ever, sat
down on the right hand of God, from henceforth expecting till His enemies be
made His footstool." [Hebrews 10:14-15] "For by one offering He has perfected
forever them that are sanctified. Whereof the Holy Ghost also is a witness to us."
He had said that those [sacrifices] are not offered; he reasoned from what is
written, [and] from what is not written; moreover also he put forward the
prophetic word which says, "sacrifice and offering You would not." He had said
that He had forgiven their sins.

Hebrews 10:16-18
Again this also He proves from the testimony of what is written, for "the
Holy Ghost" (he says) "is a witness to us: for after that He had said," [Hebrews
10:16-18] "This is the covenant, that I will make with them, after those days,
says the Lord: I will put My laws into their hearts, and in their minds will I write
them, and their sins and iniquities will I remember no more. Now where
remission of these is there is no more offering for sin." So then He forgave their
sins, when He gave the Covenant, and He gave the Covenant by sacrifice. If
therefore He forgave the sins through the one sacrifice, there is no longer need of
a second.
"He sat down on the right hand of God, from henceforth expecting." Why
the delay? "that His enemies be put under His feet. For by one offering He has
perfected for ever them that are sanctified." But perhaps some one might say;
Wherefore did He not put them under at once? For the sake of the faithful who
should afterwards be brought forth and born. Whence then [does it appear] that
they shall be put under? By the saying "He sat down." He called to mind again
that testimony which says, "until I put the enemies under His feet." [See
Hebrews 1:13] But His enemies are the Jews. Then since he had said, "Till His
enemies be put under His feet," and they [these enemies ] were vehemently
urgent, therefore he introduces all his discourse concerning faith after this. But
who are the enemies? All unbelievers: the dæmons. And intimating the greatness
of their subjection, he said not "are subjected," but "are put under His feet."
4. Let us not therefore be of [the number of] His enemies. For not they
alone are enemies, the unbelievers and Jews, but those also who are full of
unclean living. "For the carnal mind is enmity against God: for it is not subject
to the law of God, for neither can it be." [Romans 8:7] What then (you say)?
This is not a ground of blame. Nay rather, it is very much a ground of blame. For