## Homily 14 on Ephesians

Ephesians 4:25-27
"Wherefore, putting away falsehood, speak ye truth each one with his
neighbor; for we are members one of another. Be angry, and sin not; let not the
sun go down upon your wrath: neither give place to the devil."
Having spoken of the "old man" generally, he next draws him also in detail;
for this kind of teaching is more easily learned when we learn by particulars.
And what says he? "Wherefore, putting away falsehood." What sort of
falsehood? Idols does he mean? Surely not; not indeed but that they are
falsehood also. However, he is not now speaking of them, because these persons
had nothing to do with them; but he is speaking of that which passes between
one man and another, meaning that which is deceitful and false. "Speak ye truth,
each one," says he, "with his neighbor"; then what is more touching to the
conscience still, "because we are members one of another." Let no man deceive
his neighbor. As the Psalmist says here and there; "With flattering lip and with a
double heart do they speak." [Psalm 12:2] For there is nothing, no, nothing so
productive of enmity as deceit and guile.
Observe how everywhere he shames them by this similitude of the body.
Let not the eye, says he, lie to the foot, nor the foot to the eye. For example, if
there shall be a deep pit, and then by having reeds laid across upon the mouth of
it upon the earth, and yet concealed under earth, it shall by its appearance furnish
to the eye an expectation of solid ground, will not the eye use the foot, and
discover whether it yields and is hollow underneath, or whether it is firm and
resists? Will the foot tell a lie, and not report the truth as it is? And what again?
If the eye were to spy a serpent or a wild beast, will it lie to the foot? Will it not
at once inform it, and the foot thus informed by it refrain from going on? And
what again, when neither the foot nor the eye shall know how to distinguish, but

all shall depend upon the smelling, as, for example, whether a drug be deadly or
not; will the smelling lie to the mouth? And why not? Because it will be
destroying itself also. But it tells the truth as it appears to itself. And what again?
Will the tongue lie to the stomach? Does it not, when a thing is bitter, reject it,
and, if it is sweet, pass it on? Observe ministration, and interchange of service;
observe a provident care arising from truth, and, as one might say, spontaneously
from the heart. So surely should it be with us also; let us not lie, since we are
"members one of another." This is a sure token of friendship; whereas the
contrary is of enmity. What then, you will ask, if a man shall use treachery
against you? Hearken to the truth. If he use treachery, he is not a member;
whereas he says, "lie not towards the members."
"Be angry, and sin not."
Observe his wisdom. He both speaks to prevent our sinning, and, if we do
not listen, still does not forsake us; for his fatherly compassion does not desert
him. For just as the physician prescribes to the sick what he must do, and if he
does not submit to it, still does not treat him with contempt, but proceeding to
add what advice he can by persuasion, again goes on with the cure; so also does
Paul. For he indeed who does otherwise, aims only at reputation, and is annoyed
at being disregarded; whereas he who on all occasions aims at the recovery of
the patient, has this single object in view, how he may restore the patient, and
raise him up again. This then is what Paul is doing. He has said, "Lie not." Yet if
ever lying should produce anger, he goes on again to cure this also. For what
says he? "Be angry, and sin not." It were good indeed never to be angry. Yet if
ever any one should fall into passion, still let him not fall into so great a degree.
"For let not the sun," says he, "go down upon your wrath." Would you have your
fill of anger? One hour, or two, or three, is enough for you; let not the sun depart,
and leave you both at enmity. It was of God's goodness that he rose: let him not
depart, having shone on unworthy men. For if the Lord of His great goodness
sent him, and has Himself forgiven you your sins, and yet you forgive not your
neighbor, look, how great an evil is this! And there is yet another besides this.