SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.152, C.3.

preservation of the whole human race. Hence Augustine says (De
Bono Conjug. xvi): "What food is to a man's well being, such is
sexual intercourse to the welfare of the whole human race."
Wherefore just as the use of food can be without sin, if it be taken in
due manner and order, as required for the welfare of the body, so
also the use of venereal acts can be without sin, provided they be
performed in due manner and order, in keeping with the end of
human procreation.
Reply to Objection 1: A thing may be a hindrance to virtue in two
ways. First, as regards the ordinary degree of virtue, and as to this
nothing but sin is an obstacle to virtue. Secondly, as regards the
perfect degree of virtue, and as to this virtue may be hindered by that
which is not a sin, but a lesser good. In this way sexual intercourse
casts down the mind not from virtue, but from the height, i.e. the
perfection of virtue. Hence Augustine says (De Bono Conjug. viii):
"Just as that was good which Martha did when busy about serving
holy men, yet better still that which Mary did in hearing the word of
God: so, too, we praise the good of Susanna's conjugal chastity, yet
we prefer the good of the widow Anna, and much more that of the
Virgin Mary."
Reply to Objection 2: As stated above (Question 152, Article 2, ad 2;
FS, Question 64, Article 2), the mean of virtue depends not on
quantity but on conformity with right reason: and consequently the
exceeding pleasure attaching to a venereal act directed according to
reason, is not opposed to the mean of virtue. Moreover, virtue is not
concerned with the amount of pleasure experienced by the external
sense, as this depends on the disposition of the body; what matters
is how much the interior appetite is affected by that pleasure. Nor
does it follow that the act in question is contrary to virtue, from the
fact that the free act of reason in considering spiritual things is
incompatible with the aforesaid pleasure. For it is not contrary to
virtue, if the act of reason be sometimes interrupted for something
that is done in accordance with reason, else it would be against
virtue for a person to set himself to sleep. That venereal
concupiscence and pleasure are not subject to the command and
moderation of reason, is due to the punishment of the first sin,
inasmuch as the reason, for rebelling against God, deserved that its
body should rebel against it, as Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xiii, 13).
Reply to Objection 3: As Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xiii, 13), "the
child, shackled with original sin, is born of fleshly concupiscence

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.152, C.3.

(which is not imputed as sin to the regenerate) as of a daughter of
sin." Hence it does not follow that the act in question is a sin, but
that it contains something penal resulting from the first sin.