yea, if need were, their liberty itself, so that they might continue to enjoy this
present life.
5. But to proceed. The day now hastening to its close, and late evening
arriving, and the final sentence of the court being expected, all were in still
greater agony, and besought God that He would grant some delay and respite;
and incline the soul of the judges to refer the facts that had been investigated to
the decision of the Emperor; since perchance some advantage might arise from
this reference. Moreover, by the people general supplications were sent up to the
Merciful God; imploring that He would save the remnants of the city; and not
suffer it entirely to be razed from its foundations. Nor could one see any one
joining in this cry but with tears. Nevertheless, none of these things then moved
the judges within, although they heard. One thing only they considered, that
there might be a rigid enquiry into the deeds that had been perpetrated.
6. At last having loaded the culprits with chains, and bound them with iron,
they sent them away to the prison through the midst of the forum. Men that had
kept their studs of horses, who had been presidents of the games, who could
reckon up a thousand different offices of distinction which they had held, had
their goods confiscated, and seals might be seen placed upon all their doors.
Their wives also being ejected from their parents' home, each had literally to
play the part of Job's wife. For they went "wandering from house to house and
from place to place, seeking a lodging." And this it was not easy for them to
find, every one fearing and trembling to receive, or to render assistance in any
way to the relatives of those who were under impeachment. Nevertheless,
though such events had happened, the sufferers were patient under all; since they
were not deprived of the present life. And neither the loss of wealth, nor
dishonour, nor so much public exposure, nor any other matter of that nature,
caused them vexation. For the greatness of the calamity, and the circumstance of
their having expected still worse things, when they suffered these, had prepared
the soul for the exercise of a wise fortitude. And now they learned, how simple a
thing is virtue for us, how easy and expeditious of performance, and that from

our neglect only it seems to be laborious. They who before this time could not
bear the loss of a little money with meekness, now they were subject to a greater
fear, although they had lost all their substance, felt as if they had found a
treasure, because they had not lost their lives. So that if the sense of a future hell
took possession of us, and we thought of those intolerable punishments, we
should not grieve, even though for the sake of the law of God we were to give
both our substance, and our bodies and lives too, knowing that we should gain
greater things; deliverance from the terrors that are hereafter.
7. Perchance the tragedy of all I have told you, has greatly softened your
hearts. Do not however take it amiss. For since I am about to venture upon some
more subtle thoughts and require a more sensitive state of mind on your part, I
have done this intentionally, in order that by the terror of the description your
minds might have shaken off all listlessness, and withdrawn themselves from all
worldly cares, and might with the more readiness convey the force of the things
about to be spoken into the depths of your soul.
Sufficiently indeed, then, our discourse of late evinced to you, that a natural
law of good and evil is seated within us. But that our proof of it may be more
abundantly evident, we will again today apply ourselves strenuously to the same
subject of discourse. For that God from the beginning, when He formed man,
made him capable of discriminating both these, all men make evident. Hence
when we sin, we are all ashamed at the presence of our inferiors; and oftentimes
a master, on his way to the house of a harlot, if he then perceives any one of his
more respectable servants, turns back, reddening with shame, from this untoward
path. Again, when others reproach us, fixing on us the names of particular vices,
we call it an insult; and if we are aggrieved, we drag those who have done the
wrong to the public tribunal. Thus we can understand what vice is and what
virtue is. Wherefore Christ, for the purpose of declaring this, and showing that
He was not introducing a strange law, or one which surpassed our nature, but
that which He had of old deposited beforehand in our conscience, after
pronouncing those numerous Beatitudes, thus speaks; "All things whatsoever ye