## Homily on the Paralytic Let Down

Through the Roof
1. Having lately come across the incident of the paralytic who lay upon his
bed beside the pool, we discovered a rich and large treasure, not by delving in
the ground, but by diving into his heart: we found a treasure not containing silver
and gold and precious stones, but endurance, and philosophy, and patience and
much hope towards God, which is more valuable than any kind of jewel or
source of wealth. For material riches are liable to the designs of robbers, and the
tales of false accusers, and the violence of housebreakers, and the villany of
servants, and when they have escaped all these things, they often bring the
greatest ruin upon those who possess them by exciting the eyes of the envious,
and consequently breeding countless storms of trouble. But the spiritual riches
escape all these occasions of mischief and are superior to all abuse of this kind,
laughing to scorn both robbers, and housebreakers, and slanderers, and false
accusers and death itself. For they are not parted from the possessor by death,
but on the contrary the possession becomes then more especially secured to the
owners, and they accompany them on their journey to the other world, and are
transplanted with them to the future life, and become marvellous advocates of
those with whom they depart hence, and render the judge propitious to them.
This wealth we found in great abundance stored in the soul of the paralytic.
And you are witnesses who with great zeal drew up draughts of this treasure yet
without exhausting it. For such is the nature of spiritual wealth; it resembles
fountains of water, or rather exceeds their plenteousness, being most abundant
when it has many to draw upon it. For when it enters into any man's soul it is not
divided, not diminished, but coming in its entireness to each remains continually
unconsumed, being incapable of ever failing: which was just what took place at
that time. For although so many have applied to the treasure, and all are drawing

upon it as much as they can— but why do I speak of you, seeing that it has made
countless persons rich from that time to the present day, and yet abides in its
original perfection? Let us not then grow weary in having recourse to this source
of spiritual wealth: but as far as possible let us now also draw forth draughts
from it, and let us gaze upon our merciful Lord, gaze upon His patient servant.
He had been thirty and eight years struggling with an incurable infirmity and
was perpetually plagued by it, yet he did not repine, he did not utter a
blasphemous word, he did not accuse his Maker, but endured his calamity
bravely and with much meekness. And whence is this manifest? You say: for
Scripture has not told us anything clearly concerning his former life, but only
that he had been thirty-eight years in his infirmity; it has not added a word to
prove that he did not show discontent, or anger or petulance. And yet it has made
this plain also, if any one will pay careful attention to it, not looking at it
curiously and carelessly. For when you hear that on the approach of Christ who
was a stranger to him, and regarded merely as a man, he spoke to him with such
great meekness, you may be able to perceive his former wisdom. For when Jesus
said to him "Will you be made whole?" he did not make the natural reply you see
me who have been this long time lying sick of the palsy, and do you ask me if I
wish to be made whole? Have you come to insult my distress, to reproach me
and laugh me to scorn and make a mock of my calamity? He did not say or
conceive anything of this kind but meekly replied "Yea Lord." Now if after
thirty-eight; years he was thus meek and gentle, when all the vigour and strength
of his reasoning faculties was broken down, consider what he is likely to have
been at the outset of his trouble. For be assured that invalids are not so hard to
please at the beginning of their disorder, as they are after a long lapse of time:
they become most intractable, most intolerable to all, when the malady is
prolonged. But as he, after so many years, was so wise, and replied with so much
forbearance, it is quite clear that during the previous time also he had been
bearing that calamity with much thankfulness.
Considering these things then let us imitate the patience of our fellow-