resurrection of the body as compared to the seed.
Further, it is written (1 Cor. 15:22): "As in Adam all die, so also in
Christ all shall be made alive." Now all shall be made alive in Christ.
Therefore all shall die in Adam: and so all shall rise again from
death.
I answer that, The saints differ in speaking on this question, as may
be seen in the text (Sent. iv, D, 43). However, the safer and more
common opinion is that all shall die and rise again from death: and
this for three reasons. First, because it is more in accord with Divine
justice, which condemned human nature for the sin of its first parent,
that all who by the act of nature derive their origin from him should
contract the stain of original sin, and consequently be the debtors of
death. Secondly, because it is more in agreement with Divine
Scripture which foretells the resurrection of all; and resurrection is
not predicted properly except of that "which has fallen and
perished," as the Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iv). Thirdly,
because it is more in harmony with the order of nature where we find
that what is corrupted and decayed is not renewed except by means
of corruption: thus vinegar does not become wine unless the vinegar
be corrupted and pass into the juice of the grape. Wherefore since
human nature has incurred the defect of the necessity of death, it
cannot return to immortality save by means of death. It is also in
keeping with the order of nature for another reason, because, as it is
stated in Phys. viii, 1, "the movement of heaven is as a kind of life to
all existing in nature," just as the movement of the heart is a kind of
life of the whole body: wherefore even as all the members become
dead on the heart ceasing to move, so when the heavenly movement
ceases nothing can remain living with that life which was sustained
by the influence of that movement. Now such is the life by which we
live now: and therefore it follows that those who shall live after the
movement of the heaven comes to a standstill must depart from this
life.
Reply to Objection 1: This distinction of the dead and the living does
not apply to the time itself of the judgment, nor to the whole
preceding time, since all who are to be judged were living at some
time, and dead at some time: but it applies to that particular time
which shall precede the judgment immediately, when, to wit, the
signs of the judgment shall begin to appear.
Reply to Objection 2: The perfect desire of the saints cannot be void;

but nothing prevents their conditional desire being void. Such is the
desire whereby we would not be "unclothed," but "clothed upon,"
namely if that be possible: and this desire is called by some a
"velleity."
Reply to Objection 3: It is erroneous to say that any one except
Christ is conceived without original sin, because those who would
be conceived without original sin would not need the redemption
which was wrought by Christ, and thus Christ would not be the
Redeemer of all men. Nor can it be said that they needed not this
redemption, because it was granted to them that they should be
conceived without sin. For, this grace was vouchsafed---either to
their parents, that the sin of nature might be healed in them (because
so long as that sin remained they were unable to beget without
communicating original sin)---or to nature itself which was healed.
Now we must allow that every one needs the redemption of Christ
personally, and not only by reason of nature, and one cannot be
delivered from an evil or absolved from a debt unless one incur the
debt or incur the evil: and consequently all could not reap in
themselves the fruit of the Lord's prayer, unless all were born
debtors and subject to evil. Hence the forgiveness of debts or
delivery from evil cannot be applied to one who is born without a
debt or free from evil, but only to one who is born with a debt and is
afterwards delivered by the grace of Christ. Nor does it follow, if it
can be asserted without error that some die not, that they are born
without original sin, although death is a punishment of original sin;
because God can of His mercy remit the punishment which one has
incurred by a past fault, as He forgave the adulterous woman without
punishment (Jn. 8): and in like manner He can deliver from death
those who have contracted the debt of death by being born in
original sin. And thus it does not follow that if they die not, therefore
they were born without original sin.
Reply to Objection 4: The shortest way is not always the one to be
chosen, but only when it is more or equally adapted for attaining the
end. It is not so here, as is clear from what we have said.