SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.46, C.2.

but in so far as love moves to the act of prudence. Wherefore
Augustine goes on to say that "prudence is love discerning aright
that which helps from that which hinders us in tending to God." Now
love is said to discern because it moves the reason to discern.
Reply to Objection 2: The prudent man considers things afar off, in
so far as they tend to be a help or a hindrance to that which has to
be done at the present time. Hence it is clear that those things which
prudence considers stand in relation to this other, as in relation to
the end. Now of those things that are directed to the end there is
counsel in the reason, and choice in the appetite, of which two,
counsel belongs more properly to prudence, since the Philosopher
states (Ethic. vi, 5,7,9) that a prudent man "takes good counsel." But
as choice presupposes counsel, since it is "the desire for what has
been already counselled" (Ethic. iii, 2), it follows that choice can also
be ascribed to prudence indirectly, in so far, to wit, as prudence
directs the choice by means of counsel.
Reply to Objection 3: The worth of prudence consists not in thought
merely, but in its application to action, which is the end of the
practical reason. Wherefore if any defect occur in this, it is most
contrary to prudence, since, the end being of most import in
everything, it follows that a defect which touches the end is the
worst of all. Hence the Philosopher goes on to say (Ethic. vi, 5) that
prudence is "something more than a merely rational habit," such as
art is, since, as stated above (FS, Question 57, Article 4) it includes
application to action, which application is an act of the will.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.46, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether prudence belongs to the practical reason

alone or also to the speculative reason?
Objection 1: It would seem that prudence belongs not only to the
practical, but also to the speculative reason. For it is written (Prov.
10:23): "Wisdom is prudence to a man." Now wisdom consists
chiefly in contemplation. Therefore prudence does also.
Objection 2: Further, Ambrose says (De Offic. i, 24): "Prudence is
concerned with the quest of truth, and fills us with the desire of fuller
knowledge." Now this belongs to the speculative reason. Therefore
prudence resides also in the speculative reason.
Objection 3: Further, the Philosopher assigns art and prudence to
the same part of the soul (Ethic. vi, 1). Now art may be not only
practical but also speculative, as in the case of the liberal arts.
Therefore prudence also is both practical and speculative.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. vi, 5) that prudence is
right reason applied to action. Now this belongs to none but the
practical reason. Therefore prudence is in the practical reason only.
I answer that, According to the Philosopher (Ethic. vi, 5) "a prudent
man is one who is capable of taking good counsel." Now counsel is
about things that we have to do in relation to some end: and the
reason that deals with things to be done for an end is the practical
reason. Hence it is evident that prudence resides only in the
practical reason.
Reply to Objection 1: As stated above (Question 45, Articles 1,3),
wisdom considers the absolutely highest cause: so that the
consideration of the highest cause in any particular genus belongs
to wisdom in that genus. Now in the genus of human acts the highest
cause is the common end of all human life, and it is this end that
prudence intends. For the Philosopher says (Ethic. vi, 5) that just as
he who reasons well for the realization of a particular end, such as
victory, is said to be prudent, not absolutely, but in a particular
genus, namely warfare, so he that reasons well with regard to right
conduct as a whole, is said to be prudent absolutely. Wherefore it is
clear that prudence is wisdom about human affairs: but not wisdom
absolutely, because it is not about the absolutely highest cause, for