The Latin has evertisse, implying that thus Nous was more degraded.

He [they further assert] at once gave thanks to the first Anthropos (man), forsaking those who had
created him.
7. But Ialdabaoth, feeling envious at this, was pleased to form the design of again emptying
man by means of woman, and produced a woman from his own enthymesis, whom that Prunicus
[above mentioned] laying hold of, imperceptibly emptied her of power. But the others coming and
admiring her beauty, named her Eve, and falling in love with her, begat sons by her, whom they
also declare to be the angels. But their mother (Sophia) cunningly devised a scheme to seduce Eve
and Adam, by means of the serpent, to transgress the command of Ialdabaoth. Eve listened to this
as if it had proceeded from a son of God, and yielded an easy belief. She also persuaded Adam to
eat of the tree regarding which God had said that they should not eat of it. They then declare that,
on their thus eating, they attained to the knowledge of that power which is above all, and departed
from those who had created them. When Prunicus perceived that the powers were thus baffled
by their own creature, she greatly rejoiced, and again cried out, that since the father was incorruptible,
he (Ialdabaoth) who formerly called himself the father was a liar; and that, while Anthropos and
the first woman (the Spirit) existed previously, this one (Eve) sinned by committing adultery.
8. Ialdabaoth, however, through that oblivion in which he was involved, and not paying any
regard to these things, cast Adam and Eve out of Paradise, because they had transgressed his
commandment. For he had a desire to beget sons by Eve, but did not accomplish his wish, because
his mother opposed him in every point, and secretly emptied Adam and Eve of the light with which
they had been sprinkled, in order that that spirit which proceeded from the supreme power might
participate neither in the curse nor opprobrium [caused by transgression]. They also teach that, thus
being emptied of the divine substance, they were cursed by him, and cast down from heaven to this
world. But the serpent also, who was acting against the father, was cast down by him into this
lower world; he reduced, however, under his power the angels here, and begat six sons, he himself
forming the seventh person, after the example of that Hebdomad which surrounds the father. They
further declare that these are the seven mundane demons, who always oppose and resist the human
race, because it was on their account that their father was cast down to this lower world.
9. Adam and Eve previously had light, and clear, and as it were spiritual bodies, such as they
were at their creation; but when they came to this world, these changed into bodies more opaque,
and gross, and sluggish. Their soul also was feeble and languid, inasmuch as they had received
from their creator a merely mundane inspiration. This continued until Prunicus, moved with
compassion towards them, restored to them the sweet savour of the besprinkling of light, by means
of which they came to a remembrance of themselves, and knew that they were naked, as well as
that the body was a material substance, and thus recognised that they bore death about with them.
They thereupon became patient, knowing that only for a time they would be enveloped in the body.
They also found out food, through the guidance of Sophia; and when they were satisfied, they had