Therefore they are called "intellectual beings": because even with
ourselves the things which are instantly grasped by the mind are
said to be understood [intelligi]; hence "intellect" is defined as the
habit of first principles. But human souls which acquire knowledge
of truth by the discursive method are called "rational"; and this
comes of the feebleness of their intellectual light. For if they
possessed the fulness of intellectual light, like the angels, then in the
first aspect of principles they would at once comprehend their whole
range, by perceiving whatever could be reasoned out from them.
Reply to Objection 1: Discursion expresses movement of a kind.
Now all movement is from something before to something after.
Hence discursive knowledge comes about according as from
something previously known one attains to the knowledge of what is
afterwards known, and which was previously unknown. But if in the
thing perceived something else be seen at the same time, as an
object and its image are seen simultaneously in a mirror, it is not
discursive knowledge. And in this way the angels know things in the
Word.
Reply to Objection 2: The angels can syllogize, in the sense of
knowing a syllogism; and they see effects in causes, and causes in
effects: yet they do not acquire knowledge of an unknown truth in
this way, by syllogizing from causes to effect, or from effect to
cause.
Reply to Objection 3: Experience is affirmed of angels and demons
simply by way of similitude, forasmuch as they know sensible things
which are present, yet without any discursion withal.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the angels understand by composing

and dividing?
Objection 1: It would seem that the angels understand by composing
and dividing. For, where there is multiplicity of things understood,
there is composition of the same, as is said in De Anima iii, text. 21.
But there is a multitude of things understood in the angelic mind;
because angels apprehend different things by various species, and
not all at one time. Therefore there is composition and division in the
angel's mind.
Objection 2: Further, negation is far more remote from affirmation
than any two opposite natures are; because the first of distinctions
is that of affirmation and negation. But the angel knows certain
distant natures not by one, but by diverse species, as is evident from
what was said (Article 2). Therefore he must know affirmation and
negation by diverse species. And so it seems that he understands by
composing and dividing.
Objection 3: Further, speech is a sign of the intellect. But in speaking
to men, angels use affirmative and negative expressions, which are
signs of composition and of division in the intellect; as is manifest
from many passages of Sacred Scripture. Therefore it seems that the
angel understands by composing and dividing.
On the contrary, Dionysius says (Div. Nom. vii) that "the intellectual
power of the angel shines forth with the clear simplicity of divine
concepts." But a simple intelligence is without composition and
division. Therefore the angel understands without composition or
division.
I answer that, As in the intellect, when reasoning, the conclusion is
compared with the principle, so in the intellect composing and
dividing, the predicate is compared with the subject. For if our
intellect were to see at once the truth of the conclusion in the
principle, it would never understand by discursion and reasoning. In
like manner, if the intellect in apprehending the quiddity of the
subject were at once to have knowledge of all that can be attributed
to, or removed from, the subject, it would never understand by
composing and dividing, but only by understanding the essence.
Thus it is evident that for the self-same reason our intellect