FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.1, C.5.

appetite; consequently, if you remove this principle, there will be
nothing to move the appetite. On the other hand, the principle in
execution is that wherein operation has its beginning; and if this
principle be taken away, no one will begin to work. Now the principle
in the intention is the last end; while the principle in execution is the
first of the things which are ordained to the end. Consequently, on
neither side is it possible to go to infinity since if there were no last
end, nothing would be desired, nor would any action have its term,
nor would the intention of the agent be at rest; while if there is no
first thing among those that are ordained to the end, none would
begin to work at anything, and counsel would have no term, but
would continue indefinitely.
On the other hand, nothing hinders infinity from being in things that
are ordained to one another not essentially but accidentally; for
accidental causes are indeterminate. And in this way it happens that
there is an accidental infinity of ends, and of things ordained to the
end.
Reply to Objection 1: The very nature of good is that something
flows from it, but not that it flows from something else. Since,
therefore, good has the nature of end, and the first good is the last
end, this argument does not prove that there is no last end; but that
from the end, already supposed, we may proceed downwards
indefinitely towards those things that are ordained to the end. And
this would be true if we considered but the power of the First Good,
which is infinite. But, since the First Good diffuses itself according
to the intellect, to which it is proper to flow forth into its effects
according to a certain fixed form; it follows that there is a certain
measure to the flow of good things from the First Good from Which
all other goods share the power of diffusion. Consequently the
diffusion of goods does not proceed indefinitely but, as it is written
(Wis. 11:21), God disposes all things "in number, weight and
measure."
Reply to Objection 2: In things which are of themselves, reason
begins from principles that are known naturally, and advances to
some term. Wherefore the Philosopher proves (Poster. i, 3) that there
is no infinite process in demonstrations, because there we find a
process of things having an essential, not an accidental, connection
with one another. But in those things which are accidentally
connected, nothing hinders the reason from proceeding indefinitely.
Now it is accidental to a stated quantity or number, as such, that

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.1, C.5.

quantity or unity be added to it. Wherefore in such like things
nothing hinders the reason from an indefinite process.
Reply to Objection 3: This multiplication of acts of the will reacting
on itself, is accidental to the order of ends. This is clear from the fact
that in regard to one and the same end, the will reacts on itself
indifferently once or several times.