sense that wisdom is either the begetter or the creator of the Father; for
what could be more senseless? Therefore both the Father Himself is
wisdom, and the Son is in such way called the wisdom of the Father, as
He is called the light of the Father; that is, that in the same manner as
light from light, and yet both one light, so we are to understand wisdom
of wisdom, and yet both one wisdom; and therefore also one essence,
since, in God, to be, is the same as to be wise. For what to be wise is to
wisdom, and to be able is to power, and to be eternal is to eternity, and to
be just to justice, and to be great to greatness, that being itself is to
essence. And since in the Divine simplicity, to be wise is nothing else than
to be, therefore wisdom there is the same as essence.

### CHAP. 2.—THE FATHER AND THE SON ARE TOGETHER ONE WISDOM, AS ONE ESSENCE, ALTHOUGH NOT TOGETHER ONE WORD.

3. Therefore the Father and the Son together are one essence, and one
greatness, and one truth, and one wisdom. But the Father and Son both
together are not one Word, because both together are not one Son. For as
the Son is referred to the Father, and is not so called in respect to
Himself, so also the Word is referred to him whose Word it is, when it is
called the Word. Since He is the Son in that He is the Word, and He is the
Word in that He is the Son. Inasmuch, therefore, as the Father and the
Son together are certainly not one Son, it follows that the Father and the
Son together are not the one Word of both. And therefore He is not the
Word in that He is wisdom; since He is not called the Word in respect to
Himself, but only relatively to Him whose Word He is, as He is called the
Son in relation to the Father; but He is wisdom by that whereby He is
essence. And therefore, because one essence, one wisdom. But since the
Word is also wisdom, yet is not thereby the Word because He is wisdom;
for He is understood to be the Word relatively, but wisdom essentially: let
us understand, that when He is called the Word, it is meant, wisdom that
is born, so as to be both the Son and the Image; and that when these two
words are used, namely wisdom (is) born, in one of the two, namely born,
both Word, and Image, and Son, are understood, and in all these names
essence is not expressed, since they are spoken relatively; but in the other
word, namely wisdom, since it is spoken also in respect to substance, for

wisdom is wise in itself, essence also is expressed, and that being of His
which is to be wise. Whence the Father and Son together are one wisdom,
because one essence, and singly wisdom of wisdom, as essence of essence.
And hence they are not therefore not one essence, because the Father is
not the Son, and the Son is not the Father, or because the Father is unbegotten, but the Son is begotten: since by these names only their relative
attributes are expressed. But both together are one wisdom and one
essence; in which to be, is the same as to be wise. And both together are
not the Word or the Son, since to be is not the same as to be the Word or
the Son, as we have already sufficiently shown that these terms are
spoken relatively.