THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.75, C.7.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.75, C.8.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether this change is wrought instantaneously?

Objection 1: It seems that this change is not wrought
instantaneously, but successively. For in this change there is first
the substance of bread, and afterwards the substance of Christ's
body. Neither, then, is in the same instant, but in two instants. But
there is a mid-time between every two instants. Therefore this
change must take place according to the succession of time, which
is between the last instant in which the bread is there, and the first
instant in which the body of Christ is present.
Objection 2: Further, in every change something is "in becoming"
and something is "in being." But these two things do not exist at the
one time for, what is "in becoming," is not yet, whereas what is "in
being," already is. Consequently, there is a before and an after in
such change: and so necessarily the change cannot be
instantaneous, but successive.
Objection 3: Further, Ambrose says (De Sacram. iv) that this
sacrament "is made by the words of Christ." But Christ's words are
pronounced successively. Therefore the change takes place
successively.
On the contrary, This change is effected by a power which is infinite,
to which it belongs to operate in an instant.
I answer that, A change may be instantaneous from a threefold
reason. First on the part of the form, which is the terminus of the
change. For, if it be a form that receives more and less, it is acquired
by its subject successively, such as health; and therefore because a
substantial form does not receive more and less, it follows that its
introduction into matter is instantaneous.
Secondly on the part of the subject, which sometimes is prepared
successively for receiving the form; thus water is heated
successively. When, however, the subject itself is in the ultimate
disposition for receiving the form, it receives it suddenly, as a
transparent body is illuminated suddenly. Thirdly on the part of the
agent, which possesses infinite power: wherefore it can instantly
dispose the matter for the form. Thus it is written (Mk. 7:34) that
when Christ had said, "'Ephpheta,' which is 'Be thou opened,'

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.75, C.8.

immediately his ears were opened, and the string of his tongue was
loosed."
For these three reasons this conversion is instantaneous. First,
because the substance of Christ's body which is the term of this
conversion, does not receive more or less. Secondly, because in this
conversion there is no subject to be disposed successively. Thirdly,
because it is effected by God's infinite power.
Reply to Objection 1: Some [Albert the Great, Sent. iv, D, 11; St.
Bonaventure, Sent., iv, D, 11] do not grant simply that there is a midtime between every two instants. For they say that this is true of two
instants referring to the same movement, but not if they refer to
different things. Hence between the instant that marks the close of
rest, and another which marks the beginning of movement, there is
no mid-time. But in this they are mistaken, because the unity of time
and of instant, or even their plurality, is not taken according to
movements of any sort, but according to the first movement of the
heavens, which is the measure of all movement and rest.
Accordingly others grant this of the time which measures movement
depending on the movement of the heavens. But there are some
movements which are not dependent on the movement of the
heavens, nor measured by it, as was said in the FP, Question 53,
Article 3. concerning the movements of the angels. Hence between
two instants responding to those movements there is no mid-time.
But this is not to the point, because although the change in question
has no relation of itself to the movement of the heavens, still it
follows the pronouncing of the words, which (pronouncing) must
necessarily be measured by the movement of the heavens. And
therefore there must of necessity be a mid-time between every two
signate instants in connection with that change.
Some say therefore that the instant in which the bread was last, and
the instant in which the body of Christ is first, are indeed two in
comparison with the things measured, but are one comparatively to
the time measuring; as when two lines touch, there are two points on
the part of the two lines, but one point on the part of the place
containing them. But here there is no likeness, because instant and
time is not the intrinsic measure of particular movements, as a line
and point are of a body, but only the extrinsic measure, as place is to
bodies.