the city, and took great pains to find some physicians and allay this fiery fever;
for it was now the height of my tertian malady. And in addition to this there was
the fatigue of the journey, the toil, the strain, the total absence of attendants, the
difficulty of getting supplies, the want of a physician, the wasting effects of toil,
and heat and sleeplessness; thus I was well near a dead man when I entered the
city. Then indeed I was visited by the whole body of the clergy, and the people,
monks, nuns, physicians, and I had the benefit of great attention, as all paid me
every kind of ministration and assistance. Yet even thus, being oppressed by the
lethargy arising from the feverish heat I was in an extremely distressed
condition. At length by degrees the malady was coming to an end and abating.
Pharetrius however nowhere appeared; but waited for my departure, I know not
with what purpose in view. When then I saw that my disorder had slightly abated
I began to form plans for my journey so as to reach Cucusus, and enjoy a little
repose after the calamities of the way. And while I was thus situated it was
suddenly announced that the Isaurians in countless multitudes were overrunning
the district of Cæsarea, and had burnt a large village, and were most violently
disposed. The tribune, having heard this, took the soldiers which he had and
went out. For they were afraid lest the enemy should make an assault also upon
the city, and all were in terror, and in an agony of alarm the very soil of their
country being in jeopardy, so that even the old men undertook the defence of the
walls. While affairs were in this condition suddenly towards dawn a rabble of
monks (for so I must call them, indicating their frenzy by the expression) rushed
up to the house where we were, threatening to set fire to it, and to treat us with
the utmost violence unless we turned out of it. And neither the fear of the
Isaurians, nor my own infirmity which was so grievously afflicting me, nor
anything else made them more reasonable, but they pressed on, animated by
such fierce rage that even the proconsular soldiers were terrified. For they kept
threatening them with blows and boasted that they had shamefully beaten many
of the proconsular soldiers. The soldiers having heard these things, sought refuge
with me, and entreated and beseeched me, saying "even if we are to fall into the

hands of the Isaurians deliver us from these wild beasts." When the governor
heard this he hastened down to the house intending to succour me. But the
monks would not pay any heed to his exhortations, and in fact he was powerless.
Perceiving the great strait in which affairs were placed and not daring to advise
me either to go out to certain death, or on the other hand to stay indoors, owing
to the excessive fury of these men, he sent to Pharetrius beseeching him to grant
a few days respite on account of my infirmity and the impending danger. But
even then nothing was effected, and on the morrow the monks arrived even
fiercer than before, and none of the presbyters dared to stand by me and help me,
but covered with shame and blushes (for they said that these things were done by
the instructions of Pharetrius) they concealed themselves and lay hid, not
responding even when I called them. What need to make a long story? Although
such great terrors were imminent, and death well near a certainty, and the fever
was oppressing me (for I had not yet got relief from the troubles arising from
that cause) I flung myself at high noon into the litter, and was carried out thence,
all the people shrieking and howling, and imprecating curses on the perpetrator
of these deeds, while every one wailed and lamented. But when I got outside the
city, some of the clergy also gradually came out and escorted me, mourning as
they went. And having heard some persons say "Where are you leading him
away to manifest death?" one of those who was warmly attached to me said to
me "Depart I entreat you; fall into the hands of the Isaurians, provided you get
clear away from us. For wherever you may fall, you will fall into a place of
security, if only you escape our hands." Having heard and seen these things the
good Seleucia, the generous wife of my lord Ruffinus (a most attentive friend
she was to me), exhorted and entreated me to lodge at her suburban house which
was about five miles from the city and she sent some men to escort me, and so I
departed there.
3. But not even there was this plot against me to come to an end. For as
soon as Pharetrius knew what she had done, he published, as she said, many
threats against her. But when she received me into her suburban villa I knew