For to have this feeling at feasts, to howsoever great a degree, does not
seem to be so dreadful a thing; although even there the teachers ought to be held
in reverence, and not in the church only, but everywhere. And like as a man,
wherever he may appear, is manifestly distinguished from the brutes; so also
ought the teacher, both speaking and holding his peace, and dining, and doing
whatever it may be, to be distinguished as well by his gait, as by his look, and by
his garb, and by all things generally. But they were on every account objects of
ridicule, and in every respect disgraced themselves, making it their study to
follow what they ought to flee. For they love them, it is said; but if the loving
them be a matter of blame, what a thing must the doing them be; and to hunt and
strive after them, how great an evil.
3. The other things then He carried no further than to accuse them, as being
small and trifling, and as though His disciples needed not at all to be corrected
about these matters; but what was a cause of all the evils, even ambition, and the
violent seizing of the teacher's chair, this He brings forward, and corrects with
diligence, touching this vehemently and earnestly charging them.
For what says He? "But be not ye called Rabbi." Then follows the cause
also; "For one is your master, and all you are brethren;" [Matthew 23:8] and one
has nothing more than another, in respect of his knowing nothing from himself.
Wherefore Paul also says, "For who is Paul, and who is Apollos, but ministers?"
[1 Corinthians 3:5] He said not masters. And again, "Call not, father,"
[Matthew 23:9] not that they should not call, but they may know whom they
ought to call Father, in the highest sense. For like as the master is not a master
principally; so neither is the father. For He is cause of all, both of the masters,
and of the fathers.
And again He adds, "Neither be ye called guides, for one is your guide,
even Christ;" and He said not, I. For like as above He said, "What think ye of
Christ?" and He said not, "of me," so here too.
But I should be glad to ask here, what they would say, who are repeatedly
applying the term one, one, to the Father alone, to the rejection of the Only-

begotten. Is the Father guide? All would declare it, and none would gainsay it.
And yet "one," He says, "is your guide, even Christ." For like as Christ, being
called the one guide, casts not out the Father from being guide; even so the
Father, being called Master, does not cast out the Son from being Master. For the
expression, one, one, is spoken in contradistinction to men, and the rest of the
creation.
Having warned them therefore against this grievous pest, and amended
them, He instructs also how they may escape it; by humility. Wherefore He adds
also, "He that is greatest among you shall be your servant. For whosoever shall
exalt himself shall be abased, and whosoever shall abase himself shall be
exalted."
For nothing is equal to the practice of modesty, wherefore He is continually
reminding them of this virtue, both when He brought the children into the midst,
and now. And, when on the mount, beginning the beatitudes, He began from
hence. And in this place, He plucks it up by the roots hereby, saying, "He that
abases himself shall be exalted."
Do you see how He draws off the hearer right over to the contrary thing.
For not only does He forbid him to set his heart upon the first place, but requires
him to follow after the last. For so shall you obtain your desire, He says.
Wherefore he that pursues his desire for the first, must follow after the last place.
"For he that abases himself shall be exalted."
And where shall we find this humility? Will ye that we go again to the city
of virtue, the tents of the holy men, the mountains, I mean, and the groves? For
there too shall we see this height of humility.
For men, some illustrious from their rank in the world, some from their
wealth, in every way put themselves down, by their vesture, by their dwelling,
by those to whom they minister; and, as in written characters, they throughout all
things inscribe humility.
And the things that are incentives of arrogance, as to dress well, and to
build houses splendidly, and to have many servants, things which often drive