22:14] It is well said, "Of the fathers," to show that they were not Jews, but
aliens from the law, and that it was not from zeal (for the law) that they were
acting. "That you should know His will." Why then His will is this. See how in
the form of narrative it is teaching. "And see That Just One, and hear the voice
of His mouth. For you shall be His witness unto all men of what you have seen
and heard. And see," he says, "that Just One." [Acts 22:15] For the present he
says no more than this: if He is Just, they are guilty. "And hear the voice of His
mouth." See how high he raises the fact! For you shall be His witness— for this,
because you will not betray the sight and hearing (i.e. "prove false to")— "both
of what you have seen, and of what you have heard:" by means of both the
senses he claims his faith, fullness— "to all men. And now why do you tarry?
Arise, and be baptized, and wash away your sins, calling on His name." [Acts
22:16] Here it is a great thing he has uttered. For he said not, "Be baptized in His
name:" but, "calling on the name of Christ." It shows that He is God: since it is
not lawful to "call upon" any other, save God. Then he shows also, that he
himself was not compelled: for, "I said," says he, "What must I do?" Nothing is
(left) without witness: no; he brings forward the witness of a whole city, seeing
they had beheld him led by the hand. But see the prophecy fulfilled. "To all
men," it is said. For he did become a witness to Him, and a witness as it ought to
be; by what he suffered, by what he did, and by what he said. Such witnesses
ought we also to be, and not to betray the things we have been entrusted withal: I
speak not only of doctrines, but also of the manner of life.
For observe: because he had seen, because he had heard, he bears witness to
all men, and nothing hindered him. We too bear witness (Mod. text "have
heard") that there is a Resurrection and numberless good things: we are bound to
bear witness of this to all men. "Yes, and we do bear witness," you will say, "and
do believe." How; when you act the contrary? Say now: if any one should call
himself a Christian, and then having apostatized should hold with the Jews,
would this testimony suffice? By no means: for men would desire the testimony
which is borne by the actions. Just so, if we say that there is a Resurrection and

numberless good things, and then despise those things and prefer the things here,
who will believe us? Not what we say, but what we do, is what all men look to.
"You shall be a witness," it says, "unto all men:" not only to the friendly, but also
to the unbelievers: for this is what witnesses are for; not to persuade those who
know, but those who know not. Let us be trustworthy witnesses. But how shall
we be trustworthy? By the life we lead. The Jews assaulted him: our passions
assault us, bidding us abjure our testimony. But let us not obey them: we are
witnesses from God. (Christ) is judged that He is not God: He has sent us to bear
witness to Him. Let us bear witness and persuade those who have to decide the
point: if we do not bear witness, we have to answer for their error also. But if in
a court of justice, where worldly matters come in question, nobody would
receive a witness full of numberless vices, much less here, where such (and so
great) are the matters to be considered. We say, that we have heard Christ, and
that we believe the things which He has promised: Show it, say they, by your
works: for your life bears witness of the contrary— that you do not believe. Say,
shall we look at the money-getting people, the rapacious, the covetous? The
people that mourn and wail, that build and busy themselves in all sorts of things,
as though they were never to die? "You do not believe that you shall die, a thing
so plain and evident: and how shall we believe you when you bear witness?" For
there are, there are many men, whose state of mind is just as if they were not to
die. For when in a lengthened old age they set about building and planting, when
will they take death into their calculations? It will be no small punishment to us
that we were called to bear witness, but were not able to bear witness of the
things that we have seen. We have seen Angels with our eyes, yea, more clearly
than those who have (visibly) beheld them. We shall be (Mod. text "Then let us
be") witnesses to Christ: for not those only are "martyrs," (or witnesses, whom
we so call), but ourselves also. This is why they are called martyrs, because
when bidden to abjure (the faith), they endure all things, that they may speak the
truth: and we, when we are bidden by our passions to abjure, let us not be
overcome. Gold says: Say that Christ is not Christ. Then listen not to it as to