out of condescension to their weakness he put before them only
such things as are apparent to sense. Now even the most
uneducated can perceive by their senses that earth and water are
corporeal, whereas it is not evident to all that air also is corporeal,
for there have even been philosophers who said that air is nothing,
and called a space filled with air a vacuum.
Moses, then, while he expressly mentions water and earth, makes no
express mention of air by name, to avoid setting before ignorant
persons something beyond their knowledge. In order, however, to
express the truth to those capable of understanding it, he implies in
the words: "Darkness was upon the face of the deep," the existence
of air as attendant, so to say, upon the water. For it may be
understood from these words that over the face of the water a
transparent body was extended, the subject of light and darkness,
which, in fact, is the air.
Whether, then, we understand by the firmament the starry heaven, or
the cloudy region of the air, it is true to say that it divides the waters
from the waters, according as we take water to denote formless
matter, or any kind of transparent body, as fittingly designated under
the name of waters. For the starry heaven divides the lower
transparent bodies from the higher, and the cloudy region divides
that higher part of the air, where the rain and similar things are
generated, from the lower part, which is connected with the water
and included under that name.
Reply to Objection 1: If by the firmament is understood the starry
heaven, the waters above are not of the same species as those
beneath. But if by the firmament is understood the cloudy region of
the air, both these waters are of the same species, and two places
are assigned to them, though not for the same purpose, the higher
being the place of their begetting, the lower, the place of their
repose.
Reply to Objection 2: If the waters are held to differ in species, the
firmament cannot be said to divide the waters, as the cause of their
destruction, but only as the boundary of each.
Reply to Objection 3: On account of the air and other similar bodies
being invisible, Moses includes all such bodies under the name of
water, and thus it is evident that waters are found on each side of the

firmament, whatever be the sense in which the word is used.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether there is only one heaven?

Objection 1: It would seem that there is only one heaven. For the
heaven is contrasted with the earth, in the words, "In the beginning
God created heaven and earth."But there is only one earth. Therefore
there is only one heaven.
Objection 2: Further, that which consists of the entire sum of its own
matter, must be one; and such is the heaven, as the Philosopher
proves (De Coel. i, text. 95). Therefore there is but one heaven.
Objection 3: Further, whatever is predicated of many things
univocally is predicated of them according to some common notion.
But if there are more heavens than one, they are so called univocally,
for if equivocally only, they could not properly be called many. If,
then, they are many, there must be some common notion by reason
of which each is called heaven, but this common notion cannot be
assigned. Therefore there cannot be more than one heaven.
On the contrary, It is said (Ps. 148:4): "Praise Him, ye heavens of
heavens."
I answer that, On this point there seems to be a diversity of opinion
between Basil and Chrysostom. The latter says that there is only one
heaven (Hom. iv in Gen.), and that the words 'heavens of heavens'
are merely the translation of the Hebrew idiom according to which
the word is always used in the plural, just as in Latin there are many
nouns that are wanting in the singular. On the other hand, Basil
(Hom. iii in Hexaem.), whom Damascene follows (De Fide Orth. ii),
says that there are many heavens. The difference, however, is more
nominal than real. For Chrysostom means by the one heaven the
whole body that is above the earth and the water, for which reason
the birds that fly in the air are called birds of heaven [Ps. 8:9]. But
since in this body there are many distinct parts, Basil said that there
are more heavens than one.
In order, then, to understand the distinction of heavens, it must be
borne in mind that Scripture speaks of heaven in a threefold sense.
Sometimes it uses the word in its proper and natural meaning, when
it denotes that body on high which is luminous actually or
potentially, and incorruptible by nature. In this body there are three