"our Father," and "our Spirit"; but we cannot say "our Son."

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Son?

Objection 1: It would seem that the Holy Ghost does not proceed
from the Son. For as Dionysius says (Div. Nom. i): "We must not dare
to say anything concerning the substantial Divinity except what has
been divinely expressed to us by the sacred oracles." But in the
Sacred Scripture we are not told that the Holy Ghost proceeds from
the Son; but only that He proceeds from the Father, as appears from
Jn. 15:26: "The Spirit of truth, Who proceeds from the Father."
Therefore the Holy Ghost does not proceed from the Son.
Objection 2: Further, In the creed of the council of Constantinople
(Can. vii) we read: "We believe in the Holy Ghost, the Lord and Lifegiver, who proceeds from the Father; with the Father and the Son to
be adored and glorified." Therefore it should not be added in our
Creed that the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Son; and those who
added such a thing appear to be worthy of anathema.
Objection 3: Further, Damascene says (De Fide Orth. i): "We say that
the Holy Ghost is from the Father, and we name Him the spirit of the
Father; but we do not say that the Holy Ghost is from the Son, yet we
name Him the Spirit of the Son." Therefore the Holy Ghost does not
proceed from the Son.
Objection 4: Further, Nothing proceeds from that wherein it rests.
But the Holy Ghost rests in the Son; for it is said in the legend of St.
Andrew: "Peace be to you and to all who believe in the one God the
Father, and in His only Son our Lord Jesus Christ, and in the one
Holy Ghost proceeding from the Father, and abiding in the Son."
Therefore the Holy Ghost does not proceed from the Son.
Objection 5: Further, the Son proceeds as the Word. But our breath
[spiritus] does not seem to proceed in ourselves from our word.
Therefore the Holy Ghost does not proceed from the Son.
Objection 6: Further, the Holy Ghost proceeds perfectly from the
Father. Therefore it is superfluous to say that He proceeds from the
Son.
Objection 7: Further "the actual and the possible do not differ in
things perpetual" (Phys. iii, text 32), and much less so in God. But it

is possible for the Holy Ghost to be distinguished from the Son, even
if He did not proceed from Him. For Anselm says (De Process. Spir.
Sancti, ii): "The Son and the Holy Ghost have their Being from the
Father; but each in a different way; one by Birth, the other by
Procession, so that they are thus distinct from one another." And
further on he says: "For even if for no other reason were the Son and
the Holy Ghost distinct, this alone would suffice." Therefore the Holy
Spirit is distinct from the Son, without proceeding from Him.
On the contrary, Athanasius says: "The Holy Ghost is from the
Father and the Son; not made, nor created, nor begotten, but
proceeding."
I answer that, It must be said that the Holy Ghost is from the Son. For
if He were not from Him, He could in no wise be personally
distinguished from Him; as appears from what has been said above
(Question 28, Article 3; Question 30, Article 2). For it cannot be said
that the divine Persons are distinguished from each other in any
absolute sense; for it would follow that there would not be one
essence of the three persons: since everything that is spoken of God
in an absolute sense, belongs to the unity of essence. Therefore it
must be said that the divine persons are distinguished from each
other only by the relations. Now the relations cannot distinguish the
persons except forasmuch as they are opposite relations; which
appears from the fact that the Father has two relations, by one of
which He is related to the Son, and by the other to the Holy Ghost;
but these are not opposite relations, and therefore they do not make
two persons, but belong only to the one person of the Father. If
therefore in the Son and the Holy Ghost there were two relations
only, whereby each of them were related to the Father, these
relations would not be opposite to each other, as neither would be
the two relations whereby the Father is related to them. Hence, as
the person of the Father is one, it would follow that the person of the
Son and of the Holy Ghost would be one, having two relations
opposed to the two relations of the Father. But this is heretical since
it destroys the Faith in the Trinity. Therefore the Son and the Holy
Ghost must be related to each other by opposite relations. Now there
cannot be in God any relations opposed to each other, except
relations of origin, as proved above (Question 28, Article 44). And
opposite relations of origin are to be understood as of a "principle,"
and of what is "from the principle." Therefore we must conclude that
it is necessary to say that either the Son is from the Holy Ghost;
which no one says; or that the Holy Ghost is from the Son, as we