rather there is no labor at all, nor trouble, but the greater gain, why do we take
pains to plunge into an ocean of countless evils? And farther, he who does not
look upon a woman, will overcome such lust not only with greater ease, but with
a higher purity, as he on the other hand who does look, gets free with more
trouble, and not without a kind of stain, that is, if he does get free at all. For he
that does not take a view of the beautiful figure, is pure also from the lust that
might result. But he who lusts to look, after first laying his reason low, and
polluting it in countless ways, has then to cast out the stain that came of the lust,
that is, if he do cast it out. This then is why Christ, to prevent our suffering in
this way, did not prohibit murder only, but wrath; not adultery only, but an
unchaste look even: not perjury only, but all swearing whatsoever. Nor does he
make the measure of virtue stop here, but after having given these laws, He
proceeds to a still greater degree. For after keeping us far away from murder, and
bidding us to be clear of wrath, He bids us be ready even to suffer ill, and not to
be prepared to suffer no more than what he who attacks us pleases, but even to
go further, and to get the better of his utmost madness by the overflowingness of
our own Christian spirit ([τἥς οἱκείας φιγοσοφίας]). For what He says is not, "If
a man smite you on your right cheek, bear it nobly and hold your peace;" but He
adds to this the yielding to him the other too. For He says, "Turn to him the other
also." [Matthew 5:39] This then is the brilliant victory, to yield him even more
than what he wishes, and to go beyond the bounds of his evil desire by the
profuseness of one's own patient endurance. For in this way you will put a stop
to his madness, and also receive from the second act again the reward of the
first, besides putting a stop to wrath against him. See you, how in all cases it is
we that have it in our power not to suffer ill, and not they that inflict it? Or rather
it is not the not suffering ill alone, but even the having benefits (Sav. conj.
[παθεἵν εὖ], so 2 manuscripts) done us that we have in our own power. And this
is the truest wonder, that we are so far from being injured, if we be right-minded,
that we are even benefited, and that too by the very things that we suffer unjustly
at the hands of others. Reflect then; has such an one done you an affront? You

have the power of making this affront redound to your honor. For if you do an
affront in return, you only increase the disgrace. But if you bless him that did
you the affront, you will see that all men give you victory, and proclaim your
praise. Do you see how by the things wherein we are wronged, we get good done
unto us if we be so minded? This one may see happening in the case of money
matters, of blows, and the same in everything else. For if we requite them with
the opposite, we are but twining a double crown about us, one for the ills we
have suffered, as well as one for the good we are doing. Whenever then a person
comes and tells you that "such an one has done you an affront, and keeps
continually speaking ill of you to everybody," praise the man to those who tell
you of him. For thus even if you wish to avenge yourself, you will have the
power of inflicting punishment. For those who hear you, be they ever so foolish,
will praise you, and hate him as fiercer than any brute beast, because he, without
being at all wronged, caused you pain, but you, even when suffering wrong,
requited him with the opposite. And so you will have it in your power to prove
that all that he said was to no purpose. For he who feels the tooth of slander,
gives by his vexation a proof that he is conscious of the truth of what is said. But
he who smiles at it, by this very thing acquits himself of all suspicion with those
who are present. Consider then how many good things you cull together from the
affair. First, you rid yourself of all vexation and trouble. Secondly (rather this
should come first), even if you have sins, you put them off, as the Publican did
by bearing the Pharisee's accusation meekly. Besides, you will by this practice
make your soul heroic (Gr. philosophic), and will enjoy endless praises from all
men, and will divest yourself of any suspicion arising from what is said. But
even if you are desirous of taking revenge upon the man, this too will follow in
full measure, both by God's punishing him for what he has said, and before that
punishment by your heroic conduct standing to him in the place of a mortal
blow. For there is nothing that cuts those who affront us so much to the heart, as
for us who are affronted to smile at the affront. As then from behaving with
Christian heroism so many honors will accrue to us, so from being little-minded