Word, but concerning that which is according to the flesh. For if according to
John, "He was in the world, and the world was made by Him" [John 1:10]: how
is He "brought in," otherwise than in the flesh?
"And," says he, "Let all the angels of God worship Him." Whereas he is
about to say something great and lofty, he prepares it beforehand, and makes it
acceptable, in that he represents the Father as "bringing in" the Son. He had said
above, that "He spoke to us not by prophets but by His Son"; that the Son is
superior to angels; yea and he establishes this from the name [Son]. And here, in
what follows, from another fact also. What then may this be? From worship.
And he shows how much greater He is, as much as a Master is than a slave; just
as any one introducing another into a house straightway commands those having
the care thereof to do him reverence; [so] saying in regard to the Flesh, "And let
all the Angels of God worship Him."
Is it then Angels only? No; for hear what follows: "And of His Angels He
says, Which makes His Angels spirits, and His ministers a flame of fire: but unto
the Son, Your Throne, O God, is for ever and ever." Behold, the greatest
difference! That they are created, but He uncreated. While of His angels He says,
who "makes"; wherefore of the Son did He not say "Who makes"? Although he
might have expressed the difference as follows: "Of His Angels He says, Who
makes His Angels spirits, but of the Son, 'The Lord created Me': 'God has made
Him Lord and Christ.'" [Proverbs 8:22; Acts 2:36] But neither was the one
spoken concerning the Son, nor the other concerning God The Word, but
concerning the flesh. For when he desired to express the true difference, he no
longer included angels only, but the whole ministering power above. Do you see
how he distinguishes, and with how great clearness, between creatures and
Creator, ministers and Lord, the Heir and true Son, and slaves?
2. "But unto the Son he says, Your throne, O God, is for ever and ever."
Behold a symbol of Kingly Office. "A scepter of righteousness is the scepter of
Your kingdom." Behold again another symbol of Royalty.

Hebrews 1:9
Then again with respect to the flesh [Hebrews 1:9] "You have loved
righteousness and hated iniquity, therefore God, even Your God, has anointed
You."
What is, "Your God"? Why, after that he has uttered a great word, he again
qualifies it. Here he hits both Jews, and the followers of Paul of Samosata, and
the Arians, and Marcellus, and Sabellius, and Marcion. How? The Jews, by his
indicating two Persons, both God and Man; the other Jews, I mean the followers
of Paul of Samosata, by thus discoursing concerning His eternal existence, and
uncreated essence: for by way of distinction, against the word, "He made," he
put, "Your throne, O God, is for ever and ever." Against the Arians there is both
this same again, and also that He is not a slave; but if a creature, He is a slave.
And against Marcellus and the others, that these are two Persons, distinguished
in reference to their subsistence. And against the Marcionites, that the Godhead
is not anointed, but the Manhood.
Next he says, "Above Your fellows." But who are these His "fellows" other
than men? That is Christ received "not the Spirit by measure." [John 3:34] Do
you see how with the doctrine concerning His uncreated nature he always joins
also that of the "Economy"? What can be clearer than this? Did you see how
what is created and what is begotten are not the same? For otherwise he would
not have made the distinction, nor in contrast to the word, "He made" [&c.],
have added, "But unto the Son He said, Your throne, O God, is for ever and
ever." Nor would he have called the name, "Son, a more excellent Name," if it is
a sign of the same thing. For what is the excellence? For if that which is created,
and that which is begotten be the same, and they [the Angels] were made, what
is there [in Him] "more excellent"? Lo! Again [ὁ] [Θεὸς], "God," with the
Article.