wishes, he thinks, and expects; and they that gainsay him are a jest.
But let it not be so with us; for hereafter it will not be a flood; nor the
punishment till death only; but death will be the beginning of punishment for
persons who believe not that there is a Judgment. And does any ask, who has
come from thence, and said so? If now you speak thus in jest, not even so is it
well; for one ought not to jest in such matters; and we jest, not where jesting is in
place, but with peril; but if what thou really feelest, and you are of opinion that
there is nothing hereafter, how is it that you call yourself a Christian? For I take
not into account those who are without. Why do you receive the Laver? Why do
you set foot within the Church? Is it that we promise you magistracies? All our
hope is in the things to come. Why then do you come, if you believe not the
Scriptures? If you dost not believe Christ, I cannot call such an one a Christian;
God forbid! But worse than even Greeks. In what respect? In this; that when you
think Christ is God, you believe Him not as God. For in that other impiety there
is at least consistency; for he who thinks not that Christ is God, necessarily will
also not believe Him; but this impiety has not even consistency; to confess Him
to be God, and yet not to think Him worthy of belief in what He has said; these
are the words of drunkenness, of luxury, of riot. "Let us eat and drink, for
tomorrow we die." [1 Corinthians 15:32] Not tomorrow; but now you are dead,
when you thus speak. Shall we then be in nothing different from swine and
asses? Tell me. For if there be neither a judgment, nor a retribution, nor a
tribunal, wherefore have we been honored with such a gift as reason, and have
all things put under us? Why do we rule, and are they ruled? See how the devil is
on every side urgent to persuade us to be ignorant of the Gift of God. He mixes
together the slaves with their masters, like some man-stealer and ungrateful
servant; he strives to degrade the free to the level of the criminal. And he seems
indeed to be overthrowing the Judgment, but he is overthrowing the being of
God.
For such is ever the devil's way; he puts forward everything in a wily, and
not in a straightforward manner, to put us on our guard. If there is no Judgment,

God is not just (I speak as a man): if God is not just, then there is no God at all:
if there is no God, all things go on at haphazard, virtue is nought, vice nought.
But he says nothing of this openly. Do you see the drift of this satanical
argument? How, instead of men, he wishes to make us brutes, or rather, wild
beasts, or rather, demons? Let us then not be persuaded by him. For there is a
Judgment, O wretched and miserable man! I know whence you come to use such
words. You have committed many sins, you have offended, you have no
confidence, you think that the nature of things will even follow your arguments.
Meanwhile, says he, I will not torment my soul with the expectation of hell, and,
if there be a hell, I will persuade it that there is none; meanwhile I will live here
in luxury! Why do you add sin to sin? If when you have sinned you believe that
there is a hell, you will depart with the penalty of your sins only to pay; but if
you add this further impiety, you will also for your impiety, and for this your
thought, suffer the uttermost punishment; and what was a cold and shortlived
comfort to you, will be a ground for your being punished for ever. You have
sinned: be it so: why do you encourage others also to sin, by saying that there is
no hell? Why did you mislead the simpler sort? Why unnerve the hands of the
people? So far as you are concerned, everything is turned upside down; neither
will the good become better, but listless; nor the wicked desist from their
wickedness. For, if we corrupt others, do we get allowance for our sins? Do you
see not the devil, how he attempted to bring down Adam? And has there then
been allowance for him? Nay, surely it will be the occasion of a greater
punishment, that he may be punished not for his own sins only, but also for those
of others. Let us not then suppose that to bring down others into the same
destruction with ourselves will make the Judgment-seat more lenient to us.
Surely this will make it more severe. Why thrust we ourselves on destruction?
The whole of this comes of Satan.
O man, have you sinned? You have for your Master One that loves man.
Entreat, implore, weep, groan; and terrify others, and pray them that they fall not
into the same. If in a house some servant, of those that had offended their master,