it likely then I should hunt after honor, and boast in words, and threaten by
letters;' (as they accused him, saying, "his letters are weighty,") 'when our might
lay not in these things?' But having said, "bringing every thought into captivity
to the obedience of Christ," because the name of "captivity" was unpleasant, he
presently afterwards put an end to the metaphor, saying, "unto the obedience of
Christ:" from slavery unto liberty, from death unto life, from destruction to
salvation. For we came not merely to strike down, but to bring over to the truth
those who are opposed to us.

2 Corinthians 10:6
3. "And being in readiness to avenge all disobedience, when your obedience
shall be fulfilled."
Here he alarmed these also, not those alone: 'for,' says he, 'we were waiting
for you, that when by our exhortations and threatenings we have reformed you,
and purged and separated you from their fellowship; then, when those only are
left who are incurably diseased, we may visit with punishment, after we see that
you have really separated from them. For even now indeed ye obey, but not
perfectly.' 'And yet if you had done it now,' says one, you would have wrought
greater gain.' 'By no means, for if I had done it now, I should have involved you
also in the punishment. Howbeit it behooved to punish them, indeed, but to spare
you. Yet if I spared, I should have seemed to do it out of favor: now this I do not
desire, but first to amend you, and then to proceed against them.' What can be
tenderer than the heart of the Apostle? Who because he saw his own mixed up
with aliens, desires indeed to inflict the blow, but forbears, and restrains his
indignation until these shall have withdrawn, that he may smite these alone; yea
rather, not these even. For he therefore threatens this, and says he is desirous to
separate unto punishment them alone, that they also being amended by the fear
may change, and he let loose his anger against no one. For just like a most
excellent physician, and common father, and patron, and guardian , so did he all
things, so cared he for all, removing impediments, checking the pestilent,
running about every whither. For not by fighting did he so achieve the work, but
advancing as if to a ready and an easy victory, he planted his trophies,
undermining, casting down, overthrowing the strongholds of the devil, and the
engines of the demons; and carried over their whole booty to the camp of Christ.
Nor did he even take breath a little, bounding off from these to those, and from
those again to others, like some very able general, raising trophies every day, or

rather every hour. For having entered into the battle with nothing but a little
tunic , the tongue of Paul took the cities of his enemies with their men and bows
and spears and darts and all.
For he spoke only; and, falling upon his enemies more fiercely than any
fire, his words drove out the demons and brought over unto him the men that
were possessed of them. For when he cast out that demon, the evil one, fifty
thousand sorcerers coming together burnt their books of magic and revolted to
the truth. [See Acts 19:19] And like as in a war, when a tower has fallen or a
tyrant been brought low, all his partizans cast away their arms and run unto the
[opposing] general; so truly did it happen then also. For when the demon was
cast out, they all having been besieged, and having cast away, yea rather having
destroyed, their books, ran unto the feet of Paul. But he setting himself against
the world as though against a single army, no where stayed his march, but did all
things as if he were some man endued with wings : and now restored a lame,
now raised a dead man, now blinded a third, (I mean the sorcerer,) nor even
when shut up in a prison indulged in rest, but even there brought over to himself
the jailor, effecting the goodly captivity we treat of.
4. Let us also imitate him after our power. And why do I say, after our
power? For he that wills may come even near unto him, and behold his valor,
and imitate his heroism. For still he is doing this work, "casting down
imaginations, and every high thing that is exalted against the knowledge of
God." And although many heretics have attempted to cut him in pieces; yet still,
even though dismembered, he displays a mighty strength. For both Marcion and
Manichæus use him indeed, but after cutting him in pieces; but still even so they
are refuted by the several members. For even a hand only of this champion being
found among them puts them utterly to the rout; and a foot only, left among
others, pursues and prostrates them, in order that you may learn the
superabundance of his power, and that, although shorn of his limbs even, he is
able to destroy all his adversaries. 'This however,' says one, 'is an instance of
perversion, that those who are battling with each other should all use him.' An