THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.38, C.6.

Reply to Objection 1: When Christ was baptized, He was not as yet
fully manifested: consequently there was still need for John to
continue baptizing.
Reply to Objection 2: The baptism of John ceased after Christ had
been baptized, not immediately, but when the former was cast into
prison. Thus Chrysostom says (Hom. xxix in Joan.): "I consider that
John's death was allowed to take place, and that Christ's preaching
began in a great measure after John had died, so that the undivided
allegiance of the multitude was transferred to Christ, and there was
no further motive for the divergence of opinions concerning both of
them."
Reply to Objection 3: John's baptism prepared the way not only for
Christ to be baptized, but also for others to approach to Christ's
baptism: and this did not take place as soon as Christ was baptized.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.38, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether those who had been baptized with John's

baptism had to be baptized with the baptism of Christ?
Objection 1: It would seem that those who had been baptized with
John's baptism had not to be baptized with the baptism of Christ. For
John was not less than the apostles, since of him is it written (Mt.
11:11): "There hath not risen among them that are born of women a
greater than John the Baptist." But those who were baptized by the
apostles were not baptized again, but only received the imposition of
hands; for it is written (Acts 8:16,17) that some were "only baptized"
by Philip "in the name of the Lord Jesus": then the apostles--namely, Peter and John---"laid their hands upon them, and they
received the Holy Ghost." Therefore it seems that those who had
been baptized by John had not to be baptized with the baptism of
Christ.
Objection 2: Further, the apostles were baptized with John's
baptism, since some of them were his disciples, as is clear from Jn.
1:37. But the apostles do not seem to have been baptized with the
baptism of Christ: for it is written (Jn. 4:2) that "Jesus did not
baptize, but His disciples." Therefore it seems that those who had
been baptized with John's baptism had not to be baptized with the
baptism of Christ.
Objection 3: Further, he who is baptized is less than he who
baptizes. But we are not told that John himself was baptized with the
baptism of Christ. Therefore much less did those who had been
baptized by John need to receive the baptism of Christ.
Objection 4: Further, it is written (Acts 19:1-5) that "Paul . . . found
certain disciples; and he said to them: Have you received the Holy
Ghost since ye believed? But they said to him: We have not so much
as heard whether there be a Holy Ghost. And he said: In what then
were you baptized? Who said: In John's baptism." Wherefore "they
were" again "baptized in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ." Hence
it seems that they needed to be baptized again, because they did not
know of the Holy Ghost: as Jerome says on Joel 2:28 and in an
epistle (lxix De Viro unius uxoris), and likewise Ambrose (De Spiritu
Sancto). But some were baptized with John's baptism who had full
knowledge of the Trinity. Therefore these had no need to be baptized
again with Christ's baptism.