SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.24, C.7.

since, according to Wis. 1:13, not even God "hath pleasure in the
destruction of the wicked" when He punishes them, but He rejoices
in His justice, according to Ps. 10:8: "The Lord is just and hath loved
justice." Thirdly, so that this desire is referred to the removal of the
sin, and not to the punishment itself, to the effect, namely, that the
sin be destroyed, but that the man may live.
Reply to Objection 4: We love sinners out of charity, not so as to will
what they will, or to rejoice in what gives them joy, but so as to make
them will what we will, and rejoice in what rejoices us. Hence it is
written (Jer. 15:19): "They shall be turned to thee, and thou shalt not
to be turned to them."
Reply to Objection 5: The weak should avoid associating with
sinners, on account of the danger in which they stand of being
perverted by them. But it is commendable for the perfect, of whose
perversion there is no fear, to associate with sinners that they may
convert them. For thus did Our Lord eat and drink with sinners as
related by Mt. 9:11-13. Yet all should avoid the society of sinners, as
regards fellowship in sin; in this sense it is written (2 Cor. 6:17): "Go
out from among them . . . and touch not the unclean thing," i.e. by
consenting to sin.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.24, C.8.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether sinners love themselves?

Objection 1: It would seem that sinners love themselves. For that
which is the principle of sin, is most of all in the sinner. Now love of
self is the principle of sin, since Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xiv, 28)
that it "builds up the city of Babylon." Therefore sinners most of all
love themselves.
Objection 2: Further, sin does not destroy nature. Now it is in
keeping with nature that every man should love himself: wherefore
even irrational creatures naturally desire their own good, for
instance, the preservation of their being, and so forth. Therefore
sinners love themselves.
Objection 3: Further, good is beloved by all, as Dionysius states (Div.
Nom. iv). Now many sinners reckon themselves to be good.
Therefore many sinners love themselves.
On the contrary, It is written (Ps. 10:6): "He that loveth iniquity,
hateth his own soul."
I answer that, Love of self is common to all, in one way; in another
way it is proper to the good; in a third way, it is proper to the wicked.
For it is common to all for each one to love what he thinks himself to
be. Now a man is said to be a thing, in two ways: first, in respect of
his substance and nature, and, this way all think themselves to be
what they are, that is, composed of a soul and body. In this way too,
all men, both good and wicked, love themselves, in so far as they
love their own preservation.
Secondly, a man is said to be something in respect of some
predominance, as the sovereign of a state is spoken of as being the
state, and so, what the sovereign does, the state is said to do. In this
way, all do not think themselves to be what they are. For the
reasoning mind is the predominant part of man, while the sensitive
and corporeal nature takes the second place, the former of which the
Apostle calls the "inward man," and the latter, the "outward man" (2
Cor. 4:16). Now the good look upon their rational nature or the
inward man as being the chief thing in them, wherefore in this way
they think themselves to be what they are. On the other hand, the
wicked reckon their sensitive and corporeal nature, or the outward