FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.18, C.8.

another is ordained accidentally to the giving of alms. Now the
differences that divide a genus, and constitute the species of that
genus, must, as the Philosopher says (Metaph. vii, 12), divide that
genus essentially: and if they divide it accidentally, the division is
incorrect: as, if one were to say: "Animals are divided into rational
and irrational; and the irrational into animals with wings, and animals
without wings"; for "winged" and "wingless" are not essential
determinations of the irrational being. But the following division
would be correct: "Some animals have feet, some have no feet: and
of those that have feet, some have two feet, some four, some many":
because the latter division is an essential determination of the
former. Accordingly when the object is not of itself ordained to the
end, the specific difference derived from the object is not an
essential determination of the species derived from the end, nor is
the reverse the case. Wherefore one of these species is not under
the other; but then the moral action is contained under two species
that are disparate, as it were. Consequently we say that he that
commits theft for the sake of adultery, is guilty of a twofold malice in
one action. On the other hand, if the object be of itself ordained to
the end, one of these differences is an essential determination of the
other. Wherefore one of these species will be contained under the
other.
It remains to be considered which of the two is contained under the
other. In order to make this clear, we must first of all observe that the
more particular the form is from which a difference is taken, the
more specific is the difference. Secondly, that the more universal an
agent is, the more universal a form does it cause. Thirdly, that the
more remote an end is, the more universal the agent to which it
corresponds; thus victory, which is the last end of the army, is the
end intended by the commander in chief; while the right ordering of
this or that regiment is the end intended by one of the lower officers.
From all this it follows that the specific difference derived from the
end, is more general; and that the difference derived from an object
which of itself is ordained to that end, is a specific difference in
relation to the former. For the will, the proper object of which is the
end, is the universal mover in respect of all the powers of the soul,
the proper objects of which are the objects of their particular acts.
Reply to Objection 1: One and the same thing, considered in its
substance, cannot be in two species, one of which is not
subordinate to the other. But in respect of those things which are
superadded to the substance, one thing can be contained under

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.18, C.8.