even this, nor the loss of children, even should they be torn from us in one fell
swoop, nor the perpetual assaults of enemies, nor anything else of that nature,
no, nor even the head and crown of things accounted painful, namely death,
terrible and loathsome though it be, is so oppressive as infirmity of body. And
this is proved by the greatest hero of endurance, who, when he was encompassed
by bodily sickness, thought death would be a release from the calamities which
were depressing him; and when he underwent all the other sufferings, was not
sensible of them, although he received blow after blow, and at last a deadly one.
For it was no slight matter, but rather an evidence of the most malignant cruelty
on the part of his enemy in dealing with one who was no novice in suffering, nor
entering the lists for the first time, but already exhausted with the frequent
repetition of assaults, to inflict upon him that deadly blow, the destruction of his
children, so cruelly inflicted moreover that all of either sex were destroyed at the
same moment in early youth and by a violent end, and so instantaneous was their
death that it involved their burial also. For their father neither saw them laid
upon abed, nor kissed their hands, nor heard their last words, nor touched their
hands and knees, nor did he shut their mouths, or close their eyes when they
were about to die, acts which tend not a little to console parents who are being
parted from their children; neither did he follow some of them to burial, and find
others on his return home to console him for those who had departed; but he
heard that as they were reclining on their couches at a banquet, a banquet full of
love, not of excess, a table of brotherly kindness, they were all overwhelmed;
and blood, and wine, the cups and the ceiling, the table, and the dust, and the
limbs of his children, were all mingled together. Nevertheless when he heard
these things, and others before these which were also distressing; for they too
had perished in a distressing way; flocks and whole herds had been destroyed,
the latter having been consumed by fire sent down from heaven, (so said the evil
messenger of this tragedy,) and the former having been all seized together by
various enemies, and cut to pieces as well as the shepherds themselves;
nevertheless I say when he saw this great storm stirred up in a brief moment of

time affecting his lands, his house, his cattle, and his children, when he saw
billow following billow, and long lines of rocks, and the darkness was profound,
and the surging waves unbearable, even then he was not tortured by
despondency, and scarcely seemed to feel the things which had happened, save
so far as he was a man and a father. But when he was delivered over to sickness
and sores, then did he also long for death, then did he also bewail himself and
lament, so that you may understand how this kind of suffering is more severe
than all others, and this form of patience the highest of all. Nor is the Devil
himself unaware of this fact; for when after having set in motion all these trials
he perceived that the hero remained untroubled and undismayed he rushed to this
as the greatest contest of all, saying that all the other calamities were bearable, as
loss of child, or property, or anything else (for this is what is meant by the
expression "skin for skin" [Job 2:4]) but the deadly blow was when pain was
inflicted on a man's body. And therefore when he had been worsted after this
contest, he had no longer a word to utter, although on former occasions he had
made the most strenuous and shameless resistance. In this instance however he
found that he could not invent any further shameless device, but hid his face and
retreated.
3. Think not however that it is an excuse to justify you in desiring death,
that Job desired it, not being able to bear his sufferings. For consider the time
when he desired it, and the disposition of his circumstances— the law was not
given, the prophets had not appeared, grace had not been shed forth as it was
afterwards, nor had he the advantage of any other kind of philosophy. For as a
proof that more is demanded from us than from those who lived then, and that
harder tasks are assigned to us, listen to Christ, when He says "Unless your
righteousness exceeds the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees you shall
in no case enter into the kingdom of Heaven." [Matthew 5:20] Do not think
therefore that to pray for death now is exempt from blame, but hearken to the
voice of St. Paul when he says "To depart and to be with Christ is far better, but
to abide in the flesh is more necessary for your sake." [Philippians 1:23-24] For