SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.187, C.8.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether religious perfection is diminished by

possessing something in common?
Objection 1: It would seem that religious perfection is diminished by
possessing something in common. For our Lord said (Mt. 19:21): "If
thou wilt be perfect, go sell all thou hast and give to the poor." Hence
it is clear that to lack worldly wealth belongs to the perfection of
Christian life. Now those who possess something in common do not
lack worldly wealth. Therefore it would seem that they do not quite
reach to the perfection of Christian life.
Objection 2: Further, the perfection of the counsels requires that one
should be without worldly solicitude; wherefore the Apostle in giving
the counsel of virginity said (1 Cor. 7:32): "I would have you to be
without solicitude." Now it belongs to the solicitude of the present
life that certain people keep something to themselves for the
morrow; and this solicitude was forbidden His disciples by our Lord
(Mt. 6:34) saying: "Be not . . . solicitous for tomorrow." Therefore it
would seem that the perfection of Christian life is diminished by
having something in common.
Objection 3: Further, possessions held in common belong in some
way to each member of the community; wherefore Jerome (Ep. lx ad
Heliod. Episc.) says in reference to certain people: "They are richer
in the monastery than they had been in the world; though serving the
poor Christ they have wealth which they had not while serving the
rich devil; the Church rejects them now that they are rich, who in the
world were beggars." But it is derogatory to religious perfection that
one should possess wealth of one's own. Therefore it is also
derogatory to religious perfection to possess anything in common.
Objection 4: Further, Gregory (Dial. iii, 14) relates of a very holy man
named Isaac, that "when his disciples humbly signified that he
should accept the possessions offered to him for the use of the
monastery, he being solicitous for the safeguarding of his poverty,
held firmly to his opinion, saying: A monk who seeks earthly
possessions is no monk at all": and this refers to possessions held
in common, and which were offered him for the common use of the
monastery. Therefore it would seem destructive of religious
perfection to possess anything in common.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.187, C.8.

Objection 5: Further, our Lord in prescribing religious perfection to
His disciples, said (Mt. 10:9,10): "Do not possess gold, nor silver, nor
money in your purses, nor script for your journey." By these words,
as Jerome says in his commentary, "He reproves those philosophers
who are commonly called Bactroperatae [staff and scrip bearers],
who as despising the world and valuing all things at naught carried
their pantry about with them." Therefore it would seem derogatory to
religious perfection that one should keep something whether for
oneself or for the common use.
On the contrary, Prosper [Julianus Pomerius] says (De Vita
Contempl. ix) and his words are quoted (XII, qu. 1, can. Expedit): "It
is sufficiently clear both that for the sake of perfection one should
renounce having anything of one's own, and that the possession of
revenues, which are of course common property, is no hindrance to
the perfection of the Church."
I answer that, As stated above (Question 184, Article 3, ad 1;
Question 185, Article 6, ad 1), perfection consists, essentially, not in
poverty, but in following Christ, according to the saying of Jerome
(Super Matth. xix, 27): "Since it is not enough to leave all, Peter adds
that which is perfect, namely, 'We have followed Thee,'" while
poverty is like an instrument or exercise for the attainment of
perfection. Hence in the Conferences of the Fathers (Coll. i, 7) the
abbot Moses says: "Fastings, watchings, meditating on the
Scriptures, poverty, and privation of all one's possessions are not
perfection, but means of perfection."
Now the privation of one's possessions, or poverty, is a means of
perfection, inasmuch as by doing away with riches we remove
certain obstacles to charity; and these are chiefly three. The first is
the cares which riches bring with them; wherefore our Lord said (Mt.
13:22): "That which was sown among thorns, is he that heareth the
word, and the care of this world, and the deceitfulness of riches,
choketh up the word." The second is the love of riches, which
increases with the possession of wealth; wherefore Jerome says
(Super Matth. xix, 23) that "since it is difficult to despise riches when
we have them, our Lord did not say: 'It is impossible for a rich man
to enter the kingdom of heaven,' but: 'It is difficult.'" The third is
vainglory or elation which results from riches, according to Ps. 48:7,
"They that trust in their own strength, and glory in the multitude of
their riches."