SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.126, C.2.

quickly is so far praiseworthy as it is directed by reason.
Reply to Objection 3: Some vices are unnamed, and so also are
some virtues, as the Philosopher remarks (Ethic. ii, 7; iv, 4,5,6).
Hence the names of certain passions have to be applied to certain
vices and virtues: and in order to designate vices we employ
especially the names of those passions the object of which is an evil,
as in the case of hatred, fear, anger and daring. But hope and love
have a good for this object, and so we use them rather to designate
virtues.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.126, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether daring is opposed to fortitude?

Objection 1: It seems that daring is not opposed to fortitude. For
excess of daring seems to result from presumption of mind. But
presumption pertains to pride which is opposed to humility.
Therefore daring is opposed to humility rather than to fortitude.
Objection 2: Further, daring does not seem to call for blame, except
in so far as it results in harm either to the daring person who puts
himself in danger inordinately, or to others whom he attacks with
daring, or exposes to danger. But this seemingly pertains to
injustice. Therefore daring, as designating a sin, is opposed, not to
fortitude but to justice.
Objection 3: Further, fortitude is concerned about fear and daring, as
stated above (Question 123, Article 3). Now since timidity is opposed
to fortitude in respect of an excess of fear, there is another vice
opposed to timidity in respect of a lack of fear. If then, daring is
opposed to fortitude, in the point of excessive daring, there will
likewise be a vice opposed to it in the point of deficient daring. But
there is no such vice. Therefore neither should daring be accounted
a vice in opposition to fortitude.
On the contrary, The Philosopher in both the Second and Third
Books of Ethics accounts daring to be opposed to fortitude.
I answer that, As stated above (Question 126, Article 2), it belongs to
a moral virtue to observe the rational mean in the matter about which
it is concerned. Wherefore every vice that denotes lack of
moderation in the matter of a moral virtue is opposed to that virtue,
as immoderate to moderate. Now daring, in so far as it denotes a
vice, implies excess of passion, and this excess goes by the name of
daring. Wherefore it is evident that it is opposed to the virtue of
fortitude which is concerned about fear and daring, as stated above
(Question 122, Article 3).
Reply to Objection 1: Opposition between vice and virtue does not
depend chiefly on the cause of the vice but on the vice's very
species. Wherefore it is not necessary that daring be opposed to the
same virtue as presumption which is its cause.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.126, C.3.