FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.18, C.11.

condition as to place, in relation to the object, is considered as being
in disaccord with reason: for instance, reason forbids damage to be
done to a holy place. Consequently to steal from a holy place has an
additional repugnance to the order of reason. And thus place, which
was first of all considered as a circumstance, is considered here as
the principal condition of the object, and as itself repugnant to
reason. And in this way, whenever a circumstance has a special
relation to reason, either for or against, it must needs specify the
moral action whether good or bad.
Reply to Objection 1: A circumstance, in so far as it specifies an
action, is considered as a condition of the object, as stated above,
and as being, as it were, a specific difference thereof.
Reply to Objection 2: A circumstance, so long as it is but a
circumstance, does not specify an action, since thus it is a mere
accident: but when it becomes a principal condition of the object,
then it does specify the action.
Reply to Objection 3: It is not every circumstance that places the
moral action in the species of good or evil; since not every
circumstance implies accord or disaccord with reason.
Consequently, although one action may have many circumstances, it
does not follow that it is in many species. Nevertheless there is no
reason why one action should not be in several, even disparate,
moral species, as said above (Article 7, ad 1; Question 1, Article 3, ad
3).

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.18, C.12.

### ARTICLE 11. Whether every circumstance that makes an

action better or worse, places a moral action in a species of
good or evil?
Objection 1: It would seem that every circumstance relating to good
or evil, specifies an action. For good and evil are specific differences
of moral actions. Therefore that which causes a difference in the
goodness or malice of a moral action, causes a specific difference,
which is the same as to make it differ in species. Now that which
makes an action better or worse, makes it differ in goodness and
malice. Therefore it causes it to differ in species. Therefore every
circumstance that makes an action better or worse, constitutes a
species.
Objection 2: Further, an additional circumstance either has in itself
the character of goodness or malice, or it has not. If not, it cannot
make the action better or worse; because what is not good, cannot
make a greater good; and what is not evil, cannot make a greater
evil. But if it has in itself the character of good or evil, for this very
reason it has a certain species of good or evil. Therefore every
circumstance that makes an action better or worse, constitutes a
new species of good or evil.
Objection 3: Further, according to Dionysius (Div. Nom. iv), "evil is
caused by each single defect." Now every circumstance that
increases malice, has a special defect. Therefore every such
circumstance adds a new species of sin. And for the same reason,
every circumstance that increases goodness, seems to add a new
species of goodness: just as every unity added to a number makes a
new species of number; since the good consists in "number, weight,
and measure" (FP, Question 5, Article 5).
On the contrary, More and less do not change a species. But more
and less is a circumstance of additional goodness or malice.
Therefore not every circumstance that makes a moral action better
or worse, places it in a species of good or evil.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 10), a circumstance gives the
species of good or evil to a moral action, in so far as it regards a
special order of reason. Now it happens sometimes that a
circumstance does not regard a special order of reason in respect of