27. Some say they are not bound by the doctrine, explained in Our Encyclical Letter of a few years
ago, and based on the Sources of Revelation, which teaches that the Mystical Body of Christ and the
Roman Catholic Church are one and the same thing. Some reduce to a meaningless formula the
necessity of belonging to the true Church in order to gain eternal salvation. Others finally belittle the
reasonable character of the credibility of Christian faith.

28. These and like errors, it is clear, have crept in among certain of Our sons who are deceived by
imprudent zeal for souls or by false science. To them We are compelled with grief to repeat once
again truths already well known, and to point out with solicitude clear errors and dangers of error.

29. It is well known how highly the Church regards human reason, for it falls to reason to
demonstrate with certainty the existence of God, personal and one; to prove beyond doubt from
divine signs the very foundations of the Christian faith; to express properly the law which the Creator
has imprinted in the hearts of men; and finally to attain to some notion, indeed a very fruitful notion, of mysteries. But reason can perform these functions safely and well only when properly trained,
that is, when imbued with that sound philosophy which has long been, as it were, a patrimony handed
down by earlier Christian ages, and which moreover possesses an authority of an even higher order,
since the Teaching Authority of the Church, in the light of divine revelation itself, has weighed its
fundamental tenets, which have been elaborated and defined little by little by men of great genius.
For this philosophy, acknowledged and accepted by the Church, safeguards the genuine validity of
human knowledge, the unshakable metaphysical principles of sufficient reason, causality, and finality,
and finally the mind's ability to attain certain and unchangeable truth.

30. Of course this philosophy deals with much that neither directly nor indirectly touches faith or
morals, and which consequently the Church leaves to the free discussion of experts. But this does not
hold for many other things, especially those principles and fundamental tenets to which We have just
referred. However, even in these fundamental questions, we may clothe our philosophy in a more
convenient and richer dress, make it more vigorous with a more effective terminology, divest it of
certain scholastic aids found less useful, prudently enrich it with the fruits of progress of the human
mind. But never may we overthrow it, or contaminate it with false principles, or regard it as a great,
but obsolete, relic. For truth and its philosophic expression cannot change from day to day, least of all
where there is question of self-evident principles of the human mind or of those propositions which
are supported by the wisdom of the ages and by divine revelation. Whatever new truth the sincere
human mind is able to find, certainly cannot be opposed to truth already acquired, since God, the
highest Truth, has created and guides the human intellect, not that it may daily oppose new truths to
rightly established ones, but rather that, having eliminated errors which may have crept in, it may
build truth upon truth in the same order and structure that exist in reality, the source of truth. Let no
Christian therefore, whether philosopher or theologian, embrace eagerly and lightly whatever novelty
happens to be thought up from day to day, but rather let him weigh it with painstaking care and a
balanced judgment, lest he lose or corrupt the truth he already has, with grave danger and damage to
his faith.