4. Whenever there is acceptance of knowledge without judgment, the road to error is easy; but
we have in ourselves no ability by which we are able to judge of the things which we accept by
faith, since our natural judgment does not extend to truths of this kind, as they exceed reason;
therefore evidently the road to error is an easy one for us, and so it would appear rather harmful
than useful for man that he should be directed to God by the way of faith.

5. As Dionysius says, it is an evil for man to exist apart from reason; but man in adhering to faith
departs from reason, and in this he is even accustomed to despise reason; therefore it seems that
such a way is evil for men.

#### Sed contra

But on the contrary, it is said in Heb. 11:6, "Without faith it is impossible to please God"; but it
is supremely necessary for man that he be pleasing to God, since otherwise he can neither do nor
possess any good; therefore faith is most necessary for man.

Again, it is most necessary for man to know the truth, since beatitude is joy in knowing the truth,
as Augustine says; but faith establishes believers in truth and establishes truth in them, as
Dionysius says (De div. nom., chap. 7); therefore faith is most necessary for man.

Again, that without which human society cannot be conserved is especially necessary for man,
since man is a political animal, as is said in VIII Ethic.; but without faith human society cannot be
preserved, since it is requisite that one man believe in the promises of another and in his
testimony and the like, for this is necessary if they are to live together; therefore faith is most
necessary for mankind.

Response. I answer that it must be said that faith has something in common with opinion, and
something in common with knowledge and understanding, by reason of which it holds a position
midway between opinion and understanding or science, according to Hugh of St. Victor. In
common with understanding and knowledge, it possesses certain and fixed assent; and in this it
differs from opinion, which accepts one of two opposites, though with fear that the other may be
true, and on account of this doubt it fluctuates between two contraries. But, in common with
opinion, faith is concerned with things that are not naturally possible to our understanding, and in
this respect it differs from science and intellection.

That a thing should not be apparent to human understanding can arise for two reasons, as is said
in II Metaph.: namely, because of lack of knowability in things themselves, and because of lack
of intellectual ability on our part.

1. It may be due to lack on the part of things, as in the case of singular and contingent things
which are remote from our senses, like the deeds and words and thoughts of men; for these are
of such a nature that they may be known to one man, but unknown to others. And since among
men dwelling together one man should deal with another as with himself in what he is not selfsufficient, therefore it is needful that he be able to stand with as much certainty on what another
knows, but of which he himself is ignorant, as upon the truths which he himself knows. Hence it
is that in human society faith is necessary in order that one man give credence to the words of
another, and this is the foundation of justice, as Tullius says in his book, De officiis. Hence also
it is that no lie is without sin, since every lie derogates from that faith which is so necessary.