"without," as he said above, "Your life is hid with Christ in God." [Colossians
3:3]
Then, he says, seek ye glory, then honors, then all those other things, but
not so now, but give them up to those without. Next, lest you think that he is
speaking of money, he adds, "Let your speech be always with grace, seasoned
with salt, that you may know how ye ought to answer each one." That it may not
be full of hypocrisy, for this is not "grace," nor "a seasoning with salt." For
instance, if it be needful to pay court to any one without incurring danger, refuse
not [to do so]; if the occasion require that thou discourse civilly, think not the
doing so flattery, do everything that pertains to honor, so that piety be not
injured. Do you see not how Daniel pays court to an impious man? Do you see
not the three children, how wisely they bore themselves, showing both courage,
and boldness in speaking, and yet nothing rash nor galling, for so it had not been
boldness, but vainglory. "That ye may know," he says, "how ye ought to answer
every man." For the ruler ought to be answered in one way, the ruled in another,
the rich in one way, the poor in another. Wherefore? Because the souls of those
who are rich, and in authority, are weaker, more inflammable, more fluctuating,
so that towards them, one should use condescension; those of the poor, and the
ruled, firmer and more intelligent, so that to these one should use greater
boldness of speech; looking to one thing, their edification. Not that because one
is rich, another poor, the former is to be honored more, the latter less, but
because of his weakness, let the former be supported, the latter not so: for
instance, when there is no cause for it, do not call the Greek "polluted," nor be
insulting; but if you be asked concerning his doctrine, answer that it is polluted,
and impious; but when none asks you, nor forces you to speak, it becomes you
not causelessly to challenge to you his enmity. For what need is there to prepare
for yourself gratuitous hostilities? Again, if you are instructing any one; speak
on the subject at present before you, otherwise be silent. If the speech be
"seasoned with salt," should it fall into a soul that is of loose texture, it will
brace up its slackness; into one that is harsh, it will smooth its ruggedness. Let it

be gracious, and so neither hard, nor yet weak, but let it have both sternness and
pleasantness therewith. For if one be immoderately stern, he does more harm
than good; and if he be immoderately complaisant, he gives more pain than
pleasure, so that everywhere there ought to be moderation. Be not downcast, and
sour visaged, for this is offensive; nor yet be wholly relaxed, for this is open to
contempt and treading under foot; but, like the bee, culling the virtue of each, of
the one its cheerfulness, of the other its gravity, keep clear of the fault. For if a
physician deals not with all bodies alike, much more ought not a teacher. And
yet better will the body bear unsuitable medicines, than the soul language; for
instance, a Greek comes to you, and becomes your friend; discourse not at all
with him on this subject, until he have become a close friend, and after he has
become so, do it gradually.
See, when Paul also had come to Athens, how he discoursed with them. He
said not, "O polluted, and all-polluted"; but what? "You men of Athens, in all
things I perceive that you are somewhat superstitious." [Acts 17:22] Again,
when to insult was needful, he refused not; but with great vehemency he said to
Elymas, "O full of all guile and all villainy, son of the devil, enemy of all
righteousness." For as to have insulted those had been senselessness, so not to
have insulted this one had been softness. Again, are you brought unto a ruler on
a matter of business, see that you render him the honors that are his due.
Ver. 9. "They shall make known unto you," he says, "all things that are done
here." Why did you not come with them, says one? But what is, "They shall
make known unto you all things"? My bonds, that is, and all the other things that
detain me. I then, who pray to see them, who also send others, should not myself
have remained behind, had not some great necessity detained me. And yet this is
not the language of accusations— yes, of vehement accusation. For the assuring
them that he had both fallen into trials, and was bearing them nobly, is the part of
one who was confirming the fact, and lifting up again their souls.
Ver. 9. "With Onesimus," he says, "the beloved, and faithful brother."
Paul calls a slave, brother: with reason; seeing that he styles himself the