For He assumes everything that is ours, that He may in anywise attract us to
Him. He is said to receive honors, and even insults, that we may be afraid. But
with all this we are not attracted towards Him!
Moral. Let us then "glorify God," and bear God both "in our body and in
our spirit." [1 Corinthians 6:20] And how is one to glorify Him in the body?
Says one, and how in the spirit? The soul is here called the spirit to distinguish it
from the body. But how may we glorify Him in the body and in the spirit? He
glorifies Him in the body, who does not commit adultery or fornication, who
avoids gluttony and drunkenness, who does not affect a showy exterior, who
makes such provision for himself as is sufficient for health only: and so the
woman, who does not perfume nor paint her person, but is satisfied to be such as
God made her, and adds no device of her own. For why do you add your own
embellishments to the work which God made? Is not His workmanship sufficient
for you? Or do you endeavor to add grace to it, as if forsooth you were the better
artist? It is not for yourself, but to attract crowds of lovers, that you thus adornest
your person, and insultest your Creator. And do not say, "What can I do? It is no
wish of my own, but I must do it for my husband. I cannot win his love except I
consent to this." God made you beautiful, that He might be admired even in your
beauty, and not that He might be insulted. Do not therefore make Him so ill a
return, but requite Him with modesty and chastity. God made you beautiful, that
He might increase the trials of your modesty. For it is much harder for one that is
lovely to be modest, than for one who has no such attractions, for which to be
courted. Why does the Scripture tell us, that "Joseph was a goodly person, and
well favored" [Genesis 39:6], but that we might the more admire his modesty
coupled with beauty? Has God made you beautiful? Why do you make yourself
otherwise? For as though one should overlay a golden statue with a daubing of
mire, so it is with those women that use paints. Thou besmearest yourself with
red and white earth! But the homely, you say, may fairly have recourse to this.
And why? To hide their ugliness? It is a vain attempt. For when was the natural
appearance improved upon by that which is studied and artificial? And why

should you be troubled at your want of beauty, since it is no reproach? For hear
the saying of the Wise Man, "Commend not a man for his beauty, neither abhor
a man for his outward appearance." [Sirach 11:2] Let God be rather admired,
the best Artificer, and not man, who has no merit in being made such as he is.
What are the advantages, tell me, of beauty? None. It exposes its possessor to
greater trials, mishaps, perils, and suspicions. She that wants it escapes
suspicion; she that possesses it, except she practice a great and extraordinary
reserve, incurs an evil report, and what is worse than all, the suspicion of her
husband, who takes less pleasure in beholding her beauty, than he suffers pain
from jealousy. And her beauty fades in his sight from familiarity, while she
suffers in her character from the imputation of weakness, dissipation, and
wantonness, and her very soul becomes degraded and full of haughtiness. To
these evils personal beauty is exposed. But she who has not this attraction,
escapes unmolested. The dogs do not assail her; she is like a lamb, reposing in a
secure pasture, where no wolf intrudes to harass her, because the shepherd is at
hand to protect her.
The real superiority is, not that one is fair, and the other homely, but it is a
superiority that one, even if she is not fair, is unchaste, and the other is not
wicked. Tell me wherein is the perfection of eyes? Is it in their being soft, and
rolling, and round, and dark, or in their clearness and quicksightedness. Is it the
perfection of a lamp to be elegantly formed, and finely turned, or to shine
brightly, and to enlighten the whole house? We cannot say it is not this, for the
other is indifferent, and this the real object. Accordingly we often say to the
maid whose charge it is, "You have made a bad lamp of it." So entirely is it the
use of a lamp to give light. So it matters not what is the appearance of the eye,
while it performs its office with full efficiency. We call the eye bad, which is dim
or disordered, and which, when open, does not see. For that is bad, which does
not perform its proper office— and this is the fault of eyes. And for a nose, tell
me, when is it a good one? When it is straight, and polished on either side, and
finely proportioned? Or when it is quick to receive odors, and transmit them to