him; and saw his wife destroyed by pessaries, for when she bore not, a certain
wretched and miserable woman (for such indeed she was who thought to supply
the gift of God by her own wisdom) gave her pessaries, and destroyed the queen,
and herself perished with her. And this man is said to have also killed his own
brother. Another again, his successor, was destroyed by noxious drugs, and his
cup was to him no longer drink, but death. And his son had an eye put out, from
fear of what was to follow, though he had done no wrong. It is not befitting to
mention how another ended his life miserably. And after them, one was burnt,
like some miserable wretch, among horses, and beams, and all sorts of things,
and left his wife in widowhood. For it is not possible to relate the woes which he
was compelled to undergo in his lifetime, when he rose up in revolt. And has not
he who now rules, from the time he received the crown, been in toil, in danger,
in grief, in dejection, in misfortune, exposed to conspiracies? Such is not the
kingdom of heaven, but after it is received, there is peace, life, joy, delight. But
as I said, life cannot be without pain. For if in the affairs of this world even he
who is accounted most happy, if the king is burdened with so many misfortunes,
what thinkest you must be true of private life? I cannot say how many other evils
there are! How many stories have ofttimes been woven on these subjects! For
nearly all the tragedies of the stage, as well as the mythical stories, have kings
for their subjects. For most of these stories are formed from true incidents, for it
is thus they please. As for example, Thyestes' banquet, and the destruction to all
that family by their misfortunes.
These things we know from the writers that are without: but if you will, I
will adduce instances from the Scripture too. Saul was the first king, and you
knew how he perished, after experiencing numberless ills. After him, David,
Solomon, Abia, Hezekiah, Josiah, in like sort. For it is not possible, without
affliction and toil, and without dejection of mind, to pass through the present
life. But let us be cast down in mind, not for such things as these, for which
kings grieve, but for those things, whence we (thus) have great gain. "For godly
sorrow works repentance unto salvation, a repentance which brings no regret."

[2 Corinthians 7:10] On account of these things we should be grieved, for these
things we should be pained, for these things we should be pricked at heart; thus
was Paul grieved for sinners, thus did he weep. "For out of much affliction and
anguish of heart I wrote unto you in many tears." [2 Corinthians 2:4] For when
he had no cause of grief on his own account, he did so on account of others, or
rather he accounted those things too to be his own, at least as far as grief went.
Others were offended, and he burned; others were weak, and he was weak: such
grief as this is good, is superior to all worldly joy. Him who so grieves I prefer to
all men, or rather the Lord Himself pronounces them blessed, who so grieve,
who are sympathizing. I do not so much admire him in dangers, or rather I do
not admire him less for the dangers by which he died daily, yet this still more
captivates me. For it came of a soul devoted to God, and full of affection: from
the love which Christ Himself seeks: from a brotherly and a fatherly sympathy,
or rather, of one greater than both these. Thus we should be affected, thus weep;
such tears as these are full of great delight; such grief as this is the ground of joy.
And say not to me: What do they for whom I grieve gain by my so doing?
Though we no way profit them for whom we grieve, at all events we shall profit
ourselves. For he who grieves thus on account of others, much more will so do
for himself; he who thus weeps for the sins of others will not pass by his own
transgressions unwept, or rather, he will not quickly sin. But this is dreadful, that
when we are ordered so to grieve for them that sin, we do not even exhibit any
repentance for our own sins, but when sinning remain without feeling, and have
care for and take account of anything, rather than our own sins. For this cause
we rejoice with a worthless joy, which is the joy of the world, and straightway
quenched, and which brings forth griefs innumerable. Let us then grieve with
grief which is the mother of joy, and let us not rejoice with joy which brings
forth grief. Let us shed tears which are the seeds of great joy, and not laugh with
that laughter, which brings forth the gnashing of teeth for us. Let us be afflicted
with affliction, from which springs up ease, and let us not seek luxury, whence
great affliction and pain is born. Let us labor a little time upon the earth, that we