Timothy. But why does he lament such things as these? To teach us his hearers
not to fall in like sort, to teach his hearers not to seek for remission from toil; for
he who seeks remission from toil, seeks not the things that are Christ's, but his
own. We ought to be prepared against every toil, against every distress.
Ver. 22. "You know the proof of him, that as a child serves a father, so he
served with me in furtherance of the Gospel."
And that I speak not at random, "you yourselves," he says, "know, that as a
child serves a father, so he served with me in furtherance of the Gospel." He
presents then Timothy to them, and with reason, that he might enjoy much honor
from them. This too he does when he writes to the Corinthians, and he says, "Let
no man therefore despise him, for he works the work of the Lord as I also do." [1
Corinthians 16:10] This he said not as caring for him, but for those who receive
him, that they might receive a great reward.
Ver. 23. "Him therefore," he says, "I hope to send immediately, so soon as I
shall see how it will go with me," that is, when I see where I stand, and what end
my affairs will have.
Ver. 24. "But I trust in the Lord that I also myself shall come to you shortly."
I am not therefore sending him, as though I myself would not come, but that
I may be of good courage when I know your state, that even in the mean time I
may not be ignorant of it. "But I trust in the Lord," says he. See how he makes
all things depend on God, and speaks nothing of his own mind. That is, God
willing.
Ver. 25. "But I counted it necessary to send to you Epaphroditus, my
brother, and fellow-worker, and fellow-soldier."
And him too he sends with the same praises as Timothy, for he commended
him on these two points; first, in that he loved them, when he says, "who will
care truly for you"; and secondly, in that he had approved himself in the Gospel.
And for the same reason, and in the same terms, he praises this man also: and
how? By calling him a brother, and a fellow-worker, and not stopping at this
point, but also "fellow-soldier," he showed how he shared in his dangers, and

testifies of him the same things which he testifies of himself. For "fellowsoldier" is more than "fellow-worker"; for perchance he gave aid in quiet
matters, yet not so in wars and dangers; but in saying "fellow-soldier," he
showed this too.
Ver. 25. "To send to you your messenger, and minister to my needs"; that is,
I give you your own, since I send to you him that is your own, or, perhaps, that is
your Teacher. Again he adds many things concerning his love, in saying,
Ver. 26, 27. "Since he longed after you all, and was sore troubled, because
you had heard that he was sick. For indeed he was sick near unto death: but God
had mercy on him; and not on him only, but on me also, that I might not have
sorrow upon sorrow."
Here he aims at a farther point, making it manifest, that Epaphroditus too
was well aware, how he was beloved of them. And this is no light thing toward
loving. You know how he was sick, he says; and he grieved that on his recovery
he did not see you, and free you from the grief you had by reason of his sickness.
Here too he gives another reason for sending so late to them, not from any
remissness, but he kept Timothy because he had no one else, (for, as he had
written, he had "no one likeminded,") and Epaphroditus because of his sickness.
He then shows that this was a long sickness, and had consumed much time, by
adding, "for he was sick near unto death." You see how anxious Paul is to cut off
from his disciples all occasion of slighting or contempt, and every suspicion that
his not coming was because he despised them. For nothing will have such power
to draw a disciple toward one, as the persuasion that his superior cares for him,
and that he is full of heaviness on his account, for this is the part of exceeding
love. Because "you have heard," he says, "that he was sick; for he was sick near
unto death." And that I am not making an excuse, hear what follows. "But God
had mercy on him." What do you say, O heretic? Here it is written, that God's
mercy retained and brought back again him who was on the point of departure.
And yet if the world is evil, it is no mercy to leave a man in the evil. Our answer
to the heretic is easy, but what shall we say to the Christian? For he perchance