SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.98, C.3.

of irreligion.
Reply to Objection 1: Those are said to sin against the sanctity of the
divine law who assail God's law, as heretics and blasphemers do.
These are guilty of unbelief, through not believing in God; and of
sacrilege, through perverting the words of the divine law.
Reply to Objection 2: Nothing prevents one specific kind of sin being
found in various generic kinds of sin, inasmuch as various sins are
directed to the end of one sin, just as happens in the case of virtues
commanded by one virtue. In this way, by whatever kind of sin a man
acts counter to reverence due to sacred things, he commits a
sacrilege formally; although his act contains various kinds of sin
materially.
Reply to Objection 3: Sacrilege is sometimes found apart from other
sins, through its act having no other deformity than the violation of a
sacred thing: for instance, if a judge were to take a person from a
sacred place for he might lawfully have taken him from elsewhere.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.98, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the species of sacrilege are

distinguished according to the sacred things?
Objection 1: It would seem that the species of sacrilege are not
distinguished according to the sacred things. Material diversity does
not differentiate species, if the formal aspect remains the same. Now
there would seem to be the same formal aspect of sin in all
violations of sacred things, and that the only difference is one of
matter. Therefore the species of sacrilege are not distinguished
thereby.
Objection 2: Further, it does not seem possible that things belonging
to the same species should at the same time differ specifically. Now
murder, theft, and unlawful intercourse, are different species of sin.
Therefore they cannot belong to the one same species of sacrilege:
and consequently it seems that the species of sacrilege are
distinguished in accordance with the species of other sins, and not
according to the various sacred things.
Objection 3: Further, among sacred things sacred persons are
reckoned. If, therefore, one species of sacrilege arises from the
violation of a sacred person, it would follow that every sin committed
by a sacred person is a sacrilege, since every sin violates the person
of the sinner. Therefore the species of sacrilege are not reckoned
according to the sacred things.
On the contrary, Acts and habits are distinguished by their objects.
Now the sacred thing is the object of sacrilege, as stated above
(Article 1). Therefore the species of sacrilege are distinguished
according to the sacred things.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), the sin of sacrilege
consists in the irreverent treatment of a sacred thing. Now reverence
is due to a sacred thing by reason of its holiness: and consequently
the species of sacrilege must needs be distinguished according to
the different aspects of sanctity in the sacred things which are
treated irreverently: for the greater the holiness ascribed to the
sacred thing that is sinned against, the more grievous the sacrilege.
Now holiness is ascribed, not only to sacred persons, namely, those
who are consecrated to the divine worship, but also to sacred places