with their entire household. This Crispus he means where he writes, "I baptized
none save Crispus and Gaius." [1 Corinthians 1:14] This (same) I take to be
called Sosthenes— (evidently) a believer, insomuch that he is beaten, and is
always present with Paul. "And the Lord said in the night," etc. Now even the
number (of the "much people") persuaded him, but Christ's claiming them for
His own (moved him) more. Yet He says also, "Fear not:" for the danger was
become greater now, both because more believed, and also the ruler of the
synagogue. This was enough to rouse him. Not that he was reproved as fearing;
but that he should not suffer anything; "I am with you, and none shall set upon
you to hurt you." (v. 9, 10.) For He did not always permit them to suffer evil, that
they might not become too weak. For nothing so grieved Paul, as men's unbelief
and setting themselves (against the Truth): this was worse than the dangers.
Therefore it is that (Christ) appears to him now. "And he continued a year and
six months," etc. [Acts 18:11] After the year and six months, they set upon him.
"And when Gallio was proconsul of Achaia," etc. (v. 12, 13), because they had
no longer the use of their own laws. (c) And observe how prudent he is: for he
does not say straightway, I care not, but, "If," says he, "it were a matter of
wrong-doing or wicked lewdness, O you Jews, reason would that I should bear
with you; but if it be a question of doctrine and words and of your law, see ye to
it, for I do not choose to be a judge of such matters." (v. 14, 15.) (g) He taught
them that not such are the matters which crave a judicial sentence, but they do all
things out of order. And he does not say, It is not my duty, but, "I do not choose,"
that they may not trouble him again. Thus Pilate said in the case of Christ, "Take
ye Him, and judge him according to your law." [John 18:31] But they were just
like men drunken and mad. (d) "And he drove them from the judgment-seat"
[Acts 18:16]— he effectually closed the tribunal against them. "Then all" (the
Jews) "having seized Sosthenes the ruler of the synagogue, beat him before the
judgment-seat. And Gallio cared for none of these things." [Acts 18:17]. (a) This
thing, of all others, set them on (to this violence)— their persuasion that the
governor would not even let himself down (to notice it). (e) It was a splendid

victory. O the shame they were put to! (b) For it is one thing to have come off
victorious from a controversy, and another for those to learn that he cared
nothing for the affair. (f) "And Gallio cared for none of these things:" and yet the
whole was meant as an insult to him! But, forsooth, as if they had received
authority (they did this). Why did he (Sosthenes), though he also had authority,
not beat (them)? But they were (otherwise) trained: so that the judge should
learn which party was more reasonable. This was no small benefit to those
present— both the reasonableness of these, and the audacity of those. (h) He was
beaten, and said nothing.
This man let us also imitate: to them that beat us, let us return blow for
blow, by meekness, by silence, by long-suffering. More grievous these wounds,
greater this blow, and more heavy. For to show that it is not the receiving a blow
in the body that is grievous, but the receiving it in the mind, we often smite
people, but since it is in the way of friendship, they are even pleased: but if you
smite any indifferent person in an insolent manner, you have pained him
exceedingly, because you have touched his heart. So let us smite their heart. But
that meekness inflicts a greater blow than fierceness, come, let us prove, so far
as that is possible, by words. For the sure proof indeed is by acts and by
experience: but if you will, let us also make the enquiry by word, though indeed
we have often made it already. Now in insults, nothing pains us so much, as the
opinion passed by the spectators; for it is not the same thing to be insulted in
public and in private, but those same insults we endure even with ease, when we
suffer them in a solitary place, and with none by to witness them, or know of
them. So true is it that it is not the insult, as it is in itself, that mortifies us, but
the having to suffer it in the sight of all men: since if one should do us honor in
the sight of all men, and insult us in private, we shall notwithstanding even feel
obliged to him. The pain then is not in the nature of the insult, but in the opinion
of the beholders; that one may not seem to be contemptible. What then, if this
opinion should be in our favor? Is not the man attempting to disgrace us himself
more disgraced, when men give their opinion in our favor? Say, whom do the