But not only do you honor men more than God, but you compel others to do
so likewise. Many have thus compelled their domestics and slaves. Some have
drawn them into marriage against their will, and others have forced them to
minister to disgraceful services, to infamous love, to acts of rapine, and fraud,
and violence: so that the accusation is twofold, and neither can they obtain
pardon upon the plea of necessity. For if you yourself do wrong things
unwillingly, and on account of the command of the ruler, not even so is it by any
means a sufficient excuse: but the offense becomes heavier, when you compel
them also to fall into the same sins. For what pardon can there be any more for
such an one?
These things I have said, not from a wish to condemn you, but to show in
how many things we are debtors to God. For if by honoring men even equally
with God, we insult God, how much more, when we honor men above Him? But
if those offenses that are committed against men are shown to be much greater
against God; how much more when the actual offense is greater and more
grievous in its own quality.
Let any one examine himself, and he will see that he does everything on
account of men. Exceedingly blessed we should be, if we did as many things for
the sake of God, as we do for the sake of men, and of the opinion of men, and for
the dread or the respect of men. If then we have so many things to answer for,
we ought with all alacrity to forgive those who injure us, who defraud us, and
not to bear malice. For there is a way to the forgiveness of our sins that needs no
labors, nor expense of wealth, nor any other things, but merely our own choice.
We have no need to set out upon our travels, nor go beyond the boundaries of
our country, nor submit to dangers and toils, but only to will.
What excuse, tell me, shall we have in things that appear difficult, when we
do not do even a light thing, attended too with so much gain and so much
benefit, and no trouble? Can you not despise wealth? Can you not spend your
substance on the needy? Can you not will anything that is good? Can you not
forgive him that has injured you? For if you had not so many things to answer

for, and God had only commanded you to forgive, ought you not to do it? But
now having so many things to answer for, do you not forgive? And that too,
knowing that you are required to do it on account of things which you have from
Him? If indeed we go to our debtor, he knowing it, receives us courteously, and
shows us honor, and pays us every attention in a liberal way; and that though he
is not paying off his debt, but because he wishes to render us merciful in our
demand of payment: and thou, who owest so much to God, and art commanded
to forgive that you may receive in return, dost not thou forgive? And wherefore
not, I beseech you? Woe is me! How much of goodness do we receive, and what
wickedness do we show in return! What sleepiness! What indolence! How easy a
thing is virtue, attended too with much advantage; and how laborious a thing is
vice! But we, flying from that which is so light, pursue that which is heavier than
lead.
Here there is no need of bodily strength, nor of wealth, nor possessions, nor
of power, nor of friendship, nor of any other thing; but it is sufficient only to
will, and all is accomplished. Hath some one grieved you, and insulted you, and
mocked you? But consider, how often you have done such things to others, and
even to the Lord Himself; and forbear, and forgive him it. Consider that you say,
"Forgive us our debts, as we also forgive our debtors." [Matthew 6:13]
Consider, that if you dost not forgive, you will not be able to say this with
confidence: but if you forgive, you demand the matter as a debt, not by reason of
the nature of the thing, but on account of the lovingkindness of Him that has
granted it. And wherein is it equal, that one who forgives his fellow-servants
should receive remission of the sins committed against the Lord? But
nevertheless we do receive such great lovingkindness, because He is rich in
mercy and pity.
And that I may show that even without these things, and without the
remission, you are a gainer by forgiving, consider how many friends such a
person has, how the praises of such an one are everywhere sounded by men who
go about saying, "This is a good man, he is easily reconciled, he knows not to