FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.62, C.4.

prepared for them that love Him." Consequently in respect of both
the above things man needed to receive in addition something
supernatural to direct him to a supernatural end. First, as regards the
intellect, man receives certain supernatural principles, which are
held by means of a Divine light: these are the articles of faith, about
which is faith. Secondly, the will is directed to this end, both as to
that end as something attainable---and this pertains to hope---and as
to a certain spiritual union, whereby the will is, so to speak,
transformed into that end---and this belongs to charity. For the
appetite of a thing is moved and tends towards its connatural end
naturally; and this movement is due to a certain conformity of the
thing with its end.
Reply to Objection 1: The intellect requires intelligible species
whereby to understand: consequently there is need of a natural habit
in addition to the power. But the very nature of the will suffices for it
to be directed naturally to the end, both as to the intention of the end
and as to its conformity with the end. But the nature of the power is
insufficient in either of these respects, for the will to be directed to
things that are above its nature. Consequently there was need for an
additional supernatural habit in both respects.
Reply to Objection 2: Faith and hope imply a certain imperfection:
since faith is of things unseen, and hope, of things not possessed.
Hence faith and hope, in things that are subject to human power, fall
short of the notion of virtue. But faith and hope in things which are
above the capacity of human nature surpass all virtue that is in
proportion to man, according to 1 Cor. 1:25: "The weakness of God
is stronger than men."
Reply to Objection 3: Two things pertain to the appetite, viz.
movement to the end, and conformity with the end by means of love.
Hence there must needs be two theological virtues in the human
appetite, namely, hope and charity.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.62, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether faith precedes hope, and hope charity?

Objection 1: It would seem that the order of the theological virtues is
not that faith precedes hope, and hope charity. For the root precedes
that which grows from it. Now charity is the root of all the virtues,
according to Eph. 3:17: "Being rooted and founded in charity."
Therefore charity precedes the others.
Objection 2: Further, Augustine says (De Doctr. Christ. i): "A man
cannot love what he does not believe to exist. But if he believes and
loves, by doing good works he ends in hoping." Therefore it seems
that faith precedes charity, and charity hope.
Objection 3: Further, love is the principle of all our emotions, as
stated above (Article 2, ad 3). Now hope is a kind of emotion, since it
is a passion, as stated above (Question 25, Article 2). Therefore
charity, which is love, precedes hope.
On the contrary, The Apostle enumerates them thus (1 Cor. 13:13):
"Now there remain faith, hope, charity."
I answer that, Order is twofold: order of generation, and order of
perfection. By order of generation, in respect of which matter
precedes form, and the imperfect precedes the perfect, in one same
subject faith precedes hope, and hope charity, as to their acts:
because habits are all infused together. For the movement of the
appetite cannot tend to anything, either by hoping or loving, unless
that thing be apprehended by the sense or by the intellect. Now it is
by faith that the intellect apprehends the object of hope and love.
Hence in the order of generation, faith precedes hope and charity. In
like manner a man loves a thing because he apprehends it as his
good. Now from the very fact that a man hopes to be able to obtain
some good through someone, he looks on the man in whom he
hopes as a good of his own. Hence for the very reason that a man
hopes in someone, he proceeds to love him: so that in the order of
generation, hope precedes charity as regards their respective acts.
But in the order of perfection, charity precedes faith and hope:
because both faith and hope are quickened by charity, and receive
from charity their full complement as virtues. For thus charity is the
mother and the root of all the virtues, inasmuch as it is the form of