be so affected, as if we could gratify or could injure Him. But lest any one
should think that Timothy needed this advice, he has added,
"Of these things put them in remembrance, charging them before the Lord,
that they strive not about words to no profit, but to the subverting of the
hearers." It is an overawing thing to call God to witness what we say, for if no
one would dare to set at nought the testimony of man when appealed to, much
less when the appeal is to God. If any one, for instance, entering into a contract,
or making his will, chooses to call witnesses worthy of credit, would any transfer
the things to those who are not included? Surely not. And even if he wishes it,
yet fearing the credibility of the witnesses, he avoids it. What is "charging them
before the Lord"? He calls God to witness both what was said, and what was
done.
"That they strive not about words to no profit;" and not merely so, but "to
the subverting of the hearers." Not only is there no gain from it, but much harm.
"Of these things then put them in remembrance," and if they despise you, God
will judge them. But why does he admonish them not to strive about words? He
knows that it is a dainty thing, and that the human soul is ever prone to contend
and to dispute about words. To guard against this, he has not only charged them
"not to strive about words," but to render his discourse more alarming, he adds,
"to the subverting of the hearers."
Ver. 15. "Study to show yourself approved unto God, a workman that needs
not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth."
Everywhere this "not being ashamed"! And why is he ever so careful to
guard him against shame? Because it was natural for many to be ashamed both
of Paul himself, as being a tent-maker, and of the preaching, since its teachers
perished. For Christ had been crucified, himself was about to be beheaded, Peter
was crucified with his head downwards, and these things they suffered from
audacious and despicable men. Because such men were in power, he says, "Be
not ashamed"; that is, fear not to do anything tending to godliness, though it be
necessary to submit to slavery or any other suffering. For how does any one

become approved? By being "a workman that needs not to be ashamed." As the
workman is not ashamed of any work, so neither should he be ashamed who
labors in the Gospel. He should submit to anything.
"Rightly dividing the word of truth."
This he has well said. For many distort it, and pervert it in every way, and
many additions are made to it. He has not said directing it, but "rightly dividing,"
that is, cut away what is spurious, with much vehemence assail it, and extirpate
it. With the sword of the Spirit cut off from your preaching, as from a thong,
whatever is superfluous and foreign to it.
Ver. 16. "And shun profane novelties of speech."
For they will not stop there. For when anything new has been introduced, it
is ever producing innovations, and the error of him who has once left the safe
harbor is infinite, and never stops.
"For they will increase unto more ungodliness," he says,
Ver. 17. "And their word will eat as does a canker."
It is an evil not to be restrained, not curable by any medicine, it destroys the
whole frame. He shows that novelty of doctrine is a disease, and worse than a
disease. And here he implies that they are incorrigible, and that they erred not
weakly but willfully.
"Of whom is Hymeneus and Philetus,"
Ver. 18. "Who concerning the truth have erred, saying that the resurrection
is past already, and overthrow the faith of some."
He has well said, "They will increase unto more ungodliness." For it
appears indeed to be a solitary evil, but see what evils spring out of it. For if the
Resurrection is already past, not only do we suffer loss in being deprived of that
great glory, but because judgment is taken away, and retribution also. For if the
Resurrection is past, retribution also is past. The good therefore have reaped
persecutions and afflictions, and the wicked have not been punished, nay verily,
they live in great pleasure. It were better to say that there is no resurrection, than
that it is already past.