SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.172, C.4.

Moses (Ex. 3:2), and the writing shown to Daniel (Dan. 5:)---or
whether they be produced by other causes; yet so that they are
ordained by Divine providence to be prophetically significant of
something, as, for instance, the Church was signified by the ark of
Noah.
Again, abstraction from the external senses is not rendered
necessary when the prophet's mind is enlightened by an intellectual
light, or impressed with intelligible species, since in us the perfect
judgment of the intellect is effected by its turning to sensible
objects, which are the first principles of our knowledge, as stated in
the FP, Question 84, Article 6.
When, however, prophetic revelation is conveyed by images in the
imagination, abstraction from the senses is necessary lest the things
thus seen in imagination be taken for objects of external sensation.
Yet this abstraction from the senses is sometimes complete, so that
a man perceives nothing with his senses; and sometimes it is
incomplete, so that he perceives something with his senses, yet
does not fully discern the things he perceives outwardly from those
he sees in imagination. Hence Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. xii, 12):
"Those images of bodies which are formed in the soul are seen just
as bodily things themselves are seen by the body, so that we see
with our eyes one who is present, and at the same time we see with
the soul one who is absent, as though we saw him with our eyes."
Yet this abstraction from the senses takes place in the prophets
without subverting the order of nature, as is the case with those who
are possessed or out of their senses; but is due to some wellordered cause. This cause may be natural---for instance, sleep---or
spiritual---for instance, the intenseness of the prophets'
contemplation; thus we read of Peter (Acts 10:9) that while he was
praying in the supper-room "he fell into an ecstasy"---or he may be
carried away by the Divine power, according to the saying of
Ezechiel 1:3: "The hand of the Lord was upon him."
Reply to Objection 1: The passage quoted refers to prophets in
whom imaginary pictures were formed or coordinated, either while
asleep, which is denoted by the word "dream," or while awake, which
is signified by the word "vision."
Reply to Objection 2: When the mind is intent, in its act, upon distant

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.172, C.4.

things which are far removed from the senses, the intensity of its
application leads to abstraction from the senses; but when it is
intent, in its act, upon the coordination of or judgment concerning
objects of sense, there is no need for abstraction from the senses.
Reply to Objection 3: The movement of the prophetic mind results
not from its own power, but from a power acting on it from above.
Hence there is no abstraction from the senses when the prophet's
mind is led to judge or coordinate matters relating to objects of
sense, but only when the mind is raised to the contemplation of
certain more lofty things.
Reply to Objection 4: The spirit of the prophets is said to be subject
to the prophets as regards the prophetic utterances to which the
Apostle refers in the words quoted; because, to wit, the prophets in
declaring what they have seen speak their own mind, and are not
thrown off their mental balance, like persons who are possessed, as
Priscilla and Montanus maintained. But as regards the prophetic
revelation itself, it would be more correct to say that the prophets are
subject to the. spirit of prophecy, i.e. to the prophetic gift.