If we turn over these two things in our minds, we shall be enabled to attain
the promised blessings, we shall be enabled to cleanse ourselves and wipe away
[what is amiss]. Only let us take serious thought sometime; let us be anxious
about the matter, beloved. Let us grieve here in reflection, that we may not
grieve yonder in punishment, but may enjoy the everlasting blessings, where
"pain and sorrow and sighing are fled away" [Isaiah 35:10], that we may attain
to the good things which surpass man's understanding, in Christ Jesus our Lord,
for to Him is glory and power for ever and ever. Amen.

## Homily 24 on Hebrews

Hebrews 11:13-16
" These all died in faith, not having received the promises, but having seen
them afar off, and embraced them, and confessed that they were strangers and
pilgrims on the earth. For they that say such things, declare plainly that they
seek a country. And truly if they had been mindful of that country from whence
they came out, they might have had opportunity to have returned. But now they
desire a better country, that is, an heavenly; wherefore God is not ashamed to be
called their God, for He has prepared for them a city."
1. The first virtue, yea the whole of virtue, is to be a stranger to this world,
and a sojourner, and to have nothing in common with things here, but to hang
loose from them, as from things strange to us; As those blessed disciples did, of
whom he says, "They wandered about in sheepskins, and in goat-skins, being
destitute, afflicted, tormented: of whom the world was not worthy." [c. xi. 37, 38]
They called themselves therefore "strangers"; but Paul said somewhat
much beyond this: for not merely did he call himself a stranger, but said that he
was dead to the world, and that the world was dead to him. "For the world" (he
says) "has been crucified to me and I to the world." [Galatians 6:14] But we,
both citizens and quite alive, busy ourselves about everything here as citizens.
And what righteous men were to the world, "strangers" and "dead," that we are
to Heaven. And what they were to Heaven, alive and acting as citizens, that we
are to the world. Wherefore we are dead, because we have refused that which is
truly life, and have chosen this which is but for a time. Wherefore we have
provoked God to wrath, because when the enjoyments of Heaven have been set
before us, we are not willing to be separated from things on earth, but, like
worms, we turn about from the earth to the earth, and again from this to that; and

in short are not willing to look up even for a little while, nor to withdraw
ourselves from human affairs, but as if drowned in torpor and sleep and
drunkenness, we are stupefied with imaginations.
2. And as those who are under the power of sweet sleep lie on their bed not
only during the night, but even when the morning has over-taken them, and
bright day has come, and are not ashamed to indulge in pleasure, and to make
the season of business and activity a time of slumber and indolence, so truly we
also, when the day is drawing near, when the night is far spent, or rather the day;
for "work" (it is said) "while it is day" [John 9:4]; when it is day we practice all
that belongs to the night, sleeping, dreaming, indulging in luxurious fancies; and
the eyes of our understanding are closed as well as those of our body; we speak
amiss, we talk absurdly; even if a person inflict a deep wound upon us, if he
carry off all our substance, if he set the very house on fire, we are not so much as
conscious of it.
Or rather, we do not even wait for others to do this, but we do it ourselves,
piercing and wounding ourselves every day, lying in unseemly fashion, and
stripped bare of all credit, all honor, neither ourselves concealing our shameful
deeds, nor permitting others to do so, but lying exposed to public shame, to the
ridicule, the numberless jests of spectators and passers-by.
3. Do ye not suppose that the wicked themselves laugh at those who are of
like characters to themselves, and condemn them? For since God has placed
within us a tribunal which cannot be bribed nor ever utterly destroyed, even
though we come to the very lowest depth of vice; therefore even the wicked
themselves give sentence against themselves, and if one call them that which
they are, they are ashamed, they are angry, they say that it is an insult. Thus they
condemn what they do, even if not by their deeds, yet by their words, by their
conscience, nay rather even by their deeds. For when they carry on their
practices out of sight and secretly, they give the strongest proof of the opinion
they hold concerning the thing itself. For wickedness is so manifest, that all men
are its accusers, even those who follow after it, while such is the quality of