he shall be ruler, that it is not of a whole nation; and when of a whole nation, that
it is not of many nations; and when of many nations, that it is not of all. When he
becomes a deputy, he will vex himself again that he is not a king; and if a king,
that he is not so alone; and if alone, that he is not also of barbarous nations; and
if of barbarous nations, that he is not of the whole world even: and if of the
whole world, why not likewise of another world? And so his course of thought
going on without end does not suffer him ever to be pleased. Do you see, how
even if from being mean and poor you should make a man a king, thou dost not
remove his dejection, without first correcting his turn of thought, enamored as it
is of having more?
Come, let me show you the contrary too, that even if from a higher station
you should bring down to a lower one him that has consideration, you will not
cast him into dejection and grief. And if you will, let us descend the same ladder,
and do thou bring down the satrap from his throne and in supposition deprive
him of that dignity. I say that he will not on this account vex himself, if he
choose to bear in mind the things of which I have spoken. For he will not reckon
up the things of which he has been deprived, but what he has still, the glory
arising from his office. But if you take away this also, he will reckon up them
who are in private stations and have never ascended to such sway, and for
consolation his riches will suffice him. And if you also cast him out again from
this, he will look to them that have a moderate estate. And if you should take
away even moderate wealth, and should allow him to partake only of necessary
food, he may think upon them that have not even this, but wrestle with incessant
hunger and live in prison. And even if you should bring him into that prisonhouse, when he reflects on them that lie under incurable diseases and
irremediable pains, he will see himself to be in much better circumstances. And
as the scavenger before mentioned not even on being made a king will reap any
cheerfulness, so neither will this man ever vex himself if he become a prisoner. It
is not then wealth that is the foundation of pleasure, nor poverty of sadness, but
our own judgment, and the fact, that the eyes of our mind are not pure, nor are

fixed anywhere and abide, but without limit flutter abroad. And as healthy
bodies, if they be nourished with bread alone, are in good and vigorous
condition: but those that are sickly, even if they enjoy a plentiful and varied diet,
become so much the weaker; so also it is wont to happen in regard of the soul.
The mean spirited, not even in a diadem and unspeakable honors can be happy:
but the denying, even in bonds and fetters and poverty, will enjoy a pure
pleasure.
10. These things then bearing in mind, let us ever look to them that are
beneath us. There is indeed, I grant, another consolation, but of a high strain in
morality, and mounting above the grossness of the multitude. What is this? That
wealth is naught, poverty is naught, disgrace is naught, honor is naught, but for a
brief time and only in words do they differ from each other. And along with this
there is another soothing topic also, greater than it; the consideration of the
things to come, both evil and good, the things which are really evil and really
good, and the being comforted by them. But since many, as I said, stand aloof
from these doctrines, therefore were we compelled to dwell on other topics, that
in course we might lead on to them the receivers of what had been said before.
Let us then, taking all these things into account, by every means frame
ourselves aright, and we shall never grieve at these unexpected things. For
neither if we should see men rich in a picture, should we say they were to be
envied, any more than on seeing poor men there depicted we should call them
wretched and pitiable: although those are surely more abiding than they whom
we reckon wealthy. Since one abides rich in the picture longer than in the nature
itself of things. For the one often lasts, appearing such, even to a hundred years,
but the other sometimes, not having had so much as a year to live at his ease in
his possessions, has been suddenly stripped of all. Meditating then on all these
things, let us from all quarters build up cheerfulness as an outwork against our
irrational sorrow, that we may both pass the present life with pleasure, and obtain
the good things to come, through the grace and mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ,
with Whom to the Father, with the Holy Ghost, be glory, power, honor, now and