also from His desire to show forth His goodness. For how will He show it,
unless this come to pass? And He will show it in the ages to come. What? That
the blessings are both great, and more certain than any other. For now the things
which are said may to the unbelievers seem to be foolishness; but then all shall
know them. Would you understand too, how He has made us sit together with
Him? Hear what Christ Himself says to the disciples, "You also shall sit upon
twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel." [Matthew 19:28] And again,
"But to sit on My right hand and on My left hand is not Mine to give, but it is for
them for whom it has been prepared of My Father." [Matthew 20:23] So that it
has been prepared. And well says he, "in kindness towards us in Christ Jesus,"
for to sit on His right hand is honor above all honor, it is that beyond which there
is none other. This then he says, that even we shall sit there. Truly this is
surpassing riches, truly surpassing is the greatness of His power, to make us sit
down with Christ, Yea, had you ten thousand souls, would you not lose them for
His sake? Yea, had you to enter the flames, ought you not readily to endure it?
And He Himself too says again, "Where I am, there shall also My servant be."
[John 12:26] Why surely had ye to be cut to pieces every day, ought ye not, for
the sake of these promises cheerfully to embrace it? Think, where He sits?
Above all principality and power. And with whom it is that you sit? With Him.
And who you are? One dead, by nature a child of wrath. And what good have
you done? None. Truly now it is high time to exclaim, "Oh the depth of the
riches both of the wisdom and the knowledge of God!" [Romans 11:33]
Ver. 8. "For by grace," says he "have you been saved."
In order then that the greatness of the benefits bestowed may not raise you
too high, observe how he brings you down: "by grace you have been saved,"
says he,
"Through faith;"
Then, that, on the other hand, our free-will be not impaired, he adds also
our part in the work, and yet again cancels it, and adds,
"And that not of ourselves."

Neither is faith, he means, "of ourselves." Because had He not come, had
He not called us, how had we been able to believe? For "how," says he, "shall
they believe, unless they hear?" [Romans 10:14] So that the work of faith itself
is not our own.
"It is the gift," said he, "of God," it is "not of works."
Was faith then, you will say, enough to save us? No; but God, says he, has
required this, lest He should save us, barren and without work at all. His
expression is, that faith saves, but it is because God so wills, that faith saves.
Since, how, tell me, does faith save, without works? This itself is the gift of God.
Ver. 9. "That no man should glory."
That he may excite in us proper feeling touching this gift of grace. "What
then?" says a man, "Hath He Himself hindered our being justified by works?" By
no means. But no one, he says, is justified by works, in order that the grace and
loving-kindness of God may be shown. He did not reject us as having works, but
as abandoned of works He has saved us by grace; so that no man henceforth may
have whereof to boast. And then, lest when you hear that the whole work is
accomplished not of works but by faith, you should become idle, observe how he
continues,
Ver. 10. "For we are His workmanship, created in Christ Jesus for good
works, which God afore prepared that we should walk in them."
Observe the words he uses. He here alludes to the regeneration, which is in
reality a second creation. We have been brought from non-existence into being.
As to what we were before, that is, the old man, we are dead. What we are now
become, before, we were not. Truly then is this work a creation, yea, and more
noble than the first; for from that one, we have our being; but from this last, we
have, over and above, our well being.
"For good works, which God afore prepared that we should walk in them."
Not merely that we should begin, but that we should walk in them, for we
need a virtue which shall last throughout, and be extended on to our dying day. If
we had to travel a road leading to a royal city, and then when we had passed over