SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.87, C.13.

### ARTICLE 12. Whether the authority of a prelate is required for

commutation or the dispensation of a vow?
Objection 1: It would seem that the authority of a prelate is not
required for the commutation or dispensation of a vow. A person
may enter religion without the authority of a superior prelate. Now by
entering religion one is absolved from the vows he made in the
world, even from the vow of making a pilgrimage to the Holy Land
[Cap. Scripturae, de Voto et Voti redempt.]. Therefore the
commutation or dispensation of a vow is possible without the
authority of a superior prelate.
Objection 2: Further, to dispense anyone from a vow seems to
consist in deciding in what circumstances he need not keep that
vow. But if the prelate is at fault in his decision, the person who took
the vow does not seem to be absolved from his vow, since no prelate
can grant a dispensation contrary to the divine precept about
keeping one's vows, as stated above (Article 10, ad 2; Article 11).
Likewise, when anyone rightly determines of his own authority that
in his case a vow is not to be kept, he would seem not to be bound;
since a vow need not be kept if it have an evil result (Article 2, ad 2).
Therefore the Authority of a prelate is not required that one may be
dispensed from a vow.
Objection 3: Further, if it belongs to a prelate's power to grant
dispensations from vows, on the same count it is competent to all
prelates, but it does not belong to all to dispense from every vow.
Therefore it does not belong to the power of a prelate to dispense
from vows.
On the contrary, A vow binds one to do something, even as a law
does. Now the superior's authority is requisite for a dispensation
from a precept of the law, as stated above (FS, Question 96, Article 6;
FS, Question 97, Article 4). Therefore it is likewise required in a
dispensation from a vow.
I answer that, As stated above (Articles 1,2), a vow is a promise
made to God about something acceptable to Him. Now if you
promise something to anyone it depends on his decision whether he
accept what you promise. Again in the Church a prelate stands in
God's place. Therefore a commutation or dispensation of vows

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.87, C.13.

requires the authority of a prelate who in God's stead declares what
is acceptable to God, according to 2 Cor. 2:10: "For . . . have
pardoned . . . for your sakes . . . in the person of Christ." And he says
significantly "for your sakes," since whenever we ask a prelate for a
dispensation we should do so to honor Christ in Whose person he
dispenses, or to promote the interests of the Church which is His
Body.
Reply to Objection 1: All other vows are about some particular
works, whereas by the religious life a man consecrates his whole life
to God's service. Now the particular is included in the universal,
wherefore a Decretal [Cap. Scripturae, de Voto et Voti redempt.] says
that "a man is not deemed a vow-breaker if he exchange a temporal
service for the perpetual service of religion." And yet a man who
enters religion is not bound to fulfil the vows, whether of fasting or
of praying or the like, which he made when in the world, because by
entering religion he dies to his former life, and it is unsuitable to the
religious life that each one should have his own observances, and
because the burden of religion is onerous enough without requiring
the addition of other burdens.
Reply to Objection 2: Some have held that prelates can dispense
from vows at their will, for the reason that every vow supposes as a
condition that the superior prelate be willing; thus it was stated
above (Article 8) that the vow of a subject, e.g. of a slave or a son,
supposes this condition, if "the father or master consent," or "does
not dissent." And thus a subject might break his vow without any
remorse of conscience, whenever his superior tells him to.
But this opinion is based on a false supposition: because a spiritual
prelate being, not a master, but a dispenser, his power is given "unto
edification, not for destruction" (2 Cor. 10:8), and consequently, just
as he cannot command that which is in itself displeasing to God,
namely, sin, so neither can he forbid what is in itself pleasing to God,
namely, works of virtue. Therefore absolutely speaking man can vow
them. But it does belong to a prelate to decide what is the more
virtuous and the more acceptable to God. Consequently in matters
presenting no difficulty, the prelate's dispensation would not excuse
one from sin: for instance, if a prelate were to dispense a person
from a vow to enter the religious life, without any apparent cause to
prevent him from fulfilling his vow. But if some cause were to
appear, giving rise, at least, to doubt, he could hold to the prelate's
decision whether of commutation or of dispensation. He could not,