the part of genuine love, and he seems indeed to be saying some one thing, yet
states four things even here. Both that he remembers, and that he does so
continually, and that it is in his prayers, and that it is to ask great things for them.
Ver. 10, 11. "Making request, if by any means now at length I might have a
prosperous journey by the will of God to come unto you."
You see him painfully desiring to see them, and yet not enduring to see
them contrary to what seemed good unto God, but having his longing mingled
with the fear of God. For he loved them, and was eager to come to them. Yet he
did not, because he loved them, desire to see them, contrary to what seemed
good unto God. This is true love, not as we love who err on both sides from the
laws of love: for either we love no one, or if we ever do love, we love contrary to
what seems good unto God, acting in both against the Divine law. And if these
things be grievous ([φορτικὰ]) when spoken of, they are more grievous when
done. And how do we love contrary to what seems good to God? (you will say.)
When we neglect Christ pining with hunger, and provide our children and
friends and relations above their needs. Or rather what need to carry the subject
further. For if any one will examine his own conscience, he will find that this
takes place in many things. But such was not that blessed person, but he knew
both how to love and to love as he ought (3 manuscripts omit "as he ought"), and
as was fitting, and though exceeding all men in loving, he transgressed not the
measures of love. See then two things thrive extremely in him, fear of God, and
also longing towards the Romans. For to be praying continually, and not to desist
when he obtained not, shows exceeding love. But while loving, thus to continue
yielding to the will of God, shows intense reverence. In another place, however,
having "thrice besought the Lord" [2 Corinthians 12:8], he not only did not
receive, but on the contrary, when he did not receive, he was very thankful for
not having been heard. So, in all things did he look to God. But here he received,
though not when he asked, but after delay, and neither hereat was he
discontented. And these things I mention that we may not repine at not being
heard, or at being heard slowly. For we are not better than Paul, who confesses

his thankfulness for both, and with good ground. For when he had once given
himself up to the all-governing Hand, and put himself with as much subjection
under it, as clay under the potter, he followed wheresoever God led. Having then
said that he desired to see them, he mentioned also the cause of his desire; and
what is it?
Ver. 11. "That I may impart unto you some spiritual gift, to the end ye may
be established."
For it was not merely as many now go travelling in a needless and profitless
way that he also went, but for necessary and very urgent ends. And he does not
tell them his meaning openly, but by way of hints, for he does not say that I may
teach you, that I may instruct you, that I may fill up that which is wanting; but,
"that I may impart;" showing, that it is not his own things which he is giving
them, but that he was imparting to them what he had received. And here again he
is unassuming, in saying "some," he means, a small one, and suited to my
powers. And what may this small one be which you are now going to impart?
This it is, he says, "to the end that you may be established." This then also comes
of grace, namely, the being unwavering and standing fast. But when you hear of
grace, think not that the reward of resolve on our part is thereby cast aside; for
he speaks of grace, not to disparage the labor of resolve on our part, but to
undermine ([ὑ] [ποτεμνόμενος], as piercing a thing inflated) the haughtiness of
an insolent spirit ([ἀ] [πονοίας]). Do not thou then, because that Paul has called
this a gift of grace, grow supine. For he knows how, in his great candor, to call
even well doings, graces; because even in these we need much influence from
above. But in saying, "to the end that you may be established," he covertly
shows that they needed much correction: for what he would say is this: Of a
"long time I have both desired" and prayed to see you, for no other reason than
that I may "establish, strengthen, fix" you thoroughly in the word of God, so that
you be not continually wavering. But he does not express himself so (for he
would have shocked them), but in another way he hints to them the same thing,
though in a subdued tone. For when he says, "to the end that you may be