FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.93, C.7.

destroyed, in the wicked; because in them the natural inclination to
virtue is corrupted by vicious habits, and, moreover, the natural
knowledge of good is darkened by passions and habits of sin. But in
the good both ways are found more perfect: because in them,
besides the natural knowledge of good, there is the added
knowledge of faith and wisdom; and again, besides the natural
inclination to good, there is the added motive of grace and virtue.
Accordingly, the good are perfectly subject to the eternal law, as
always acting according to it: whereas the wicked are subject to the
eternal law, imperfectly as to their actions, indeed, since both their
knowledge of good, and their inclination thereto, are imperfect; but
this imperfection on the part of action is supplied on the part of
passion, in so far as they suffer what the eternal law decrees
concerning them, according as they fail to act in harmony with that
law. Hence Augustine says (De Lib. Arb. i, 15): "I esteem that the
righteous act according to the eternal law; and (De Catech. Rud.
xviii): Out of the just misery of the souls which deserted Him, God
knew how to furnish the inferior parts of His creation with most
suitable laws."
Reply to Objection 1: This saying of the Apostle may be understood
in two ways. First, so that a man is said to be under the law, through
being pinned down thereby, against his will, as by a load. Hence, on
the same passage a gloss says that "he is under the law, who
refrains from evil deeds, through fear of punishment threatened by
the law, and not from love of virtue." In this way the spiritual man is
not under the law, because he fulfils the law willingly, through
charity which is poured into his heart by the Holy Ghost. Secondly, it
can be understood as meaning that the works of a man, who is led
by the Holy Ghost, are the works of the Holy Ghost rather than his
own. Therefore, since the Holy Ghost is not under the law, as neither
is the Son, as stated above (Article 4, ad 2); it follows that such
works, in so far as they are of the Holy Ghost, are not under the law.
The Apostle witnesses to this when he says (2 Cor. 3:17): "Where the
Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty."
Reply to Objection 2: The prudence of the flesh cannot be subject to
the law of God as regards action; since it inclines to actions contrary
to the Divine law: yet it is subject to the law of God, as regards
passion; since it deserves to suffer punishment according to the law
of Divine justice. Nevertheless in no man does the prudence of the
flesh dominate so far as to destroy the whole good of his nature: and

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.93, C.7.

consequently there remains in man the inclination to act in
accordance with the eternal law. For we have seen above (Question
85, Article 2) that sin does not destroy entirely the good of nature.
Reply to Objection 3: A thing is maintained in the end and moved
towards the end by one and the same cause: thus gravity which
makes a heavy body rest in the lower place is also the cause of its
being moved thither. We therefore reply that as it is according to the
eternal law that some deserve happiness, others unhappiness, so is
it by the eternal law that some are maintained in a happy state,
others in an unhappy state. Accordingly both the blessed and the
damned are under the eternal law.