the phrase means that generation is repugnant to the divine nature.
If, however, something be added belonging to the person of the Son,
this proposition, for instance, "God begotten does not beget," is
true. Consequently, it does not follow that there exists a "God
generator," and a "God not generator"; unless there be an adjunct
pertaining to the persons; as, for instance, if we were to say, "the
Father is God the generator" and the "Son is God the non-generator"
and so it does not follow that there are many Gods; for the Father
and the Son are one God, as was said above (Article 3).
Reply to Objection 4: This is false, "the Father begot God, that is
Himself," because the word "Himself," as a reciprocal term, refers to
the same "suppositum." Nor is this contrary to what Augustine says
(Ep. lxvi ad Maxim.) that "God the Father begot another self [alterum
se]," forasmuch as the word "se" is either in the ablative case, and
then it means "He begot another from Himself," or it indicates a
single relation, and thus points to identity of nature. This is,
however, either a figurative or an emphatic way of speaking, so that
it would really mean, "He begot another most like to Himself."
Likewise also it is false to say, "He begot another God," because
although the Son is another than the Father, as above explained
(Question 31, Article 2), nevertheless it cannot be said that He is
"another God"; forasmuch as this adjective "another" would be
understood to apply to the substantive God; and thus the meaning
would be that there is a distinction of Godhead. Yet this proposition
"He begot another God" is tolerated by some, provided that
"another" be taken as a substantive, and the word "God" be
construed in apposition with it. This, however, is an inexact way of
speaking, and to be avoided, for fear of giving occasion to error.
Reply to Objection 5: To say, "God begot God Who is God the
Father," is wrong, because since the word "Father" is construed in
apposition to "God," the word "God" is restricted to the person of
the Father; so that it would mean, "He begot God, Who is Himself the
Father"; and then the Father would be spoken of as begotten, which
is false. Wherefore the negative of the proposition is true, "He begot
God Who is not God the Father." If however, we understand these
words not to be in apposition, and require something to be added,
then, on the contrary, the affirmative proposition is true, and the
negative is false; so that the meaning would be, "He begot God Who
is God Who is the Father." Such a rendering however appears to be
forced, so that it is better to say simply that the affirmative
proposition is false, and the negative is true. Yet Prepositivus said

that both the negative and affirmative are false, because this relative
"Who" in the affirmative proposition can be referred to the
"suppositum"; whereas in the negative it denotes both the thing
signified and the "suppositum." Whence, in the affirmative the sense
is that "to be God the Father" is befitting to the person of the Son;
and in the negative sense is that "to be God the Father," is to be
removed from the Son's divinity as well as from His personality.
This, however, appears to be irrational; since, according to the
Philosopher (Peri Herm. ii), what is open to affirmation, is open also
to negation.