forgiveness of sin: but the dispositive cause can be from us also,
and likewise the sacramental cause, since the sacramental forms are
words uttered by us, having an instrumental power of conferring
grace whereby sins are forgiven.
Reply to Objection 2: The forgiveness of sin precedes virtue and the
infusion of grace, in one way, and, in another, follows: and in so far
as it follows, the act elicited by the virtue can be a cause of the
forgiveness of sin.
Reply to Objection 3: The dispensation of the Eucharist belongs to
the ministers of the Church: wherefore a man should not go to
Communion until his sin has been forgiven through the ministers of
the Church, although his sin may be forgiven him before God.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether contrition can take away the debt of

punishment entirely?
Objection 1: It would seem that contrition cannot take away the debt
of punishment entirely. For satisfaction and confession are ordained
for man's deliverance from the debt of punishment. Now no man is
so perfectly contrite as not to be bound to confession and
satisfaction. Therefore contrition is never so great as to blot out the
entire debt of punishment.
Objection 2: Further, in Penance the punishment should in some way
compensate for the sin. Now some sins are accomplished by
members of the body. Therefore, since it is for the due compensation
for sin that "by what things a man sinneth, by the same also he is
tormented" (Wis. 11:17), it seems that the punishment for suchlike
sins can never be remitted by contrition.
Objection 3: Further, the sorrow of contrition is finite. Now an infinite
punishment is due for some, viz. mortal, sins. Therefore contrition
can never be so great as to remit the whole punishment.
On the contrary, The affections of the heart are more acceptable to
God than external acts. Now man is absolved from both punishment
and guilt by means of external actions; and therefore he is also by
means of the heart's affections, such as contrition is.
Further, we have an example of this in the thief, to whom it was said
(Lk. 23:43): "This day shalt thou be with Me in paradise," on account
of his one act of repentance.
As to whether the whole debt of punishment is always taken away by
contrition, this question has already been considered above (Sent.
iv, D, 14, Question 2, Articles 1,2; TP, Question 86, Article 4), where
the same question was raised with regard to Penance.
I answer that, The intensity of contrition may be regarded in two
ways. First, on the part of charity, which causes the displeasure, and
in this way it may happen that the act of charity is so intense that the
contrition resulting therefrom merits not only the removal of guilt,
but also the remission of all punishment. Secondly, on the part of the
sensible sorrow, which the will excites in contrition: and since this