not positively rejected, have been thought to hinder rather than assist
faith in three divine persons and one God. But the history of opinions
shows that such sections of the church have not proved to be the
strongest defenders of the Scripture statement, nor the most successful in
keeping clear of the Sabellian, Arian, or even Socinian departure from it.
Those churches which have followed Scripture most implicitly, and have
most feared human speculation, are the very churches which have
inserted into their creeds the most highly analytic statement that has yet
been made of the doctrine of the Trinity. The Nicene Trinitarianism is
incorporated into nearly all the symbols of modern Christendom; and this
specifies, particularly, the tenets of eternal generation and procession
with their corollaries. The English Church, to whose great divines,
Hooker, Bull, Waterland, and Pearson, scientific Trinitarianism owes a
very lucid and careful statement, has added the Athanasian creed to the
Nicene. The Presbyterian churches, distinguished for the closeness of
their adherence to the simple Scripture, yet call upon their membership
to confess, that "in the unity of the Godhead there be three persons, of
one substance, power, and eternity; God the Father, God the Son, and
God the Holy Ghost. The Father is of none, neither begotten nor
proceeding; the Son is eternally begotten of the Father; the Holy Ghost
eternally proceeding from the Father and the Son."
The treatise of Augustin upon the Trinity, which is here made accessible
to the English reader, is one of the ablest produced in the patristic age.
The author devoted nearly thirty years of his matured life to its
composition (A. D. 400 to 428). He was continually touching and
retouching it, and would have delayed its publication longer than he did,
had a copy not been obtained surreptitiously and published. He seems to
have derived little assistance from others; for although the great Greek
Trinitarians—Athanasius, the two Gregories, and Basil—had published
their treatises, yet he informs us that his knowledge of Greek, though
sufficient for understanding the exegetical and practical writings of his
brethren of the Greek Church, was not adequate to the best use of their
dialectical and metaphysical compositions. Accordingly, there is no trace
in this work of the writings of the Greek Trinitarians, though a substantial
agreement with them. The only Trinitarian author to whom he alludes is

Hilary—a highly acute and abstruse Trinitarian.
In his general position, Augustin agrees with the Nicene creed; but laying
more emphasis upon the consubstantiality of the persons, and definitely
asserting the procession of the Spirit from the Father and Son. Some
dogmatic historians seem to imply that he differed materially from the
Nicene doctrine on the point of subordination. Hagenbach (Smith's Ed. §
95) asserts that "Augustin completely purified the dogma of the Trinity
from the older vestiges of subordination;" and adds that "such vestiges
are unquestionably to be found in the most orthodox Fathers, not only in
the East but also in the West." He cites Hilary and Athanasius as
examples, and quotes the remark of Gieseler, that "the idea of a
subordination lies at the basis of such declarations." Neander (II. 470,
Note 2) says that Augustin "kept at a distance everything that bordered
on subordinationism." These statements are certainly too sweeping and
unqualified. There are three kinds of subordination: the filial or
trinitarian; the theanthropic; and the Arian. The first is taught, and the
second implied, in the Nicene creed. The last is denied and excluded.
Accordingly, dogmatic historians like Petavius, Bull, Waterland, and
Pearson, contend that the Nicene creed, in affirming the filial, but
denying the Arian subordination; in teaching subordination as to person
and relationship, but denying it as to essence; enunciates a revealed
truth, and that this is endorsed by all the Trinitarian fathers, Eastern and
Western. And there certainly can be no doubt that Augustin held this
view. He maintains, over and over again, that Sonship as a relationship is
second and subordinate to Fatherhood; that while a Divine Father and a
Divine Son must necessarily be of the very same nature and grade of
being, like a human father and a human son, yet the latter issues from the
former, not the former from the latter. Augustin's phraseology on this
point is as positive as that of Athanasius, and in some respects even more
bold and capable of misinterpretation. He denominates the Father the
"beginning" (principium) of the Son, and the Father and Son the
"beginning" (principium) of the Holy Spirit. "The Father is the beginning
of the whole divinity, or if it is better so expressed, deity." IV. xx. 29. "In
their mutual relation to one another in the Trinity itself, if the begetter is
a beginning (principium) in relation to that which he begets, the Father is
a beginning in relation to the Son, because he begets Him." V. xiv. 15.