SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.82, C.4.

Reply to Objection 2: It is a matter of precept not only that we should
ask for what we desire, but also that we should desire aright. But to
desire comes under a precept of charity, whereas to ask comes
under a precept of religion, which precept is expressed in Mt. 7:7,
where it is said: "Ask and ye shall receive".
Reply to Objection 3: By praying man surrenders his mind to God,
since he subjects it to Him with reverence and, so to speak, presents
it to Him, as appears from the words of Dionysius quoted above
(Article 1, Objection 2). Wherefore just as the human mind excels
exterior things, whether bodily members, or those external things
that are employed for God's service, so too, prayer surpasses other
acts of religion.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.82, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether we ought to pray to God alone?

Objection 1: It would seem that we ought to pray to God alone.
Prayer is an act of religion, as stated above (Article 3). But God alone
is to be worshiped by religion. Therefore we should pray to God
alone.
Objection 2: Further, it is useless to pray to one who is ignorant of
the prayer. But it belongs to God alone to know one's prayer, both
because frequently prayer is uttered by an interior act which God
alone knows, rather than by words, according to the saying of the
Apostle (1 Cor. 14:15), "I will pray with the spirit, I will pray also with
the understanding": and again because, as Augustine says (De Cura
pro mortuis xiii) the "dead, even the saints, know not what the living,
even their own children, are doing." Therefore we ought to pray to
God alone.
Objection 3: Further, if we pray to any of the saints, this is only
because they are united to God. Now some yet living in this world, or
even some who are in Purgatory, are closely united to God by grace,
and yet we do not pray to them. Therefore neither should we pray to
the saints who are in Paradise.
On the contrary, It is written (Job 5:1), "Call . . . if there be any that
will answer thee, and turn to some of the saints."
I answer that, Prayer is offered to a person in two ways: first, as to
be fulfilled by him, secondly, as to be obtained through him. In the
first way we offer prayer to God alone, since all our prayers ought to
be directed to the acquisition of grace and glory, which God alone
gives, according to Ps. 83:12, "The Lord will give grace and glory."
But in the second way we pray to the saints, whether angels or men,
not that God may through them know our petitions, but that our
prayers may be effective through their prayers and merits. Hence it
is written (Apoc. 8:4) that "the smoke of the incense," namely "the
prayers of the saints ascended up before God." This is also clear
from the very style employed by the Church in praying: since we
beseech the Blessed Trinity "to have mercy on us," while we ask any
of the saints "to pray for us."
Reply to Objection 1: To Him alone do we offer religious worship