Literally, "reading from things unwritten."

the king. In like manner do these persons patch together old wives' fables, and then endeavour, by
violently drawing away from their proper connection, words, expressions, and parables whenever
found, to adapt the oracles of God to their baseless fictions. We have already stated how far they
proceed in this way with respect to the interior of the Pleroma.
2. Then, again, as to those things outside of their Pleroma, the following are some specimens
of what they attempt to accommodate out of the Scriptures to their opinions. They affirm that the
Lord came in the last times of the world to endure suffering, for this end, that He might indicate
the passion which occurred to the last of the Æons, and might by His own end announce the cessation
of that disturbance which had risen among the Æons. They maintain, further, that that girl of twelve
years old, the daughter of the ruler of the synagogue, to whom the Lord approached and raised
her from the dead, was a type of Achamoth, to whom their Christ, by extending himself, imparted
shape, and whom he led anew to the perception of that light which had forsaken her. And that the
Saviour appeared to her when she lay outside of the Pleroma as a kind of abortion, they affirm Paul
to have declared in his Epistle to the Corinthians [in these words], "And last of all, He appeared to
me also, as to one born out of due time." Again, the coming of the Saviour with His attendants
to Achamoth is declared in like manner by him in the same Epistle, when he says, "A woman ought
to have a veil upon her head, because of the angels." Now, that Achamoth, when the Saviour
came to her, drew a veil over herself through modesty, Moses rendered manifest when he put a veil
upon his face. Then, also, they say that the passions which she endured were indicated by the Lord
upon the cross. Thus, when He said, "My God, my God, why hast Thou forsaken Me?" He
simply showed that Sophia was deserted by the light, and was restrained by Horos from making
any advance forward. Her anguish, again, was indicated when He said, "My soul is exceeding
sorrowful, even unto death;" her fear by the words, "Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass
from Me;" and her perplexity, too, when He said, "And what I shall say, I know not."
3. And they teach that He pointed out the three kinds of men as follows: the material, when He
said to him that asked Him, "Shall I follow Thee?" "The Son of man hath not where to lay His
head;"— the animal, when He said to him that declared, "I will follow Thee, but suffer me first to
bid them farewell that are in my house," "No man, putting his hand to the plough, and looking

John xii. 27. The Valentinians seem, for their own purposes, to have added )-! )./& to this text.

back, is fit for the kingdom of heaven" (for this man they declare to be of the intermediate class,
even as they do that other who, though he professed to have wrought a large amount of righteousness,
yet refused to follow Him, and was so overcome by [the love of] riches, as never to reach
perfection)—this one it pleases them to place in the animal class;—the spiritual, again, when He
said, "Let the dead bury their dead, but go thou and preach the kingdom of God," and when He
said to Zaccheus the publican, "Make haste, and come down, for to-day I must abide in thine
house"—for these they declared to have belonged to the spiritual class. Also the parable of the
leaven which the woman is described as having hid in three measures of meal, they declare to make
manifest the three classes. For, according to their teaching, the woman represented Sophia; the
three measures of meal, the three kinds of men— spiritual, animal, and material; while the leaven
denoted the Saviour Himself. Paul, too, very plainly set forth the material, animal, and spiritual,
saying in one place, "As is the earthy, such are they also that are earthy;" and in another place,
"But the animal man receiveth not the things of the Spirit;" and again: "He that is spiritual judgeth
all things." And this, "The animal man receiveth not the things of the Spirit," they affirm to have
been spoken concerning the Demiurge, who, as being animal, knew neither his mother who was
spiritual, nor her seed, nor the Æons in the Pleroma. And that the Saviour received first-fruits of
those whom He was to save, Paul declared when he said, "And if the first-fruits be holy, the lump
is also holy," teaching that the expression "first-fruits" denoted that which is spiritual, but that
"the lump" meant us, that is, the animal Church, the lump of which they say He assumed, and
blended it with Himself, inasmuch as He is "the leaven."
4. Moreover, that Achamoth wandered beyond the Pleroma, and received form from Christ,
and was sought after by the Saviour, they declare that He indicated when He said, that He had come
after that sheep which was gone astray. For they explain the wandering sheep to mean their
mother, by whom they represent the Church as having been sown. The wandering itself denotes
her stay outside of the Pleroma in a state of varied passion, from which they maintain that matter
derived its origin. The woman, again, who sweeps the house and finds the piece of money, they
declare to denote the Sophia above, who, having lost her enthymesis, afterwards recovered it, on