things are lawful to me, but all things are not expedient;" referring both to the liberty of man, in
which respect "all things are lawful," God exercising no compulsion in regard to him; and [by the
expression] "not expedient" pointing out that we "should not use our liberty as a cloak of
maliciousness," for this is not expedient. And again he says, "Speak ye every man truth with his
neighbour." And, "Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, neither filthiness,
nor foolish talking, nor scurrility, which are not convenient, but rather giving of thanks." And,
"For ye were sometimes darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord; walk honestly as children of
the light, not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in anger and
jealousy. And such were some of you; but ye have been washed, but ye have been sanctified in the
name of our Lord." If then it were not in our power to do or not to do these things, what reason
had the apostle, and much more the Lord Himself, to give us counsel to do some things, and to
abstain from others? But because man is possessed of free will from the beginning, and God is
possessed of free will, in whose likeness man was created, advice is always given to him to keep
fast the good, which thing is done by means of obedience to God.
5. And not merely in works, but also in faith, has God preserved the will of man free and under
his own control, saying, "According to thy faith be it unto thee;" thus showing that there is a
faith specially belonging to man, since he has an opinion specially his own. And again, "All things
are possible to him that believeth;" and, "Go thy way; and as thou hast believed, so be it done
unto thee." Now all such expressions demonstrate that man is in his own power with respect to
faith. And for this reason, "he that believeth in Him has eternal life while he who believeth not the
Son hath not eternal life, but the wrath of God shall remain upon him." In the same manner
therefore the Lord, both showing His own goodness, and indicating that man is in his own free will
and his own power, said to Jerusalem, "How often have I wished to gather thy children together,
as a hen [gathereth] her chickens under her wings, and ye would not! Wherefore your house shall
be left unto you desolate."
6. Those, again, who maintain the opposite to these [conclusions], do themselves present the
Lord as destitute of power, as if, forsooth, He were unable to accomplish what He willed; or, on

Eph. iv. 29.

Matt. viii. 13.

the other hand, as being ignorant that they were by nature "material," as these men express it, and
such as cannot receive His immortality. "But He should not," say they, "have created angels of
such a nature that they were capable of transgression, nor men who immediately proved ungrateful
towards Him; for they were made rational beings, endowed with the power of examining and
judging, and were not [formed] as things irrational or of a [merely] animal nature, which can do
nothing of their own will, but are drawn by necessity and compulsion to what is good, in which
things there is one mind and one usage, working mechanically in one groove (inflexibiles et sine
judicio), who are incapable of being anything else except just what they had been created." But
upon this supposition, neither would what is good be grateful to them, nor communion with God
be precious, nor would the good be very much to be sought after, which would present itself without
their own proper endeavour, care, or study, but would be implanted of its own accord and without
their concern. Thus it would come to pass, that their being good would be of no consequence,
because they were so by nature rather than by will, and are possessors of good spontaneously, not
by choice; and for this reason they would not understand this fact, that good is a comely thing, nor
would they take pleasure in it. For how can those who are ignorant of good enjoy it? Or what credit
is it to those who have not aimed at it? And what crown is it to those who have not followed in
pursuit of it, like those victorious in the contest?
7. On this account, too, did the Lord assert that the kingdom of heaven was the portion of "the
violent;" and He says, "The violent take it by force;" that is, those who by strength and earnest
striving are on the watch to snatch it away on the moment. On this account also Paul the Apostle
says to the Corinthians, "Know ye not, that they who run in a racecourse, do all indeed run, but
one receiveth the prize? So run, that ye may obtain. Every one also who engages in the contest is
temperate in all things: now these men [do it] that they may obtain a corruptible crown, but we an
incorruptible. But I so run, not as uncertainty; I fight, not as one beating the air; but I make my
body livid, and bring it into subjection, lest by any means, when preaching to others, I may myself
be rendered a castaway." This able wrestler, therefore, exhorts us to the struggle for immortality,
that we may be crowned, and may deem the crown precious, namely, that which is acquired by our
struggle, but which does not encircle us of its own accord (sed non ultro coalitam). And the harder
we strive, so much is it the more valuable; while so much the more valuable it is, so much the more
should we esteem it. And indeed those things are not esteemed so highly which come spontaneously,
as those which are reached by much anxious care. Since, then, this power has been conferred upon
us, both the Lord has taught and the apostle has enjoined us the more to love God, that we may
reach this [prize] for ourselves by striving after it. For otherwise, no doubt, this our good would be
[virtually] irrational, because not the result of trial. Moreover, the faculty of seeing would not appear
to be so desirable, unless we had known what a loss it were to be devoid of sight; and health, too,
is rendered all the more estimable by an acquaintance with disease; light, also, by contrasting it