FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.35, C.7.

Therefore desire for pleasure is naturally greater than the shunning
of sorrow. Another reason is because the good, which is the object
of pleasure, is sought for its own sake: whereas the evil, which is the
object of sorrow, is to be shunned as being a privation of good: and
that which is by reason of itself is stronger than that which is by
reason of something else. Moreover we find a confirmation of this in
natural movements. For every natural movement is more intense in
the end, when a thing approaches the term that is suitable to its
nature, than at the beginning, when it leaves the term that is
unsuitable to its nature: as though nature were more eager in
tending to what is suitable to it, than in shunning what is unsuitable.
Therefore the inclination of the appetitive power is, of itself, more
eager in tending to pleasure than in shunning sorrow.
But it happens accidentally that a man shuns sorrow more eagerly
than he seeks pleasure: and this for three reasons. First, on the part
of the apprehension. Because, as Augustine says (De Trin. x, 12),
"love is felt more keenly, when we lack that which we love." Now
from the lack of what we love, sorrow results, which is caused either
by the loss of some loved good, or by the presence of some contrary
evil. But pleasure suffers no lack of the good loved, for it rests in
possession of it. Since then love is the cause of pleasure and
sorrow, the latter is more the shunned, according as love is the more
keenly felt on account of that which is contrary to it. Secondly, on
the part of the cause of sorrow or pain, which cause is repugnant to
a good that is more loved than the good in which we take pleasure.
For we love the natural well-being of the body more than the
pleasure of eating: and consequently we would leave the pleasure of
eating and the like, from fear of the pain occasioned by blows or
other such causes, which are contrary to the well-being of the body.
Thirdly, on the part of the effect: namely, in so far as sorrow hinders
not only one pleasure, but all.
Reply to Objection 1: The saying of Augustine that "sorrow is
shunned more than pleasure is sought" is true accidentally but not
simply. And this is clear from what he says after: "Since we see that
the most savage animals are deterred from the greatest pleasures by
fear of pain," which pain is contrary to life which is loved above all.
Reply to Objection 2: It is not the same with movement from within
and movement from without. For movement from within tends to
what is suitable more than it recedes from that which is unsuitable;
as we remarked above in regard to natural movement. But movement

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.35, C.7.

from without is intensified by the very opposition: because each
thing strives in its own way to resist anything contrary to it, as
aiming at its own preservation. Hence violent movement is intense at
first, and slackens towards the end. Now the movement of the
appetitive faculty is from within: since it tends from the soul to the
object. Consequently pleasure is, of itself, more to be sought than
sorrow is to be shunned. But the movement of the sensitive faculty
is from without, as it were from the object of the soul. Consequently
the more contrary a thing is the more it is felt. And then too,
accidentally, in so far as the senses are requisite for pleasure and
pain, pain is shunned more than pleasure is sought.
Reply to Objection 3: A brave man is not praised because, in
accordance with reason, he is not overcome by any kind of sorrow
or pain whatever, but because he is not overcome by that which is
concerned with the dangers of death. And this kind of sorrow is
more shunned, than pleasures of the table or of sexual intercourse
are sought, which latter pleasures are the object of temperance: thus
life is loved more than food and sexual pleasure. But the temperate
man is praised for refraining from pleasures of touch, more than for
not shunning the pains which are contrary to them, as is stated in
Ethic. iii, 11.