SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.31, C.8.

or when a man, with the desire of making money out of another man,
entices him to play, and wins from him by cheating. In these cases
he is bound to restitution, and consequently cannot give away his
gains in alms. Then again there would seem to be something
unlawful as being against the positive civil law, which altogether
forbids any such profits. Since, however, a civil law does not bind
all, but only those who are subject to that law, and moreover may be
abrogated through desuetude, it follows that all such as are bound
by these laws are bound to make restitution of such gains, unless
perchance the contrary custom prevail, or unless a man win from
one who enticed him to play, in which case he is not bound to
restitution, because the loser does not deserve to be paid back: and
yet he cannot lawfully keep what he has won, so long as that positive
law is in force, wherefore in this case he ought to give it away in
alms.
Reply to Objection 3: All things are common property in a case of
extreme necessity. Hence one who is in such dire straits may take
another's goods in order to succor himself, if he can find no one who
is willing to give him something. For the same reason a man may
retain what belongs to another, and give alms thereof; or even take
something if there be no other way of succoring the one who is in
need. If however this be possible without danger, he must ask the
owner's consent, and then succor the poor man who is in extreme
necessity.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.31, C.9.

### ARTICLE 8. Whether one who is under another's power can

give alms?
Objection 1: It would seem that one who is under another's power
can give alms. For religious are under the power of their prelates to
whom they have vowed obedience. Now if it were unlawful for them
to give alms, they would lose by entering the state of religion, for as
Ambrose says on 1 Tim. 4:8: "'Dutifulness is profitable to all things':
The sum total of the Christian religion consists in doing one's duty
by all," and the most creditable way of doing this is to give alms.
Therefore those who are in another's power can give alms.
Objection 2: Further, a wife is under her husband's power (Gn. 3:16).
But a wife can give alms since she is her husband's partner; hence it
is related of the Blessed Lucy that she gave alms without the
knowledge of her betrothed. Therefore a person is not prevented
from giving alms, by being under another's power.
Objection 3: Further, the subjection of children to their parents is
founded on nature, wherefore the Apostle says (Eph. 6:1): "Children,
obey your parents in the Lord." But, apparently, children may give
alms out of their parents' property. For it is their own, since they are
the heirs; wherefore, since they can employ it for some bodily use, it
seems that much more can they use it in giving alms so as to profit
their souls. Therefore those who are under another's power can give
alms.
Objection 4: Further, servants are under their master's power,
according to Titus 2:9: "Exhort servants to be obedient to their
masters." Now they may lawfully do anything that will profit their
masters: and this would be especially the case if they gave alms for
them. Therefore those who are under another's power can give alms.
On the contrary, Alms should not be given out of another's property;
and each one should give alms out of the just profit of his own labor
as Augustine says (De Verb. Dom. xxxv, 2). Now if those who are
subject to anyone were to give alms, this would be out of another's
property. Therefore those who are under another's power cannot
give alms.
I answer that, Anyone who is under another's power must, as such,