earth and corruption, the absence of any one to help: but none of these things
soften those accursed wretches, because of the tyranny they are under from their
base cupidity. For the passion of covetousness, like some ruthless tyrant, is at
hand, enjoining those inhuman commands and having made wild beasts of them,
so brings them to the tombs. Yea, like wild beasts attacking the dead, they would
not even abstain from their flesh, if their limbs were any way useful unto them.
Such is our enjoyment of wealth; to be insulted even after death, and deprived of
sepulture which even the most desperate criminals obtain.
14. Are we still then, tell me, to be fond of so grievous an enemy? Nay, I
beseech you, nay, my brethren! But let us fly from it without turning to look: and
if it come into our hands, let us not keep it within, but bind it fast by the hands of
the poor. For these are the bonds which have more power to hold it, and from
those treasuries it will never more escape; and so this faithless one abides for the
time to come faithful, tractable, tame, the right hand of Mercy producing this
effect on it.
As I have said then, if it ever come to us, let us hand it over to her; but if it
come not, let us not seek after it, nor fret ourselves, nor count its possessors
happy; for what sort of a notion of happiness is this? Unless you would also say
that those who fight with beasts are to be envied, because those high-priced
animals are shut up and reserved by the proposers of such contests for
themselves: who however not daring themselves to approach or to touch them,
but fearing and trembling because of them, hand over others to them. Something
like this, I say, is the case of the wealthy, when they have shut up their wealth in
their treasuries as if it were some savage beast, and day by day receive from it
innumerable wounds: in this latter unlike to the beasts: since they, when you lead
them out, then, and not till then, hurt such as meet them: but this, when it is shut
up and preserved, then destroys its possessors and hoarders.
But let us make this beast tame. And it will be tame, if we do not shut it up,
but give it into the hands of all who are in need. So shall we reap from this
quarter the greatest blessings, both living in the present life with safety and a

good hope, and in the day that is to come standing with boldness: to which may
we all attain, through the grace and mercy, etc. etc.

## Homily 36 on First Corinthians

1 Corinthians 14:20
Brethren, be not children in mind; howbeit in malice be ye babes, but in
mind be men.
As might be expected, after his long argument and demonstration he adopts
a more vehement style and abundance of rebuke; and mentions an example
suited to the subject. For children too are wont to gape after trifles and to be
fluttered, but of things very great they have not so much admiration. Since then
these also having the gift of tongues, which was the lowest of all, thought they
had the whole; therefore he says, "Be not children," i.e., be not without
understanding where ye ought to be considerate, but there be ye childlike and
simple, where unrighteousness is, where vain-glory, where pride. For he that is a
babe in wickedness ought also to be wise. Since as wisdom with wickedness
would not be wisdom, so also simplicity with folly would not be simplicity, it
being requisite both in simplicity to avoid folly, and in wisdom wickedness. For
as neither bitter nor sweet medicines in excess do good, so neither does
simplicity by itself, nor wisdom: and this is why Christ enjoining us to mix both
said, "Be wise as serpents, and harmless as doves." [Matthew 10:16]
But what is it to be a babe in wickedness? Not even to know what
wickedness is: yea, such he willed them to be. Wherefore also he said, "It is
actually reported that there is fornication among you." [1 Corinthians 5:1] He
said not, "is done," but is "reported:" as if he said, "you are not without
knowledge of the thing; you have heard of it some time." I say, he would have
them both to be men and children; the one however in wickedness, but the other
in wisdom. For so even the man may become a man, if he be also a child: but as
long as he is not a child in wickedness, neither will he be a man. For the wicked,