John 1:10
"He was in the world."
But not as of equal duration with the world. Away with the thought.
Wherefore he adds, "And the world was made by Him"; thus leading you up
again to the eternal existence of the Only-Begotten. For he who has heard that
this universe is His work, though he be very dull, though he be a hater, though he
be an enemy of the glory of God, will certainly, willing or unwilling, be forced
to confess that the maker is before his works. Whence wonder always comes
over me at the madness of Paul of Samosata, who dared to look in the face so
manifest a truth, and voluntarily threw himself down the precipice. For he erred
not ignorantly but with full knowledge, being in the same case as the Jews. For
as they, looking to men, gave up sound faith, knowing that he was the onlybegotten Son of God, but not confessing Him, because of their rulers, lest they
should be cast out of the synagogue; so it is said that he, to gratify a certain
woman, sold his own salvation. A powerful thing, powerful indeed, is the
tyranny of vainglory; it is able to make blind the eyes even of the wise, except
they be sober; for if the taking of gifts can effect this, much more will the yet
more violent feeling of this passion. Wherefore Jesus said to the Jews, "How can
you believe, which receive honor one of another, and seek not the honor that
comes from God only?" [John 5:44]
"And the world knew Him not." By "the world" he here means the
multitude, which is corrupt, and closely attached to earthly things, the common
turbulent, silly people. For the friends and favorites of God all knew Him, even
before His coming in the flesh. Concerning the Patriarch Christ Himself speaks
by name, "that your father Abraham rejoiced to see My day, and he saw it, and
was glad." [John 8:56] And concerning David, confuting the Jews He said,
"How then does David in spirit call Him Lord, saying, the Lord said unto my
Lord, Sit on My right hand." [Matthew 22:43; Mark 12:36; Luke 20:42] And in

many places, disputing with them, He mentions Moses; and the Apostle
(mentions) the rest of the prophets; for Peter declares, that all the prophets from
Samuel knew Him, and proclaimed beforehand His coming afar off, when he
says, "All the prophets from Samuel and those that follow after, as many as have
spoken, have likewise foretold of these days." [Acts 3:24] But Jacob and his
father, as well as his grandfather, He both appeared to and talked with, and
promised that He would give them many and great blessings, which also He
brought to pass.
"How then," says one, "did He say Himself, 'Many prophets have desired to
see those things which you see, and have not seen them; and to hear those things
which you hear, and have not heard them'? [Luke 10:24] Did they then not share
in the knowledge of Him?" Surely they did; and I will endeavor to make this
plain from this very saying, by which some think that they are deprived of it.
"For many," He says, "have desired to see the things which you see." So that
they knew that He would come [to men] from heaven, and would live and teach
as He lived and taught; for had they not known, they could have not desired,
since no one can conceive desire for things of which he has no idea; therefore
they knew the Son of Man, and that He would come among men. What then are
the things which they did not hear? What those which they did not know? The
things which you now see and hear. For if they did hear His voice and did see
Him, it was not in the Flesh, not among men; nor when He was living so
familiarly, and conversing so frankly with them. And indeed He to show this
said not simply, "to see" "Me": but what? "the things which you see"; nor "to
hear" "Me": but what? "the things which you hear." So that if they did not
behold His coming in the Flesh, still they knew that it would be, and they desired
it, and believed on Him without having seen Him in the Flesh.
When therefore the Greeks bring charges such as these against us, and say;
"What then did Christ in former time, that He did not look upon the race of men?
And for what possible reason did He come at last to assist in our salvation, after
neglecting us so long?" we will reply, that before this He was in the world, and