says, "God gave them up unto a reprobate mind." For when they themselves first
disbelieved, and rendered themselves unworthy to see the mysteries; He Himself
also thereafter permitted it. But what did it behoove Him to do? To draw them by
force, and reveal to those who would not see? But so they would have despised
the more, and would not have seen either. Wherefore also he added,
"That the light of the Gospel of the glory of Christ should not dawn upon
them."
Not that they might disbelieve in God, but that unbelief might not see what
are the things within, as also He enjoined us, commanding not to "cast the pearls
before the swine." [Matthew 7:6] For had He revealed even to those who
disbelieve, their disease would have been the rather aggravated. For if one
compel a man laboring under ophthalmia to look at the sunbeams, he the rather
increases his infirmity. Therefore the physicians even shut them up in darkness,
so as not to aggravate their disorder. So then here also we must consider that
these persons indeed became unbelievers of themselves, but having become so,
they no longer saw the secret things of the Gospel, God thenceforth excluding its
beams from them. As also he said to the disciples, "Therefore I speak unto them
in proverbs , [Matthew 13:13] because hearing they hear not." But what I say
may also become clearer by an example; suppose a Greek, accounting our
religion to be fables. This man then, how will he be more advantaged? By going
in and seeing the mysteries, or by remaining without? Therefore he says, "That
the light should not dawn upon them," still dwelling on the history of Moses. For
what happened to the Jews in his case, this happens to all unbelievers in the case
of the Gospel. And what is that which is overshadowed, and which is not
illuminated unto them? Hear him saying, "That the light of the glorious Gospel
of Christ who is the Image of God, should not dawn upon them." Namely, that
the Cross is the salvation of the world, and His glory; that this Crucified One
himself is about to come with much splendor; all the other things, those present,
those to come, those seen, those not seen, the unspeakable splendor of the things
looked for. Therefore also he said, "dawn," that you may not look for the whole

here, for that which is [here] given is only, as it were, a little dawning of the
Spirit. Therefore, also above as indicating this, he spoke of "savor;" [2
Corinthians 2:16] and again, "earnest," [2 Corinthians 1:25] showing that the
greater part remains there. But nevertheless all these things have been hidden
from them; but had been hidden because they disbelieved first. Then to show
that they are not only ignorant of the Glory of Christ, but of the Father's also,
since they know not His, he added, "Who is the Image of God?" For do not halt
at Christ only. For as by Him you see the Father, so if you are ignorant of His
Glory, neither will you know the Father's.