THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.39, C.4.

wisdom, it has been granted to some, contrary to the common law,
to exercise the functions of governing or teaching. such as Solomon,
Daniel, and Jeremias.
Reply to Objection 4: It was not fitting that Christ should be baptized
by John either before or after all others. Because, as Chrysostom
says (Hom. iv in Matth. [Opus Imperfectum]), for this was Christ
baptized, "that He might confirm the preaching and the baptism of
John, and that John might bear witness to Him." Now, men would
not have had faith in John's testimony except after many had been
baptized by him. Consequently it was not fitting that John should
baptize Him before baptizing anyone else. In like manner, neither
was it fitting that he should baptize Him last. For as he (Chrysostom)
says in the same passage: "As the light of the sun does not wait for
the setting of the morning star, but comes forth while the latter is
still above the horizon, and by its brilliance dims its shining: so
Christ did not wait till John had run his course, but appeared while
he was yet teaching and baptizing."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.39, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether Christ should have been baptized in the

Jordan?
Objection 1: It would seem that Christ should not have been baptized
in the Jordan. For the reality should correspond to the figure. But
baptism was prefigured in the crossing of the Red Sea, where the
Egyptians were drowned, just as our sins are blotted out in baptism.
Therefore it seems that Christ should rather have been baptized in
the sea than in the river Jordan.
Objection 2: Further, "Jordan" is interpreted a "going down." But by
baptism a man goes up rather than down: wherefore it is written (Mt.
3:16) that "Jesus being baptized, forthwith came up from the water."
Therefore it seems unfitting that Christ should be baptized in the
Jordan.
Objection 3: Further, while the children of Israel were crossing, the
waters of the Jordan "were turned back," as it is related Jos. 4, and
as it is written Ps. 113:3,5. But those who are baptized go forward,
not back. Therefore it was not fitting that Christ should be baptized
in the Jordan.
On the contrary, It is written (Mk. 1:9) that "Jesus was baptized by
John in the Jordan."
I answer that, It was through the river Jordan that the children of
Israel entered into the land of promise. Now, this is the prerogative
of Christ's baptism over all other baptisms: that it is the entrance to
the kingdom of God, which is signified by the land of promise;
wherefore it is said (Jn. 3:5): "Unless a man be born again of water
and the Holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God." To
this also is to be referred the dividing of the water of the Jordan by
Elias, who was to be snatched up into heaven in a fiery chariot, as it
is related 4 Kgs. 2: because, to wit, the approach to heaven is laid
open by the fire of the Holy Ghost, to those who pass through the
waters of baptism. Therefore it was fitting that Christ should be
baptized in the Jordan.
Reply to Objection 1: The crossing of the Red Sea foreshadowed
baptism in this---that baptism washes away sin: whereas the
crossing of the Jordan foreshadows it in this---that it opens the gate