THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.27, C.7.

far accelerated that while yet in his mother's womb he was able to
acknowledge, believe, and consent, whereas in other children we
have to wait for these things till they grow older: this again I count as
a miraculous result of the divine power."
But since it is expressly said (of John) in the Gospel that "he shall be
filled with the Holy Ghost, even from his mother's womb"; and of
Jeremias, "Before thou camest forth out of the womb, I sanctified
thee"; it seems that we must needs assert that they were sanctified
in the womb, although, while in the womb, they had not the use of
reason (which is the point discussed by Augustine); just as neither
do children enjoy the use of free will as soon as they are sanctified
by baptism.
Nor are we to believe that any others, not mentioned by Scripture,
were sanctified in the womb. For such privileges of grace, which are
bestowed on some, outside the common law, are ordered for the
salvation of others, according to 1 Cor. 12:7: "The manifestation of
the Spirit is given to every man unto profit," which would not result
from the sanctification of anyone unless it were made known to the
Church.
And although it is not possible to assign a reason for God's
judgments, for instance, why He bestows such a grace on one and
not on another, yet there seems to be a certain fittingness in both of
these being sanctified in the womb, by their foreshadowing the
sanctification which was to be effected through Christ. First, as to
His Passion, according to Heb. 13:12: "Jesus, that He might sanctify
the people by His own blood, suffered without the gate": which
Passion Jeremias foretold openly by words and by symbols, and
most clearly foreshadowed by his own sufferings. Secondly, as to
His Baptism (1 Cor. 6:11): "But you are washed, but you are
sanctified"; to which Baptism John prepared men by his baptism.
Reply to Objection 1: The blessed Virgin, who was chosen by God to
be His Mother, received a fuller grace of sanctification than John the
Baptist and Jeremias, who were chosen to foreshadow in a special
way the sanctification effected by Christ. A sign of this is that it was
granted to the Blessed Virgin thence-forward never to sin either
mortally or venially: whereas to the others who were thus sanctified
it was granted thenceforward not to sin mortally, through the
protection of God's grace.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.27, C.7.

Reply to Objection 2: In other respects these saints might be more
closely united to Christ than Jeremias and John the Baptist. But the
latter were most closely united to Him by clearly foreshadowing His
sanctification, as explained above.
Reply to Objection 3: The mercy of which Job speaks is not the
infused virtue; but a certain natural inclination to the act of that
virtue.