THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.83, C.6.

Now, in the celebration of this sacrament words are used to signify
things pertaining to Christ's Passion, which is represented in this
sacrament; or again, pertaining to Christ's mystical body, which is
signified therein; and again, things pertaining to the use of this
sacrament, which use ought to be devout and reverent.
Consequently, in the celebration of this mystery some things are
done in order to represent Christ's Passion, or the disposing of His
mystical body, and some others are done which pertain to the
devotion and reverence due to this sacrament.
Reply to Objection 1: The washing of the hands is done in the
celebration of mass out of reverence for this sacrament; and this for
two reasons: first, because we are not wont to handle precious
objects except the hands be washed; hence it seems indecent for
anyone to approach so great a sacrament with hands that are, even
literally, unclean. Secondly, on account of its signification, because,
as Dionysius says (Eccl. Hier. iii), the washing of the extremities of
the limbs denotes cleansing from even the smallest sins, according
to Jn. 13:10: "He that is washed needeth not but to wash his feet."
And such cleansing is required of him who approaches this
sacrament; and this is denoted by the confession which is made
before the "Introit" of the mass. Moreover, this was signified by the
washing of the priests under the Old Law, as Dionysius says (Eccl.
Hier. iii). However, the Church observes this ceremony, not because
it was prescribed under the Old Law, but because it is becoming in
itself, and therefore instituted by the Church. Hence it is not
observed in the same way as it was then: because the washing of the
feet is omitted, and the washing of the hands is observed; for this
can be done more readily, and suffices far denoting perfect
cleansing. For, since the hand is the "organ of organs" (De Anima
iii), all works are attributed to the hands: hence it is said in Ps. 25:6:
"I will wash my hands among the innocent."
Reply to Objection 2: We use incense, not as commanded by a
ceremonial precept of the Law, but as prescribed by the Church;
accordingly we do not use it in the same fashion as it was ordered
under the Old Law. It has reference to two things: first, to the
reverence due to this sacrament, i.e. in order by its good odor, to
remove any disagreeable smell that may be about the place;
secondly, it serves to show the effect of grace, wherewith Christ was
filled as with a good odor, according to Gn. 27:27: "Behold, the odor
of my son is like the odor of a ripe field"; and from Christ it spreads
to the faithful by the work of His ministers, according to 2 Cor. 2:14:

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.83, C.6.

"He manifesteth the odor of his knowledge by us in every place";
and therefore when the altar which represents Christ, has been
incensed on every side, then all are incensed in their proper order.
Reply to Objection 3: The priest, in celebrating the mass, makes use
of the sign of the cross to signify Christ's Passion which was ended
upon the cross. Now, Christ's Passion was accomplished in certain
stages. First of all there was Christ's betrayal, which was the work of
God, of Judas, and of the Jews; and this is signified by the triple
sign of the cross at the words, "These gifts, these presents, these
holy unspotted sacrifices."
Secondly, there was the selling of Christ. Now he was sold to the
Priests, to the Scribes, and to the Pharisees: and to signify this the
threefold sign of the cross is repeated, at the words, "blessed,
enrolled, ratified." Or again, to signify the price for which He was
sold, viz. thirty pence. And a double cross is added at the
words---"that it may become to us the Body and the Blood," etc., to
signify the person of Judas the seller, and of Christ Who was sold.
Thirdly, there was the foreshadowing of the Passion at the last
supper. To denote this, in the third place, two crosses are made, one
in consecrating the body, the other in consecrating the blood; each
time while saying, "He blessed."
Fourthly, there was Christ's Passion itself. And so in order to
represent His five wounds, in the fourth place, there is a fivefold
signing of the cross at the words, "a pure Victim, a holy Victim, a
spotless Victim, the holy bread of eternal life, and the cup of
everlasting salvation."
Fifthly, the outstretching of Christ's body, and the shedding of the
blood, and the fruits of the Passion, are signified by the triple
signing of the cross at the words, "as many as shall receive the body
and blood, may be filled with every blessing," etc.
Sixthly, Christ's threefold prayer upon the cross is represented; one
for His persecutors when He said, "Father, forgive them"; the second
for deliverance from death, when He cried, "My God, My God, why
hast Thou forsaken Me?" the third referring to His entrance into
glory, when He said, "Father, into Thy hands I commend My spirit";
and in order to denote these there is a triple signing with the cross