so), having also given him letters. "Who when he had come, helped them much
which had believed through grace: for he mightily convinced the Jews, and that
publicly, showing by the Scriptures that Jesus was Christ." [Acts 18:28] "And it
came to pass, that, while Apollos was at Corinth, Paul, having passed through
the upper coasts"— meaning what we have read as to Cæsarea and the other
places— came to Ephesus, and having found certain disciples [Acts 19:1], "he
said to them, Have ye received the Holy Ghost since you believed? And they said
unto him, We have not so much as heard whether there be any Holy Ghost. And
he said unto them, Unto what then were ye baptized? And they said, Unto John's
baptism. Then said Paul, John verily baptized with the baptism of repentance,
saying unto the people, that they should believe in Him who should come after
him, that is, on Christ Jesus." [Acts 19:2-4] For that they did not even believe in
Christ is plain from his saying, "that they should believe in Him that was to come
after him." And he did not say, The baptism of John is nothing, but, It is
incomplete. Nor does he add this (in so many words), but he taught them, and
many received the Holy Ghost. "When they heard this, they were baptized in the
name of the Lord Jesus. And when Paul had laid his hands upon them, the Holy
Ghost came on them; and they spoke with tongues, and prophesied. And all the
men were about twelve" [Acts 19:5-7]: so that it was likely they had the Spirit,
but it did not appear. "And all the men were about twelve."
(Recapitulation.) "And they came to Ephesus, and there he left them" [Acts
18:19]: for he did not wish to take them about with him, but left them at
Ephesus. But they subsequently dwelt at Corinth, and he bears high testimony to
them, and writing to the Romans, salutes them. [Romans 16:3] Whence it seems
to me that they afterwards went back to Rome, in the time of Nero, as having an
attachment for those parts whence they had been expelled in the time of
Claudius. "But he himself went into the synagogue." It seems to me that the
faithful still assembled there, for they did not immediately withdraw them. "And
when they besought him to stay, he consented not" [Acts 18:20, 21], for he was
hastening to Cæsarea. "And having arrived at Cæsarea," etc., "passing through

the region of Galatia and Phrygia, confirming all the disciples." (v. 22, 23.)
Through these regions also he merely passes again, just enough to establish them
by his presence. "And a certain Jew, Apollos by name," etc. [Acts 18:24] For he
was an awakened man, travelling in foreign parts for this very purpose. Writing
of him the Apostle said, "Now concerning Apollos our brother." [1 Corinthians
16:12] ([β] [)] "Whom when Aquila and Priscilla had heard," etc. [Acts 18:26] It
was not for nothing that he left them at Ephesus, but for Apollos' sake, the Spirit
so ordered it, that he might come with greater force to the attack ([ἑ] [πιβἥναι])
upon Corinth. What may be the reason that to him they did nothing, but Paul
they assault? They knew that he was the leader, and great was the name of the
man. "And when he was disposed to pass into Achaia" [Acts 18:27] i.e. in faith,
he did all by faith; "the brethren wrote," etc. nowhere envy, nowhere an evil eye.
Aquila teaches, or rather this man lets himself be taught. He was minded to
depart, and they send letters. (a) "For he mightily convinced the Jews, and that
publicly," etc. [Acts 18:28] Now by this, that he "publicly" convinced them, his
boldness was shown: by the clearness of his arguing, his power was declared: by
his convicting them out of the Scriptures, his skill (of learning). For neither
boldness by itself contributes anything, where there is not power, nor power
where there is not boldness. "He mightily convinced," it says. ([β] ) "And it came
to pass," etc. [Acts 19:1] But whence had those, being in Ephesus, the baptism
of John? Probably they had been on a visit at Jerusalem at the time (of John's
preaching), and did not even know Jesus. And he does not say to them, Do ye
believe in Jesus? But what? "Have ye received the Holy Ghost?" [Acts 19:2] He
knew that they had not, but wishes themselves to say it, that having learned what
they lack, they may ask. "John verily baptized," etc. [Acts 19:4] From the
baptism itself he (John) prophesies: and he leads them (to see) that this is the
meaning of John's baptism. (a) "That they should believe in Him that was to
come:" on what kind (of Person)? "I indeed baptize you with water, but He that
comes after me, shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost." [Matthew 3:11] "And
when Paul," it says, "had laid his hands upon them, the Holy Ghost came on