Dynamis, and from Dynamis and Sophia the powers, and principalities, and angels, whom he also
calls the first; and that by them the first heaven was made. Then other powers, being formed by
emanation from these, created another heaven similar to the first; and in like manner, when others,
again, had been formed by emanation from them, corresponding exactly to those above them, these,
too, framed another third heaven; and then from this third, in downward order, there was a fourth
succession of descendants; and so on, after the same fashion, they declare that more and more
principalities and angels were formed, and three hundred and sixty-five heavens. Wherefore the
year contains the same number of days in conformity with the number of the heavens.
4. Those angels who occupy the lowest heaven, that, namely, which is visible to us, formed all
the things which are in the world, and made allotments among themselves of the earth and of those
nations which are upon it. The chief of them is he who is thought to be the God of the Jews; and
inasmuch as he desired to render the other nations subject to his own people, that is, the Jews, all
the other princes resisted and opposed him. Wherefore all other nations were at enmity with his
nation. But the father without birth and without name, perceiving that they would be destroyed,
sent his own first-begotten Nous (he it is who is called Christ) to bestow deliverance on them that
believe in him, from the power of those who made the world. He appeared, then, on earth as a man,
to the nations of these powers, and wrought miracles. Wherefore he did not himself suffer death,
but Simon, a certain man of Cyrene, being compelled, bore the cross in his stead; so that this latter
being transfigured by him, that he might be thought to be Jesus, was crucified, through ignorance
and error, while Jesus himself received the form of Simon, and, standing by, laughed at them. For
since he was an incorporeal power, and the Nous (mind) of the unborn father, he transfigured
himself as he pleased, and thus ascended to him who had sent him, deriding them, inasmuch as he
could not be laid hold of, and was invisible to all. Those, then, who know these things have been
freed from the principalities who formed the world; so that it is not incumbent on us to confess him
who was crucified, but him who came in the form of a man, and was thought to be crucified, and
was called Jesus, and was sent by the father, that by this dispensation he might destroy the works
of the makers of the world. If any one, therefore, he declares, confesses the crucified, that man is
still a slave, and under the power of those who formed our bodies; but he who denies him has been
freed from these beings, and is acquainted with the dispensation of the unborn father.
5. Salvation belongs to the soul alone, for the body is by nature subject to corruption. He declares,
too, that the prophecies were derived from those powers who were the makers of the world, but
the law was specially given by their chief, who led the people out of the land of Egypt. He attaches
no importance to [the question regarding] meats offered in sacrifice to idols, thinks them of no
consequence, and makes use of them without any hesitation; he holds also the use of other things,
and the practice of every kind of lust, a matter of perfect indifference. These men, moreover, practise
magic; and use images, incantations, invocations, and every other kind of curious art. Coining also
certain names as if they were those of the angels, they proclaim some of these as belonging to the