work. Now as venial offenses are called sins as being dispositions to
sin, and not as having simply and perfectly the character of sin, so
the punishment which is awarded to them in purgatory is not a
retribution simply, but rather a cleansing, which is wrought
separately in the body, by death and by its being reduced to ashes,
and in the soul by the fire of purgatory.
Reply to Objection 4: Other things being equal, the state of the soul
in the body is more perfect than outside the body, because it is a
part of the whole composite; and every integral part is material in
comparison to the whole: and though it were conformed to God in
one respect, it is not simply. Because, strictly speaking, a thing is
more conformed to God when it has all that the condition of its
nature requires, since then most of all it imitates the Divine
perfection. Hence the heart of an animal is more conformed to an
immovable God when it is in movement than when it is at rest,
because the perfection of the heart is in its movement, and its rest is
its undoing.
Reply to Objection 5: Bodily death was brought about by Adam's sin
which was blotted out by Christ's death: hence its punishment lasts
not for ever. But mortal sin which causes everlasting death through
impenitence will not be expiated hereafter. Hence that death will be
everlasting.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the resurrection will be for all without

exception?
Objection 1: It would seem that the resurrection will not be for all
without exception. For it is written (Ps. 1:5): "The wicked shall not
rise again in judgment." Now men will not rise again except at the
time of the general judgment. Therefore the wicked shall in no way
rise again.
Objection 2: Further, it is written (Dan. 12:2): "Many of those that
sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake." But these words imply a
restriction. Therefore all will not rise again.
Objection 3: Further, by the resurrection men are conformed to
Christ rising again; wherefore the Apostle argues (1 Cor. 15:12,
seqq.) that if Christ rose again, we also shall rise again. Now those
alone should be conformed to Christ rising again who have borne
His image, and this belongs to the good alone. Therefore they alone
shall rise again.
Objection 4: Further, punishment is not remitted unless the fault be
condoned. Now bodily death is the punishment of original sin.
Therefore, as original sin is not forgiven to all, all will not rise again.
Objection 5: Further, as we are born again by the grace of Christ,
even so shall we rise again by His grace. Now those who die in their
mother's womb can never be born again: therefore neither can they
rise again, and consequently all will not rise again.
On the contrary, It is said (Jn. 5:28,25): "All that are in the graves
shall hear the voice of the Son of God . . . and they that hear shall
live." Therefore the dead shall all rise again.
Further, it is written (1 Cor. 15:51): "We shall all indeed rise again,"
etc.
Further, the resurrection is necessary in order that those who rise
again may receive punishment or reward according to their merits.
Now either punishment or reward is due to all, either for their own
merits, as to adults, or for others' merits, as to children. Therefore all
will rise again.