bathed in blood, horses with their riders thrown headlong down, owing to the
number of corpses, the ground a scene of general confusion, blood, and bows,
and arrows, hoofs of horses and heads of men lying together, a human arm and a
chariot wheel and a helmet, a breast pierced through, brains sticking to swords,
the point of a dart broken off with an eye transfixed upon it. Then let him reckon
up the sufferings of the naval force, the triremes burning in the midst of the
waves, and sinking with their armed crews, the roaring of the sea, the tumult of
the sailors, the shout of the soldiers, the foam of the waves mixed with blood,
and dashing over into all the ships; the corpses on the decks, some sinking, some
floating, some cast upon the beach, overwhelmed by the waves, and obstructing
the passage of the ships. And when he has been carefully instructed in all the
tragedy of warfare, let the horrors of captivity and of slavery be added to it,
worse than any kind of death; and having told him all this, bid him mount his
horse straightway, and take command of all that armament.
Do you really think that this lad would be equal to more than the mere
description, and would not, at the very first glance, lose heart?
13. Do not think that I have exaggerated the matter by my account, nor
suppose that because we are shut up in this body, as in some prison house, and
are unable to see anything of the invisible world, that what has been said is
overstated. For you would see a far greater and more formidable conflict than
this, couldest thou ever behold, with these eyes of yours, the devil's most gloomy
battle array, and his frantic onset. For there is no brass or iron there. No horses,
or chariots or wheels, no fire and darts. These are visible things. But there are
other much more fearful engines than these. One does not need against these
enemies breastplate or shield, sword and spear, yet the sight only of this accursed
array is enough to paralyze the soul, unless it happen to be very noble, and to
enjoy in a high degree as a protection to its own courage the providential care of
God. And if it were possible by putting off this body, or still keeping it, to see
clearly and fearlessly with the naked eye the whole of his battle array, and his
warfare against us, you would see no torrents of blood, nor dead bodies, but so

many fallen souls, and such disastrous wounds that the whole of that description
of warfare which I just now detailed to you you would think to be mere child's
sport and pastime rather than war: so many are there smitten every day, and the
wounds in the two cases do not bring about the same death, but as great as is the
difference between the soul from the body, so great is the difference between that
death and this. For when the soul receives a wound, and falls, it does not lie as a
lifeless body, but it is thenceforth tormented, being gnawed by an evil
conscience; and after its removal hence, at the time of judgment, it is delivered
over to eternal punishment; and if any one be without grief in regard to the
wounds given by the devil, his danger becomes the greater for his insensibility.
For whoever is not pained by the first wound, will readily receive a second, and
after that a third. For the unclean spirit will not cease assaulting to the last
breath, whenever he finds a soul supine and indifferent to his first wounds; and if
you would inquire into the method of attack, you would find this much more
severe and varied. For no one ever knew so many forms of craft and deceit as
that unclean spirit. By this indeed, he has acquired the greater part of his power,
nor can any one have so implacable a hatred against his worst enemies as the
evil one against the human race. And if any one inquire into the vehemence with
which he fights, here again it would be ludicrous to bring men into comparison
with him. But if any one choose out the fiercest and most savage of beasts, and is
minded to set their fury against his, he will find that they were meek and quiet in
comparison, such rage does he breathe forth when he attacks our souls; and the
period of the warfare indeed in the former case is brief, and in this brief space
there are respites; for the approach of the night and the fatigue of slaughter,
meal-times also, and many other things, afford a respite to the soldier, so that he
can doff his armor and breathe a little, and refresh himself with food and drink,
and in many other ways recover his former strength. But in the case of the evil
one it is not possible ever to lay aside one's armor, it is not possible even to take
sleep, for one who would remain always unscathed. For one of two things must
be: either to fall and perish unarmed, or to stand equipped and ever watchful. For