from within, and from his conscience, he presented that sacrifice. On this
account I do not carry the argument down to a later period; but I bring it to bear
upon the time of these earlier men, when there were as yet no letters, as yet no
law, nor as yet prophets and judges; but Adam only existed with his children; in
order that you may learn, that the knowledge of good and evil had been
previously implanted in their natures. For from whence did Abel learn that to
offer sacrifice was a good thing; that it was good to honour God, and in all things
to give thanks? "Why then?" replies some one, "did not Cain bring his offering?"
This man also did offer sacrifice, but not in like manner. And from thence again
the knowledge of conscience is apparent. For when, envying him who had been
honoured, he deliberated upon murder, he conceals his crafty determination. And
what says he; "Come, let us go forth into the field." The outward guise was one
thing, the pretence of love; the thought another, the purpose of fratricide. But if
he had not known the design to be a wicked one, why did he conceal it? And
again, after the murder had been perpetrated, being asked of God, "Where is Abel
your brother?" he answers, "I know not; Am I my brother's keeper?" Wherefore
does he deny the crime? Is it not evidently because he exceedingly condemns
himself. For as his father had hid himself, so also this man denies his guilt, and
after his conviction, again says, "My crime is too great to obtain pardon."
12. But it may be objected, that the Gentile allows nothing of this sort.
Come then, let us discuss this point, and as we have done with respect to the
creation, having carried on the warfare against these objectors not only by the
help of the Scriptures, but of reason, so also let us now do with respect to
conscience. For Paul too, when he was engaged in controversy with such
persons, entered upon this head. What then is it that they urge? They say, that
there is no self-evident law seated in our consciences; and that God has not
implanted this in our nature. But if so, whence is it, I ask, that legislators have
written those laws which are among them concerning marriages, concerning
murders, concerning wills, concerning trusts, concerning abstinence from
encroachments on one another, and a thousand other things. For the men now

living may perchance have learned them from their elders; and they from those
who were before them, and these again from those beyond? But from whom did
those learn who were the originators and first enactors of laws among them? Is it
not evident that it was from conscience? For they cannot say, that they held
communication with Moses; or that they heard the prophets. How could it be so
when they were Gentiles? But it is evident that from the very law which God
placed in man when He formed him from the beginning, laws were laid down,
and arts discovered, and all other things. For the arts too were thus established,
their originators having come to the knowledge of them in a self-taught manner.
13. So also came there to be courts of justice, and so were penalties defined,
as Paul accordingly observes. For since many of the Gentiles were ready to
controvert this, and to say, "How will God judge mankind who lived before
Moses? He did not send a lawgiver; He did not introduce a law; He
commissioned no prophet, nor apostle, nor evangelist; how then can He call
these to account?" Since Paul therefore wished to prove that they possessed a
self taught law; and that they knew clearly what they ought to do; hear how he
speaks; "For when the Gentiles who have not the law, do by nature the things
contained in the law, these having not the law, are a law unto themselves; which
show the work of the law written in their hearts." [Romans 2:14-15] But how
without letters? "Their conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts the
meanwhile accusing, or else excusing one another. In the day when God shall
judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ according to my gospel." [Romans 2:16]
And again; "As many as have sinned without law, shall perish without law; and
as many as have sinned in the law, shall be judged by the law." [Romans 2:12]
What means, "They shall perish without law?" The law not accusing them, but
their thoughts, and their conscience; for if they had not a law of conscience, it
were not necessary that they should perish through having done amiss. For how
should it be so if they sinned without a law? But when he says, "without a law,"
he does not assert that they had no law, but that they had no written law, though
they had the law of nature. And again; "But glory, honour, and peace, to every