are the wholesome doctrines. For we call him "a perfect man" [i.e. "of full age"]
who with the faith has a right life; but if any one have faith, yet does evil, and is
in doubt concerning [the faith] itself, and brings disgrace on the doctrine, him we
shall with reason call "a babe," in that he has gone back again to the beginning.
So that even if we have been ten thousand years in the faith, yet are not firm in
it, we are babes; when we show a life not in conformity with it; when we are still
laying a foundation.
4. But besides [their way of] life he brings another charge also against these
[Hebrews], as being shaken to and fro, and needing "to lay a foundation of
repentance from dead works." For he who changes from one to another, giving
up this, and choosing that, ought first to condemn this, and to be separated from
the system, and then to pass to the other. But if he intends again to lay hold on
the first, how shall he touch the second?
What then of the Law (he says)? We have condemned it, and again we run
back to it. This is not a shifting about, for here also [under the Gospel] we have a
law. "Do we then" (he says) "make void the law through faith? God forbid, yea
we establish the Law." [Romans 3:31] I was speaking concerning evil deeds. For
he that intends to pursue virtue ought to condemn wickedness first, and then go
in pursuit of it. For repentance cannot prove them clean. For this cause they were
straightway baptized, that what they were unable to accomplish by themselves,
this might be effected by the grace of Christ. Neither then does repentance
suffice for purification, but men must first receive baptism. At all events, it was
necessary to come to baptism, having condemned the sins thereby and given
sentence against them.
But what is "the doctrine of baptisms"? Not as if there were many baptisms,
but one only. Why then did he express it in the plural? Because he had said, "not
laying again a foundation of repentance." For if he again baptized them and
catechised them afresh, and having been baptized at the beginning they were
again taught what things ought to be done and what ought not, they would
remain perpetually incorrigible.

"And of laying on of hands." For thus did they receive the Spirit, "when
Paul had laid his hands on them" [Acts 19:6], it is said.
"And of the resurrection of the dead." For this is both effected in baptism,
and is affirmed in the confession.
"And of eternal judgment." But why does he say this? Because it was likely
that, having already believed, they would either be shaken [from their faith], or
would lead evil and slothful lives, he says, "be wakeful."
It is not open to them to say, If we live slothfully we will be baptized again,
we will be catechised again, we will again receive the Spirit; even if now we fall
from the faith, we shall be able again by being baptized, to wash away our sins,
and to attain to the same state as before. You are deceived (he says) in supposing
these things.