bridechamber. And with reason, since the lamps had gone out before the coming
of the Bridegroom. On this account we need much oil, and abundant
lovingkindness. Hear at least what the Prophet says, "Have mercy upon me, O
God, according to Your great mercy." [Psalm 51:1] We therefore must so take
pity upon our neighbor, according to His great mercy towards us. For such as we
are towards our fellow-servants, such shall we find our Lord towards ourselves.
And what kind of "mercy" is "great"? When we give not of our abundance, but
of our deficiency. But if we give not even of our abundance, what hope shall
there be for us? Whence shall we have deliverance from those woes? Where
shall we be enabled to flee and to find salvation? For if the virgins after so many
and so great toils found no comfort anywhere, who shall stand forth for us when
we hear those fearful words of the Judge Himself, addressing and reproaching
us, because "I was an hungered, and you gave Me no meat; for inasmuch," It
says, "as you did it not unto one of the least of these, you did it not unto Me";
saying this not merely of His disciples, nor of those who have taken upon
themselves the ascetic life, but of every faithful man. For such an one though he
be a slave, or one of those that beg in the market-place, yet if he believes in God,
ought by right to enjoy all our good will. And if we neglect such an one when
naked or hungry, we shall hear those words. With reason. For what difficult or
grievous thing has He demanded of us? What that is not of the very lightest and
easiest? He says not, "I was sick, and you restored Me not," but, "and you visited
Me not." He says not, "I was in prison, and you delivered Me not," but, "and you
came not unto Me." In proportion therefore as the commands are easy, so is the
punishment greater to them that disobey. For what is easier, tell me, than to walk
forth and enter into a prison? And what more pleasant? For when you see some
bound, others covered with filth, others with uncut hair and clothed in rags,
others perishing with hunger, and running like dogs to your feet, others with
deep ploughed sides, others now returning in chains from the market-place, who
beg all day and do not collect even necessary sustenance, and yet at evening are
required by those set over them to furnish that wicked and savage service;

though thou be like any stone, you will certainly be rendered kinder; though you
live a soft and dissipated life, you will certainly become wiser, when you
observe the nature of human affairs in other men's misfortunes; for you will
surely gain an idea of that fearful day, and of its varied punishments. Revolving
and considering these things, you will certainly cast out both wrath and pleasure,
and the love of worldly things, and wilt make your soul more calm than the
calmest harbor; and you will reason concerning that Judgment seat, reflecting
that if among men there is so much forethought, and order, and terror, and
threatenings, much more will there be with God. "For there is no power but from
God." [Romans 13:1] He therefore who permits rulers to order these things thus,
will much more do the same Himself.
5. And certainly were there not this fear, all would be lost, when though
such punishments hang over them, there are many who go over to the side of
wickedness. These things if you wisely observe, you will be more ready-minded
towards alms-doing, and wilt reap much pleasure, far greater than those who
come down from the theater. For they when they remove from thence are
inflamed and burn with desire. Having seen those women hovering on the stage,
and received from them ten thousand wounds, they will be in no better condition
than a tossing sea, when the image of the faces, the gestures, the speeches, the
walk, and all the rest, stand before their eyes and besiege their soul. But they
who come forth from a prison will suffer nothing of this kind, but will enjoy
great calm and tranquillity. For the compunction arising from the sight of the
prisoners, quenches all that fire. And if a woman that is an harlot and a wanton
meet a man coming forth from among the prisoners, she will work him no
mischief. For becoming for the time to come, as it were, incapable of molding,
he will thus not be taken by the nets of her countenance, because instead of that
wanton countenance there will then be placed before his eyes the fear of the
Judgment. On this account, he who had gone over every kind of luxury said, "It
is better to go into the house of mourning than into the house of mirth."
[Ecclesiastes 7:2] And so "here" you will show forth great wisdom, and "there"