quarrel, when you are vexatious, when you make schism in the Church, and
reproachest your brother, and art distant with him, those that are without will
speak evil of you. And so good is so far from coming of this, that just the
opposite is the case. For your good is charity, love of the brotherhood, being
united, being bound together, living at peace, living in gentleness ([ἐ]
[πιεικείας]). He again, to put an end to his fears and the other's disputatiousness,
says, "For the kingdom of God is not meat and drink." Is it by these, he means,
that we are to be approved? As he says in another passage too, "Neither if we eat
are we the better, neither if we eat not are we the worse." And he does not need
any proof, but is content with stating it. And what he says is this, If you eat, does
this lead you to the Kingdom? And this was why, by way of satirizing them as
mightily pleased with themselves herein, he said, not "meat" only, but "drink."
What then are the things that do bring us here? "Righteousness, and peace, and
joy," and a virtuous life, and peace with our brethren (whereto this
quarrelsomeness is opposed), the joy from unanimity, which this rebuking puts
an end to. But this he said not to one party only, but to both of them, it being a fit
season for saying it to both. Then as he had mentioned peace and joy, but there is
a peace and joy over bad actions also, he adds, "in the Holy Ghost." Since he that
ruins his brother, has at once subverted peace, and wronged joy, more grievously
than he that plunders money. And what is worse is, that Another saved him, and
you wrong and ruinest him. Since then eating, and the supposed perfect state,
does not bring in these virtues, but the things subversive of them it does bring in,
how can it be else than right to make light of little things, in order to give
firmness to great ones? Then since this rebuking took place in some degree out
of vanity, he proceeds to say,
Ver. 18. "For he that in these things serves Christ, is acceptable to God,
and approved of men."
For they will not admire you so much for your perfect state, as all will for
peace and amity. For this is a goodly thing, that all will have the benefit of, but
of that not one even will.

Ver. 19. "Let us therefore follow after the things which make for peace, and
things wherewith one may edify one another."
This applies to the other, that he may grow peaceable. But the other to the
latter too, that he may not destroy his brother. Still he has made both apply to
either again, by saying, "one another," and showing that without peace it is not
easy to edify.
Ver. 20. "For meat destroy not the work of God."
Giving this name to the salvation of a brother, and adding greatly to the
fears, and showing that he is doing the opposite of that he desires. For thou, he
says, art so far from building up as you intend, that you dost even destroy, and
that a building too not of man but of God, and not for any great end either, but
for a trivial thing. For it was "for meat," he says. Then lest so many indulgences
should confirm the weaker brother in his misconception, he again becomes
doctrinal, as follows,
"All things indeed are pure, but it is evil for that man who eats with
offense."
Who does it, that is, with a bad conscience. And so if you should force him,
and he should eat, there would be nothing gained. For it is not the eating that
makes unclean, but the intention with which a man eats. If then thou dost not set
that aright, you have done all to no purpose, and hast made things worse: for
thinking a thing unclean is not so bad as tasting it when one thinks it unclean.
Here then you are committing two errors, one by increasing his prejudice
through your quarrelsomeness, and another by getting him to taste of what is
unclean. And so, as long as you do not persuade him, do not force him.
Ver. 21. "It is good neither to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor anything
whereby your brother stumbles, or is offended, or is made weak."
Again, he requires the greater alternative, that they should not only not
force him, but even condescend to him. For he often did this himself also, as
when he circumcised [Acts 16:3], when he was shorn [Acts 18:18], when he
sacrificed that Jewish sacrifice. [Acts 21:26]. And he does not say to the man