THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.59, C.6.

appointed unto men once to die, and after this the Judgment."
But it must be observed that although man's temporal life in itself
ends with death, still it continues dependent in a measure on what
comes after it in the future. In one way, as it still lives on in men's
memories, in which sometimes, contrary to the truth, good or evil
reputations linger on. In another way in a man's children, who are so
to speak something of their parent, according to Ecclus. 30:4: "His
father is dead, and he is as if he were not dead, for he hath left one
behind him that is like himself." And yet many good men have
wicked sons, and conversely. Thirdly, as to the result of his actions:
just as from the deceit of Arius and other false leaders unbelief
continues to flourish down to the close of the world; and even until
then faith will continue to derive its progress from the preaching of
the apostles. In a fourth way, as to the body, which is sometimes
buried with honor and sometimes left unburied, and finally falls to
dust utterly. In a fifth way, as to the things upon which a man's heart
is set, such as temporal concerns, for example, some of which
quickly lapse, while others endure longer.
Now all these things are submitted to the verdict of the Divine
Judgment; and consequently, a perfect and public Judgment cannot
be made of all these things during the course of this present time.
Wherefore, there must be a final Judgment at the last day, in which
everything concerning every man in every respect shall be perfectly
and publicly judged.
Reply to Objection 1: Some men have held the opinion that the souls
of the saints shall not be rewarded in heaven, nor the souls of the
lost punished in hell, until the Judgment-day. That this is false
appears from the testimony of the Apostle (2 Cor. 5:8), where he
says: "We are confident and have a good will to be absent rather
from the body, and to be present with the Lord": that is, not to "walk
by faith" but "by sight," as appears from the context. But this is to
see God in His Essence, wherein consists "eternal life," as is clear
from Jn. 17:3. Hence it is manifest that the souls separated from
bodies are in eternal life.
Consequently, it must be maintained that after death man enters into
an unchangeable state as to all that concerns the soul: and therefore
there is no need for postponing judgment as to the reward of the
soul. But since there are some other things pertaining to a man
which go on through the whole course of time, and which are not

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.59, C.6.

foreign to the Divine judgment, all these things must be brought to
judgment at the end of time. For although in regard to such things a
man neither merits nor demerits, still in a measure they accompany
his reward or punishment. Consequently all these things must be
weighed in the final judgment.
Reply to Objection 2: "God shall not judge twice the same thing," i.e.
in the same respect; but it is not unseemly for God to judge twice
according to different respects.
Reply to Objection 3: Although the reward or punishment of the body
depends upon the reward or punishment of the soul, nevertheless,
since the soul is changeable only accidentally, on account of the
body, once it is separated from the body it enters into an
unchangeable condition, and receives its judgment. But the body
remains subject to change down to the close of time: and therefore it
must receive its reward or punishment then, in the last Judgment.