having gotten before Peter, and having seen the linen clothes, enquired not
farther, but withdrew; but that fervent one passing farther in, looked at
everything carefully, and saw somewhat more, and then the other too was
summoned to the sight. For he entering after Peter, saw the grave-clothes lying,
and separate. Now to separate, and to place one thing by itself, and another, after
rolling it up, by itself, was the act of some one doing things carefully, and not in
a chance way, as if disturbed.
5. But do thou, when you hear that your Lord arose naked, cease from your
madness about funerals; for what is the meaning of that superfluous and
unprofitable expense, which brings much loss to the mourners, and no gain to
the departed, or (if we must say that it brings anything) rather harm? For the
costliness of burial has often caused the breaking open of tombs, and has caused
him to be cast out naked and unburied, who had been buried with much care. But
alas for vainglory! How great the tyranny which it exhibits even in sorrow! How
great the folly! Many, that this may not happen, having cut in pieces those fine
clothes, and filled them with many spices, so that they may be doubly useless to
those who would insult the dead, then commit them to the earth. Are not these
the acts of madmen? Of men beside themselves? To make a show of their
ambition, and then to destroy it? "Yea," says some one, "it is in order that they
may lie safely with the dead that we use all these contrivances." Well then, if the
robbers do not get them, will not the moths get them, and the worms? Or if the
moths and worms get them not, will not time and the moisture of putrefaction
destroy them? But let us suppose that neither tomb-breakers, nor moths, nor
worms, nor time, nor anything else, destroy what lies in the tomb, but that the
body itself remains untouched until the Resurrection, and these things are
preserved new and fresh and fine; what advantage is there from this to the
departed, when the body is raised naked, while these remain here, and profit us
nothing for those accounts which must be given? "Wherefore then," says some
one, "was it done in the case of Christ?" First of all, do not compare these with
human matters, since the harlot poured even ointment upon His holy feet. But if

we must speak on these things, we say, that they were done when the doers knew
not the word of the Resurrection; therefore it says, "As was the manner of the
Jews." For they who honored Christ were not of the twelve, but were those who
did not honor Him greatly. The twelve honored Him not in this way, but by death
and massacre and dangers for His sake. That other indeed was honor, but far
inferior to this of which I have spoken. Besides, as I began by saying, we are
now speaking of men, but at that time these things were done with relation to the
Lord. And that you may learn that Christ made no account of these things, He
said, "You saw Me an hungered, and you fed Me; thirsty, and you gave Me drink;
naked, and you clothed Me" [Matthew 25:35]; but nowhere did He say, "dead,
and you buried Me." And this I say not as taking away the custom of burial, (that
be far from me,) but as cutting short its extravagance and unseasonable vanity.
"But," says some one, "feeling and grief and sympathy for the departed persuade
to this practice." The practice does not proceed from sympathy for the departed,
but from vainglory. Since if you desire to sympathize with the dead, I will show
you another way of mourning, and will teach you to put on him garments which
shall rise again with him, and make him glorious. For these garments are not
consumed by worms, nor wasted by time, nor stolen by tomb-breakers. Of what
sort then are these? The clothing of alms-doing; for this is a robe that shall rise
again with him, because the seal of alms-doing is with him. With these garments
shine they who then hear, "Hungering ye fed Me." These make men
distinguished, these make them glorious, these place them in safety; but those
used now are only something for moths to consume, and a table for worms. And
this I say, not forbid ding to use funeral observance, but bidding you to do it with
moderation, so as to cover the body, and not commit it naked to the earth. For if
living He bids us have no more than enough to cover us, much more when dead;
since the dead body has not so much need of garments as when it is living and
breathing. For when alive, on account of the cold, and for decency's sake, we
need the covering of garments, but when dead we require grave-clothes for none
of these reasons, but that the body may not lie naked; and better than grave-