SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.9, C.2.

Joan.) as "referring to the sin whereby they believed not in Christ."
Reply to Objection 1: To have the faith is not part of human nature,
but it is part of human nature that man's mind should not thwart his
inner instinct, and the outward preaching of the truth. Hence, in this
way, unbelief is contrary to nature.
Reply to Objection 2: This argument takes unbelief as denoting a
pure negation.
Reply to Objection 3: Unbelief, in so far as it is a sin, arises from
pride, through which man is unwilling to subject his intellect to the
rules of faith, and to the sound interpretation of the Fathers. Hence
Gregory says (Moral. xxxi, 45) that "presumptuous innovations arise
from vainglory."
It might also be replied that just as the theological virtues are not
reduced to the cardinal virtues, but precede them, so too, the vices
opposed to the theological virtues are not reduced to the capital
vices.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.9, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether unbelief is in the intellect as its subject?

Objection 1: It would seem that unbelief is not in the intellect as its
subject. For every sin is in the will, according to Augustine (De
Duabus Anim. x, xi). Now unbelief is a sin, as stated above (Article
1). Therefore unbelief resides in the will and not in the intellect.
Objection 2: Further, unbelief is sinful through contempt of the
preaching of the faith. But contempt pertains to the will. Therefore
unbelief is in the will.
Objection 3: Further, a gloss [Augustine, Enchiridion lx.] on 2 Cor.
11:14 "Satan . . . transformeth himself into an angel of light," says
that if "a wicked angel pretend to be a good angel, and be taken for a
good angel, it is not a dangerous or an unhealthy error, if he does or
says what is becoming to a good angel." This seems to be because
of the rectitude of the will of the man who adheres to the angel, since
his intention is to adhere to a good angel. Therefore the sin of
unbelief seems to consist entirely in a perverse will: and,
consequently, it does not reside in the intellect.
On the contrary, Things which are contrary to one another are in the
same subject. Now faith, to which unbelief is opposed, resides in the
intellect. Therefore unbelief also is in the intellect.
I answer that, As stated above (FS, Question 74, Articles 1,2), sin is
said to be in the power which is the principle of the sinful act. Now a
sinful act may have two principles: one is its first and universal
principle, which commands all acts of sin; and this is the will,
because every sin is voluntary. The other principle of the sinful act is
the proper and proximate principle which elicits the sinful act: thus
the concupiscible is the principle of gluttony and lust, wherefore
these sins are said to be in the concupiscible. Now dissent, which is
the act proper to unbelief, is an act of the intellect, moved, however,
by the will, just as assent is.
Therefore unbelief, like faith, is in the intellect as its proximate
subject. But it is in the will as its first moving principle, in which way
every sin is said to be in the will.
Hence the Reply to the First Objection is clear.