John 8:24
"I said therefore unto you that...if you believe not that I am He, you shall die in
your sins."
For if He came to take away the sin of the world, and if it is impossible for
men to put that off in any other way except by the washing, it needs must be that
he that believes not must depart hence, having the old man; since he that will not
by faith slay and bury that old man, shall die in him, and shall go away to that
place to suffer the punishment of His former sins. Wherefore He said, "He that
believes not is judged already" [John 3:18]; not merely through his not
believing, but because he de parts parts hence having his former sins upon him.

John 8:25
"Then said they unto Him, Who are you?"
Oh folly! After so long a time, such signs and teaching, they ask, "Who are
you?" What then says Christ?
"The same that I told you from the beginning."
What He says, is of this kind; "You are not worthy to hear My words at all,
much less to learn who I am, for you say all that you do, tempting Me, and
giving heed to none of My sayings. And all this I could now prove against you."
For this is the sense of,

John 8:26
"I have many things to say and to judge of you."
"I could not only prove you guilty, but also punish you; but He that sent Me,
that is, the Father, wills not this. For I have come not to judge the world, but to
save the world, since God sent not His Son to judge the world, He says, but to
save the world. [John 3:17] If now He has sent Me for this, and He is true, with
good cause I judge no one now. But these things I speak that are for your
salvation, not what are for your condemnation." He speaks thus, lest they should
deem that it was through weakness that on hearing so much from them He went
not to extremities, or that He knew not their secret thoughts and scoffings.

John 8:27
"They understood not that He spoke to them of the Father."
Oh folly! He ceased not to speak concerning Him, and they knew Him not.
Then when after working many signs, and teaching them, He drew them not to
Himself, He next speaks to them of the Cross, saying,

John 8:28-29
"When you have lifted up the Son of Man, then you shall know that I Am, and
that I speak not of Myself, and that He that sent Me is with Me. And the Father
has not left Me alone."
2. He shows that He rightly said, "the same that I said unto you from the
beginning." So little heed they gave to His words. "When you have lifted up the
Son of Man." "Do ye not expect that you then shall certainly rid yourselves of
Me, and slay Me? But I tell you that then you shall most know that I Am, by
reason of the miracles, the resurrection, and the destruction (of Jerusalem)." For
all these things were sufficient to manifest His power. He said not, "Then you
shall know who I am"; for, "when you shall see," He says, "that I suffer nothing
from death, then you shall know that I Am, that is, the Christ, the Son of God,
who govern all things, and am not opposed to Him." For which cause He adds,
"and of Myself I speak nothing." For you shall know both My power and My
unanimity with the Father. Because the, "of Myself I speak nothing," shows that
His Substance differs not (from that of the Father), and that He utters nothing
save that which is in the mind of the Father. "For when you have been driven
away from your place of worship, and it is not allowed you even to serve Him as
hitherto, then you shall know that He does this to avenge Me, and because He is
angry with those who would not hear Me." As though He had said, "Had I been
an enemy and a stranger to God, He would not have stirred up such wrath
against you." This also Esaias declares, "He shall give the wicked in return for
His burial" [Isaiah 53:9, Septuagint]; and David, "Then shall He speak unto
them in His wrath" [Psalm 2:5]; and Christ Himself, "Behold, your house is left
unto you desolate." [Matthew 23:38] And His parables declare the same thing
when He says, "What shall the Lord of that vineyard do to those husbandmen?
He shall miserably destroy those wicked men." [Matthew 21:40-41] Do you see
that everywhere He speaks thus, because He is not yet believed? But if He will