SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.3, C.8.

present to the will, since the will has no inclination for anything
except in so far as it is apprehended by the intellect. Hence, as the
last end is present in the will by hope and charity, and in the
intellect, by faith, the first of all the virtues must, of necessity, be
faith, because natural knowledge cannot reach God as the object of
heavenly bliss, which is the aspect under which hope and charity
tend towards Him.
On the other hand, some virtues can precede faith accidentally. For
an accidental cause precedes its effect accidentally. Now that which
removes an obstacle is a kind of accidental cause, according to the
Philosopher (Phys. viii, 4): and in this sense certain virtues may be
said to precede faith accidentally, in so far as they remove obstacles
to belief. Thus fortitude removes the inordinate fear that hinders
faith; humility removes pride, whereby a man refuses to submit
himself to the truth of faith. The same may be said of some other
virtues, although there are no real virtues, unless faith be
presupposed, as Augustine states (Contra Julian. iv, 3).
This suffices for the Reply to the First Objection.
Reply to Objection 2: Hope cannot lead to faith absolutely. For one
cannot hope to obtain eternal happiness, unless one believes this
possible, since hope does not tend to the impossible, as stated
above (FS, Question 40, Article 1). It is, however, possible for one to
be led by hope to persevere in faith, or to hold firmly to faith; and it
is in this sense that hope is said to lead to faith.
Reply to Objection 3: Obedience is twofold: for sometimes it denotes
the inclination of the will to fulfil God's commandments. In this way it
is not a special virtue, but is a general condition of every virtue;
since all acts of virtue come under the precepts of the Divine law, as
stated above (FS, Question 100, Article 2); and thus it is requisite for
faith. In another way, obedience denotes an inclination to fulfil the
commandments considered as a duty. In this way it is a special
virtue, and a part of justice: for a man does his duty by his superior
when he obeys him: and thus obedience follows faith, whereby man
knows that God is his superior, Whom he must obey.
Reply to Objection 4: To be a foundation a thing requires not only to
come first, but also to be connected with the other parts of the
building: since the building would not be founded on it unless the

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.3, C.8.

other parts adhered to it. Now the connecting bond of the spiritual
edifice is charity, according to Col. 3:14: "Above all . . . things have
charity which is the bond of perfection." Consequently faith without
charity cannot be the foundation: and yet it does not follow that
charity precedes faith.
Reply to Objection 5: Some act of the will is required before faith, but
not an act of the will quickened by charity. This latter act
presupposes faith, because the will cannot tend to God with perfect
love, unless the intellect possesses right faith about Him.