hypostases or persons as resulting therefrom; as also in creatures
the properties manifest the distinctions of individuals, which
distinctions are caused by the material principles.
This opinion, however, cannot stand---for two reasons. Firstly,
because, in order that two things be understood as distinct, their
distinction must be understood as resulting from something intrinsic
to both; thus in things created it results from their matter or their
form. Now origin of a thing does not designate anything intrinsic, but
means the way from something, or to something; as generation
signifies the way to a thing generated, and as proceeding from the
generator. Hence it is not possible that what is generated and the
generator should be distinguished by generation alone; but in the
generator and in the thing generated we must presuppose whatever
makes them to be distinguished from each other. In a divine person
there is nothing to presuppose but essence, and relation or property.
Whence, since the persons agree in essence, it only remains to be
said that the persons are distinguished from each other by the
relations. Secondly: because the distinction of the divine persons is
not to be so understood as if what is common to them all is divided,
because the common essence remains undivided; but the
distinguishing principles themselves must constitute the things
which are distinct. Now the relations or the properties distinguish or
constitute the hypostases or persons, inasmuch as they are
themselves the subsisting persons; as paternity is the Father, and
filiation is the Son, because in God the abstract and the concrete do
not differ. But it is against the nature of origin that it should
constitute hypostasis or person. For origin taken in an active sense
signifies proceeding from a subsisting person, so that it
presupposes the latter; while in a passive sense origin, as "nativity,"
signifies the way to a subsisting person, and as not yet constituting
the person.
It is therefore better to say that the persons or hypostases are
distinguished rather by relations than by origin. For, although in both
ways they are distinguished, nevertheless in our mode of
understanding they are distinguished chiefly and firstly by relations;
whence this name "Father" signifies not only a property, but also the
hypostasis; whereas this term "Begetter" or "Begetting" signifies
property only; forasmuch as this name "Father" signifies the relation
which is distinctive and constitutive of the hypostasis; and this term
"Begetter" or "Begotten" signifies the origin which is not distinctive
and constitutive of the hypostasis.

Reply to Objection 1: The persons are the subsisting relations
themselves. Hence it is not against the simplicity of the divine
persons for them to be distinguished by the relations.
Reply to Objection 2: The divine persons are not distinguished as
regards being, in which they subsist, nor in anything absolute, but
only as regards something relative. Hence relation suffices for their
distinction.
Reply to Objection 3: The more prior a distinction is, the nearer it
approaches to unity; and so it must be the least possible distinction.
So the distinction of the persons must be by that which
distinguishes the least possible; and this is by relation.
Reply to Objection 4: Relation presupposes the distinction of the
subjects, when it is an accident; but when the relation is subsistent,
it does not presuppose, but brings about distinction. For when it is
said that relation is by nature to be towards another, the word
"another" signifies the correlative which is not prior, but
simultaneous in the order of nature.