only the Son is of God, that is to say, of the Father; nor are both together
Light of Light, but the Son only is of Light, that is, of the Father. Unless,
perhaps, it was in order to intimate and inculcate briefly that the Son is
co-eternal with the Father, that it is said, God of God, and Light of Light,
or anything else of the like kind: as if to say, This which is not the Son
without the Father, of this which is not the Father without the Son; that
is, this Light which is not Light without the Father, of that Light, viz. the
Father, which is not Light without the Son; so that, when it is said, God
which is not the Son without the Father, and of God which is not the
Father without the Son, it may be perfectly understood that the Begetter
did not precede that which He begot. And if this be so, then this alone
cannot be said of them, namely, this or that of this or that, which they are
not both together. Just as the Word cannot be said to be of the Word,
because both are not the Word together, but only the Son; nor image of
image, since they are not both together the image; nor Son of Son, since
both together are not the Son, according to that which is said, "I and my
Father are one." For "we are one" means, what He is, that am I also;
according to essence, not according to relation.

### CHAP. 3.—THAT THE UNITY OF THE ESSENCE OF THE FATHER AND THE SON IS TO BE GATHERED FROM THE WORDS, "WE ARE ONE." THE SON IS EQUAL TO THE FATHER BOTH IN WISDOM AND IN ALL OTHER THINGS.

4. And I know not whether the words, "They are one," are ever found in
Scripture as spoken of things of which the nature is different. But if there
are more things than one of the same nature, and they differ in
sentiment, they are not one, and that so far as they differ in sentiment.
For if the disciples were already one by the fact of being men, He would
not say, "That they may be one, as we are one," when commending them
to the Father. But because Paul and Apollos were both alike men, and
also of like sentiments, "He that planteth," he says, "and he that watereth
are one." When, therefore, anything is so called one, that it is not added
in what it is one, and yet more things than one are called one, then the
same essence and nature is signified, not differing nor disagreeing. But
when it is added in what it is one, it may be meant that something is
made one out of things more than one, though they are different in

nature. As soul and body are assuredly not one; for what are so different?
unless there be added or understood in what they are one, that is, one
man, or one animal . Thence the apostle says, "He who is joined
to a harlot, is one body;" he does not say, they are one or he is one; but he
has added "body," as though it were one body composed by being joined
together of two different bodies, masculine and feminine. And, "He that is
joined unto the Lord," he says," is one spirit:" he did not say, he that is
joined unto the Lord is one, or they are one; but he added, "spirit" For the
spirit of man and the Spirit of God are different in nature; but by being
joined they become one spirit of two different spirits, so that the Spirit of
God is blessed and perfect without the human spirit, but the spirit of man
cannot be blessed without God. Nor is it without cause, I think, that when
the Lord said so much in the Gospel according to John, and so often, of
unity itself, whether of His own with the Father, or of ours
interchangeably with ourselves; He has nowhere said, that we are also
one with Himself, but, "that they may be one as we also are one."
Therefore the Father and the Son are one, undoubtedly according to unity
of substance; and there is one God, and one great, and one wise, as we
have argued.
5. Whence then is the Father greater? For if greater, He is greater by
greatness; but whereas the Son is His greatness, neither assuredly is the
Son greater than He who begat Him, nor is the Father greater than that
greatness, whereby He is great; therefore they are equal. For whence is
He equal, if not in that which He is, to whom it is not one thing to be, and
another to be great? Or if the Father is greater in eternity, the Son is not
equal in anything whatsoever. For whence equal? If you say in greatness,
that greatness is not equal which is less eternal, and so of all things else.
Or is He perhaps equal in power, but not equal in wisdom? But how is
that power which is less wise, equal? Or is He equal in wisdom, but not
equal in power? But how is that wisdom equal which is less powerful? It
remains, therefore, that if He is not equal in anything, He is not equal in
all. But Scripture proclaims, that "He thought it not robbery to be equal
with God." Therefore any adversary of the truth whatever, provided he
feels bound by apostolical authority, must needs confess that the Son is
equal with God in each one thing whatsoever. Let him choose that which
he will; from it he will be shown, that He is equal in all things which are