## CHAPTER LXV--That God preserves things in being
FROM God's governing all things by His providence it follows that He preserves them in
being. For everything whereby things gain their end is part of the governing of
them. But to the last end which God intends, namely, the divine goodness, things are
directed not only by their activities, but also by the fact of their existence, because by
that mere fact they bear some likeness to the divine goodness. Therefore it is proper to
divine providence to keep things in being.
5. As a work of art presupposes a work of nature, so a work of nature presupposes a
work of God creating: for the material of artificial things is from nature, and the material
of natural things is through creation of God. But artificial things are preserved in being
by virtue of natural things, as a house by the solidity of its stones. Therefore natural
things are not preserved in being otherwise than through the power of God.
6. The impression made by an agent does not remain in the effect when the action of
the agent ceases, unless that impression turns into and becomes part of the nature of
the effect. Thus the forms and properties of things generated remain in them to the end,
after the generation is done, because they are made natural to the things: in like
manner habits are difficult to change, because they turn into nature. But dispositions,
bodily impressions, and emotions, though they remain for some little while after the
action of the agent, do not remain permanently: they find place in the subject as being
on the way to become part of its nature. But what belongs to the nature of a
superior genus in no way remains after the action of the agent is over, as light does not
remain in a transparent medium after the source of light is taken away. But being
is not the nature or essence of anything created, but of God alone (B. I, Chapp.

built a house, and goes away, and still the structure remains, when his work has ceased
and his presence is withdrawn. The world could not endure for the twinkling of an eye, if
God retired from the government of it."
Hereby is excluded the theory of some Doctors of the Law of the Moors, who, by way of
sustaining the position that the world needs the preserving hand of God, have supposed
all forms to be accidents, and that no accident lasts for two successive instants,
the consequence being that the formation of things is always in the making, -- as though
a thing needed no efficient cause except while it is in the making. Some of them are
further said to hold that the indivisible atoms, out of which they say that all
substances are composed, -- which atoms, according to them, alone are indestructible,
-- could last for some short time, even though God were to withdraw His guidance from
the world. Some of them further say that things would not cease to be but for God
causing in them an accident of `ceasing.' All which positions are manifestly
absurd.