SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.153, C.10.

persons related by blood, for instance between parents and children
who are directly and immediately related to one another, since
children naturally owe their parents honor. Hence the Philosopher
instances a horse (De Animal. ix, 47) which covered its own mother
by mistake and threw itself over a precipice as though horrified at
what it had done, because some animals even have a natural respect
for those that have begotten them. There is not the same essential
unbecomingness attaching to other persons who are related to one
another not directly but through their parents: and, as to this,
becomingness or unbecomingness varies according to custom, and
human or Divine law: because, as stated above (Article 2), sexual
intercourse, being directed to the common good, is subject to law.
Wherefore, as Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xv, 16), whereas the union
of brothers and sisters goes back to olden times, it became all the
more worthy of condemnation when religion forbade it.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.153, C.11.

### ARTICLE 10. Whether sacrilege can be a species of lust?

Objection 1: It would seem that sacrilege cannot be a species of lust.
For the same species is not contained under different genera that are
not subalternated to one another. Now sacrilege is a species of
irreligion, as stated above (Question 99, Article 2). Therefore
sacrilege cannot be reckoned a species of lust.
Objection 2: Further, the Decretals (XXXVI, qu. 1 [Append. Grat. ad
can. Lex illa]), do not place sacrilege among other sins which are
reckoned species of lust. Therefore it would seem not to be a
species of lust.
Objection 3: Further, something derogatory to a sacred thing may be
done by the other kinds of vice, as well as by lust. But sacrilege is
not reckoned a species of gluttony, or of any other similar vice.
Therefore neither should it be reckoned a species of lust.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xv, 16) that "if it is
wicked, through covetousness, to go beyond one's earthly bounds,
how much more wicked is it through venereal lust to transgress the
bounds of morals!" Now to go beyond one's earthly bounds in
sacred matters is a sin of sacrilege. Therefore it is likewise a sin of
sacrilege to overthrow the bounds of morals through venereal desire
in sacred matters. But venereal desire pertains to lust. Therefore
sacrilege is a species of lust.
I answer that, As stated above (FS, Question 18, Articles 6,7), the act
of a virtue or vice, that is directed to the end of another virtue or
vice, assumes the latter's species: thus, theft committed for the sake
of adultery, passes into the species of adultery. Now it is evident that
as Augustine states (De Virgin. 8), the observance of chastity, by
being directed to the worship of God, becomes an act of religion, as
in the case of those who vow and keep chastity. Wherefore it is
manifest that lust also, by violating something pertaining to the
worship of God, belongs to the species of sacrilege: and in this way
sacrilege may be accounted a species of lust.
Reply to Objection 1: Lust, by being directed to another vice as its
end, becomes a species of that vice: and so a species of lust may be
also a species of irreligion, as of a higher genus.