shocking as tongues like these.
How then will you salute your brother? How will you touch the sacrifice?
How taste the Lord's blood, when you have so much venom upon your mind?
Since when you say, "Rend him in pieces, and overthrow his house, and destroy
all," when you are imprecating on him ten thousand deaths, you are in nothing
different from a murderer, or rather from a wild beast that devours men.
Let us cease then from this disease and madness, and that kindliness which
He com manded let us show forth towards them that have vexed us: that we may
become like "our Father which is in heaven." And we shall cease therefrom, if
we call to mind our own sins; if we strictly search out all our misdeeds at home,
abroad, and in the market, and in church.
12. For if for nothing else, surely for our disrespectfulness here we are
worthy to undergo the utmost punishment. For when prophets are chanting, and
apostles singing hymns, and God is discoursing, we wander without, and bring
in upon us a turmoil of worldly business. And we do not afford to the laws of
God so great stillness, even as the spectators in the theatres to the emperor's
letters, keeping silence for them. For there, when these letters are being read,
deputies at once, and governors, and senate, and people, stand all upright, with
quietness hearkening to the words. And if amid that most profound silence any
one should suddenly leap up and cry out, he suffers the utmost punishment, as
having been insolent to the emperor. But here, when the letters from heaven are
being read, great is the confusion on all sides. And yet both He who sent the
letters is much greater than this our king, and the assembly more venerable: for
not men only, but angels too are in it; and these triumphs, of which the letters
bear us the good tidings, are much more awful than those on earth. Wherefore
not men only, but angels also and archangels; both the nations of heaven, and all
we on the earth, are commanded to give praise. For, "Bless the Lord," it is said,
"all His works." Yea, for His are no small achievements, rather they surpass all
speech, and thought, and understanding of man.
And these things the prophets proclaim every day, each of them in a

different way publishing this glorious triumph. For one says, "You have gone up
on high, You have led captivity captive, and hast received gifts among men."
And, "The Lord strong and mighty in battle." And another says, "He shall divide
the spoils of the strong." [Isaiah 53:12] For indeed to this purpose He came, that
He might "preach deliverance to captives, and recovery of sight to the blind."
And raising aloud the cry of victory over death, he said, "Where, O Death,
is your victory? Where, O Grave, is your sting?" And another again, declaring
glad tidings of the most profound peace, said, "They shall beat their swords into
ploughshares, and their spears into pruning hooks." And while one calls on
Jerusalem, saying, "Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Sion, for lo! Your King comes
to you meek, riding upon an ass, and a young colt;" [Zechariah 9:9] another
proclaims His second coming also, saying on this wise, "The Lord, whom you
seek, will come, and who will abide the day of His coming? [Malachi 3:1-2]
Leap ye as calves set free from bonds." And another again, amazed at such
things, said, "This is our God; there shall none other be accounted of in
comparison of Him." [Baruch 3:35]
Yet, nevertheless, while both these and many more sayings than these are
being uttered, while we ought to tremble, and not so much as account ourselves
to be on the earth; still, as though in the midst of a forum, we make an uproar
and disturbance, and spend the whole time of our solemn assembly in
discoursing of things which are nothing to us.
When therefore both in little things, and in great, both in hearing, and in
doing, both abroad, and at home, in the church, we are so negligent; and together
with all this, pray also against our enemies: whence are we to have any hope of
salvation, adding to so great sins yet another grievous enhancement, and
equivalent to them all, even this unlawful prayer?
Have we then hereafter any right to marvel, if anything befall us of the
things which are unexpected and painful? Whereas we ought to marvel when no
such thing befalls us. For the former is in the natural order of things, but the
latter were beyond all reason and expectation. For surely it is beyond reason, that