The little child, whether it be insulted and beaten, or honored and glorified,
neither by the one is it moved to impatience or envy, nor by the other lifted up.
Do you see how again He calls us on to all natural excellencies, indicating
that of free choice it is possible to attain them, and so silences the wicked frenzy
of the Manichæans? For if nature be an evil thing, wherefore does He draw from
hence His patterns of severe goodness?
And the child which He set in the midst I suppose to have been a very
young child indeed, free from all these passions. For such a little child is free
from pride and the mad desire of glory, and envy, and contentiousness, and all
such passions, and having many virtues, simplicity, humility, unworldliness,
prides itself upon none of them; which is a twofold severity of goodness; to have
these things, and not to be puffed up about them.
Wherefore He brought it in, and set it in the midst; and not at this merely
did He conclude His discourse, but carries further this admonition, saying, "And
whoso shall receive such a little child in my name, receives me."
"For know," says He, "that not only, if you yourselves become like this,
shall you receive a great reward; but also if for my sake ye honor others who are
such, even for your honor to them do I appoint unto you a kingdom as your
recompence." Or rather, He sets down what is far greater, saying, "he receives
me. So exceedingly dear to me is all that is lowly and artless." For by "a little
child," here, He means the men that are thus simple and lowly, and abject and
contemptible in the judgment of the common sort.
4. After this, to obtain yet more acceptance for His saying, He establishes it
not by the honor only, but also by the punishment, going on to say, "And whoso
shall offend one of these little ones, it were better for him that a millstone were
hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea."
"For as they," says He, who honor these for my sake, have heaven, or rather
an honor greater than the very kingdom; even so they likewise who dishonor
them (for this is to offend them), shall suffer the extremity of punishment. And
marvel thou not at His calling the affront "an offense;" for many feeble-minded

persons have suffered no ordinary offense from being treated with slight and
insult. To heighten therefore and aggravate the blame, He states the mischief
arising therefrom.
And He does not go on to express the punishment in the same way, but
from the things familiar to us, He indicates how intolerable it is. For when He
would touch the grosser sort most sharply, He brings sensible images. Wherefore
here also, meaning to indicate the greatness of the punishment they shall
undergo, and to strike into the arrogance of those that despise them, He brought
forward a kind of sensible punishment, that of the millstone, and of the
drowning. Yet surely it were suitable to what had gone before to have said, "He
that receives not one of these little ones, receives not me;" a thing bitterer than
any punishment; but since the very unfeeling, and exceeding gross, were not so
much penetrated by this, terrible as it is, He puts "a millstone," and "a
drowning." And He said not, "A millstone shall be hanged about his neck," but,
"It were better for him" to undergo this; implying that another evil, more
grievous than this, awaits him; and if this be unbearable, much more that.
Do you see how in both respects He made His threat terrible, first by the
comparison with the known image rendering it more distinct, then by the excess
on its side presenting it to the fancy as far greater than that visible one. Do you
see how He plucks up by the root the spirit of arrogance; how He heals the ulcer
of vainglory; how He instructs us in nothing to set our heart on the first honors;
how He persuades such as covet them in everything to follow after the lowest
place?
5. For nothing is worse than arrogance. This even takes men out of their
natural senses, and brings upon them the character of fools; or rather, it really
makes them to be utterly like idiots.
For like as, if any one, being three cubits in stature, were to strive to be
higher than the mountains, or actually to think it, and draw himself up, as
overpassing their summits, we should seek no other proof of his being out of his
senses; so also when you see a man arrogant, and thinking himself superior to