occupied in the digestion of such things, that which ought to serve for growth is
spent on this digestion of superfluities. Why need one speak of gout, rheum
dispersed every where, the other diseases hence arising, the whole abomination?
For nothing is so disgusting as a woman pampering herself with much food.
Therefore among the poorer women one may see more of beauty: the
superfluities being consumed and not cleaving to them, like some superfluous
clay, of no use and benefit. For their daily exercise, and labors, and hardships,
and their frugal table, and spare diet, minister unto them much soundness of
body, and thence also much bloom.
18. But if you talk of the pleasure of luxury, you will find it to go no farther
than the throat: since as soon as it has passed the tongue, it is flown away,
leaving behind in the body much that is disgusting. For do not I pray look on the
voluptuaries at table only, but when you see them rise up, then follow them, and
you will see bodies rather of wild beasts and irrational creatures than of human
beings. You will see them with headache, distended, bound up, needing a bed
and a couch and plenty of rest, and like men who are tossed in a great tempest
and require others to save them, and long for that condition in which they were
before they were swelled even to bursting : they carrying their bellies about with
a burden like that of women with child, and can scarce step forward, and scarce
see, and scarce speak, and scarce do any thing. But if it should chance that they
sleep a little, they see again strange dreams and full of all manner of fancies.
What should one say of that other madness of theirs? The madness of lust, I
mean, for this also has its fountains from hence. Yea, as horses wild after the
female, so they, goaded on by the sting of their drunkenness, leap upon all, more
irrational than they, and more frantic in their boundings; and committing many
more unseemlinesses which but to name is unlawful. For they know not in fact
any longer what they suffer, nor what they do.
But not so he that keeps from luxury: rather he sits in harbor, beholding
other men's shipwrecks, and enjoys a pleasure pure and lasting, following after
that life which becomes him that is free. Knowing therefore these things, let us

flee from the evil banquets of luxury and cleave to a spare table; that being of a
good habit both of soul and body, we may both practice all virtue, and attain the
good things to come, through the grace and mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, with
Whom to the Father, with the Holy Ghost, be glory, power, and honor, now and
ever, and world without end. Amen.

## Homily 40 on First Corinthians

1 Corinthians 15:29
Else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead? If the dead are not
raised at all, why then are they baptized for the dead?
He takes in hand again another topic, establishing what he said at one time
from what God does , and at another from the very things which they practice.
And this also is no small plea for the defence of any cause when a man brings
forward the gainsayers themselves as witnessing by their own actions what he
affirms. What then is that which he means? Or will you that I should first
mention how they who are infected with the Marcionite heresy pervert this
expression? And I know indeed that I shall excite much laughter; nevertheless,
even on this account most of all I will mention it that you may the more
completely avoid this disease: viz., when any Catechumen departs among them,
having concealed the living man under the couch of the dead, they approach the
corpse and talk with him, and ask him if he wishes to receive baptism; then when
he makes no answer, he that is concealed underneath says in his stead that of
course he should wish to be baptized; and so they baptize him instead of the
departed, like men jesting upon the stage. So great power has the devil over the
souls of careless sinners. Then being called to account, they allege this
expression, saying that even the Apostle has said, "They who are baptized for the
dead." Do you see their extreme ridiculousness? Is it meet then to answer these
things? I trow not; unless it were necessary to discourse with madmen of what
they in their frenzy utter. But that none of the more exceedingly simple folk may
be led captive, one must needs submit to answer even these men. As thus, if this
was Paul's meaning wherefore did God threaten him that is not baptized? For it
is impossible that any should not be baptized henceforth, this being once