things there, while in the other are the contraries to these, discomfort, distemper,
disease, embarrassment— waste of substance ([ἀ] [νελευθερία]). Then how
comes it, you will ask, that we all run eagerly after this? It comes of disease. For
say, what is it that makes the sick man hanker after the thing that does him harm?
Is not this very hankering a part of his disease? Why is it that the lame man does
not walk upright? This very thing, does it come of his being lazy, and not
choosing to go to the physician? For there are some things, in which the pleasure
they bring with them is temporary, but lasting the punishment: others just the
contrary, in which the endurance is for a time, the pleasure perpetual. He,
therefore, that has so little solidity and strength of purpose as not to slight
present sweets for future, is soon overcome. Say, how came Esau to be
overcome? How came he to prefer the present pleasure to the future honor?
Through want of solidity and firmness of character. [Genesis 25:33] And this
fault itself, say you, whence comes it? Of our ownselves: and it is plain from this
consideration. When we have the mind, we do rouse ourselves, and become
capable of endurance. Certain it is, if at any time necessity comes upon us, nay,
often only from a spirit of emulation, we get to see clearly what is useful for us.
When therefore you are about to indulge in luxury, consider how brief the
pleasure, consider the loss— for loss it is indeed to spend so much money to
one's own hurt— the diseases, the infirmities: and despise luxury. How many
shall I enumerate who have suffered evils from indulgence? Noah was drunken,
and was exposed in his nakedness, and see what evils came of this. [Genesis
9:20] Esau through greediness abandoned his birthright, and was set upon
fratricide. The people of Israel "sat down to eat and to drink, and rose up to
play." [Exodus 32:6] Therefore says the Scripture, "When you have eaten and
drunken, remember the Lord your God." [Deuteronomy 6:12] For they fell over a
precipice, in failing into luxury. "The widow," he says, "that lives in pleasure, is
dead while she lives" [1 Timothy 5:6]: and again, "The beloved waxed sleek,
grew thick, and kicked" [Deuteronomy 32:15]: and again the Apostle, "Make not
provision for the flesh, to fulfil the lusts thereof." [Romans 13:14] I am not

enacting as a law that there shall be fasting, for indeed there is no one who
would listen; but I am doing away with daintiness, I am cutting off luxury for the
sake of your own profit: for like a winter torrent, luxury overthrows all: there is
nothing to stop its course: it casts out from a kingdom: what is the gain of it ([τί
τὸ πλέον])? Would you enjoy a (real) luxury? Give to the poor; invite Christ, so
that even after the table is removed, you may still have this luxury to enjoy. For
now, indeed, you have it not, and no wonder: but then you will have it. Would
you taste a (real) luxury? Nourish your soul, give to her of that food to which she
is used: do not kill her by starvation.— It is the time for war, the time for
contest: and do you sit enjoying yourself? Do you not see even those who wield
sceptres, how they live frugally while abroad on their campaigns? "We wrestle
not against flesh and blood" [Ephesians 6:12]; and are you fattening yourself
when about to wrestle? The adversary stands grinding his teeth, and are you
giving a loose to jollity, and devoting yourself to the table? I know that I speak
these things in vain, yet not (in vain) for all. "He that has ears to hear, let him
hear." [Luke 8:8] Christ is pining through hunger, and are you frittering yourself
away ([διασπᾅς]) with gluttony? Two inconsistencies ([Δύο ἀμετρίαι]). For what
evil does not luxury cause? It is contrary to itself: so that I know not how it gets
its name: but just as that is called glory, which is (really) infamy, and that riches,
which in truth is poverty, so the name of luxury is given to that which in reality
is nauseousness. Do we intend ourselves for the shambles, that we so fatten
ourselves? Why cater for the worm that it may have a sumptuous larder? Why
make more of their humors (ἰ[χὥρας])? Why store up in yourself sources of
sweat and rank smelling? Why make yourself useless for everything? Do you
wish your eye to be strong? Get your body well strung? For in musical strings,
that which is coarse and not refined, is not fit to produce musical tones, but that
which has been well scraped, stretches well, and vibrates with full harmony.
Why do you bury the soul alive? Why make the wall about it thicker? Why
increase the reek and the cloud, with fumes like a mist steaming up from all
sides? If none other, let the wrestlers teach you, that the more spare the body, the