John 16:1
"These things have I spoken unto you, that you should not be offended."
That is, "when you see many disbelieve, and yourselves ill-treated."

John 16:2
"They shall put you out of the synagogues."
(For "the Jews had already agreed, that if any one should confess Christ, he
should be put out of the synagogues" [John 9:22])
"Yea, the time comes, that whosoever kills you will think that he does God
service."
"They shall so seek after your murder, as of an action pious and pleasing to
God." Then again He adds the consolation,

John 16:3
"And these things will they do, because they have not known the Father, nor
Me."
"It is sufficient for your comfort that you endure these things for My sake,
and the Father's." Here He reminds them of the blessedness of which He spoke
at the beginning, "Blessed are you, when men shall revile you, and persecute
you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for My sake. Rejoice,
and be exceeding glad; for great is your reward in heaven." [Matthew 5:11-12]

John 16:4
"These things have I told you, that when the time shall come, you may remember
them."
"So, judging from these words, deem the rest also trustworthy. For you will
not be able to say, that I flatteringly told you only those things which would
please you, nor that the words were words of deceit; for one who intended to
deceive, would not have told you beforehand of matters likely to turn you away. I
have therefore told you before, that these things might not fall upon you
unexpectedly, and trouble you; and for another reason besides, that you might
not say, that I did not foreknow that these things would be. Remember then that I
have told you." And indeed the heathen always covered their persecutions of
them by a pretense of their wickedness, driving them out as corrupters; but this
did not trouble the disciples who had heard beforehand, and knew for what they
suffered. The cause of what took place was sufficient to rouse their courage.
Therefore He everywhere handles this, saying, "they have not known Me"; and,
"for My sake they shall do it"; and, "for My Name's sake, and for the Father's
sake"; and, "I suffered first"; and, "from no just cause they dare these things."
4. Let us too consider these things in our temptations, when we suffer
anything from wicked men, "looking to the Beginner and Finisher of our faith"
[Hebrews 12:2], and considering that it is by wicked men, and that it is for
virtue's sake, and for His sake. For if we reflect on these things, all will be most
easy and tolerable. Since if one suffering for those he loves is even proud of it,
what feeling of things dreadful will he have who suffers for the sake of God? For
if He, for our sake, calls that shameful thing, the Cross, "glory" [John 13:31],
much more ought we to be thus disposed. And if we can so despise sufferings,
much more shall we be able to despise riches, and covetousness. We ought then,
when about to endure anything unpleasant, to think not of the toils but of the
crowns; for as merchants take into account not the seas only, but also the profits,