THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.88, C.3.

way explained above, just as mortal sins do, in so far as the favor
conferred by God in forgiving those sins is despised. A man does
not, however, incur ingratitude by committing a venial sin, because
by sinning venially man does not act against God, but apart from
Him, wherefore venial sins nowise cause the return of sins already
forgiven.
Reply to Objection 3: A favor can be weighed in two ways. First by
the quantity of the favor itself, and in this way innocence is a greater
favor from God than penance, which is called the second plank after
shipwreck (cf. Question 84, Article 6). Secondly, a favor may be
weighed with regard to the recipient, who is less worthy, wherefore a
greater favor is bestowed on him, so that he is the more ungrateful if
he scorns it. In this way the favor of the pardon of sins is greater
when bestowed on one who is altogether unworthy, so that the
ingratitude which follows is all the greater.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.88, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the debt of punishment that arises

through ingratitude in respect of a subsequent sin is as great
as that of the sins previously pardoned?
Objection 1: It would seem that the debt of punishment arising
through ingratitude in respect of a subsequent sin is as great as that
of the sins previously pardoned. Because the greatness of the favor
of the pardon of sins is according to the greatness of the sin
pardoned, and so too, in consequence, is the greatness of the
ingratitude whereby this favor is scorned. But the greatness of the
consequent debt of punishment is in accord with the greatness of
the ingratitude. Therefore the debt of punishment arising through
ingratitude in respect of a subsequent sin is as great as the debt of
punishment due for all the previous sins.
Objection 2: Further, it is a greater sin to offend God than to offend
man. But a slave who is freed by his master returns to the same state
of slavery from which he was freed, or even to a worse state. Much
more therefore he that sins against God after being freed from sin,
returns to the debt of as great a punishment as he had incurred
before.
Objection 3: Further, it is written (Mt. 18:34) that "his lord being
angry, delivered him" (whose sins returned to him on account of his
ingratitude) "to the torturers, until he paid all the debt." But this
would not be so unless the debt of punishment incurred through
ingratitude were as great as that incurred through all previous sins.
Therefore an equal debt of punishment returns through ingratitude.
On the contrary, It is written (Dt. 25:2): "According to the measure of
the sin shall the measure also of the stripes be," whence it is evident
that a great debt of punishment does not arise from a slight sin. But
sometimes a subsequent mortal sin is much less grievous than any
one of those previously pardoned. Therefore the debt of punishment
incurred through subsequent sins is not equal to that of sins
previously forgiven.
I answer that, Some have maintained that the debt of punishment
incurred through ingratitude in respect of a subsequent sin is equal
to that of the sins previously pardoned, in addition to the debt proper
to this subsequent sin. But there is no need for this, because, as