And knowing, lovest and smilest on thyself!"
—DANTE: Paradise xxxiii. 125.
While, however, this analogue from the conditions of finite personality
approaches nearer to the eternal distinctions in the Godhead than does
that ternary which Augustin employs—namely, memory, understanding,
and will—yet like all finite analogies to the Infinite it is inadequate. For
the subject-ego, object-ego, and ego-percipient, are not so essentially
distinct and completely objective to each other, as are the Father, Son,
and Holy Spirit. They cannot employ the personal pronouns in reference
to each other. They cannot reciprocally perform acts and discharge
functions towards each other, like the Divine Three. Revelation is explicit
upon this point. It specifies at least the following twelve actions and
relations, that incontestably prove the conscious distinctness and mutual
objectivity of the persons of the Trinity. One divine person loves another
(John 3:35); dwells in another (John 14:10, 11); knows another (Matt.
11:27); sends another (Gen. 16:7); suffers from another (Zech. 13:7–9);
addresses another (Heb. 1:8); is the way to another (John 14:6); speaks of
another (Luke 3:22); glorifies another (John 17:5); confers with another
(Gen. 1:26; 11:7); plans with another (Is. 9:6); rewards another (Phil. 2:5–
11; Heb. 2:9).
Such are some of the salient features of this important treatise upon the
Trinity. It has its defects; but they pertain to the form more than to the
matter; to arrangement and style more than to dogma. Literary
excellence is no the forte of the patristic writers. Hardly any of them are
literary artists. Lactantius among the Latins, and Chrysostom among the
Greeks, are almost the only fathers that have rhetorical grace. And none
of them approach the beauty of the classic writers, as seen in the
harmonious flow and diction of Plato, and the exquisite finish of Horace
and Catullus.
Augustin is prolix, repetitious, and sometimes leaves his theme to discuss
cognate but distantly related subjects. This appears more in the last eight
chapters, which are speculative, than in the first seven, which are
scriptural. The material in this second division is capable of considerable
compression. The author frequently employs two illustrations when one

would suffice, and three or more when two are enough. He discusses
many themes which are not strictly trinitarian.
Yet the patient student will derive some benefit from this discursiveness.
He will find, for example, in this treatise on the Trinity, an able
examination of the subject of miracles (Book III); of creation ex nihilo
(III. ix); of vicarious atonement (IV. vii–xiv); of the faculty of memory
(XI. x); and, incidentally, many other high themes are touched upon.
Before such a contemplative intellect as that of Augustin, all truth lay
spread out like the ocean, with no limits and no separating chasms.
Everything is connected and fluid. Consequently, one doctrine inevitably
leads to and merges in another, and the eager and intense inquirer rushes
forward, and outward, and upward, and downward, in every direction.
The only aim is to see all that can be seen, and state all that can be stated.
The neglect of the form, and the anxiety after the substance, contribute to
the discursiveness. Caring little for proportion in method, and nothing for
elegance in diction, the writer, though bringing forth a vast amount of
truth, does it at the expense of clearness, conciseness, and grace. Such is
the case with the North African father—one of the most voluminous and
prolix of authors, yet one of the most original, suggestive, and fertilizing
of any.
And this particular treatise is perhaps as pregnant and suggestive as any
that Augustin, or any other theologian, ever composed. The doctrine of
the Trinity is the most immense of all the doctrines of religion. It is the
foundation of theology. Christianity, in the last analysis, is
Trinitarianism. Take out of the New Testament the persons of the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Spirit, and there is no God left. Take out of the
Christian consciousness the thoughts and affections that relate to the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, and there is no Christian
consciousness left. The Trinity is the constitutive idea of the evangelical
theology, and the formative idea of the evangelical experience. The
immensity of the doctrine makes it of necessity a mystery; but a mystery
which like night enfolds in its unfathomed depths the bright stars—points
of light, compared with which there is no light so keen and so glittering.
Mysterious as it is, the Trinity of Divine Revelation is the doctrine that
holds in it all the hope of man; for it holds within it the infinite pity of the