(a) "Therefore they that were scattered abroad, went everywhere, preaching
the word." But I would have you admire how even in a season of calamity they
neglected not the preaching. "Hearing and seeing the miracles which he did."
[Recapitulation, Acts 8:4-6] Just as in the case of Moses by contrast (with the
magicians) the miracles were evident miracles, so here also. There was magic,
and so these signs were manifest. (b) "For unclean spirits came out of many that
were possessed with them" [Acts 8:7]; for this was a manifest miracle:— not as
the magicians did: for the other (Simon), it is likely, bound (men with spells)
—"and many," it says, "that were palsied and lame were healed." There was no
deceit here: for it needed but that they should walk and work. "And to him they
all gave heed, saying, This (man) is the Power of God." [Acts 8:10] And that
was fulfilled which was spoken by Christ, "There shall come false Christs and
false Prophets in My name."— [Matthew 24:24] "And to him they had regard,
because that of long time he had bewitched them with sorceries." [Acts 8:11] (a)
And yet there ought to have been not one demoniac there, seeing that of a long
time he had been bewitching them with sorceries: but if there were many
demoniacs, many palsied, these pretences were not truth. But Philip here by his
word also won them over, discoursing concerning the kingdom of Christ. [Acts
8:12] "And Simon," it says, being baptized, continued with Philip [Acts 8:13]:
not for faith's sake, but in order that he might become such (as he). (b) But why
did they not correct him instantly? They were content with his condemning
himself. For this too belonged to their work of teaching ([τἥς διδασκαλίας]). But
when he had not power to resist, he plays the hypocrite, just as did the
magicians, who said, "This is the finger of God." And indeed that he might not
be driven away again, therefore he "continued with Philip," and did not part
from him. "And when the Apostles which were at Jerusalem," etc. (v. 13, 14.)
See how many things are brought about by God's Providence through the death
of Stephen! (a) "But they," it says, "having come down, prayed for them that they
might receive the Holy Ghost: for as yet He was fallen upon none of them. Then
laid they their hands upon them, and they received the Holy Ghost." [Acts 8:15-

17] Do you see that it was not to be done in any ordinary manner, but it needed
great power to give the Holy Ghost? For it is not all one, to obtain remission of
sins, and to receive such a power. (b) By degrees it is, that those receive the gift.
It was a twofold sign: both the giving to those, and the not giving to this man.
Whereas then this man ought, on the contrary, to have asked to receive the Holy
Ghost, he, because he cared not for this, asks power to give It to others. And yet
those received not this power to give: but this man wished to be more illustrious
than Philip, he being among the disciples! (a) "He offered them money." (v. 18,
19.) What? Had he seen the others doing this? Had he seen Philip? Did he
imagine they did not know with what mind he came to them? (b) "Your money
with you to perdition" [Acts 8:20]: since you have not used it as it ought to be
used. These are not words of imprecation, but of chastisement. "To you," he says,
be it (to you): being such. As if one should say, Let it perish along with your
purpose. Have you so mean conceptions of the gift of God, that you have
imagined it to be altogether a thing of man? It is not this. (a) Wherefore also
Peter well calls the affair a gift: "You have thought that the gift of God may be
purchased with money." Do you observe how on all occasions they are clean
from money? "For your heart is not right in the sight of God." [Acts 8:21] Do
you see how he does all of malice? To be simple, however, was the thing needed.
(b) For had it been done with simplicity, he would have even welcomed his
willing mind. Do you see that to have mean conceptions of great things is to sin
doubly? Accordingly, two things he bids him: "Repent and pray, if haply the
thought of your heart may be forgiven you." [Acts 8:22] Do you see it was a
wicked thought he had entertained? Therefore he says, "If haply it may be
forgiven you:" because he knew him to be incorrigible. (a) "For I perceive that
you are in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity." [Acts 8:23] Words
of exceeding wrath! But otherwise he did not punish him: that faith may not
thereafter be of compulsion; that the matter may not seem to be carried
ruthlessly; that he may introduce the subject of repentance: or also, because it
suffices for correction to have convicted him, to have told him what was in his