41. At the same time, today’s vast and rapid cultural changes demand that we constantly seek
ways of expressing unchanging truths in a language which brings out their abiding newness. “The
deposit of the faith is one thing... the way it is expressed is another”. There are times when the
faithful, in listening to completely orthodox language, take away something alien to the authentic
Gospel of Jesus Christ, because that language is alien to their own way of speaking to and
understanding one another. With the holy intent of communicating the truth about God and
humanity, we sometimes give them a false god or a human ideal which is not really Christian. In
this way, we hold fast to a formulation while failing to convey its substance. This is the greatest
danger. Let us never forget that “the expression of truth can take different forms. The renewal of
these forms of expression becomes necessary for the sake of transmitting to the people of today
the Gospel message in its unchanging meaning”.

42. All of this has great relevance for the preaching of the Gospel, if we are really concerned to
make its beauty more clearly recognized and accepted by all. Of course, we will never be able to
make the Church’s teachings easily understood or readily appreciated by everyone. Faith always
remains something of a cross; it retains a certain obscurity which does not detract from the
firmness of its assent. Some things are understood and appreciated only from the standpoint of
this assent, which is a sister to love, beyond the range of clear reasons and arguments. We need
to remember that all religious teaching ultimately has to be reflected in the teacher’s way of life,
which awakens the assent of the heart by its nearness, love and witness.

43. In her ongoing discernment, the Church can also come to see that certain customs not directly
connected to the heart of the Gospel, even some which have deep historical roots, are no longer
properly understood and appreciated. Some of these customs may be beautiful, but they no longer
serve as means of communicating the Gospel. We should not be afraid to re-examine them. At the
same time, the Church has rules or precepts which may have been quite effective in their time, but

no longer have the same usefulness for directing and shaping people’s lives. Saint Thomas
Aquinas pointed out that the precepts which Christ and the apostles gave to the people of God
“are very few”. Citing Saint Augustine, he noted that the precepts subsequently enjoined by the
Church should be insisted upon with moderation “so as not to burden the lives of the faithful” and
make our religion a form of servitude, whereas “God’s mercy has willed that we should be
free”. This warning, issued many centuries ago, is most timely today. It ought to be one of the
criteria to be taken into account in considering a reform of the Church and her preaching which
would enable it to reach everyone.