SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.88, C.6.

because by a vow we direct something to the honor of God, so that
for this very reason a vow is an act of religion. On the other hand, in
an oath reverence for the name of God is taken in confirmation of a
promise. Hence what is confirmed by oath does not, for this reason,
become an act of religion, since moral acts take their species from
the end.
Reply to Objection 2: He who swears does indeed make use of his
reverence or love for the person by whom he swears: he does not,
however, direct his oath to the reverence or love of that person, but
to something else that is necessary for the present life.
Reply to Objection 3: Even as a medicine is useful for healing, and
yet, the stronger it is, the greater harm it does if it be taken unduly,
so too an oath is useful indeed as a means of confirmation, yet the
greater the reverence it demands the more dangerous it is, unless it
be employed aright; for, as it is written (Ecclus. 23:13), "if he make it
void," i.e. if he deceive his brother, "his sin shall be upon him: and if
he dissemble it," by swearing falsely, and with dissimulation, "he
offendeth double,": "and if he swear in vain," i.e. without due cause
and necessity, "he shall not be justified."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.88, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether it is lawful to swear by creatures?

Objection 1: It would seem that it is not lawful to swear by creatures.
It is written (Mt. 5:34-36): "I say to you not to swear at all, neither by
heaven . . . nor by the earth . . . nor by Jerusalem . . . nor by thy
head": and Jerome, expounding these words, says: "Observe that
the Saviour does not forbid swearing by God, but by heaven and
earth," etc.
Objection 2: Further, punishment is not due save for a fault. Now a
punishment is appointed for one who swears by creatures: for it is
written (22, qu. i, can. Clericum): "If a cleric swears by creatures he
must be very severely rebuked: and if he shall persist in this vicious
habit we wish that he be excommunicated." Therefore it is unlawful
to swear by creatures.
Objection 3: Further, an oath is an act of religion, as stated above
(Article 4). But religious worship is not due to any creature,
according to Rm. 1:23,25. Therefore it is not lawful to swear by a
creature.
On the contrary, Joseph swore "by the health of Pharaoh" (Gn.
42:16). Moreover it is customary to swear by the Gospel, by relics,
and by the saints.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1, ad 3), there are two kinds of
oath. One is uttered a simple contestation or calling God as witness:
and this kind of oath, like faith, is based on God's truth. Now faith is
essentially and chiefly about God Who is the very truth, and
secondarily about creatures in which God's truth is reflected, as
stated above (Question 1, Article 1). In like manner an oath is chiefly
referred to God Whose testimony is invoked; and secondarily an
appeal by oath is made to certain creatures considered, not in
themselves, but as reflecting the Divine truth. Thus we swear by the
Gospel, i.e. by God Whose truth is made known in the Gospel; and
by the saints who believed this truth and kept it.
The other way of swearing is by cursing and in this kind of oath a
creature is adduced that the judgment of God may be wrought
therein. Thus a man is wont to swear by his head, or by his son, or
by some other thing that he loves, even as the Apostle swore (2 Cor.