manageable. And though we pass through the fire and through the water, all
things yield to virtue, even death itself. Let us then be zealous in the pursuit of it,
that we may attain the good things to come, in Jesus Christ our Lord, with
whom, etc.

## Homily 5 on Titus

[Titus 2:11-14]
"For the grace of God that brings salvation has appeared unto all men,
Teaching them that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live
soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present world; Looking for that blessed
hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ;
who gave Himself for us, that He might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify
unto Himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works."
Having demanded from servants so great virtue, for it is great virtue to
adorn the doctrine of our God and Saviour in all things, and charged them to
give no occasion of offense to their masters, even in common matters, he adds
the just cause, why servants should be such: "For the grace of God, that brings
salvation, has appeared." Those who have God for their Teacher, may well be
such as I have described, seeing their numberless sins have been forgiven to
them. For you know that in addition to other considerations, this in no common
degree awes and humbles the soul, that when it had innumerable sins to answer
for, it received not punishment, but obtained pardon, and infinite favors. For if
one, whose servant had committed many offenses, instead of scourging him with
thongs, should grant him a pardon for all those, but should require an account of
his future conduct, and bid him beware of falling into the same faults again, and
should bestow high favors upon him, who do you think would not be overcome
at hearing of such kindness? But do not think that grace stops at the pardon of
former sins— it secures us against them in future, for this also is of grace. Since
if He were never to punish those who still do amiss, this would not be so much
grace, as encouragement to evil and wickedness.
"For the grace of God," he says, "has appeared, teaching us that, denying
ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in

the present world; looking for the blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of
the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ." See, how together with the rewards
he places the virtue. And this is of grace, to deliver us from worldly things, and
to lead us to Heaven. He speaks here of two appearings; for there are two; the
first of grace, the second of retribution and justice.
"That denying ungodliness," he says, "and worldly lusts."
See here the foundation of all virtue. He has not said "avoiding," but
"denying." Denying implies the greatest distance, the greatest hatred and
aversion. With as much resolution and zeal as they turned from idols, with so
much let them turn from vice itself, and worldly lusts. For these too are idols,
that is, worldly lusts, and covetousness, and this he names idolatry. Whatever
things are useful for the present life are worldly lusts, whatever things perish
with the present life are worldly lusts. Let us then have nothing to do with these.
Christ came, "that we should deny ungodliness." Ungodliness relates to
doctrines, worldly lusts to a wicked life.
"And should live soberly, righteously, and godly in the present world."
Do you see, what I always affirm, that it is not sobriety only to abstain from
fornication, but that we must be free from other passions. So then he who loves
wealth is not sober. For as the fornicator loves women, so the other loves money,
and even more inordinately, for he is not impelled by so strong a passion. And he
is certainly a more powerless charioteer who cannot manage a gentle horse, than
he who cannot restrain a wild and unruly one. What then? Says he, is the love of
wealth weaker than the love of women? This is manifest from many reasons. In
the first place, lust springs from the necessity of nature, and what arises from this
necessity must be difficult to restrain, since it is implanted in our nature.
Secondly, because the ancients had no regard for wealth, but for women they had
great regard, in respect of their chastity. And no one blamed him who cohabited
with his wife according to law, even to old age, but all blamed him who hoarded
money. And many of the Heathen philosophers despised money, but none of
them were indifferent to women, so that this passion is more imperious than the