FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.38, C.3.

Reply to Objection 2: The relation of effect to cause is like the
relation of the object of pleasure to him that takes pleasure in it:
because in each case the one agrees with the other. Now every like
thing increases its like. Therefore joy is increased by laughter and
the other effects of joy: except they be excessive, in which case,
accidentally, they lessen it.
Reply to Objection 3: The image of that which saddens us,
considered in itself, has a natural tendency to increase sorrow: yet
from the very fact that a man imagines himself to be doing that
which is fitting according to his actual state, he feels a certain
amount of pleasure. For the same reason if laughter escapes a man
when he is so disposed that he thinks he ought to weep, he is sorry
for it, as having done something unbecoming to him, as Cicero says
(De Tusc. Quaest. iii, 27).

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.38, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether pain or sorrow are assuaged by the

sympathy of friends?
Objection 1: It would seem that the sorrow of sympathizing friends
does not assuage our own sorrow. For contraries have contrary
effects. Now as Augustine says (Confess. viii, 4), "when many rejoice
together, each one has more exuberant joy, for they are kindled and
inflamed one by the other." Therefore, in like manner, when many are
sorrowful, it seems that their sorrow is greater.
Objection 2: Further, friendship demands mutual love, as Augustine
declares (Confess. iv, 9). But a sympathizing friend is pained at the
sorrow of his friend with whom he sympathizes. Consequently the
pain of a sympathizing friend becomes, to the friend in sorrow, a
further cause of sorrow: so that, his pain being doubled his sorrow
seems to increase.
Objection 3: Further, sorrow arises from every evil affecting a friend,
as though it affected oneself: since "a friend is one's other
self" (Ethic. ix, 4,9). But sorrow is an evil. Therefore the sorrow of the
sympathizing friend increases the sorrow of the friend with whom he
sympathizes.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. ix, 11) that those who
are in pain are consoled when their friends sympathize with them.
I answer that, When one is in pain, it is natural that the sympathy of a
friend should afford consolation: whereof the Philosopher indicates
a twofold reason (Ethic. ix, 11). The first is because, since sorrow
has a depressing effect, it is like a weight whereof we strive to
unburden ourselves: so that when a man sees others saddened by
his own sorrow, it seems as though others were bearing the burden
with him, striving, as it were, to lessen its weight; wherefore the load
of sorrow becomes lighter for him: something like what occurs in the
carrying of bodily burdens. The second and better reason is because
when a man's friends condole with him, he sees that he is loved by
them, and this affords him pleasure, as stated above (Question 32,
Article 5). Consequently, since every pleasure assuages sorrow, as
stated above (Article 1), it follows that sorrow is mitigated by a
sympathizing friend.