commands us to lay aside, he says in the same Epistle, "Cast ye off the old man with his deeds."
But when he said this, he does not remove away the ancient formation [of man]; for in that case it
would be incumbent on us to rid ourselves of its company by committing suicide.
4. But the apostle himself also, being one who had been formed in a womb, and had issued
thence, wrote to us, and confessed in his Epistle to the Philippians that "to live in the flesh was the
fruit of [his] work;" thus expressing himself. Now the final result of the work of the Spirit is the
salvation of the flesh. For what other visible fruit is there of the invisible Spirit, than the rendering
of the flesh mature and capable of incorruption? If then [he says], "To live in the flesh, this is the
result of labour to me," he did not surely contemn the substance of flesh in that passage where he
said, "Put ye off the old man with his works;" but he points out that we should lay aside our
former conversation, that which waxes old and becomes corrupt; and for this reason he goes on to
say, "And put ye on the new man, that which is renewed in knowledge, after the image of Him who
created him." In this, therefore, that he says, "which is renewed in knowledge," he demonstrates
that he, the selfsame man who was in ignorance in times past, that is, in ignorance of God, is renewed
by that knowledge which has respect to Him. For the knowledge of God renews man. And when
he says, "after the image of the Creator," he sets forth the recapitulation of the same man, who was
at the beginning made after the likeness of God.
5. And that he, the apostle, was the very same person who had been born from the womb, that
is, of the ancient substance of flesh, he does himself declare in the Epistle to the Galatians: "But
when it pleased God, who separated me from my mother's womb, and called me by His grace, to
reveal His Son in me, that I might preach Him among the Gentiles," it was not, as I have already
observed, one person who had been born from the womb, and another who preached the Gospel
of the Son of God; but that same individual who formerly was ignorant, and used to persecute the
Church, when the revelation was made to him from heaven, and the Lord conferred with him, as I
have pointed out in the third book, preached the Gospel of Jesus Christ the Son of God, who
was crucified under Pontius Pilate, his former ignorance being driven out by his subsequent
knowledge: just as the blind men whom the Lord healed did certainly lose their blindness, but
received the substance of their eyes perfect, and obtained the power of vision in the very same eyes
with which they formerly did not see; the darkness being merely driven away by the power of
vision, while the substance of the eyes was retained, in order that, by means of those eyes through
which they had not seen, exercising again the visual power, they might give thanks to Him who
had restored them again to sight. And thus, also, he whose withered hand was healed, and all who