fornication it is impossible to enter into the kingdom of heaven. Or rather, this is
henceforth not fornication but adultery; for as a woman who is bound to a man,
if she come together with another man, then has committed adultery, so he that is
bound to a woman, if he have another, has committed adultery. Such an one shall
not inherit the kingdom of heaven, but shall fall into the pit. Hear what Christ
says concerning these, "Their worm shall not die, and the fire shall not be
quenched." [Mark 9:44] For he can have no pardon, who after (possessing) a
wife, and the comfort of a wife, then acts shamelessly towards another woman;
since this is henceforth wantonness. And if the many abstain even from their
wives when it be a season of fast or prayer, how great a fire does he heap up for
himself who is not even content with his wife, but mingles with another; and if it
is not permitted one who has put away and cast out his own wife to mingle with
another, (for this is adultery,) how great evil does he commit who, while his wife
is in his house, brings in another. Let no one then allow this malady to dwell in
his soul; let him tear it up by the root. He does not so much wrong his wife as
himself. For so grievous and unpardonable is this offense, that if a woman
separate herself from a husband which is an idolater without his consent, God
punishes her; but if she separate herself from a fornicator, not so. Do you see
how great an evil this is? "If," It says, "any faithful woman have a husband that
believes not, and if he be pleased to dwell with her, let her not leave him." [1
Corinthians 7:13] Not so concerning a harlot; but what? "If any man put away
his wife, saving for the cause of fornication, he causes her to commit adultery."
[Matthew 5:32] For if the coming together makes one body, he who comes
together with a harlot must needs become one body with her. How then shall the
modest woman, being a member of Christ, receive such an one, or how shall she
join to herself the member of an harlot. And observe the excess of the one
(fornication) over the other (idolatry). The woman who dwells with an
unbeliever is not impure; ("for," It says, "the unbelieving husband is sanctified
by the wife" [1 Corinthians 6:15]) not so with the harlot; but what? "Shall I then
make the members of Christ the members of an harlot?" In the one case

sanctification remains, and is not removed though the unbeliever dwells with his
wife; but in the other case it departs. A dreadful, a dreadful thing is fornication,
and an agent for everlasting punishment; and even in this world it brings with it
ten thousand woes. The man so guilty is forced to lead a life of anxiety and toil;
he is nothing better off than those who are under punishment, creeping into
another man's house with fear and much trembling, suspecting all alike both
slave and free. Wherefore I exhort you to be freed from this malady, and if you
obey not, step not on the sacred threshold. Sheep that are covered with the scab,
and full of disease, may not herd with those that are in health; we must drive
them from the fold until they get rid of the malady. We have been made members
of Christ; let us not, I entreat, become members of an harlot. This place is not a
brothel but a church; if then you have the members of an harlot, stand not in the
church, lest you insult the place. If there were no hell, if there were no
punishment, yet, after those contracts, those marriage torches, the lawful bed, the
procreation of children, the intercourse, how couldest thou bear to join yourself
to another? How is it that you are not ashamed nor blushest? Do you not know
that they who after the death of their own wife, introduce another into their own
house, are blamed by many? Yet this action has no penalty attached to it: but you
bring in another while your wife is yet alive. What lustfulness is this! Learn what
has been spoken concerning such men, "Their worm," It says, "shall not die, and
the fire shall not be quenched." [Mark 9:44] Shudder at the threat, dread the
vengeance. The pleasure here is not so great as the punishment there, but may it
not came to pass that any one (here) become liable to that punishment, but that
exercising holiness they may see Christ, and obtain the promised good things,
which may we all enjoy, through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus
Christ, to whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost be glory, for ever and ever.
Amen.