SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.30, C.3.

his nature. Accordingly we are bound to succor the sinner as to the
maintenance of his nature, but not so as to abet his sin, for this
would be to do evil rather than good.
Reply to Objection 3: The excommunicated and the enemies of the
common weal are deprived of all beneficence, in so far as this
prevents them from doing evil deeds. Yet if their nature be in urgent
need of succor lest it fail, we are bound to help them: for instance, if
they be in danger of death through hunger or thirst, or suffer some
like distress, unless this be according to the order of justice.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.30, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether we ought to do good to those rather who

are more closely united to us?
Objection 1: It would seem that we are nor bound to do good to
those rather who are more closely united to us. For it is written (Lk.
14:12): "When thou makest a dinner or a supper, call not thy friends,
nor thy brethren, nor thy kinsmen." Now these are the most closely
united to us. Therefore we are not bound to do good to those rather
who are more closely united to us, but preferably to strangers and to
those who are in want: hence the text goes on: "But, when thou
makest a feast, call the poor, the maimed," etc.
Objection 2: Further, to help another in the battle is an act of very
great goodness. But a soldier on the battlefield is bound to help a
fellow-soldier who is a stranger rather than a kinsman who is a foe.
Therefore in doing acts of kindness we are not bound to give the
preference to those who are most closely united to us.
Objection 3: Further, we should pay what is due before conferring
gratuitous favors. But it is a man's duty to be good to those who
have been good to him. Therefore we ought to do good to our
benefactors rather than to those who are closely united to us.
Objection 4: Further, a man ought to love his parents more than his
children, as stated above (Question 26, Article 9). Yet a man ought to
be more beneficent to his children, since "neither ought the children
to lay up for the parents," according to 2 Cor. 12:14. Therefore we are
not bound to be more beneficent to those who are more closely
united to us.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Doctr. Christ. i, 28): "Since one
cannot do good to all, we ought to consider those chiefly who by
reason of place, time or any other circumstance, by a kind of chance
are more closely united to us."
I answer that, Grace and virtue imitate the order of nature, which is
established by Divine wisdom. Now the order of nature is such that
every natural agent pours forth its activity first and most of all on the
things which are nearest to it: thus fire heats most what is next to it.
In like manner God pours forth the gifts of His goodness first and
most plentifully on the substances which are nearest to Him, as