SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.179, C.5.

upon the works of Thy hands: I stretched forth my hands to Thee."
Reply to Objection 2: By considering the divine judgments man is
guided to the consideration of the divine justice; and by considering
the divine benefits and promises, man is led to the knowledge of
God's mercy or goodness, as by effects already manifested or yet to
be vouchsafed.
Reply to Objection 3: These six denote the steps whereby we ascend
by means of creatures to the contemplation of God. For the first step
consists in the mere consideration of sensible objects; the second
step consists in going forward from sensible to intelligible objects;
the third step is to judge of sensible objects according to intelligible
things; the fourth is the absolute consideration of the intelligible
objects to which one has attained by means of sensibles; the fifth is
the contemplation of those intelligible objects that are unattainable
by means of sensibles, but which the reason is able to grasp; the
sixth step is the consideration of such intelligible things as the
reason can neither discover nor grasp, which pertain to the sublime
contemplation of divine truth, wherein contemplation is ultimately
perfected.
Reply to Objection 4: The ultimate perfection of the human intellect
is the divine truth: and other truths perfect the intellect in relation to
the divine truth.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.179, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether in the present state of life the

contemplative life can reach to the vision of the Divine
essence?
Objection 1: It would seem that in the present state of life the
contemplative life can reach to the vision of the Divine essence. For,
as stated in Gn. 32:30, Jacob said: "I have seen God face to face, and
my soul has been saved." Now the vision of God's face is the vision
of the Divine essence. Therefore it would seem that in the present
life one may come, by means of contemplation, to see God in His
essence.
Objection 2: Further, Gregory says (Moral. vi, 37) that "contemplative
men withdraw within themselves in order to explore spiritual things,
nor do they ever carry with them the shadows of things corporeal, or
if these follow them they prudently drive them away: but being
desirous of seeing the incomprehensible light, they suppress all the
images of their limited comprehension, and through longing to reach
what is above them, they overcome that which they are." Now man is
not hindered from seeing the Divine essence, which is the
incomprehensible light, save by the necessity of turning to corporeal
phantasms. Therefore it would seem that the contemplation of the
present life can extend to the vision of the incomprehensible light in
its essence.
Objection 3: Further, Gregory says (Dial. ii, 35): "All creatures are
small to the soul that sees its Creator: wherefore when the man of
God," the blessed Benedict, to wit, "saw a fiery globe in the tower
and angels returning to heaven, without doubt he could only see
such things by the light of God." Now the blessed Benedict was still
in this life. Therefore the contemplation of the present life can extend
to the vision of the essence of God.
On the contrary, Gregory says (Hom. xiv in Ezech.): "As long as we
live in this mortal flesh, no one reaches such a height of
contemplation as to fix the eyes of his mind on the ray itself of
incomprehensible light."
I answer that, As Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. xii, 27), "no one seeing
God lives this mortal life wherein the bodily senses have their play:
and unless in some way he depart this life, whether by going