FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.114, C.2.

the character of justice is found there, since the child merits
something from his father and the slave from his lord.
Now it is clear that between God and man there is the greatest
inequality: for they are infinitely apart, and all man's good is from
God. Hence there can be no justice of absolute equality between
man and God, but only of a certain proportion, inasmuch as both
operate after their own manner. Now the manner and measure of
human virtue is in man from God. Hence man's merit with God only
exists on the presupposition of the Divine ordination, so that man
obtains from God, as a reward of his operation, what God gave him
the power of operation for, even as natural things by their proper
movements and operations obtain that to which they were ordained
by God; differently, indeed, since the rational creature moves itself
to act by its free-will, hence its action has the character of merit,
which is not so in other creatures.
Reply to Objection 1: Man merits, inasmuch as he does what he
ought, by his free-will; otherwise the act of justice whereby anyone
discharges a debt would not be meritorious.
Reply to Objection 2: God seeks from our goods not profit, but glory,
i.e. the manifestation of His goodness; even as He seeks it also in
His own works. Now nothing accrues to Him, but only to ourselves,
by our worship of Him. Hence we merit from God, not that by our
works anything accrues to Him, but inasmuch as we work for His
glory.
Reply to Objection 3: Since our action has the character of merit,
only on the presupposition of the Divine ordination, it does not
follow that God is made our debtor simply, but His own, inasmuch as
it is right that His will should be carried out.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.114, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether anyone without grace can merit eternal

life?
Objection 1: It would seem that without grace anyone can merit
eternal life. For man merits from God what he is divinely ordained to,
as stated above (Article 1). Now man by his nature is ordained to
beatitude as his end; hence, too, he naturally wishes to be blessed.
Hence man by his natural endowments and without grace can merit
beatitude which is eternal life.
Objection 2: Further, the less a work is due, the more meritorious it
is. Now, less due is that work which is done by one who has received
fewer benefits. Hence, since he who has only natural endowments
has received fewer gifts from God, than he who has gratuitous gifts
as well as nature, it would seem that his works are more meritorious
with God. And thus if he who has grace can merit eternal life to some
extent, much more may he who has no grace.
Objection 3: Further, God's mercy and liberality infinitely surpass
human mercy and liberality. Now a man may merit from another,
even though he has not hitherto had his grace. Much more,
therefore, would it seem that a man without grace may merit eternal
life.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (Rm. 6:23): "The grace of God, life
everlasting."
I answer that, Man without grace may be looked at in two states, as
was said above (Question 109, Article 2): the first, a state of perfect
nature, in which Adam was before his sin; the second, a state of
corrupt nature, in which we are before being restored by grace.
Therefore, if we speak of man in the first state, there is only one
reason why man cannot merit eternal life without grace, by his purely
natural endowments, viz. because man's merit depends on the
Divine pre-ordination. Now no act of anything whatsoever is divinely
ordained to anything exceeding the proportion of the powers which
are the principles of its act; for it is a law of Divine providence that
nothing shall act beyond its powers. Now everlasting life is a good
exceeding the proportion of created nature; since it exceeds its
knowledge and desire, according to 1 Cor. 2:9: "Eye hath not seen,
nor ear heard, neither hath it entered into the heart of man." And