Ex. xxxiv. 6, 7.

see God; and that, through the wisdom of God, man shall see Him in the last times, in the depth of
a rock, that is, in His coming as a man. And for this reason did He [the Lord] confer with him face
to face on the top of a mountain, Elias being also present, as the Gospel relates, He thus making
good in the end the ancient promise.
10. The prophets, therefore, did not openly behold the actual face of God, but [they saw] the
dispensations and the mysteries through which man should afterwards see God. As was also said
to Elias: "Thou shalt go forth tomorrow, and stand in the presence of the Lord; and, behold, a wind
great and strong, which shall rend the mountains, and break the rocks in pieces before the Lord.
And the Lord [was] not in the wind; and after the wind an earthquake, but the Lord [was] not in
the earthquake; and after the earthquake a fire, but the Lord [was] not in the fire; and after the fire
a scarcely audible voice" (vox auræ tenuis). For by such means was the prophet—very indignant,
because of the transgression of the people and the slaughter of the prophets—both taught to act in
a more gentle manner; and the Lord's advent as a man was pointed out, that it should be subsequent
to that law which was given by Moses, mild and tranquil, in which He would neither break the
bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax. The mild and peaceful repose of His kingdom was
indicated likewise. For, after the wind which rends the mountains, and after the earthquake, and
after the fire, come the tranquil and peaceful times of His kingdom, in which the spirit of God does,
in the most gentle manner, vivify and increase mankind. This, too, was made still clearer by Ezekiel,
that the prophets saw the dispensations of God in part, but not actually God Himself. For when
this man had seen the vision of God, and the cherubim, and their wheels, and when he had
recounted the mystery of the whole of that progression, and had beheld the likeness of a throne
above them, and upon the throne a likeness as of the figure of a man, and the things which were
upon his loins as the figure of amber, and what was below like the sight of fire, and when he set
forth all the rest of the vision of the thrones, lest any one might happen to think that in those [visions]
he had actually seen God, he added: "This was the appearance of the likeness of the glory of God."
11. If, then, neither Moses, nor Elias, nor Ezekiel, who had all many celestial visions, did see
God; but if what they did see were similitudes of the splendour of the Lord, and prophecies of
things to come; it is manifest that the Father is indeed invisible, of whom also the Lord said, "No
man hath seen God at any time." But His Word, as He Himself willed it, and for the benefit of
those who beheld, did show the Father's brightness, and explained His purposes (as also the Lord