the philosopher, and that before grace (i.e. of Baptism), what pardon can they
deserve, who, after so great grace, fight, and worry, and kick one another, worse
than beasts? Nothing is more base than passion, nothing more disgraceful,
nothing more frightful, nothing more odious, nothing more hurtful. These things
I say, not only in order that towards men we may be gentle, but also if a wife be
a talker, that you may bear it: let your wife be to you a school for training and
exercise ([παλαίστρα καὶ γυμνάσιον]). For how can it but be absurd, to submit to
exercises which yield no profit, where we afflict the body, but not to practise
exercises at home, which, even before the contest, present to us a crown? Does
your wife abuse you? Do not thou become a woman: to be abusive is womanly:
it is a disease of the soul, an inferiority. Think not that it is unworthy of you,
when your wife abuses you. Unworthy it is, when you are abusive, but she bears
patiently ([φιλοσοφῇ]): then do you act unseemly, then are you disgraced: but if,
having been abused, thou bear it, great is the proof of your strength. I do not say
this, to induce wives to be abusive: God forbid: but only in case it should so
happen at the instance of Satan. It is the part of men that are strong, to bear the
weak. And if your servant contradict you, bear it philosophically: not what he
deserves to have said to him, do thou say or do, but that which it behooves you
both to do and to say. Never insult a girl by uttering some foul word against her:
never call your servant, scoundrel ([μιαρὸν]): not he is disgraced, but thou. It is
not possible to be master of one's self, being in a passion. Like a sea rolling
mountains high, it is all hurly-burly: or even as a pure fountain, when mire is
cast into it, becomes muddied, and all is in turmoil. You may beat him, you may
rend his coat to rags, but it is you that sustain the greater damage: for to him the
blow is on the body and the garment, but to you on the soul. It is your own soul
that you have cut open; it is there that you have inflicted a wound: you have
flung your own charioteer from his horses, you have got him dragging along the
ground upon his back. And it is all one, as if one driver being in a passion with
another, should choose to be thus dragged along. You may rebuke, you may
chide, you may do whatever if be, only let it be without wrath and passion. For if

he who rebukes is physician to him who offends, how can he heal another, when
he has first hurt himself, when he does not heal himself? Say, if a physician
should go to heal another person, does he first wound his own hand, first blind
his own eyes, and so set about healing that other? God forbid. So also, however
thou rebuke, however thou chide, let your eyes see clearly. Do not make your
mind muddy, else how shall the cure be wrought? It is not possible to be in the
same tranquillity, being in a passion, and being free from passion. Why do you
first overturn your master from his seat, and then discourse with him as he lies
sprawling on the ground? Do you see not the judges, how, when about to hold
the assize, they seat themselves upon the bench, in their becoming attire? Thus
do thou likewise dress your soul with the judicial robe (which is gentleness).
"But he will not be afraid of me," say you. He will be the more afraid. In the
other case, though you speak justly, your servant will impute it to passion: but if
you do it with gentleness, he will condemn himself: and, what is of the first
importance, God will accept you, and thus you will be able to attain unto the
eternal blessings, through the grace and loving-kindness of our Lord Jesus
Christ, with Whom to the Father together with the Holy Spirit be glory,
dominion, and honor, now and ever, and world without end. Amen.