forms, afterwards receiving those that are accidental, among which
light holds the first place.
Reply to Objection 2: In the opinion of some the light here spoken of
was a kind of luminous nebula, and that on the making of the sun
this returned to the matter of which it had been formed. But this
cannot well be maintained, as in the beginning of Genesis Holy
Scripture records the institution of that order of nature which
henceforth is to endure. We cannot, then, say that what was made at
that time afterwards ceased to exist.
Others, therefore, held that this luminous nebula continues in
existence, but so closely attached to the sun as to be
indistinguishable. But this is as much as to say that it is superfluous,
whereas none of God's works have been made in vain. On this
account it is held by some that the sun's body was made out of this
nebula. This, too, is impossible to those at least who believe that the
sun is different in its nature from the four elements, and naturally
incorruptible. For in that case its matter cannot take on another form.
I answer, then, with Dionysius (Div. Nom. iv), that the light was the
sun's light, formless as yet, being already the solar substance, and
possessing illuminative power in a general way, to which was
afterwards added the special and determinative power required to
produce determinate effects. Thus, then, in the production of this
light a triple distinction was made between light and darkness. First,
as to the cause, forasmuch as in the substance of the sun we have
the cause of light, and in the opaque nature of the earth the cause of
darkness. Secondly, as to place, for in one hemisphere there was
light, in the other darkness. Thirdly, as to time; because there was
light for one and darkness for another in the same hemisphere; and
this is signified by the words, "He called the light day, and the
darkness night."
Reply to Objection 3: Basil says (Hom. ii in Hexaem.) that day and
night were then caused by expansion and contraction of light, rather
than by movement. But Augustine objects to this (Gen. ad lit. i), that
there was no reason for this vicissitude of expansion and
contraction since there were neither men nor animals on the earth at
that time, for whose service this was required. Nor does the nature of
a luminous body seem to admit of the withdrawal of light, so long as
the body is actually present; though this might be effected by a
miracle. As to this, however, Augustine remarks (Gen. ad lit. i) that in

the first founding of the order of nature we must not look for
miracles, but for what is in accordance with nature. We hold, then,
that the movement of the heavens is twofold. Of these movements,
one is common to the entire heaven, and is the cause of day and
night. This, as it seems, had its beginning on the first day. The other
varies in proportion as it affects various bodies, and by its variations
is the cause of the succession of days, months, and years. Thus it is,
that in the account of the first day the distinction between day and
night alone is mentioned; this distinction being brought about by the
common movement of the heavens. The further distinction into
successive days, seasons, and years recorded as begun on the
fourth day, in the words, "let them be for seasons, and for days, and
years" is due to proper movements.
Reply to Objection 4: As Augustine teaches (Confess. xii; Gen. ad lit.
1,15), formlessness did not precede forms in duration; and so we
must understand the production of light to signify the formation of
spiritual creatures, not, indeed, with the perfection of glory, in which
they were not created, but with the perfection of grace, which they
possessed from their creation as said above (Question 62, Article 3).
Thus the division of light from darkness will denote the distinction of
the spiritual creature from other created things as yet without form.
But if all created things received their form at the same time, the
darkness must be held to mean the spiritual darkness of the wicked,
not as existing from the beginning but such as God foresaw would
exist.