disciples, when they see their teachers in dangers? But this was not your case.
"For our exhortation," that is, our teaching, "is not of error." The matter, he
says, is not guile nor deceit, that we should give it up. It is not for things
abominable, as the tricks of jugglers and sorcerers. "And of uncleanness," says
he, "nor in guile," nor for any insurrection, like what Theudas did. "But even as
we have been approved of God to be entrusted with the Gospel, so we speak, not
as pleasing men, but God." Do you see, that it is not vainglory? "But God," he
says, "which proves our hearts." We do nothing for the sake of pleasing men, he
says. For on whose account should we do these things? Then having praised
them, he says, Not as wishing to please men, nor seeking the honors that are
from men, he adds, "But as we have been approved of God to be entrusted with
the Gospel." Unless He had seen that we were free from every worldly
consideration, He would not have chosen us. As therefore He approved us, such
we remain, as having been "approved of God." Whence did he approve us, and
entrust us with the Gospel? We appeared to God approved, so we remain. It is a
proof of our virtue, that we are entrusted with the Gospel; if there had been
anything bad in us, God would not have approved us. But the expression that He
approved us, does not here imply search. But what we do upon proving, that he
does without proving. That is, as he found us proof, and trusted us, so we speak;
as it is reasonable that those should, who are approved and entrusted to be
worthy of the Gospel, so we speak, "not as pleasing men," that is, not on your
account do we do all these things. Because previously he had praised them, that
he might not bring his speech under suspicion, he says,
Ver. 5, 6. "For neither at any time were we found using words of flattery, as
you know, nor a cloak of covetousness, God is witness; nor seeking glory of men,
neither from you, nor from others, when we might have been burdensome, as
Apostles of Christ."
For "neither at any time," he says, "were we found using words of flattery";
that is, we did not flatter, which is the part of deceivers, who wish to get
possession and to domineer. No one can say that we flattered in order to rule, nor

that we had recourse to it for the sake of wealth. Of this, which was manifest, he
afterwards calls them to be witnesses. "Whether we flattered," he says, "ye
know." But as to what was uncertain, namely, whether it were in the way of
covetousness, he calls God to witness. "Nor seeking glory of men, neither from
you, nor from others, when we might have been burdensome, as Apostles of
Christ;" that is, not seeking after honors either, nor boasting ourselves, nor
requiring attendance of guards. And yet even if we had done this, we should
have done nothing out of character. For if persons sent forth by kings are
nevertheless in honor, much more might we be. And he has not said, that "we
were dishonored," nor that "we did not enjoy honors," which would have been to
reproach them, but "we did not seek them." We therefore, who, when we might
have sought them, sought them not, even when the preaching required it, how
should we do anything for the sake of glory? And yet even if we had sought
them, not even in that case would there have been any blame. For it is fit that
those men who are sent forth from God, as ambassadors now coming from
heaven, should enjoy great honor.
But with an excess of forbearance we do none of these things, that we may
stop the mouths of the adversaries. And it cannot be said, that to you we act thus,
but not so others. For thus also he said in his Epistle to the Corinthians: "For you
bear with a man if he brings you into bondage, if he devours you, if he takes you
captive, if he exalts himself, if he smites you on the face." [2 Corinthians 11:20]
And again, "His bodily presence is weak, and his speech of no account." [2
Corinthians 10:10] And again, "Forgive me this wrong." [2 Corinthians 12:13]
He shows there also that he was exceeding humble from his suffering so many
things. But here he also says concerning money, "when we might have been
burdensome, as Apostles of Christ."
Ver. 7, 8. "But we were gentle in the midst of you, as when a nurse cherishes
her own children: even so, being affectionately desirous of you, we were well
pleased to impart unto you, not the Gospel of God only, but also our own souls,
because you had become very dear to us."