do we rely upon the mercy of God, than upon the fidelity of our Teacher and the
humanity of the Emperor. For while the Emperor is supplicated, and the priest is
supplicating, He Himself will interpose, softening the heart of the Emperor, and
exciting the tongue of the priest; facilitating his utterance—preparing the mind
of the other to receive what is said and with much indulgence, to accede to the
petitions. For our city is dearer to Christ than all others both because of the
virtue of our ancestors, and of your own. And as Peter was the first among the
apostles to preach Christ, so as I said before, this city was the first of cities that
adorned itself by assuming the Christian appellation, as a sort of admirable
diadem. But if where only ten just men were found, God promised to save all
who dwelt therein, why should we not expect a favourable issue, and become
assured of all our lives, when there are not only ten, twenty, or twice so many
only, but far more; who are serving God with all strictness.
5. I have heard many saying, "The threats of a king are like the wrath of a
lion;" [Proverbs 19:12] being full of dejection and lamentation. What then
should we say to such? That He who said, "The wolves and the lambs shall feed
together; and the leopard shall lie down with the kid, and the lion shall eat straw
like the ox," [Isaiah 11:6-7] will be able to convert the lion into a mild lamb. Let
us therefore supplicate Him; let us send an embassy to Him; and He will
doubtless allay the Emperor's wrath, and deliver us from the impending distress.
Our Father has gone there on this embassy. Let us go on embassy from hence to
the Majesty of heaven! Let us assist him by prayers! The community of the
Church can do much, if with a sorrowful soul, and with a contrite spirit, we offer
up our prayers! It is unnecessary to cross the ocean, or to undertake a long
journey. Let every man and woman among us, whether meeting together at
church, or remaining at home, call upon God with much earnestness, and He will
doubtless accede to these petitions.
Whence does this appear evident? Because He is exceedingly desirous, that
we should always take refuge in Him, and in everything make our requests unto
Him; and do nothing and speak nothing without Him. For men, when we trouble

them repeatedly concerning our affairs, become slothful and evasive, and
conduct themselves unpleasantly towards us; but with God it is quite the reverse.
Not when we apply to him continually respecting our affairs, but when we fail to
do so, then is he especially displeased. Hear at least what He reproves the Jews
for, when He says, "You have taken counsel, but not of Me, and made treaties,
but not by My Spirit." [Isaiah 30:1] For this is the custom of those who love; they
desire that all the concerns of their beloved should be accomplished by means of
themselves; and that they should neither do anything, nor say anything, without
them. On this account did God not only on that occasion, but again elsewhere,
uttering a reproof, speak the same language. "They have reigned, but not by Me;
they have ruled, and they made it not known to Me." [Hosea 8:4] Let us not then
be slow to take refuge in Him continually; and whatever be the evil, it will in
any case find its appropriate solution.
6. Does a man affright you? Hasten to the Lord above, and you will suffer
no evil. Thus the ancients had release from their calamities; and not men only,
but also women. There was a certain Hebrew woman, Esther was her name. This
Esther rescued the whole people of the Jews, when they were about to be
delivered over to destruction, by this very method. For when the Persian king
gave orders that all the Jews should be utterly destroyed, and there was no one
who was able to stand in the way of his wrath—this woman having divested
herself of the splendid robe, and clothed herself with sackcloth and being
besprinkled with ashes, supplicated the merciful God to go in with her to the
king; and offering up her prayer to Him, these were the words she uttered, "O
Lord, make my words acceptable, and put eloquent speech in my mouth." Let this
be the prayer which we offer to God for our Teacher. For if a woman,
supplicating on behalf of the Jews, prevailed to allay the wrath of a barbarian,
much rather will our Teacher, entreating on behalf of so great a city, and in
conjunction with so great a Church, be able to persuade this most mild and
merciful Emperor. For if he has received authority to loose sins committed
against God, much more will he be able to take away and blot out those which