THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.68, C.4.

Baptism, as stated above (Article 2). And therefore Baptism should
not be conferred on adults as soon as they are converted, but it
should be deferred until some fixed time. First, as a safeguard to the
Church, lest she be deceived through baptizing those who come to
her under false pretenses, according to 1 Jn. 4:1: "Believe not every
spirit, but try the spirits, if they be of God." And those who approach
Baptism are put to this test, when their faith and morals are
subjected to proof for a space of time. Secondly, this is needful as
being useful for those who are baptized; for they require a certain
space of time in order to be fully instructed in the faith, and to be
drilled in those things that pertain to the Christian mode of life.
Thirdly, a certain reverence for the sacrament demands a delay
whereby men are admitted to Baptism at the principal festivities, viz.
of Easter and Pentecost, the result being that they receive the
sacrament with greater devotion.
There are, however, two reasons for forgoing this delay. First, when
those who are to be baptized appear to be perfectly instructed in the
faith and ready for Baptism; thus, Philip baptized the Eunuch at once
(Acts 8); and Peter, Cornelius and those who were with him (Acts
10). Secondly, by reason of sickness or some kind of danger of
death. Wherefore Pope Leo says (Epist. xvi): "Those who are
threatened by death, sickness, siege, persecution, or shipwreck,
should be baptized at any time." Yet if a man is forestalled by death,
so as to have no time to receive the sacrament, while he awaits the
season appointed by the Church, he is saved, yet "so as by fire," as
stated above (Article 2, ad 2). Nevertheless he sins if he defer being
baptized beyond the time appointed by the Church, except this be for
an unavoidable cause and with the permission of the authorities of
the Church. But even this sin, with his other sins, can be washed
away by his subsequent contrition, which takes the place of
Baptism, as stated above (Question 66, Article 11).
Reply to Objection 1: This decree of Pope Leo, concerning the
celebration of Baptism at two seasons, is to be understood "with the
exception of the danger of death" (which is always to be feared in
children) as stated above.
Reply to Objection 2: This decree concerning the Jews was for a
safeguard to the Church, lest they corrupt the faith of simple people,
if they be not fully converted. Nevertheless, as the same passage
reads further on, "if within the appointed time they are threatened
with danger of sickness, they should be baptized."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.68, C.4.

Reply to Objection 3: Baptism, by the grace which it bestows,
removes not only past sins, but hinders the commission of future
sins. Now this is the point to be considered---that men may not sin: it
is a secondary consideration that their sins be less grievous, or that
their sins be washed away, according to 1 Jn. 2:1,2: "My little
children, these things I write to you, that you may not sin. But if any
man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the just;
and He is the propitiation for our sins."