did not say at once, "Go, sell that you have," [Matthew 19:16] but omitting this,
he spoke to him of other commandments. Nor afterwards, when he challenged
Him and said, "What lack I yet?" did He simply say, "Sell what you have;" but,
"If you will be perfect, go and sell that you have." [Matthew 19:21] "I lay it
down for your determination. I give you full power to choose. I do not lay upon
you any necessity." For this reason also, Paul spoke nothing to the rich
concerning poverty, but concerning humility; as well because of the weakness of
his hearers, as because he perfectly knew, that could he bring them to exercise
moderation, and to be free from pride, he should also quickly free them from
eagerness about being rich.
15. And further, after giving this admonition, "not to be high-minded," he
also taught the manner in which they would be able to avoid being so. And how
was it? That they should consider the nature of wealth, how uncertain and
faithless it is! Therefore he goes on to say, "Neither trust in uncertain riches."
The rich man is not one who is in possession of much, but one who gives much.
Abraham was rich, but he was not covetous; for he turned not his thoughts to the
house of this man, nor prayed into the wealth of that man; but going forth he
looked around wherever there chanced to be a stranger, or a poor man, in order
that he might succour poverty, and hospitably entertain the traveller. He covered
not his roof with gold, but fixing his tent near the oak, he was contented with the
shadow of its leaves. Yet so illustrious was his lodging, that angels were not
ashamed to tarry with him; for they sought not splendour of abode, but virtue of
soul. This man then let us imitate, beloved, and bestow what we have upon the
needy. That lodging was rudely prepared, but it was more illustrious than the
halls of kings. No king has ever entertained angels; but he, dwelling under that
oak, and having but pitched a tent, was thought worthy of that honour: not
receiving the honour on account of the meanness of his dwelling, but enjoying
that benefit on account of the magnificence of his soul, and the wealth therein
deposited.
16. Let us too, then, adorn not our houses, but our souls in preference to the

house. For is it not disgraceful to clothe our walls with marble, vainly and to no
end, and to neglect Christ going about naked? What does your house profit you,
O man! For will you take it with you when you depart? This you can not take
with you, when you depart. But your soul, when you depart, you shall assuredly
take with you! Behold now this great danger has overtaken us! Let your houses
stand by you! Let them deliver you from the threatened peril! But they cannot!
And ye yourselves are witnesses, who are leaving them solitary, and hurrying
forth to the wilderness; fearing them as you would do snares and nets! Let riches
now lend assistance! But it is no time for them to do so! If then the power of
riches is found wanting before the wrath of man, much rather will this be the
case, before the divine and inexorable tribunal! If it is but a man that is provoked
and offended, and even now gold is of no avail, much more will the power of
money be utterly impotent then, when God is angry, who has no need of wealth!
We build houses that we may have a habitation; not that we may make an
ambitious display. What is beyond our wants, is superfluous and useless. Put on
a sandal which is larger than your foot! You will not endure it; for it is a
hindrance to the step. Thus also a house larger than necessity requires, is an
impediment to your progress towards heaven. Do you wish to build large and
splendid houses? I forbid it not; but let it be not upon the earth! Build yourself
tabernacles in heaven, and such that you may be able to receive others; —
tabernacles which never fall to pieces. Why are you mad about fleeting things;
and things that must be left here? Nothing is more slippery than wealth. Today it
is for you; tomorrow it is against you. It arms the eyes of the envious
everywhere. It is a hostile comrade, a domestic enemy; and you are witnesses of
this, who possess it, and are in every way burying and concealing it from view;
as even now too our very wealth makes the danger more insupportable to us!
You see indeed the poor ready for action, disengaged, and prepared for all
things; but the wealthy in great perplexity, and wandering about, seeking where
they may bury their gold, or seeking with whom they may deposit it! Why, O
man, do you seek your fellow slaves? Christ stands ready to receive, and to keep