well or ill."
Reply to Objection 2: The name of Thrones is given to angels in
reference to the judgment which God is ever pronouncing, by
governing all things with supreme justice: of which judgment angels
are in a way the executors and promulgators. On the other hand, the
judgment of men by the man Christ will require human assessors.
Reply to Objection 3: Equality with angels is promised to men as
regards the essential reward. But nothing hinders an accidental
reward from being bestowed on men to the exclusion of the angels,
as in the case of the virgins' and martyrs' crowns: and the same may
be said of the judicial power.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the demons will carry out the sentence of

the Judge on the damned?
Objection 1: It would seem that the demons will not carry out the
sentence of the Judge on the damned after the day of judgment. For,
according to the Apostle (1 Cor. 15:24): "He will then bring to naught
all principality, and power, and virtue." Therefore all supremacy will
cease then. But the carrying out of the Judge's sentence implies
some kind of supremacy. Therefore after the judgment day the
demons will not carry out the Judge's sentence.
Objection 2: Further, the demons sinned more grievously than men.
Therefore it is not just that men should be tortured by demons.
Objection 3: Further, just as the demons suggest evil things to men,
so good angels suggest good things. Now it will not be the duty of
the good angels to reward the good, but this will be done by God,
immediately by Himself. Therefore neither will it be the duty of the
demons to punish the wicked.
On the contrary, Sinners have subjected themselves to the devil by
sinning. Therefore it is just that they should be subjected to him in
their punishments, and punished by him as it were.
I answer that, The Master in the text of Sentent. iv, D, 47 mentions
two opinions on this question, both of which seem consistent with
Divine justice, because it is just for man to be subjected to the devil
for having sinned, and yet it is unjust for the demon to be over him.
Accordingly the opinion which holds that after the judgment day the
demons will not be placed over men to punish them, regards the
order of Divine justice on the part of the demons punishing; while
the contrary opinion regards the order of Divine justice on the part of
the men punished.
Which of these opinions is nearer the truth we cannot know for
certain. Yet I think it truer to say that just as, among the saved, order
will be observed so that some will be enlightened and perfected by
others (because all the orders of the heavenly hierarchies will
continue for ever) [FP, Question 108, Articles 7,8], so, too, will order
be observed in punishments, men being punished by demons, lest
the Divine order, whereby the angels are placed between the human