said, "perhaps." And he has not said, therefore he fled, but, therefore he was
"separated," by a more fair sounding expression softening him the more. And he
has not said, He separated himself, but, "he was separated." For it was not his
own arrangement that he should depart either for this purpose or for that. Which
also Joseph says, in making excuse for his brethren, "For God did send me
hither" [Genesis 45:5], that is, He made use of their wickedness for a good end.
"Therefore," he says, "he was parted for a season." Thus he contracts the time,
acknowledges the offense, and turns it all to a providence. "That you should
receive him," he says, "for ever," not for the present season only, but even for the
future, that you might always have him, no longer a slave, but more honorable
than a slave. For you will have a slave abiding with you, more well-disposed
than a brother, so that you have gained both in time, and in the quality of your
slave. For hereafter he will not run away. "That you should receive him," he says,
"for ever," that is, have him again.
"No longer as a bond-servant, but more than a bond-servant, a brother
beloved, especially to me."
You have lost a slave for a short time, but you will find a brother for ever,
not only your brother, but mine also. Here also there is much virtue. But if he is
my brother, you also will not be ashamed of him. By calling him his son, he has
shown his natural affection; and by calling him his brother, his great good will
for him, and his equality in honor.
Moral. These things are not written without an object, but that we masters
may not despair of our servants, nor press too hard on them, but may learn to
pardon the offenses of such servants, that we may not be always severe, that we
may not from their servitude be ashamed to make them partakers with us in all
things when they are good. For if Paul was not ashamed to call one "his son, his
own bowels, his brother, his beloved," surely we ought not to be ashamed. And
why do I say Paul? The Master of Paul is not ashamed to call our servants His
own brethren; and are we ashamed? See how He honors us; He calls our servants
His own brethren, friends, and fellow-heirs. See to what He has descended!

What therefore having done, shall we have accomplished our whole duty? We
shall never in any wise do it; but to whatever degree of humility we have come,
the greater part of it is still left behind. For consider, whatever you doest, you do
to a fellow-servant, but your Master has done it to your servants. Hear and
shudder! Never be elated at your humility!
Perhaps you laugh at the expression, as if humility could puff up. But be not
surprised at it, it puffs up, when it is not genuine. How, and in what manner?
When it is practiced to gain the favor of men, and not of God, that we may be
praised, and be high-minded. For this also is diabolical. For as many are
vainglorious on account of their not being vainglorious, so are they elated on
account of their humbling themselves, by reason of their being high-minded. For
instance, a brother has come, or even a servant you have received him, you have
washed his feet; immediately you think highly of yourself. I have done, you say,
what no other has done. I have achieved humility. How then may any one
continue in humility? If he remembers the command of Christ, which says,
"When you shall have done all things, say, We are unprofitable servants." [Luke
17:10] And again the Teacher of the world, saying, "I count not myself to have
apprehended." [Philippians 3:13] He who has persuaded himself that he has
done no great thing, however many things he may have done, he alone can be
humble-minded, he who thinks that he has not reached perfection.
Many are elated on account of their humility; but let not us be so affected.
Have you done any act of humility? Be not proud of it, otherwise all the merit of
it is lost. Such was the Pharisee, he was puffed up because he gave his tythes to
the poor, and he lost all the merit of it. [Luke 18:12] But not so the publican.
Hear Paul again saying, "I know nothing by myself, yet am I not hereby justified."
[1 Corinthians 4:4] Do you see that he does not exalt himself, but by every
means abases and humbles himself, and that too when he had arrived at the very
summit. And the Three Children were in the fire, and in the midst of the furnace,
and what said they? "We have sinned and committed iniquity with our fathers."
[Song of Songs 5:6, in the Septuagint; Daniel 3:29-30; 5:16] This it is to have a