we are anointed at our Baptism, then we savor sweetly of it; but it must be by
our care afterwards that we retain the savor. Of old the Priests were anointed
with ointment, as an emblem of the virtue, the fragrance of which a Priest should
diffuse around him.
But nothing is more offensive than the savor of sin, which made the
Psalmist say, "My wounds stink and are corrupt." [Psalm 38:5] For sin is more
foul than putrefaction itself. What, for instance, is more offensive than
fornication? And if this is not perceived at the time of its commission, yet, after
it is committed, its offensive nature, the impurity contracted in it, and the curse,
and the abomination of it is perceived. So it is with all sin. Before it is
committed it has something of pleasure, but after its commission, the pleasure
ceases and fades away, and pain and shame succeed. But with righteousness it is
the reverse. At the beginning it is attended with toil, but in the end with pleasure
and repose. But even here, as in the one case the pleasure of sin is no pleasure,
because of the expectation of disgrace and punishment, so in the other the toil is
not felt as toil, by reason of the hope of reward. And what is the pleasure of
drunkenness? The poor gratification of drinking, and hardly that. For when
insensibility follows, and the man sees nothing that is before him, and is in a
worse state than a madman, what enjoyment remains? Nay, one might well say
there is no pleasure in fornication itself. For when passion has deprived the soul
of its judgment, can there be any real delights? As well might we say that the
itch is a pleasure! I should call that true pleasure, when the soul is not affected
by passion, not agitated nor overpowered by the body. For what pleasure can it
be to grind the teeth, to distort the eyes, to be irritated and inflamed beyond
decency? But so far is it from being pleasant, that men hasten to escape from it,
and when it is over are in pain. But if it were pleasure, they would wish not to
escape from it, but to continue it. It has therefore only the name of pleasure.
But not such are the pleasures enjoyed by us; they are truly delightful, they
do not agitate nor inflame. They leave the soul free, and cheer and expand it.
Such was the pleasure of Paul when he said, "In this I rejoice, yea, and I will

rejoice"; and again, "Rejoice in the Lord always." [Philippians 1:18, and 4:4] For
sinful pleasure is attended with shame and condemnation; it is indulged in secret,
and is attended with infinite uneasiness. But from all these the true pleasure is
exempt. This then let us pursue, that we may attain those good things to come,
through the grace and mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom, etc.

## Homily 3 on First Timothy

1 Timothy 1:12-14
" And I thank Christ Jesus our Lord, who has enabled me, for that he
counted me faithful, putting me into the ministry [R.V.: to his service, [εἰς
διακονίαν] ]; who was before a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and injurious: but
I obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly in unbelief. And the grace of our
Lord was exceeding abundant, with faith and love which is in Christ Jesus."
The advantages arising from humility are generally acknowledged, and yet
it is a thing not easily to be met with. There is affectation of humble talking
enough and to spare, but humbleness of mind is nowhere to be found. This
quality was so cultivated by the blessed Paul, that he is ever looking out for
inducements to be humble. They who are conscious to themselves of great
merits must struggle much with themselves if they would be humble. And he too
was one likely to be under violent temptations, his own good conscience
swelling him up like a gathering humor. Observe therefore his method in this
place. "I was entrusted," he had said, "with the glorious Gospel of God, of which
they who still adhere to the law have no right to partake; for it is now opposed to
the Gospel, and their difference is such, that those who are actuated by the one,
are as yet unworthy to partake of the other; as we should say, that those who
require punishments, and chains, have no right to be admitted into the train of
philosophers." Being filled therefore with high thoughts, and having used
magnificent expressions, he at once depresses himself, and engages others also
to do the like. Having said therefore that "the Gospel was committed to his
trust"; lest this should seem to be said from pride, he checks himself at once,
adding by way of correction, "I thank Christ Jesus our Lord, who has enabled
me, for that He counted me faithful, putting me into the ministry." Thus
everywhere, we see, he conceals his own merit, and ascribes everything to God,