life. "And fully assured," he says, "in all the will of God." It is not enough,
simply to do His will. He that is "filled," suffers not any other will to be within
him, for if so, he is not wholly filled. "For I bear him witness," he says, "that he
has much zeal." Both "zeal," and "great"; both are intensitive. As he says
himself, when writing to the Corinthians, "For I am jealous over you with a
godly jealousy." [2 Corinthians 11:2]
Ver. 14. "Luke, the beloved physician, salutes you." This is the Evangelist. It
is not to lower this man that he places him after, but to raise the other, viz.
Epaphroditus. It is probable that there were others called by this name. "And
Demas," he says. After saying, "Luke, the physician, salutes you," he added, "the
beloved." And no small praise is this, but even great exceedingly, to be beloved
of Paul.
Ver. 15. "Salute the brethren that are in Laodicea, and Nymphas, and the
Church that is in their house."
See how he cements, and knits them together with one another, not by
salutation only, but also by interchanging his Epistles. Then again he pays a
compliment by addressing him individually. And this he does not without a
reason, but in order to lead the others also to emulate his zeal. For it is not a
small thing not to be numbered with the rest. Mark further how he shows the
man to be great, seeing his house was a church.
Ver. 14. "And when this Epistle has been read among you, cause that it be
read also in the church of the Laodiceans." I suppose there are some of the
things therein written, which it was needful that those also should hear. And they
would have the greater advantage of recognizing their own errors in the charges
brought against others.
"And that you also read the Epistle from Laodicea." Some say that this is
not Paul's to them, but theirs to Paul, for he said not that to the Laodiceans, but
that written "from Laodicea."
Ver. 17. "And say to Archippus, Take heed to the ministry which you have
received in the Lord, that you fulfill it." Wherefore does he not write to him?

Perhaps he needed it not, but only a bare reminding, so as to be more diligent.
Ver. 18. "The salutation of me, Paul, with my own hand." This is a proof of
their sincerity and affection; that they both looked at his handwriting, and that
with emotion. "Remember my bonds." Wonderful! How great the consolation!
For this is enough to cheer them on to all things, and make them bear themselves
more nobly in their trials; but he made them not only the braver, but also the
more nearly interested. "Grace be with you. Amen."
It is great praise, and greater than all the rest, his saying of Epaphras, "who
is [one] of you, a servant of Christ." And he calls him a minister for them, like
as he terms himself also a minister of the Church, as when he says, "Whereof I
Paul was made a minister." [Colossians 1:23] To the same dignity he advances
this man; and above he calls him a "fellow-servant" [Colossians 1:7], and here,
"a servant." "Who is of you," he says, as if speaking to a mother, and saying,
"who is of your womb." But this praise might have gendered envy; therefore he
commends him not from these things only, but also from what had regard to
themselves; and so he does away with envy, both in the former place, and here.
"Always," he says, "striving for you," not now only, while with us, to make a
display; nor yet only while with you, to make a display before you. By saying,
"striving," he has showed his great earnestness. Then, that he might not seem to
be flattering them, he added, "that he has much zeal for you, and for them in
Laodicea, and for them in Hierapolis." And the words, "that you may stand
perfect," are not words of flattery, but of a reverend teacher. Both "fully assured"
he says, "and perfect." The one he granted them, the other he said was lacking.
And he said not, "that you be not shaken," but, "that you may stand." Their being
saluted, however, by many, is refreshing to them, seeing that not only their
friends from among themselves; but others also, remember them.
"And say to Archippus, Take heed to the ministry which you have received
in the Lord." His chief aim is to subject them to him entirely. For they could no
more have complaint against him for rebuking them, when they themselves had
taken it all upon them; for it is not reasonable to talk to the disciples about the