THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.52, C.2.

from going down into hell. Hence it is written (Osee 13:14): "O death,
I will be thy death; O hell, I will be thy bite." Secondly, because it was
fitting when the devil was overthrown by the Passion that Christ
should deliver the captives detained in hell, according to Zach. 9:11:
"Thou also by the blood of Thy Testament hast sent forth Thy
prisoners out of the pit." And it is written (Col. 2:15): "Despoiling the
principalities and powers, He hath exposed them confidently."
Thirdly, that as He showed forth His power on earth by living and
dying, so also He might manifest it in hell, by visiting it and
enlightening it. Accordingly it is written (Ps. 23:7): "Lift up your
gates, O ye princes," which the gloss thus interprets: "that is---Ye
princes of hell, take away your power, whereby hitherto you held
men fast in hell"; and so "at the name of Jesus every knee should
bow," not only "of them that are in heaven," but likewise "of them
that are in hell," as is said in Phil. 2:10.
Reply to Objection 1: The name of hell stands for an evil of penalty,
and not for an evil of guilt. Hence it was becoming that Christ should
descend into hell, not as liable to punishment Himself, but to deliver
them who were.
Reply to Objection 2: Christ's Passion was a kind of universal cause
of men's salvation, both of the living and of the dead. But a general
cause is applied to particular effects by means of something special.
Hence, as the power of the Passion is applied to the living through
the sacraments which make us like unto Christ's Passion, so
likewise it is applied to the dead through His descent into hell. On
which account it is written (Zach. 9:11) that "He sent forth prisoners
out of the pit, in the blood of His testament," that is, by the power of
His Passion.
Reply to Objection 3: Christ's soul descended into hell not by the
same kind of motion as that whereby bodies are moved, but by that
kind whereby the angels are moved, as was said in the FP, Question
53, Article 1.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.52, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether Christ went down into the hell of the

lost?
Objection 1: It would seem that Christ went down into the hell of the
lost, because it is said by the mouth of Divine Wisdom (Ecclus.
24:45): "I will penetrate to all the lower parts of the earth." But the
hell of the lost is computed among the lower parts of the earth
according to Ps. 62:10: "They shall go into the lower parts of the
earth." Therefore Christ who is the Wisdom of God, went down even
into the hell of the lost.
Objection 2: Further, Peter says (Acts 2:24) that "God hath raised up
Christ, having loosed the sorrows of hell, as it was impossible that
He should be holden by it." But there are no sorrows in the hell of
the Fathers, nor in the hell of the children, since they are not
punished with sensible pain on account of any actual sin, but only
with the pain of loss on account of original sin. Therefore Christ
went down into the hell of the lost, or else into Purgatory, where men
are tormented with sensible pain on account of actual sins.
Objection 3: Further, it is written (1 Pt. 3:19) that "Christ coming in
spirit preached to those spirits that were in prison, which had some
time been incredulous": and this is understood of Christ's descent
into hell, as Athanasius says (Ep. ad Epict.). For he says that
"Christ's body was laid in the sepulchre when He went to preach to
those spirits who were in bondage, as Peter said." But it is clear the
unbelievers were in the hell of the lost. Therefore Christ went down
into the hell of the lost.
Objection 4: Further, Augustine says (Ep. ad Evod. clxiv): "If the
sacred Scriptures had said that Christ came into Abraham's bosom,
without naming hell or its woes, I wonder whether any person would
dare to assert that He descended into hell. But since evident
testimonies mention hell and its sorrows, there is no reason for
believing that Christ went there except to deliver men from the same
woes." But the place of woes is the hell of the lost. Therefore Christ
descended into the hell of the lost.
Objection 5: Further, as Augustine says in a sermon upon the
Resurrection: Christ descending into hell "set free all the just who
were held in the bonds of original sin." But among them was Job,