Master of the conflicts Himself. What then does He Himself say to the rich man
seeking eternal life? He said not, "raise up the lame," but, "Sell your goods, and
give to the poor, and come and follow me, and you shall have treasure in
Heaven." [Matthew 19:21] And Peter again said not, "Behold, in Your name we
cast out devils;" although he was casting them out, but, "Behold, we have
forsaken all and followed You what shall we have?" [Matthew 19:27] And Christ
again, in answering this apostle, said not, "If any man raise up the lame," but,
"Whosoever has forsaken houses or lands, shall receive an hundredfold in this
world, and shall inherit everlasting life."
Let us also then emulate this man, that we may not be confounded, but may
with confidence stand at the judgment seat of Christ; that we may win Him to be
with us, even as He was with His disciples. For He will be with us, like as He
was with them, if we are willing to follow them, and to be imitators of their life
and conversation. For in consequence of these things God crowns, and
commends men, not requiring of you to raise the dead, or to cure the lame. For
not these things make one to be like Peter, but the casting away one's goods, for
this was the apostles' achievement.
But do you not find it possible to cast them away? In the first place, I say, it
is possible; but I compel you not, if you are not willing, nor constrain you to it;
but this I entreat, to spend at least a part on the needy, and to seek for yourself
nothing more than is necessary. For thus shall we both live our life here without
trouble, and in security, and enjoy eternal life; unto which God grant we all may
attain, by the grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be
glory and might, together with the Father and the Holy Ghost, now and always,
and world without end. Amen.

Homily 1 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts 1:1-2
"The former treatise have I made, O Theophilus, concerning all things
which Jesus began both to do and to teach, until the day on which, having given
charge to the Apostles, whom He had chosen, by the Holy Spirit, He was taken
up."
To many persons this Book is so little known, both it and its author, that
they are not even aware that there is such a book in existence. For this reason
especially I have taken this narrative for my subject, that I may draw to it such as
do not know it, and not let such a treasure as this remain hidden out of sight. For
indeed it may profit us no less than even the Gospels; so replete is it with
Christian wisdom and sound doctrine, especially in what is said concerning the
Holy Ghost. Then let us not hastily pass by it, but examine it closely. Thus, the
predictions which in the Gospels Christ utters, here we may see these actually
come to pass; and note in the very facts the bright evidence of Truth which
shines in them, and the mighty change which is taking place in the disciples now
that the Spirit has come upon them. For example, they heard Christ say, "Whoso
believes in Me, the works that I do shall he do also, and greater works than these
shall he do" [John 14:12]: and again, when He foretold to the disciples, that they
should be brought before rulers and kings, and in their synagogues they should
scourge them, and that they should suffer grievous things, and overcome all
[Matthew 10:18]: and that the Gospel should be preached in all the world
[Matthew 24:14]: now all this, how it came to pass exactly as it was said, may be
seen in this Book, and more besides, which He told them while yet with them.
Here again you will see the Apostles themselves, speeding their way as on wings
over land and sea; and those same men, once so timorous and void of
understanding, on the sudden become quite other than they were; men despising