SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.188, C.7.

in order to enter religion. If, however, he owes a sum of money, and
has not wherewithal to pay the debt, he must do what he can, namely
by surrendering his goods to his creditor. According to civil law
[Cod. IV, x, de Oblig. et Action, 12] money lays an obligation not on
the person of a freeman, but on his property, because the person of
a freeman "is above all pecuniary consideration" [Dig. L, xvii, de div.
reg. Jur. ant. 106,176]. Hence, after surrendering his property, he
may lawfully enter religion, nor is he bound to remain in the world in
order to earn the means of paying the debt.
On the other hand, he does not owe his father a special debt, except
as may arise in a case of necessity, as stated above.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.188, C.8.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether parish priests may lawfully enter

religion?
Objection 1: It would seem that parish priests cannot lawfully enter
religion. For Gregory says (Past. iii, 4) that "he who undertakes the
cure of souls, receives an awful warning in the words: 'My son, if
thou be surety for thy friend, thou hast engaged fast thy hand to a
stranger'" (Prov. 6:1); and he goes on to say, "because to be surety
for a friend is to take charge of the soul of another on the surety of
one's own behavior." Now he who is under an obligation to a man for
a debt, cannot enter religion, unless he pay what he owes, if he can.
Since then a priest is able to fulfil the cure of souls, to which
obligation he has pledged his soul, it would seem unlawful for him to
lay aside the cure of souls in order to enter religion.
Objection 2: Further, what is lawful to one is likewise lawful to all.
But if all priests having cure of souls were to enter religion, the
people would be left without a pastor's care, which would be
unfitting. Therefore it seems that parish priests cannot lawfully enter
religion.
Objection 3: Further, chief among the acts to which religious orders
are directed are those whereby a man gives to others the fruit of his
contemplation. Now such acts are competent to parish priests and
archdeacons, whom it becomes by virtue of their office to preach
and hear confessions. Therefore it would seem unlawful for a parish
priest or archdeacon to pass over to religion.
On the contrary, It is said in the Decretals (XIX, qu. ii, cap. Duce sunt
leges.): "If a man, while governing the people in his church under the
bishop and leading a secular life, is inspired by the Holy Ghost to
desire to work out his salvation in a monastery or under some
canonical rule, even though his bishop withstand him, we authorize
him to go freely."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 3, ad 3; Question 88, Article
12, ad 1), the obligation of a perpetual vow stands before every other
obligation. Now it belongs properly to bishops and religious to be
bound by perpetual vow to devote themselves to the divine service
[Question 184, Article 5], while parish priests and archdeacons are
not, as bishops are, bound by a perpetual and solemn vow to retain