SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.110, C.2.

properly a lie told by the signs of outward deeds. Now it matters not
whether one lie in word or in any other way, as stated above
(Question 110, Article 1, Objection 2). Wherefore, since every lie is a
sin, as stated above (Question 110, Article 3), it follows that also all
dissimulation is a sin.
Reply to Objection 1: As Augustine says (De Questions. Evang. ii),
"To pretend is not always a lie: but only when the pretense has no
signification, then it is a lie. When, however, our pretense refers to
some signification, there is no lie, but a representation of the truth."
And he cites figures of speech as an example, where a thing is
"pretended," for we do not mean it to be taken literally but as a figure
of something else that we wish to say. In this way our Lord
"pretended He would go farther," because He acted as if wishing to
go farther; in order to signify something figuratively either because
He was far from their faith, according to Gregory (Hom. xxiii in Ev.);
or, as Augustine says (De Questions. Evang. ii), because, "as He was
about to go farther away from them by ascending into heaven, He
was, so to speak, held back on earth by their hospitality."
Abraham also spoke figuratively. Wherefore Ambrose (De Abraham i)
says that Abraham "foretold what he knew not": for he intended to
return alone after sacrificing his son: but by his mouth the Lord
expressed what He was about to do. It is evident therefore that
neither dissembled.
Reply to Objection 2: Jerome employs the term "simulation" in a
broad sense for any kind of pretense. David's change of
countenance was a figurative pretense, as a gloss observes in
commenting on the title of Ps. 33, "I will bless the Lord at all times."
There is no need to excuse Jehu's dissimulation from sin or lie,
because he was a wicked man, since he departed not from the
idolatry of Jeroboam (4 Kgs. 10:29,31). And yet he is praised withal
and received an earthly reward from God, not for his dissimulation,
but for his zeal in destroying the worship of Baal.
Reply to Objection 3: Some say that no one may pretend to be
wicked, because no one pretends to be wicked by doing good deeds,
and if he do evil deeds, he is evil. But this argument proves nothing.
Because a man might pretend to be evil, by doing what is not evil in
itself but has some appearance of evil: and nevertheless this
dissimulation is evil, both because it is a lie, and because it gives
scandal; and although he is wicked on this account, yet his

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.110, C.2.

wickedness is not the wickedness he simulates. And because
dissimulation is evil in itself, its sinfulness is not derived from the
thing simulated, whether this be good or evil.
Reply to Objection 4: Just as a man lies when he signifies by word
that which he is not, yet lies not when he refrains from saying what
he is, for this is sometimes lawful; so also does a man dissemble,
when by outward signs of deeds or things he signifies that which he
is not, yet he dissembles not if he omits to signify what he is. Hence
one may hide one's sin without being guilty of dissimulation. It is
thus that we must understand the saying of Jerome on the words of
Isaias 3:9, that the "second remedy after shipwreck is to hide one's
sin," lest, to wit, others be scandalized thereby.