not only because He healed him, but because He healed one who had come
against Him, and who shortly after would buffet Him, and because He stayed the
war which was like to have been kindled from this circumstance against the
disciples. For this cause the Evangelist has put the name, so that the men of that
time might search and enquire diligently whether these things had really come to
pass. And not without a cause does he mention the "right ear," but as I think
desiring to show the impetuosity of the Apostle, that he almost aimed at the head
itself. Yet Jesus not only restrains him by a threat, but also calms him by other
words, saying,

John 18:11
"The cup which My Father has given Me, shall I not drink it?"
Showing, that what was done proceeded not from their power, but from His
consent, and declaring that He was not one opposed to God but obedient to the
Father even unto death.

John 18:12-13
"Then Jesus was taken; and they bound Him, and led Him away to Annas."
Why to Annas? In their pleasure they made a show of what had been done,
as though forsooth they had set up a trophy.
"And he was father-in-law to Caiaphas."

John 18:14
"Now Caiaphas was he which gave counsel to the Jews, that it was expedient
that one man should die for the people."
Why does the Evangelist again remind us of his prophecy? To show that
these things were done for our salvation. And such is the exceeding force of
truth, that even enemies proclaimed these things beforehand. For lest the listener,
hearing of bonds, should be confounded, he reminds him of that prophecy, that
the death of Jesus was the salvation of the world.

John 18:15
"And Simon Peter followed Jesus, and so did another disciple."
Who is that other disciple? It is the writer himself. "And wherefore does he
not name himself? When he lay on the bosom of Jesus, he with reason concealed
his name; but now why does he this?" For the same reason, for here too he
mentions a great good deed, that when all had started away, he followed.
Therefore he conceals himself, and puts Peter before him. He was obliged to
mention himself, that you might understand that he narrates more exactly than
the rest what took place in the hall, as having been himself within. But observe
how he detracts from his own praise; for, lest any one should ask, "How, when
all had retreated, did this man enter in farther than Simon?" he says, that he
"was known to the high priest." So that no one should wonder that he followed,
or cry him up for his manliness. But the wonder was that matter of Peter, that
being in such fear, he came even as far as the hall, when the others had retreated.
His coming there was caused by love, his not entering within by distress and
fear. For the Evangelist has recorded these things, to clear a way for excusing his
denial; with regard to himself, he does not set it down as any great matter that he
was known to the high priest, but since he had said that he alone with Jesus went
in, lest you should suppose that the action proceeded from any exalted feelings,
he puts also the cause. And that Peter would have also entered had he been
permitted, he shows by the sequel; for when he went out, and bade the damsel
who kept the door bring in Peter, he straightway came in. But why did he not
bring him in himself? He clung to Christ, and followed Him; on this account he
bade the woman bring him in. What then says the woman?