SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.173, C.6.

Reply to Objection 1: This vision of Moses was interrupted after the
manner of a passion, and was not permanent like the beatific vision,
wherefore he was as yet a seer from afar. For this reason his vision
did not entirely lose the character of prophecy.
Reply to Objection 2: The divine revelation is made to the angels, not
as being far distant, but as already wholly united to God; wherefore
their revelation has not the character of prophecy.
Reply to Objection 3: Christ was at the same time comprehensor and
wayfarer [TP, Questions 9, seqq.]. Consequently the notion of
prophecy is not applicable to Him as a comprehensor, but only as a
wayfarer.
Reply to Objection 4: Samuel had not yet attained to the state of
blessedness. Wherefore although by God's will the soul itself of
Samuel foretold to Saul the issue of the war as revealed to him by
God, this pertains to the nature of prophecy. It is not the same with
the saints who are now in heaven. Nor does it make any difference
that this is stated to have been brought about by the demons' art,
because although the demons are unable to evoke the soul of a
saint, or to force it to do any particular thing, this can be done by the
power of God, so that when the demon is consulted, God Himself
declares the truth by His messenger: even as He gave a true answer
by Elias to the King's messengers who were sent to consult the god
of Accaron (4 Kgs. 1).
It might also be replied that it was not the soul of Samuel, but a
demon impersonating him; and that the wise man calls him Samuel,
and describes his prediction as prophetic, in accordance with the
thoughts of Saul and the bystanders who were of this opinion.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.173, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether the degrees of prophecy change as time

goes on?
Objection 1: It would seem that the degrees of prophecy change as
time goes on. For prophecy is directed to the knowledge of Divine
things, as stated above (Article 2). Now according to Gregory (Hom.
in Ezech.), "knowledge of God went on increasing as time went on."
Therefore degrees of prophecy should be distinguished according to
the process of time.
Objection 2: Further, prophetic revelation is conveyed by God
speaking to man; while the prophets declared both in words and in
writing the things revealed to them. Now it is written (1 Kgs. 3:1) that
before the time of Samuel "the word of the Lord was precious," i.e.
rare; and yet afterwards it was delivered to many. In like manner the
books of the prophets do not appear to have been written before the
time of Isaias, to whom it was said (Is. 8:1): "Take thee a great book
and write in it with a man's pen," after which many prophets wrote
their prophecies. Therefore it would seem that in course of time the
degree of prophecy made progress.
Objection 3: Further, our Lord said (Mt. 11:13): "The prophets and
the law prophesied until John"; and afterwards the gift of prophecy
was in Christ's disciples in a much more excellent manner than in
the prophets of old, according to Eph. 3:5, "In other generations" the
mystery of Christ "was not known to the sons of men, as it is now
revealed to His holy apostles and prophets in the Spirit." Therefore it
would seem that in course of time the degree of prophecy advanced.
On the contrary, As stated above (Article 4), Moses was the greatest
of the prophets, and yet he preceded the other prophets. Therefore
prophecy did not advance in degree as time went on.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 2), prophecy is directed to the
knowledge of Divine truth, by the contemplation of which we are not
only instructed in faith, but also guided in our actions, according to
Ps. 42:3, "Send forth Thy light and Thy truth: they have conducted
me." Now our faith consists chiefly in two things: first, in the true
knowledge of God, according to Heb. 11:6, "He that cometh to God
must believe that He is"; secondly, in the mystery of Christ's
incarnation, according to Jn. 14:1, "You believe in God, believe also