SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.88, C.10.

does not admit of dispensation: but it implies that what hitherto
came under an oath no longer comes under it, as not being due
matter for an oath, just as we have said with regard to vows
(Question 88, Article 10, ad 2). Now the matter of a declaratory oath,
which is about something past or present, has already acquired a
certain necessity, and has become unchangeable, wherefore the
dispensation will regard not the matter but the act itself of the oath:
so that such a dispensation would be directly contrary to the Divine
precept. On the other hand, the matter of a promissory oath is
something future, which admits of change, so that, to wit, in certain
emergencies, it may be unlawful or hurtful, and consequently undue
matter for an oath. Therefore a promissory oath admits of
dispensation, since such dispensation regards the matter of an oath,
and is not contrary to the Divine precept about the keeping of oaths.
Reply to Objection 2: One man may promise something under oath
to another in two ways. First, when he promises something for his
benefit: for instance, if he promise to serve him, or to give him
money: and from such a promise he can be released by the person
to whom he made it: for he is understood to have already kept his
promise to him when he acts towards him according to his will.
Secondly, one man promises another something pertaining to God's
honor or to the benefit of others: for instance, if a man promise
another under oath that he will enter religion, or perform some act of
kindness. In this case the person to whom the promise is made
cannot release him that made the promise, because it was made
principally not to him but to God: unless perchance it included some
condition, for instance, "provided he give his consent" or some such
like condition.
Reply to Objection 3: Sometimes that which is made the matter of a
promissory oath is manifestly opposed to justice, either because it is
a sin, as when a man swears to commit a murder, or because it is an
obstacle to a greater good, as when a man swears not to enter a
religion: and such an oath requires no dispensation. But in the
former case a man is bound not to keep such an oath, while in the
latter it is lawful for him to keep or not to keep the oath, as stated
above (Article 7, ad 2). Sometimes what is promised on oath is
doubtfully right or wrong, useful or harmful, either in itself or under
the circumstance. In this case any bishop can dispense. Sometimes,
however, that which is promised under oath is manifestly lawful and
beneficial. An oath of this kind seemingly admits not of dispensation
but of commutation, when there occurs something better to be done

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.88, C.10.

for the common good, in which case the matter would seem to
belong chiefly to the power of the Pope, who has charge over the
whole Church; and even of absolute relaxation, for this too belongs
in general to the Pope in all matters regarding the administration of
things ecclesiastical. Thus it is competent to any man to cancel an
oath made by one of his subjects in matters that come under his
authority: for instance, a father may annul his daughter's oath, and a
husband his wife's (Num. 30:6, seqq.), as stated above with regard to
vows (Question 88, Articles 8,9).