to repel from you him that pronounces it!
For you the presbyter sits, for you the teacher stands, laboring and toiling.
What plea then will you have, for not affording him so much welcome as to
listen to Him? For indeed the church is the common home of all, and when you
have first occupied it, we enter in, strictly observing the type which they
exhibited. For this cause we also pronounce "peace" in common to all, directly
as we enter, according to that law.
Let no one therefore be careless, no one inattentive, when the priests have
entered in and are teaching; for there is really no small punishment appointed for
this. Yea, and I for one would rather enter into any of your houses ten thousand
times, and find myself baffled, than not be heard when I speak here. This latter is
to me harder to bear than the other, by how much this house is of greater dignity;
our great possessions being verily laid up here, here all the hopes we have. For
what is here, that is not great and awful? Thus both this table is far more
precious and delightful than the other, and this candlestick than the candlestick
there. And this they know, as many as have put away diseases by anointing
themselves with oil in faith and in due season. And this coffer too is far better
and more indispensable than that other chest; for it has not clothes but alms shut
up in it; even though they be few that own them. Here too is a couch better than
that other; for the repose of the divine Scriptures is more delightful than any
couch.
And had we attained to excellence in respect of concord, then had we no
other home beside this. And that there is nothing over-burdensome in this
saying, the "three thousand," [Acts 2:41] bear witness, and the "five thousand,"
[Acts 4:4] who had but one home, one table, one soul; for "the multitude of them
that believed," we read, "were of one heart and of one soul." [Acts 4:32] But
since we fall far short of their virtue, and dwell scattered in our several homes,
let us at least, when we meet here, be earnest in so doing. Because though in all
other things we be destitute and poor, yet in these we are rich. Wherefore here at
least receive us with love when we come in unto you. And when I say, "Peace be

unto you," and you say, "And with your spirit," say it not with the voice only, but
also with the mind; not in mouth, but in understanding also. But if, while here
you say, "Peace also to your spirit," out of doors you are mine enemy, spitting at
and calumniating me, and secretly aspersing me with innumerable reproaches;
what manner of peace is this?
For I indeed, though thou speak evil of me ten thousand times, give you that
peace with a pure heart, with sincerity of purpose, and I can say nothing evil at
any time of you; for I have a father's bowels. And if I rebuke you at any time, I
do it out of concern for you. But as for you, by your secret carping at me, and
not receiving me in the Lord's house, I fear lest you should in return add to my
despondency; not for your insulting me, not for your casting me out, but for your
rejecting our peace, and drawing down upon yourself that grievous punishment.
For though I shake not off the dust, though I turn not away, what is
threatened remains unchanged. For I indeed oftentimes pronounce peace to you,
and will not cease from continually speaking it; and if, besides your insults, you
receive me not, even then I shake not off the dust; not that I am disobedient to
our Lord, but that I vehemently burn for you. And besides, I have suffered
nothing at all for you; I have neither come a long journey, nor with that garb and
that voluntary poverty am I come (therefore we first blame ourselves), nor
without shoes and a second coat; and perhaps this is why ye also fail of your
part. However, this is not a sufficient plea for you; but while our condemnation
is greater, to you it imparts no excuse.
10. Then the houses were churches, but now the church has become a
house. Then one might say nothing worldly in a house, now one may say nothing
spiritual in a church, but even here ye bring in the business from the market
place, and while God is discoursing, you leave off listening in silence to His
sayings, and bring in the contrary things, and make discord. And I would it were
your own affairs, but now the things which are nothing to you, those ye both
speak and hear.
For this I lament, and will not cease lamenting. For I have no power to quit