opposition to the rest of the Gnostics, from whom these also (the Valentinians) have adopted the
ideas about emissions, and were refuted in the first book. But I have now plainly shown that the
first production of Nous, that is, of the intelligence they speak of, is an untenable and impossible
opinion. And let us see how the matter stands with respect to the rest [of the Æons]. For they
maintain that Logos and Zoe were sent forth by him (i.e., Nous) as fashioners of this Pleroma; while
they conceive of an emission of Logos, that is, the Word after the analogy of human feelings, and
rashly form conjectures respecting God, as if they had discovered something wonderful in their
assertion that Logos was I produced by Nous. All indeed have a clear perception that this may be
logically affirmed with respect to men. But in Him who is God over all, since He is all Nous,
and all Logos, as I have said before, and has in Himself nothing more ancient or late than another,
and nothing at variance with another, but continues altogether equal, and similar, and homogeneous,
there is no longer ground for conceiving of such production in the order which has been mentioned.
Just as he does not err who declares that God is all vision, and all hearing (for in what manner He
sees, in that also He hears; and in what manner He hears, in that also He sees), so also he who
affirms that He is all intelligence, and all word, and that, in whatever respect He is intelligence, in
that also He is word, and that this Nous is His Logos, will still indeed have only an inadequate
conception of the Father of all, but will entertain far more becoming [thoughts regarding Him] than
do those who transfer the generation of the word to which men gave utterance to the eternal Word
of God, assigning a beginning and course of production [to Him], even as they do to their own
word. And in what respect will the Word of God—yea, rather God Himself, since He is the
Word—differ from the word of men, if He follows the same order and process of generation?
9. They have fallen into error, too, respecting Zoe, by maintaining that she was produced in the
sixth place, when it behoved her to take precedence of all [the rest], since God is life, and
incorruption, and truth. And these and such like attributes have not been produced according to a
gradual scale of descent, but they are names of those perfections which always exist in God, so far
as it is possible and proper for men to hear and to speak of God. For with the name of God the
following words will harmonize: intelligence, word, life, incorruption, truth, wisdom, goodness,
and such like. And neither can any one maintain that intelligence is more ancient than life, for
intelligence itself is life; nor that life is later than intelligence, so that He who is the intellect of all,
that is God, should at one time have been destitute of life. But if they affirm that life was indeed
[previously] in the Father, but was produced in the sixth place in order that the Word might live,
surely it ought long before, [according to such reasoning,] to have been sent forth, in the fourth
place, that Nous might have life; and still further, even before Him, [it should have been] with
Bythus, that their Bythus might live. For to reckon Sige, indeed, along with their Propator, and to
assign her to Him as His consort, while they do not join Zoe to the number,—is not this to surpass
all other madness?