FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.19, C.8.

do something, and may afterwards refer it to God. And then the
goodness of the previous act of the will does not depend on the
subsequent intention, except in so far as that act is repeated with the
subsequent intention.
Reply to Objection 1: When the intention is the cause of the act of
willing, the order to the end is considered as the reason of the
goodness of the object, as stated above.
Reply to Objection 2: The act of the will cannot be said to be good, if
an evil intention is the cause of willing. For when a man wills to give
an alms for the sake of vainglory, he wills that which is good in itself,
under a species of evil; and therefore, as willed by him, it is evil.
Wherefore his will is evil. If, however, the intention is subsequent to
the act of the will, then the latter may be good: and the intention
does not spoil that act of the will which preceded, but that which is
repeated.
Reply to Objection 3: As we have already stated (Article 6, ad 1), "evil
results from each particular defect, but good from the whole and
entire cause." Hence, whether the will tend to what is evil in itself,
even under the species of good; or to the good under the species of
evil, it will be evil in either case. But in order for the will to be good, it
must tend to the good under the species of good; in other words, it
must will the good for the sake of the good.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.19, C.9.

### ARTICLE 8. Whether the degree of goodness or malice in the

will depends on the degree of good or evil in the intention?
Objection 1: It would seem that the degree of goodness in the will
depends on the degree of good in the intention. Because on Mt.
12:35, "A good man out of the good treasure of his heart bringeth
forth that which is good," a gloss says: "A man does as much good
as he intends." But the intention gives goodness not only to the
external action, but also to the act of the will, as stated above (Article
7). Therefore the goodness of a man's will is according to the
goodness of his intention.
Objection 2: Further, if you add to the cause, you add to the effect.
But the goodness of the intention is the cause of the good will.
Therefore a man's will is good, according as his intention is good.
Objection 3: Further, in evil actions, a man sins in proportion to his
intention: for if a man were to throw a stone with a murderous
intention, he would be guilty of murder. Therefore, for the same
reason, in good actions, the will is good in proportion to the good
intended.
On the contrary, The intention can be good, while the will is evil.
Therefore, for the same reason, the intention can be better, and the
will less good.
I answer that, In regard to both the act, and the intention of the end,
we may consider a twofold quantity: one, on the part of the object,
by reason of a man willing or doing a good that is greater; the other,
taken from the intensity of the act, according as a man wills or acts
intensely; and this is more on the part of the agent.
If then we speak of these respective quantities from the point of view
of the object, it is evident that the quantity in the act does not
depend on the quantity in the intention. With regard to the external
act this may happen in two ways. First, through the object that is
ordained to the intended end not being proportionate to that end; for
instance, if a man were to give ten pounds, he could not realize his
intention, if he intended to buy a thing worth a hundred pounds.
Secondly, on account of the obstacles that may supervene in regard
to the exterior action, which obstacles we are unable to remove: for