Him, Behold, Your disciples do that which is not lawful to do upon the Sabbath
day." [Matthew 12:2]
Now here indeed with no great vehemence (yet surely that would have been
consistent in them)—nevertheless they are not vehemently provoked, but simply
find fault. But when He stretched out the withered hand and healed it, then they
were so infuriated, as even to consult together about slaying and destroying Him.
For where nothing great and noble is done, they are calm; but where they see any
made whole, they are savage, and fret themselves, and none so intolerable as
they are: such enemies are they of the salvation of men.
How then does Jesus defend His disciples? "Have ye not read," says He,
"what David did in the temple, when he was an hungered, himself and all they
that were with him? How he entered into the house of God, and did eat the showbread, which was not lawful for him to eat, neither for them which were with
him, but only for the priests?" [Matthew 12:3-4]
Thus, whereas in pleading for His disciples, He brings forward David; for
Himself, it is the Father. [John 5:17]
And observe His reproving manner: "Have ye not read what David did?"
For great indeed was that prophet's glory, so that Peter also afterwards pleading
with the Jews, spoke on this wise, "Let me freely speak unto you of the patriarch
David, that he is both dead and buried." [Acts 2:29]
But wherefore does He not call him by the name of his rank, either on this
occasion or afterwards? Perhaps because He derived His race from him.
Now had they been a candid sort of persons, He would have turned His
discourse to the disciples' suffering from hunger; but abominable as they were
and inhuman, He rather rehearses unto them a history.
But Mark says, "In the days of Abiathar the High Priest:" not stating what
was con trary to the history, but implying that he had two names; and adds that
"he gave unto him," indicating that herein also David had much to say for
himself, since even the very priest suffered him; and not only suffered, but even
ministered unto him. For tell me not that David was a prophet, for not even so

was it lawful, but the privilege was the priests': wherefore also He added, "but
for the priests only." For though he were ten thousand times a prophet, yet was
he not a priest; and though he were himself a prophet, yet not so they that were
with him; since to them too we know that he gave.
"What then," it might be said, "were they all one with David?" Why talk to
me of dignity, where there seems to be a transgression of the law, even though it
be the constraint of nature? Yea, and in this way too He has the more entirely
acquitted them of the charges, in that he who is greater is found to have done the
same.
"And what is this to the question," one may say; "for it was not surely the
Sabbath, that he transgressed?" Thou tellest me of that which is greater, and
which especially shows the wisdom of Christ, that letting go the Sabbath, He
brings another example greater than the Sabbath. For it is by no means the same,
to break in upon a day, and to touch that holy table, which it was not lawful for
any man to touch. Since the Sabbath indeed has been violated, and that often;
nay rather it is continually being violated, both by circumcision, and by many
other works; and at Jericho [Joshua 6:15] too one may see the same to have
happened; but this happened then only. So that He more than obtains the victory.
How then did no man blame David, although there was yet another ground of
charge heavier than this, that of the priests' murder, which had its origin from
this? But He states it not, as applying himself to the present subject only.
2. Afterwards again He refutes it in another way also. For as at first He
brought in David, by the dignity of the person quelling their pride; so when He
had stopped their mouths, and had put down their boasting, then He adds also the
more appropriate refutation. And of what sort is this? "Do you not know, that in
the temple the priests profane the Sabbath, and are blameless?" [Matthew 12:5]
For in that other instance indeed, says He, the emergency made the relaxation,
but here is the relaxation even without emergency. He did not however at once
thus refute them but first by way of permission, afterwards as insisting upon his
argument. Because it was meet to draw the stronger inference last, although the