SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.160, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether twelve degrees of humility are fittingly

distinguished in the Rule of the Blessed Benedict?
Objection 1: It would seem that the twelve degrees of humility that
are set down in the Rule of the Blessed Benedict are unfittingly
distinguished. The first is to be "humble not only in heart, but also to
show it in one's very person, one's eyes fixed on the ground"; the
second is "to speak few and sensible words, and not to be loud of
voice"; the third is "not to be easily moved, and disposed to
laughter"; the fourth is "to maintain silence until one is asked"; the
fifth is "to do nothing but to what one is exhorted by the common
rule of the monastery"; the sixth is "to believe and acknowledge
oneself viler than all"; the seventh is "to think oneself worthless and
unprofitable for all purposes"; the eighth is "to confess one's sin";
the ninth is "to embrace patience by obeying under difficult and
contrary circumstances"; the tenth is "to subject oneself to a
superior"; the eleventh is "not to delight in fulfilling one's own
desires"; the twelfth is "to fear God and to be always mindful of
everything that God has commanded." For among these there are
some things pertaining to the other virtues, such as obedience and
patience. Again there are some that seem to involve a false opinion--and this is inconsistent with any virtue---namely to declare oneself
more despicable than all men, and to confess and believe oneself to
be in all ways worthless and unprofitable. Therefore these are
unfittingly placed among the degrees of humility.
Objection 2: Further, humility proceeds from within to externals, as
do other virtues. Therefore in the aforesaid degrees, those which
concern outward actions are unfittingly placed before those which
pertain to inward actions.
Objection 3: Further, Anselm (De Simil. ci, seqq.) gives seven
degrees of humility, the first of which is "to acknowledge oneself
contemptible"; the second, "to grieve for this"; the third, "to confess
it"; the fourth, "to convince others of this, that is to wish them to
believe it"; the fifth, "to bear patiently that this be said of us"; the
sixth, "to suffer oneself to be treated with contempt"; the seventh,
"to love being thus treated." Therefore the aforesaid degrees would
seem to be too numerous.
Objection 4: Further, a gloss on Mt. 3:15 says: "Perfect humility has

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.160, C.7.

three degrees. The first is to subject ourselves to those who are
above us, and not to set ourselves above our equals: this is
sufficient. The second is to submit to our equals, and not to set
ourselves before our inferiors; this is called abundant humility. The
third degree is to subject ourselves to inferiors, and in this is perfect
righteousness." Therefore the aforesaid degrees would seem to be
too numerous.
Objection 5: Further, Augustine says (De Virginit. xxxi): "The
measure of humility is apportioned to each one according to his
rank. It is imperiled by pride, for the greater a man is the more liable
is he to be entrapped." Now the measure of a man's greatness
cannot be fixed according to a definite number of degrees. Therefore
it would seem that it is not possible to assign the aforesaid degrees
to humility.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 2) humility has essentially to
do with the appetite, in so far as a man restrains the impetuosity of
his soul, from tending inordinately to great things: yet its rule is in
the cognitive faculty, in that we should not deem ourselves to be
above what we are. Also, the principle and origin of both these
things is the reverence we bear to God. Now the inward disposition
of humility leads to certain outward signs in words, deeds, and
gestures, which manifest that which is hidden within, as happens
also with the other virtues. For "a man is known by his look, and a
wise man, when thou meetest him, by his countenance" (Ecclus.
19:26). Wherefore the aforesaid degrees of humility include
something regarding the root of humility, namely the twelfth degree,
"that a man fear God and bear all His commandments in mind."
Again, they include certain things with regard to the appetite, lest
one aim inordinately at one's own excellence. This is done in three
ways. First, by not following one's own will, and this pertains to the
eleventh degree; secondly, by regulating it according to one's
superior judgment, and this applies to the tenth degree; thirdly, by
not being deterred from this on account of the difficulties and
hardships that come in our way, and this belongs to the ninth
degree.
Certain things also are included referring to the estimate a man
forms in acknowledging his own deficiency, and this in three ways.
First by acknowledging and avowing his own shortcomings; this
belongs to the eighth degree: secondly, by deeming oneself