Extreme Unction is not a sacramental but a sacrament.
Reply to Objection 1: The oil with which catechumens are anointed
does not convey the remission of sins to them by its unction, for that
belongs to Baptism. It does, however, dispose them to receive
Baptism, as stated above (TP, Question 71, Article 3). Hence that
unction is not a sacrament as Extreme Unction is.
Reply to Objection 2: This sacrament prepares man for glory
immediately, since it is given to those who are departing from this
life. And as, under the Old Law, it was not yet time to enter into glory,
because "the Law brought nobody to perfection" (Heb. 7:19), so this
sacrament had not to be foreshadowed therein by some
corresponding sacrament, as by a figure of the same kind.
Nevertheless it was somewhat foreshadowed remotely by all the
healings related in the Old Testament.
Reply to Objection 3: Dionysius makes no mention of Extreme
Unction, as neither of Penance, nor of Matrimony, because he had no
intention to decide any question about the sacraments, save in so far
as they serve to illustrate the orderly disposition of the ecclesiastical
hierarchy, as regards the ministers, their actions, and the recipients.
Nevertheless since Extreme Unction confers grace and remission of
sins, there is no doubt that it possesses an enlightening and
cleansing power, even as Baptism, though not so copious.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether Extreme Unction is one sacrament?

Objection 1: It would seem that Extreme Unction is not one
sacrament. Because the oneness of a thing depends on its matter
and form, since being and oneness are derived from the same
source. Now the form of this sacrament is said several times during
the one administration, and the matter is applied to the person
anointed in respect of various parts of his body. Therefore it is not
one sacrament.
Objection 2: Further, the unction itself is a sacrament, for it would be
absurd to say that the oil is a sacrament. But there are several
unctions. Therefore there are several sacraments.
Objection 3: Further, one sacrament should be performed by one
minister. But the case might occur that Extreme Unction could not
be conferred by one minister: thus if the priest die after the first
unction, another priest would have to proceed with the others.
Therefore Extreme Unction is not one sacrament.
On the contrary, As immersion is in relation to Baptism, so is
unction to this sacrament. But several immersions are but one
sacrament of Baptism. Therefore the several unctions in Extreme
Unction are also one sacrament.
Further, if it were not one sacrament, then after the first unction, it
would not be essential for the perfection of the sacrament that the
second unction should be performed, since each sacrament has
perfect being of itself. But that is not true. Therefore it is one
sacrament.
I answer that, Strictly speaking, a thing is one numerically in three
ways. First, as something indivisible, which is neither actually nor
potentially several---as a point, and unity. Secondly, as something
continuous, which is actually one, but potentially several---as a line.
Thirdly, as something complete, that is composed of several parts--as a house, which is, in a way, several things, even actually,
although those several things go together towards making one. In
this way each sacrament is said to be one thing, in as much as the
many things which are contained in one sacrament, are united
together for the purpose of signifying or causing one thing, because