you still cling to him though departed, and forsakest God, when it was your duty
to give thanks, to cast it all upon Him? For what is it that you have received from
your husband? The pains of childbirth, and labors, and insults and reproaches
often, and chidings, and bursts of anger. Are not these the things that come from
husbands? But there are, you say, other things too that are good. Of what sort
then are these? Did he set off your beauty with costly garments? Did he put gold
ornaments about your face? Did he make you respected by all? But if you will,
you shall adorn yourself with a much better ornament than the departed. For
gravity makes its possessor much more admirable than golden ornaments. This
King also has garments, not of this sort, but much better. With those, if you will,
invest yourself. Of what sort then are they? There is a clothing which has fringes
of gold; if you will, array the soul. But did he make you not to be despised by
men? And what is there great in that? Your widowhood suffers you not to be
despised by the demons. Then you ruled over your servants, if at least you at all
ruled over them. But now, instead of your servants, you have mastery over
unbodied powers, principalities, authorities, the ruler of this world. And thou
dost not mention the troubles, in which you shared with him, sometimes the fear
of magistrates, sometimes the preference given to neighbors. From all these
things you are now delivered, from dread and fear. But are you solicitous who
will support the children that are left you? The "Father of the fatherless." For tell
me, who gave them? Do you not hear Christ in the Gospels saying, "Is not the
life more than the food, and the body than the raiment?" [Matthew 6:25]
Do you see, that your lamentation is not from loss of his society, but from
want of faith. But the children of a father that is dead are not equally illustrious.
Wherefore? They have God for their Father, and are they not illustrious? How
many can I show you brought up by widows, who have become famous, how
many who have been under their fathers, and have been undone! For if you bring
them up from their first youth, as they ought to be brought up, they will enjoy an
advantage much greater than a father's protection. For that it is the business of
widows— I speak of the bringing up of children— hear Paul saying, "If she has

brought up children" [1 Timothy 5:10]; and again, "She shall be saved through
the child-bearing," (he has not said through her husband,) if they continue in
faith and love and sanctification with sobriety. [1 Timothy 2:15] Instill into them
the fear of God from their first youth, and He will protect them better than any
father; this will be a wall not to be broken. For when there is a guard seated
within, we have no need of contrivances without: but where he is not, all our
outward contrivances are vain.
This will be to them wealth and glory too and ornament. This will make
them illustrious, not upon earth, but even in heaven. For do not look to those
who are begirt with the golden girdles, nor those who are borne on horses, nor
those who shine in kings' palaces on account of their fathers, nor those who have
footmen and tutors. For these things perhaps cause widows to bewail over their
orphans, thinking that this my son also, if his father at least were living, would
have enjoyed so much happiness; but now he is in a state of depression and
dishonor, and worthy of no consideration. Think not of these things, O woman,
but open to you in thought the gates of heaven, consider the palace there, behold
the King who is there seated. Consider if those who are upon the earth can be
more illustrious than your son there— and then groan. But if some are of good
repute on earth, this is not worth any consideration. It is allowed him, if you will,
to be a soldier in heaven, to enlist him in the ranks of that army. For those who
are enlisted there are not borne on horses, but in the clouds. They walk not upon
earth, but are caught up into heaven. They have not slaves to go before them, but
the Angels themselves. They stand not in the presence of a mortal king, but of
Him who is immortal, the King of kings and Lord of lords. They have not a
leathern girdle about their loins, but that glory which is unspeakable, and they
are more splendid than kings, or whoever have been most illustrious. For in
those royal courts not wealth is required, nor noble birth, nothing else than virtue
alone; and where that is present, nothing is wanting to their obtaining the chief
place.
Nothing is painful to us, if we are willing to cultivate wisdom. Look up to