SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.156, C.3.

according to right reason, when and where this is requisite.
Wherefore they are not opposed to one another as they are not about
the same thing.
Reply to Objection 2: According to the Philosopher (Ethic. iv, 5), "the
habit that observes the mean in anger is unnamed; so that the virtue
is denominated from the diminution of anger, and is designated by
the name of meekness." For the virtue is more akin to diminution
than to excess, because it is more natural to man to desire
vengeance for injuries done to him, than to be lacking in that desire,
since "scarcely anyone belittles an injury done to himself," as
Sallust observes [Question 120]. As to clemency, it mitigates
punishment, not in respect of that which is according to right
reason, but as regards that which is according to common law,
which is the object of legal justice: yet on account of some particular
consideration, it mitigates the punishment, deciding, as it were, that
a man is not to be punished any further. Hence Seneca says (De
Clementia ii, 1): "Clemency grants this, in the first place, that those
whom she sets free are declared immune from all further
punishment; and remission of punishment due amounts to a
pardon." Wherefore it is clear that clemency is related to severity as
equity ['epieikeia'] to legal justice, whereof severity is a part, as
regards the infliction of punishment in accordance with the law. Yet
clemency differs from equity, as we shall state further on (Article 3,
ad 1).
Reply to Objection 3: The beatitudes are acts of virtue: while the
fruits are delights in virtuous acts. Wherefore nothing hinders
meekness being reckoned both virtue, and beatitude and fruit.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.156, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the aforesaid virtues are parts of

temperance?
Objection 1: It would seem that the aforesaid virtues are not parts of
temperance. For clemency mitigates punishment, as stated above
(Article 2). But the Philosopher (Ethic. v, 10) ascribes this to equity,
which pertains to justice, as stated above (Question 120, Article 2).
Therefore seemingly clemency is not a part of temperance.
Objection 2: Further, temperance is concerned with concupiscences;
whereas meekness and clemency regard, not concupiscences, but
anger and vengeance. Therefore they should not be reckoned parts
of temperance.
Objection 3: Further, Seneca says (De Clementia ii, 4): "A man may
be said to be of unsound mind when he takes pleasure in cruelty."
Now this is opposed to clemency and meekness. Since then an
unsound mind is opposed to prudence, it seems that clemency and
meekness are parts of prudence rather than of temperance.
On the contrary, Seneca says (De Clementia ii, 3) that "clemency is
temperance of the soul in exercising the power of taking revenge."
Tully also (De Invent. Rhet. ii, 54) reckons clemency a part of
temperance.
I answer that, Parts are assigned to the principal virtues, in so far as
they imitate them in some secondary matter as to the mode whence
the virtue derives its praise and likewise its name. Thus the mode
and name of justice consist in a certain "equality," those of fortitude
in a certain "strength of mind," those of temperance in a certain
"restraint," inasmuch as it restrains the most vehement
concupiscences of the pleasures of touch. Now clemency and
meekness likewise consist in a certain restraint, since clemency
mitigates punishment, while meekness represses anger, as stated
above (Articles 1,2). Therefore both clemency and meekness are
annexed to temperance as principal virtue, and accordingly are
reckoned to be parts thereof.
Reply to Objection 1: Two points must be considered in the
mitigation of punishment. one is that punishment should be
mitigated in accordance with the lawgiver's intention, although not