so far from doing anything, they went much beyond this in wickedness, they
even used to corrupt others. These are they that are called pests, who make their
employment the ruin of others, standing right contrary to teachers. For if it be the
part of a teacher to save that which is perishing, to destroy that which is on the
point of being saved is that of a destroyer.
After this, again another charge: "You compass sea and land to make one
proselyte, and when he is made, you make him twofold more the child of hell
than yourselves;" that is, not even the fact that hardly you have taken him, and
with endless toils, induces you to be sparing towards him, although of the things
we have hardly acquired, we are more sparing, but you not even this renders
more gentle.
Here He lays to their charge two things; one, that they are unprofitable for
the salvation of the many, and need much toil in order to win over even one;
another, that they were remiss in the preservation of him whom they had gained,
or rather that they were not only careless, but even traitors, by their wickedness
in their life corrupting him, and making him worse. For when the disciple sees
his teachers to be such as these, he becomes worse than they. For he stops not at
his teacher's wickedness; but as when his teacher is virtuous, he imitates him, so
when he is bad, he even goes beyond him, by reason of our proneness to what is
evil.
And He calls him "a child of hell," that is, a very hell. And He said "twofold
more than you," that He might both alarm those, and make these feel the more
severely, because they are teachers of wickedness. And not this only, but because
they labor to instill into their disciples a greater wickedness, hardening them to a
much greater depravity than they have, and this is above all a mark of a depraved
soul.
Then He derides them for folly also, because they bade them disregard the
greater commandments. And yet before He had said the opposite, that "they bind
heavy burdens, and grievous to be borne." But these things too they did again
and were doing everything for the corruption of those who were subject to them,

in little things requiring strictness, and despising the great.
"For you pay tithe," He says, "of mint and anise, and have omitted the
weightier matters of the law, judgment, and mercy, and faith. These ought ye to
have done, and not to leave the others undone."
Here then He naturally says it, where it is tithe and almsgiving, for what
does it hurt to give alms? But not to keep the law; for neither does it say thus.
Therefore here indeed He says, "These ought ye to have done;" but where He is
speaking about clean and unclean, He no longer adds this, but makes a
distinction, and shows that the inward purity is necessarily followed by the
outward, but the converse is no longer so.
For where there is a plea of love to man, He passes it over lightly, for this
very reason, and because it was not yet time expressly and plainly to revoke the
things of the law. But where it is an observance of bodily purification, He
overthrows it more plainly.
So, therefore, while with respect to alms He says, "These ought ye to have
done, and not to leave the others undone," touching purifications He speaks not
on this wise, but what? "You make clean," He says, "the outside of the cup and
the platter, but within they are full of extortion, and injustice. Cleanse that which
is within the cup, that the outside may be clean also." And He took it from a
thing confessed and manifest, from a cup and platter.
2. Then, to show that there is no harm arising from despising bodily
cleansings, but very great vengeance from not regarding the purifications of the
soul, which is virtue, He called these "a gnat," for they are small and nothing,
but those other a camel, for they were beyond what men could bear. Wherefore
also He says, "Straining at the gnat, and swallowing the camel." For indeed the
one were enacted for the sake of the other, I mean of mercy and judgment; so
that not even then did they profit being done alone. For whereas the little things
were mentioned for the sake of the great, and after that these last were neglected,
and labor was spent on those alone, nothing was gained even then by this. For
the greater followed not the lesser, but the lesser were sure to follow these