Throne of the Father.
But language is too weak (as I said) to set forth the whole. Experience is
necessary, and the knowledge which [comes] by experience. Tell me, how was it
(think you) with Adam in Paradise? This course of life is far better than that, as
much as heaven [is better] than earth.
11. But however let us search after another image still. If it happened that
he who now reigns was master of the whole world, and then was troubled neither
by wars nor by cares, but was honored only and lived delicately; and had large
tributes, and on every side gold flowed in to him, and he was looked up to, what
feelings do you think he would have, if he saw that all the wars in all parts of the
world had ceased? Something such as this will it be. But rather I have not even
yet arrived at that image [which I seek]; therefore I must search after another
too.
Consider then, I pray you: for as some royal child, so long as he is in the
womb, has no sense of anything, but should it happen that he suddenly came
forth from thence, and ascended the royal throne, not gradually, but all at once
received possession of all things; so is it as regards this [present] and that
[future] state. Or, if some captive, having suffered innumerable evils, should be
caught up at once to the royal throne.
But not even thus have I attained to the image exactly. For here indeed
whatever good things a person may obtain, even should you say the kingdom
itself, during the first day indeed his desires are in full vigor, and for the second
too, and the third, but as time goes on, he continues indeed to have pleasure, but
not so great. For whatever it be, it always ceases from familiarity with it. But
yonder it not only does not diminish, but even increases. For consider how great
a thing it is, that a soul after departing there, should no longer look for an end of
those good things, nor yet change, but increase, and life that has no end, and life
set free from all danger, and from all despondency and care, full of cheerfulness
and blessings innumerable.
For if when we go out into a plain, and there see the soldiers' tents fixed

with curtains, and the spears, and helmets, and bosses of the bucklers glittering,
we are lifted up with wonder; but if we also chance to see the king himself
running in the midst or even riding with golden armor, we think we have
everything; what do you think [it will be] when you see the everlasting
tabernacles of the saints pitched in heaven? (For it is said, "They shall receive
you into their everlasting tabernacles" [Luke 16:9]) when you see each one of
them beaming with light above the rays of the sun, not from brass and steel, but
from that glory whose gleamings the eye of man cannot look upon? And this
indeed with respect to the men. But what, if one were to speak of the thousands
of Angels, of Archangels, of Cherubim, of Seraphim, of thrones, of dominions,
of principalities, of powers, whose beauty is inimitable, passing all
understanding?
But how far shall I go in pursuing what cannot be overtaken? "For eye has
not seen," it is said, "nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man,
the things which God has prepared for them that love Him." [1 Corinthians 2:9]
Therefore nothing is more pitiable than those who miss, nor anything more
blessed than those who attain. Let us then be of the blessed, that we may attain to
the everlasting good things that are in Christ Jesus our Lord, with whom to the
Father together with the Holy Ghost be glory, might, honor, now and for ever
and world without end. Amen.