natural temper; and he had need have a thousand eyes on all sides. Do you not
see what a number of qualifications the Bishop must have? To be apt to teach,
patient, holding fast the faithful word in doctrine [see 1 Timothy 3:2-9; Titus
1:7-9]. What trouble and pains does this require! And then, others do wrong, and
he bears all the blame. To pass over every thing else: if one soul depart
unbaptized, does not this subvert all his own prospect of salvation? The loss of
one soul carries with it a penalty which no language can represent. For if the
salvation of that soul was of such value, that the Son of God became man, and
suffered so much, think how sore a punishment must the losing of it bring! And
if in this present life he who is cause of another's destruction is worthy of death,
much more in the next world. Do not tell me, that the presbyter is in fault, or the
deacon. The guilt of all these comes perforce upon the head of those who
ordained them. Let me mention another instance. It chances, that a bishop has
inherited from his predecessor a set of persons of indifferent character. What
measures is it proper to take in respect of bygone transgressions (for here are two
precipices) so as not to let the offender go unpunished, and not to cause scandal
to the rest? Must one's first step be to cut him off? There is no actual present
ground for that. But is it right to let him go unmarked? Yes, say you; for the fault
rests with the bishop who ordained him. Well then? Must one refuse to ordain
him again, and to raise him to a higher degree of the ministry? That would be to
publish it to all men, that he is a person of indifferent character, and so again one
would cause scandal in a different way. But is one to promote him to a higher
degree? That is much worse.
If then there were only the responsibility of the office itself for people to
run after in the episcopate, none would be so quick to accept it. But as things go,
we run after this, just as we do after the dignities of the world. That we may have
glory with men, we lose ourselves with God. What profit in such honor? How
self-evident its nothingness is! When you covet the episcopal rank, put in the
other scale, the account to be rendered after this life. Weigh against it, the
happiness of a life free from toil, take into account the different measure of the

punishment. I mean, that even if you have sinned, but in your own person
merely, you will have no such great punishment, nothing like it: but if you have
sinned as bishop, you are lost. Remember what Moses endured, what wisdom he
displayed, what good deeds he exhibited: but, for committing one sin only, he
was bitterly punished; and with good reason; for this fault was attended with
injury to the rest. Not in regard that the sin was public, but because it was the sin
of a spiritual Ruler ([ί] [ερέως]) cf. S.); for in truth we do not pay the same
penalty for public and for hidden faults. [Augustine in Psalm 99:6] The sin may
be the same, but not the ([ζημία]) harm of it; nay, not the sin itself; for it is not
the same thing to sin in secret and unseen, and to sin openly. But the bishop
cannot sin unobserved. Well for him if he escape reproach, though he sin not;
much less can he think to escape notice, if he do sin. Let him be angry, let him
laugh, or let him but dream of a moment's relaxation, many are they that scoff,
many that are offended, many that lay down the law, many that bring to mind the
former bishops, and abuse the present one; not that they wish to sound the praise
of those; no, it is only to carp at him that they bring up the mention of fellow
bishops, of presbyters. Sweet, says the proverb, is war to the inexperienced; but
it may rather be said now, that even after one has come out of it, people in
general have seen nothing of it: for in their eyes it is not war, but like those
shepherds in Ezekiel, we slay and devour. [Ezekiel 34:2] Which of us has it in
his power to show that he has taken as much care for the flocks of Christ, as
Jacob did for Laban's? [Genesis 31:40] Which of us can tell of the frost of the
night? For talk not to me of vigils, and all that parade. The contrary plainly is the
fact. Prefects, and governors ([ὕ] [παρχοι καὶ τοπάρχαι]) of provinces, do not
enjoy such honour as he that governs the Church. If he enter the palace, who but
he is first? If he go to see ladies, or visit the houses of the great, none is preferred
to him. The whole state of things is ruined and corrupt. I do not speak thus as
wishing to put us bishops to shame, but to repress your hankering after the
office. For with what conscience, (even should you succeed in becoming a
bishop, having made interest for it either in person or by another), with what