FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.52, C.2.

account of the oneness of the term by which it is specified. We may
observe the same thing in health; for a body attains to the nature of
health, according as it has a disposition suitable to an animal's
nature, to which various dispositions may be suitable; which
disposition is therefore variable as regards more or less, and withal
the nature of health remains. Whence the Philosopher says (Ethic. x,
2,3): "Health itself may be more or less: for the measure is not the
same in all, nor is it always the same in one individual; but down to a
certain point it may decrease and still remain health."
Now these various dispositions and measures of health are by way
of excess and defect: wherefore if the name of health were given to
the most perfect measure, then we should not speak of health as
greater or less. Thus therefore it is clear how a quality or form may
increase or decrease of itself, and how it cannot.
But if we consider a quality or form in respect of its participation by
the subject, thus again we find that some qualities and forms are
susceptible of more or less, and some not. Now Simplicius assigns
the cause of this diversity to the fact that substance in itself cannot
be susceptible of more or less, because it is "per se" being. And
therefore every form which is participated substantially by its
subject, cannot vary in intensity and remission: wherefore in the
genus of substance nothing is said to be more or less. And because
quantity is nigh to substance, and because shape follows on
quantity, therefore is it that neither in these can there be such a thing
as more or less. Whence the Philosopher says (Phys. vii, text. 15)
that when a thing receives form and shape, it is not said to be
altered, but to be made. But other qualities which are further
removed from quantity, and are connected with passions and
actions, are susceptible of more or less, in respect of their
participation by the subject.
Now it is possible to explain yet further the reason of this diversity.
For, as we have said, that from which a thing receives its species
must remain indivisibly fixed and constant in something indivisible.
Wherefore in two ways it may happen that a form cannot be
participated more or less. First because the participator has its
species in respect of that form. And for this reason no substantial
form is participated more or less. Wherefore the Philosopher says
(Metaph. viii, text. 10) that, "as a number cannot be more or less, so
neither can that which is in the species of substance," that is, in
respect of its participation of the specific form: "but in so far as

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.52, C.2.

substance may be with matter," i.e. in respect of material
dispositions, "more or less are found in substance."
Secondly this may happen from the fact that the form is essentially
indivisible: wherefore if anything participate that form, it must needs
participate it in respect of its indivisibility. For this reason we do not
speak of the species of number as varying in respect of more or
less; because each species thereof is constituted by an indivisible
unity. The same is to be said of the species of continuous quantity,
which are denominated from numbers, as two-cubits-long, threecubits-long, and of relations of quantity, as double and treble, and of
figures of quantity, as triangle and tetragon.
This same explanation is given by Aristotle in the Predicaments
(Categor. vi), where in explaining why figures are not susceptible of
more or less, he says: "Things which are given the nature of a
triangle or a circle, are accordingly triangles and circles": to wit,
because indivisibility is essential to the motion of such, wherefore
whatever participates their nature must participate it in its
indivisibility.
It is clear, therefore, since we speak of habits and dispositions in
respect of a relation to something (Phys. vii, text. 17), that in two
ways intensity and remission may be observed in habits and
dispositions. First, in respect of the habit itself: thus, for instance,
we speak of greater or less health; greater or less science, which
extends to more or fewer things. Secondly, in respect of
participation by the subject: in so far as equal science or health is
participated more in one than in another, according to a diverse
aptitude arising either from nature, or from custom. For habit and
disposition do not give species to the subject: nor again do they
essentially imply indivisibility.
We shall say further on (Question 66, Article 1) how it is with the
virtues.
Reply to Objection 1: As the word "great" is taken from corporeal
quantities and applied to the intelligible perfections of forms; so also
is the word "growth," the term of which is something great.
Reply to Objection 2: Habit is indeed a perfection, but not a
perfection which is the term of its subject; for instance, a term giving