ugly and unsightly and black, do you think to gain anything from golden
ornaments? What madness is this! Shift this adorning within, put these necklaces
about your soul. The things that are put about your body help neither to its health
nor to its beauty, for it will not make black white, nor what is ugly either
beautiful or good looking. But if you put them about your soul, you shall soon
make it white instead of black, instead of ugly and unsightly, you shall make it
beautiful and well-favored. The words are not mine, but those of the Lord
Himself, who says, "Though your sins be as scarlet, I will make them white as
snow" [Isaiah 1:18, Septuagint]; and, "Give alms— and all things shall be clean
unto you" [Luke 11:41]; and by such a disposition you shall beautify not yourself
only, but your husband. For they if they see you putting off these outward
ornaments, will have no great need of expense, and not having it, they will
abstain from all covetousness, and will be more inclined to give alms, and you
too will be able boldly to give them fitting counsel. At present you are deprived
of all such authority. For with what mouth will you speak of these things? With
what eyes will you look your husbands in the face, asking money for alms, when
you spend most upon the covering of your bodies? Then will you be able boldly
to speak with your husband concerning almsgiving, when you lay aside your
ornaments of gold. Even if you accomplish nothing, you have fulfilled all your
part; but I should rather say, that it is impossible that the wife should not gain the
husband, when she speaks by the very actions. "For what do you know, O
woman, whether you shall save your husband?" [1 Corinthians 7:16] As then
now you shall give account both for yourself and for him, so if you put off all
this vanity you shall have a double crown, wearing your crown and triumphing
with your husband through those unalloyed ages, and enjoying the everlasting
good things, which may we all obtain, through the grace and lovingkindness of
our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Homily 70 on the Gospel of John
John 13:1
"Now before the feast of the Passover, when Jesus knew that His hour had come
that He should depart out of this world unto the Father, having loved His own
which were in the world, He loved them unto the end."
1. " Be imitators of me," said Paul, "as I also am of Christ." [1 Corinthians
11:1] For on this account He took also flesh of our substance, that by means of it
He might teach us virtue. For ("God sending His own Son) in the likeness of
sinful flesh," it says, "and for sin condemned sin in the flesh." [Romans 8:3] And
Christ Himself says, "Learn of Me, for I am meek and lowly in heart." [Matthew
11:29] And this He taught, not by words alone, but by actions also. For they
called Him a Samaritan, and one that had a devil, and a deceiver, and cast stones
at Him; and at one time the Pharisees sent servants to take Him, at another they
sent plotters against Him; and they continued also insulting Him themselves, and
that when they had no fault to find, but were even being continually benefited.
Still after such conduct He ceases not to do well to them both by words and
deeds. And, when a certain domestic smote Him on the face, He said, "If I have
spoken evil, bear witness of the evil, but if well, why do you smite Me?" [John
18:23] But this was to those who hated and plotted against Him. Let us see also
what He does now towards the disciples, or rather what actions He now exhibits
towards the traitor. The man whom most of all there was reason to hate, because
being a disciple, having shared the table and the salt, having seen the miracles
and been deemed worthy of such great things, he acted more grievously than
any, not stoning indeed, nor insulting Him, but betraying and giving Him up,
observe in how friendly sort He receives this man, washing his feet; for even in
this way He desired to restrain him from that wickedness. Yet it was in His
power, had He willed it, to have withered him like the fig-tree, to have cut him in