Reply to Objection 2: Virginity and martyrdom do not dispose man to
retain the precepts of Divine justice in his heart in the same degree
as poverty does: even so, on the other hand, outward riches choke
the word of God by the cares which they entail (Lk. 8:14). Or we may
reply that poverty does not suffice alone to merit judicial power, but
is the fundamental part of that perfection to which the judicial power
corresponds. Wherefore among those things regarding perfection
which follow after poverty we may reckon both virginity and
martyrdom and all the works of perfection: yet they do not rank as
high as poverty, since the beginning of a thing is its chief part.
Reply to Objection 3: He who propounded the law or urged men to
good will judge, in the causal (Cf. Article 1) sense, because others
will be judged in reference to the words he has uttered or
propounded. Hence the judicial power does not properly correspond
to preaching or teaching. or we may reply that, as some say, three
things are requisite for the judicial power; first, that one renounce
temporal cares, lest the mind be hindered from the contemplation of
wisdom; secondly that one possess Divine justice by way of habit
both as to knowledge and as to observance; thirdly that one should
have taught others this same justice; and this teaching will be the
perfection whereby a man merits to have judicial power.
Reply to Objection 4: Christ humbled Himself in that He was judged
unjustly; for "He was offered because it was His own will" (Is. 53:7):
and by His humility He merited His exaltation to judicial power, since
all things are made subject to Him (Phil. 2:8,9). Hence, judicial power
is more due to them who humble themselves of their own will by
renouncing temporal goods, on account of which men are honored
by worldlings, than to those who are humbled by others.
Reply to Objection 5: An inferior cannot judge a superior by his own
authority, but he can do so by the authority of a superior, as in the
case of a judge-delegate. Hence it is not unfitting that it be granted to
the poor as an accidental reward to judge others, even those who
have higher merit in respect of the essential reward.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the angels will judge?

Objection 1: It would seem that the angels will judge. For it is written
(Mt. 25:31): "When the Son of man shall come in His majesty, and all
the angels with Him." Now He is speaking of His coming to
judgment. Therefore it would seem that also the angels will judge.
Objection 2: Further, the orders of the angels take their names from
the offices which they fulfill. Now one of the angelic orders is that of
the Thrones, which would seem to pertain to the judicial power,
since a throne is the "judicial bench, a royal seat, a professor's
chair" [St. Isidore, Etym. vii, 5]. Therefore some of the angels will
judge.
Objection 3: Further, equality with the angels is promised the saints
after this life (Mt. 22:30). If then men will have this power of judging,
much more will the angels have it.
On the contrary, It is written (Jn. 5:27): "He hath given Him power to
judgment, because He is the Son of man." But the angels have not
the human nature in common with Him. Neither therefore do they
share with Him in the judicial power.
Further, the same person is not judge and judge's minister. Now in
this judgment the angels will act as ministers of the Judge and,
according to Mt. 13:41: "The Son of man shall send His angels and
they shall gather out of His kingdom all scandals." Therefore the
angels will not judge.
I answer that, The judge's assessors must be conformed to the
judge. Now judgment is ascribed to the Son of man because He will
appear to all, both good and wicked, in His human nature, although
the whole Trinity will judge by authority. Consequently it behooves
also the Judge's assessors to have the human nature, so as to be
visible to all, both good and wicked. Hence it is not fitting for the
angels to judge, although in a certain sense we may say that the
angels will judge, namely by approving the sentence [Article 1].
Reply to Objection 1: As a gloss on this passage observes, the
angels will come with Christ, not to judge, but "as witnesses of
men's deeds because it was under their guardianship that men did