THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.48, C.4.

words, in order to commend it without tediousness": and, as
Augustine observe, (De Trin. iv), "since there are four things to be
noted in every sacrifice---to wit, to whom it is offered, by whom it is
offered, what is offered, and for whom it is offered---that the same
one true Mediator reconciling us with God through the peacesacrifice might continue to be one with Him to whom He offered it,
might be one with them for whom He offered it, and might Himself be
the offerer and what He offered."
Reply to Objection 1: Although the truth answers to the figure in
some respects, yet it does not in all, since the truth must go beyond
the figure. Therefore the figure of this sacrifice, in which Christ's
flesh is offered, was flesh right fittingly, not the flesh of men, but of
animals, as denoting Christ's. And this is a most perfect sacrifice.
First of all, since being flesh of human nature, it is fittingly offered
for men, and is partaken of by them under the Sacrament. Secondly,
because being passible and mortal, it was fit for immolation. Thirdly,
because, being sinless, it had virtue to cleanse from sins. Fourthly,
because, being the offerer's own flesh, it was acceptable to God on
account of His charity in offering up His own flesh. Hence it is that
Augustine says (De Trin. iv): "What else could be so fittingly
partaken of by men, or offered up for men, as human flesh? What
else could be so appropriate for this immolation as mortal flesh?
What else is there so clean for cleansing mortals as the flesh born in
the womb without fleshly concupiscence, and coming from a virginal
womb? What could be so favorably offered and accepted as the flesh
of our sacrifice, which was made the body of our Priest?"
Reply to Objection 2: Augustine is speaking there of visible
figurative sacrifices: and even Christ's Passion, although denoted by
other figurative sacrifices, is yet a sign of something to be observed
by us, according to 1 Pt. 4:1: "Christ therefore, having suffered in the
flesh, be you also armed with the same thought: for he that hath
suffered in the flesh hath ceased from sins: that now he may live the
rest of his time in the flesh, not after the desires of men, but
according to the will of God."
Reply to Objection 3: Christ's Passion was indeed a malefice on His
slayers' part; but on His own it was the sacrifice of one suffering out
of charity. Hence it is Christ who is said to have offered this
sacrifice, and not the executioners.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.48, C.4.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.48, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether Christ's Passion brought about our

salvation by way of redemption?
Objection 1: It would seem that Christ's Passion did not effect our
salvation by way of redemption. For no one purchases or redeems
what never ceased to belong to him. But men never ceased to belong
to God according to Ps. 23:1: "The earth is the Lord's and the fulness
thereof: the world and all they that dwell therein." Therefore it seems
that Christ did not redeem us by His Passion.
Objection 2: Further, as Augustine says (De Trin. xiii): "The devil had
to be overthrown by Christ's justice." But justice requires that the
man who has treacherously seized another's property shall be
deprived of it, because deceit and cunning should not benefit
anyone, as even human laws declare. Consequently, since the devil
by treachery deceived and subjugated to himself man, who is God's
creature, it seems that man ought not to be rescued from his power
by way of redemption.
Objection 3: Further, whoever buys or redeems an object pays the
price to the holder. But it was not to the devil, who held us in
bondage, that Christ paid His blood as the price of our redemption.
Therefore Christ did not redeem us by His Passion.
On the contrary, It is written (1 Pt. 1:18): "You were not redeemed
with corruptible things as gold or silver from your vain conversation
of the tradition of your fathers: but with the precious blood of Christ,
as of a lamb unspotted and undefiled." And (Gal. 3:13): "Christ hath
redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us."
Now He is said to be a curse for us inasmuch as He suffered upon
the tree, as stated above (Question 46, Article 4). Therefore He did
redeem us by His Passion.
I answer that, Man was held captive on account of sin in two ways:
first of all, by the bondage of sin, because (Jn. 8:34): "Whosoever
committeth sin is the servant of sin"; and (2 Pt. 2:19): "By whom a
man is overcome, of the same also he is the slave." Since, then, the
devil had overcome man by inducing him to sin, man was subject to
the devil's bondage. Secondly, as to the debt of punishment, to the
payment of which man was held fast by God's justice: and this, too,
is a kind of bondage, since it savors of bondage for a man to suffer