## CHAPTER XVI--That God has brought things into being out of nothing
TO every effect produced by God there is either something pre-existent or not. If not,
the thesis stands, that God produces some effect out of nothing pre-existent. If anything
pre-exists, we either have a process to infinity, which is impossible, or we must come to
something primitive, which does not presuppose anything else previous to it. Now this
primitive something cannot be God Himself, for God is not the material out of which
anything is made (B. I, Chap.XVI): nor can it be any other being, distinct from God
and uncaused by God (Chap.XV).
3. The more universal the effect, the higher the cause: for the higher the cause, the
wider its range of efficiency. Now being is more universal than motion. Therefore above
any cause that acts only by moving and transmitting must be that cause which is the
first principle of being; and that we have shown to be God (B. I, Chap.XIII). God
therefore does not act merely by moving and transmuting: whereas every cause that
can only bring things into being out of pre-existing material acts merely in that way, for a
thing is made out of material by movement or some change.
4. It is not proper to the universal cause of being, as such, to act only by movement and
change: for not by movement and change is being, as such, made out of not-being, as
such, but `being this' is made out of `not being this.' But God is the universal principle of
being (Chap.XV). Therefore it is not proper to Him to act only by movement or
change, or to need pre-existent material to make anything.
5. Every agent has a term of action like itself, for its acts inasmuch as it is in actuality.
Given then an agent in actuality by some form inherent in it, and not to the whole extent
of its substance, it will be proper to such an agent to produce its effect by causing
a form in some way inherent in matter. But God is in actuality, not by anything inhering
in Him, but to the whole extent of His substance (B. I, Chap.XVIII). Therefore the
proper mode of divine action is to produce the whole subsistent thing, and not a mere
inherent thing, as is form in matter.
10. Between actuality and potentiality such an order obtains, that, though in one and the
same being, which is sometimes in potentiality sometimes in actuality, potentiality is
prior in time to actuality (although actuality is prior in nature), yet, absolutely speaking,
actuality must be prior to potentiality, as is clear from this, that potentiality is not reduced
to actuality except by some actual being. But matter is being in potentiality.
Therefore God, first and pure actuality, must be absolutely prior to matter, and
consequently cause thereof.
This truth divine Scripture confirms, saying: In the beginning God created heaven and
earth (Gen. i, 1). For to create is nothing else than to bring a thing into being without any
pre-existent material.
Hereby is confuted the error of the ancient philosophers, who supposed no cause at all
for matter, since in the actions of particular agents they always saw some matter pre-