2 Corinthians 2:7
"So that contrariwise ye should rather forgive him and comfort him, lest by
any means such a one should be swallowed up with his overmuch sorrow."
He bids them not only take off the censure; but, besides, restores him to his
former estate; for if one let go him that has been scourged and heal him not, he
has done nothing. And see how him too he keeps down lest he should be
rendered worse by the forgiveness. For though he had both confessed and
repented, he makes it manifest that he obtains remission not so much by his
penitence as by this free gift. Wherefore he says, "to forgive him and to comfort
him," and what follows again makes the same thing plain. 'For' says he, 'it is not
because he is worthy, not because he has shown sufficient penitence; but because
he is weak, it is for this I request it.' Whence also he added, "lest by any means
such a one should be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow." And this is both as
testifying to his deep repentance and as not allowing him to fall into despair.
But what means this, "swallowed up?" Either doing as Judas did, or even in
living becoming worse. For, says he, if he should rush away from longer
enduring the anguish of this lengthened censure, perchance also despairing he
will either come to hang himself, or fall into greater crimes afterwards. One
ought then to take steps beforehand , lest the sore become too hard to deal with;
and lest what we have well done we lose by want of moderation.
Now this he said, (as I have already observed,) both to keep him low, and to
teach him not to be over-listless after this restoration. For, not as one who has
washed all quite away; but as fearing lest he should work anything of deeper
mischief, I have received him, he says. Whence we learn that we must determine
the penance, not only by the nature of the sins, but by the disposition and habit
of them that sin. As the Apostle did in that instance. For he feared his weakness,
and therefore said, "lest he be swallowed up," as though by a wild beast, by a

storm, by a billow.

2 Corinthians 2:8
"Wherefore I beseech you."
He no longer commands but beseeches, not as a teacher but as an equal; and
having seated them on the judgment seat he placed himself in the rank of an
advocate; for having succeeded in his object, for joy he adopts without restraint
the tone of supplication. And what can it be that you beseech? Tell me.
"To confirm your love toward him."
That is, 'make it strong,' not simply have intercourse with him, nor any how.
Herein, again, he bears testimony to their virtue as very great; since they who
were so friendly and so applauded him as even to be puffed up, were so
estranged that Paul takes such pains to make them confirm their love towards
him. Herein is excellence of disciples, herein excellence of teachers; that they
should so obey the rein, he so manage their motions. If this were so even now,
they who sin would not have transgressed senselessly. For one ought neither to
love carelessly, nor to be estranged without some reason.