servants bind. Knowing these things, let us not rejoice over those who are
suffering punishment, but even grieve: for these let us mourn, for these let us
weep, that for this also we may receive a reward. But now, many rejoice even
over those who suffer evil unjustly. But not so, we: let us show all sympathy:
that we also may have God vouchsafed us, through the grace and mercy of His
only-begotten Son, with Whom to the Father and the Holy Ghost together be
glory, might, honor, now and ever, world without end. Amen.

Homily 44 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts XX. 17-21
"And from Miletus he sent to Ephesus, and called the elders of the Church.
And when they had come to him, he said unto them, You know, from the first day
that I came into Asia, after what manner I have been with you at all seasons,
serving the Lord with all humility of mind, and with many tears, and temptations,
which befell me by the lying in wait of the Jews: and how I kept back nothing
that was profitable unto you, but have showed you, and have taught you publicly,
and from house to house, testifying both to the Jews, and also to the Greeks,
repentance toward God and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ."
See him, hasting to sail by, and yet not overlooking them, but taking order
for all. Having sent for the rulers, through those he discourses to them (the
Ephesians): but it is worthy of admiration, how finding himself under a necessity
of saying certain great things about himself, he tries to make the least he can of it
([πειρἅτα μετριάζειν]). "You know." For just as Samuel, when about to deliver up
the government to Saul says in their presence, "Have I taken anything of your
hands? You are witnesses, and God also" [1 Samuel 12:3-5]; (so Paul here).
David also, when disbelieved, says, "I was with the flock keeping my father's
sheep: and when the bear came, I scared her away with my hands" [1 Samuel
17:34-35]: and Paul himself too says to the Corinthians, "I have become a fool;
you have compelled me." [2 Corinthians 12:11] Nay, God Himself also does the
same, not speaking of himself upon any and every occasion, but only when He is
disbelieved, then He brings up His benefits. Accordingly, see what Paul does
here: first he adduces their own testimony: that you may not imagine his words
to be mere boasting, he calls the hearers themselves as witnesses of the things he
says, since he was not likely to speak lies in their presence. This is the
excellence of a teacher, to have for witnesses of his merits those who are his

disciples. And what is wonderful, Not for one day nor for two, says he, have I
continued doing this. He wishes to cheer them for the future, that they may
bravely bear all things, both the parting from him, and the trials about to take
place— just as it was in the case of Moses and Joshua. And see how he begins:
"How I have been with you the whole time, serving the Lord with all humility of
mind." Observe, what most becomes rulers: "hating pride" [Exodus 18:21,
Septuagint], says (Moses): which (qualification) is especially in point for rulers,
because to them there is (almost) a necessity of becoming arrogant. This
(humility) is the groundwork of all that is good, as in fact Christ says, "Blessed
are the poor in spirit." [Matthew 5:3] And (here) not simply, "with humility of
mind," but, "with all humility." For there are many kinds of humility, in word and
in action, towards rulers, and toward the ruled. Will you that I mention to you
some kinds of humility? There are some who are lowly towards those who are
lowly, and high towards the high: this is not the character of humility. Some then
are such. Then, that he may not seem to be arrogant, he lays a foundation
beforehand, removing that suspicion: For, "if, says he, I have acted 'with all
humility of mind,' it is not from arrogance that I say the things I say." Then for
his gentleness, ever with much condescension making them his fellows. "With
you," he says, "have I been, serving the Lord;" he makes the good works
common to them with himself: none of it his own peculiar. "What?" (you will
say) "why, against God could he possibly bear himself arrogantly?" And yet
there are many who do bear themselves arrogantly against God: but this man not
even against his own disciples. This is the merit of a teacher, by his own
achievements of virtue to form the character of his disciples. Then for his
fortitude, upon which also he is very concise. "With many tears," he says, "and
temptations which befell me by the lying in wait of the Jews." Do you see that he
grieves at their doings? But here too he seems to show how sympathizing he
was: for he suffered for those who were going to perdition, for the doers
themselves: what was done to himself, he even rejoiced at it; for he belonged to
that band which "rejoiced that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for that