him, He put into him that law of nature, making it to dwell by him as a security
to the whole kind (Gr. Nature, see p. 365). And besides this, it does not appear
that he has anywhere called the law of nature a commandment. But this he calls
as well a commandment, and that "just and holy," as a "spiritual law." But the
law of nature was not given to us by the Spirit. For barbarians, as well as Greeks
and other men, have this law. Hence it is plain, that it is the Mosaic Law that he
is speaking of above, as well as afterwards, and in all the passages. For this
cause also he calls it holy, saying, "Wherefore the Law is holy, and the
commandment holy, and just, and good." For even though the Jews have been
unclean since the Law, and unjust and covetous, this does not destroy the virtue
of the Law, even as their unbelief does not make the faith of God of none effect.
So from all these things it is plain, that it is of the Law of Moses that he here
speaks.
Ver. 13. "Was then that which is good made death unto me? God forbid. But
sin that it might appear sin." (4 manuscripts om. [ἡ].)
That is, that it might be shown what great evil sin is, namely, a listless will,
an inclinableness to the worse side, the actual doing (3 manuscripts om. this
clause), and the perverted judgment. For this is the cause of all the evils; but he
amplifies it by pointing out the exceeding grace of Christ, and teaching them
what an evil He freed the human race from, which, by the medicines used to cure
it, had become worse, and was increased by the preventives. Wherefore he goes
on to say: "That sin, by the commandment, might become exceeding sinful." Do
you see how these things are woven together everywhere? By the very means he
uses to accuse sin, he again shows the excellency of the Law. Neither is it a
small point which he has gained by showing what an evil sin is, and unfolding
the whole of its poison, and bringing it to view. For this is what he shows, by
saying, "that sin by the commandment might become exceeding sinful." That is,
that it may be made clear what an evil sin is, what a ruinous thing. And this is
what was shown by the commandment. Hereby he also shows the preëminence
of grace above the Law, the preëminence above, not the conflict with, the Law.

For do not look to this fact, that those who received it were the worse for it; but
consider the other, that the Law had not only no design of drawing wickedness
out to greater lengths, but even seriously aimed at hewing down what already
existed. But if it had no strength, give to it indeed a crown for its intention, but
adore more highly the power of Christ, which abolished, cut away: and plucked
up the very roots an evil so manifold and so hard to be overthrown. But when
you hear me speak of sin, do not think of it as a substantial power, but evil doing,
as it comes upon men and goes from them continually, and which, before it takes
place, has no being, and when it has taken place, vanishes again. This then was
why the Law was given. Now no law is ever given to put an end to things
natural, but in order to correct a way of acting purposely wicked. And this the
lawgivers that are without too are aware of, and all mankind in general. For it is
the evils from viciousness alone that they are for setting right, and they do not
undertake to extirpate those allotted us along with our nature; since this they
cannot do. For things natural remain unalterable (Arist. Eth. b. 2, c. 1), as we
have told you frequently in other discourses also.
And so let us leave these contests, and again practise ourselves in
exhortation. Or rather, this last part belongs to those contests. For if we cast out
wickedness, we should bring virtue in also: and by these means we shall clearly
teach that wickedness is no natural evil, and shall be able easily to stop the
mouths of them that enquire for the origin of evil, not by means of words only,
but of actions also, since we share the same nature with them, but are freed from
their wickedness. For let us not be looking at the laboriousness of virtue, but at
the possibility of succeeding in it. But if we be in earnest, it will be at once light
and palatable to us. But if you tell me of the pleasure of vice, tell out its end too.
For it issues in death, even as virtue leads us to life. Or if you think fit let us
rather scrutinize them both even before their end; for we shall see that vice has a
great deal of pain attached to it, and virtue great pleasure. For what pray is so
painful as a bad conscience? Or what more pleasing than a good hope? For there
is nothing, assuredly there is nothing, which is used to cut us so deep, and press