case is otherwise with physical agencies: they cannot wait: physical action takes place
according as nature is ready for it: there the effect must follow at once upon the
complete being of the cause. But the will does not act according to the mode of its
being, but according to the mode of its purpose; and therefore, as the effect of a
physical agent follows the being of the agent, if it is sufficient, so the effect of a
voluntary agent follows the mode of purpose.
Arg. 4. A voluntary agent does not delay the execution of his purpose except in
expectation of some future condition not yet realised. And this unfulfilled futurity is
sometimes in the agent himself, as when maturity of active power or the removal of
some hindrance is the condition expected: sometimes it is without the agent, as when
there is expected the presence of some one before whom the action is to take place, or
the arrival of some opportune time that is not yet come. A complete volition is at once
carried into effect by the executive power, except for some defect in that power. Thus at
the command of the will a limb is at once moved, unless there be some break-down in
the motor apparatus. Therefore, when any one wishes to do a thing and it is not at once
done, that must be either for some defect of power, the removal of which has to be
waited for, or because of the incompleteness of the volition to do the thing. I call it
`completeness of volition,' when there is a will absolutely to do the thing, anyhow. The
volition I say is `incomplete,' when there is no will absolutely to do the thing, but the will
is conditioned on the existence of some circumstance not yet present, or the withdrawal
of some present impediment. But certainly, whatever God now wills to be, He has from
eternity willed to be. No new motion of the will can come upon Him: no defect or
impediment can have clogged His power: there can have been nothing outside Himself
for Him to wait for in the production of the universe, since there is nothing else
uncreated save Him alone (Chapp.VI,XV). It seems therefore
necessary that God must have brought the creature into being from all eternity.
Reply. The object of the divine will is not the mere being of the creature, but its being at
a certain time. What is thus willed, namely, the being of the creature at that time, is not
delayed: because the creature began to exist then exactly when God from eternity
arranged that it should begin to exist.
Arg. 5. An intellectual agent does not prefer one alternative to another except for some
superiority of the one over the other. But where there is no difference, there can be no
superiority. But between one non-existence and another non-existence there can be no
difference, nor is one non-existence preferable to another. But, looking beyond the
entire universe, we find nothing but the eternity of God. Now in nothing there can be
assigned no difference of instants, that a thing should be done in one instant rather than
in another. In like manner neither in eternity, which is all uniform and simple (B. I, Chap.