said in secret He published aloud, so as to put them to shame; after that He
revealed also what was in their hearts. As though He had said, "I am not one of
the abjects, nor of those who come for nothing, but He 'that sent Me is true,
whom you know not.'" What means," He that sent Me is true"? "If He be true, He
has sent Me for the truth; if He be true, it is probable that He who is sent is true
also." This also He proves in another way, vanquishing them with their own
words. For whereas they had said, "When Christ comes, no man knows whence
He is," He proves from this that He Himself is the Christ. They used the words,
"No man knows," with reference to distinction of some definite locality; but from
the same words He shows Himself to be the Christ, because He came from the
Father; and everywhere He witnesses that He alone has the knowledge of the
Father, saying, "Not that any man has seen the Father, save He which is from the
Father." [John 6:46] And His words exasperated them; for to tell them, "You
know Him not," and to rebuke them because knowing they pretended to be
ignorant, was sufficient to sting and annoy them.

John 7:30
"Then they sought to take Him, and no man laid his hand upon Him, because His
hour was not yet come."
Do you see that they are invisibly restrained, and their anger bridled? But
wherefore says It not, that He had restrained them invisibly, but, "Because His
hour was not yet come"? The Evangelist was minded to speak more humanly and
in a lowlier strain, so that Christ might be deemed to be also Man. For because
Christ everywhere speaks of sublime matters, he therefore intersperses
expressions of this kind. And when Christ says, "I am from Him," He speaks not
as a Prophet who learns, but as seeing Him, and being with Him.

John 7:29
"I know Him, for I am from Him, and He has sent Me."
Do you see how He continually seeks to prove the, "I am not come of
Myself," and, "He that sent Me is true," striving not to be thought an enemy of
God? And observe how great is the profit of the humility of His words; for, it
says, after this many said,

John 7:31
"When Christ comes, will He do more miracles than these which this man has
done?"
How many were the miracles? In truth, there were three, that of the wine,
that of the paralytic, and that of the nobleman's son; and the Evangelist has
related no more. From which circumstance it is plain, as I have often said, that
the writers pass by most of them, and discourse to us of those alone on account
of which the rulers ill-treated Him. "Then they sought to take Him," and kill
Him. Who "sought"? Not the multitude, who had no desire of rule, nor could be
made captives by malice; but the priests. For they of the multitude said, "When
Christ comes, will He do more miracles?" Yet neither was this sound faith, but,
as it were, the idea of a promiscuous crowd; for to say, "When He comes," was
not the expression of men firmly persuaded that He was the Christ. We may
either understand the words thus, or that they were uttered by the multitudes
when they came together. "Since," they may have said, "our rulers are taking
every pains to prove that this man is not the Christ, let us suppose that he is not
the Christ; will the Christ be better than he?" For, as I ever repeat, men of the
grosser sort are led in not by doctrine, nor by preaching, but by miracles.