SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.170, C.6.

prophet's certitude may be gathered from the fact that Abraham
being admonished in a prophetic vision, prepared to sacrifice his
only-begotten son, which he nowise would have done had he not
been most certain of the Divine revelation.
On the other hand, his position with regard to the things he knows
by instinct is sometimes such that he is unable to distinguish fully
whether his thoughts are conceived of Divine instinct or of his own
spirit. And those things which we know by Divine instinct are not all
manifested with prophetic certitude, for this instinct is something
imperfect in the genus of prophecy. It is thus that we are to
understand the saying of Gregory. Lest, however, this should lead to
error, "they are very soon set aright by the Holy Ghost [2 Kgs. 7:3
seqq.], and from Him they hear the truth, so that they reproach
themselves for having said what was untrue," as Gregory adds
(Hom. i super Ezech.).
The arguments set down in the first place consider the revelation
that is made by the prophetic spirit; wherefore the answer to all the
objections is clear.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.170, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether things known or declared prophetically

can be false?
Objection 1: It would seem that things known or declared
prophetically can be false. For prophecy is about future
contingencies, as stated above (Article 3). Now future contingencies
may possibly not happen; else they would happen of necessity.
Therefore the matter of prophecy can be false.
Objection 2: Further, Isaias prophesied to Ezechias saying (Is. 38:1):
"Take order with thy house, for thou shalt surely die, and shalt not
live," and yet fifteen years were added to his life (4 Kgs. 20:6). Again
the Lord said (Jer. 18:7,8): "I will suddenly speak against a nation
and against a kingdom, to root out and to pull down and to destroy it.
If that nation against which I have spoken shall repent of their evil, I
also will repent of the evil that I have thought to do them." This is
instanced in the example of the Ninevites, according to Jn. 3:10:
"The Lord had mercy with regard to the evil which He had said that
He would do to them, and He did it not." Therefore the matter of
prophecy can be false.
Objection 3: Further, in a conditional proposition, whenever the
antecedent is absolutely necessary, the consequent is absolutely
necessary, because the consequent of a conditional proposition
stands in the same relation to the antecedent, as the conclusion to
the premises in a syllogism, and a syllogism whose premises are
necessary always leads to a necessary conclusion, as we find
proved in I Poster. 6. But if the matter of a prophecy cannot be false,
the following conditional proposition must needs be true: "If a thing
has been prophesied, it will be." Now the antecedent of this
conditional proposition is absolutely necessary, since it is about the
past. Therefore the consequent is also necessary absolutely; yet this
is unfitting, for then prophecy would not be about contingencies.
Therefore it is untrue that the matter of prophecy cannot be false.
On the contrary, Cassiodorus says [Prol. in Psalt. i] that "prophecy is
a Divine inspiration or revelation, announcing the issue of things
with invariable truth." Now the truth of prophecy would not be
invariable, if its matter could be false. Therefore nothing false can
come under prophecy.