12:36] And do you think yourself better than another, and do you not groan, and
beat your breast, and bow down your head, and imitate the Publican?
And then you destroy yourself, though thou be better. Be silent, that you
cease not to be better. If you speak of it, you have done away the merit; if you
think it, I do not say so; if you dost not think it, you have added much. For if a
notorious sinner, when he confessed, "went home justified," he who is a sinner in
a less degree, and is conscious of it, how will he not be rewarded? Examine your
own life. Thou dost not steal; but you are rapacious, and overbearing, and guilty
of many other such things. I say not this to defend theft; God forbid! Deeply
lament if there is any one really guilty of it, but I do not believe it. How great an
evil is sacrilege, it is impossible to say. But I spare you. For I would not that our
virtue should be rendered vain by accusing others. What was worse than the
Publican? For it is true that he was a publican, and guilty of many offenses, yet
because the Pharisee only said, "I am not as this publican," he destroyed all his
merit. I am not, you say, like this sacrilegious Priest. And dost not thou make all
in vain?
This I am compelled to say, and to enlarge upon in my discourse, not so
much because I am concerned for them, but because I fear for you, lest you
should render your virtue vain by this boasting of yourselves, and condemnation
of others. For hear the exhortation of Paul, "Let every one prove his own work,
and then shall he have rejoicing in himself alone, and not in another." [Galatians
6:4]
If you had a wound, tell me, and should go to a physician, would you stay
him from salving and dressing your own wound, and be curious to enquire
whether the physician had a wound, or not? And if he had, would you mind it?
Or because he had it, would you forbear dressing your own, and say, A physician
ought to be in sound health, and since he is not so, I shall let my wound go
uncured? For will it be any palliation for him that is under rule, that his Priest is
wicked? By no means. He will suffer the destined punishment, and you too will
meet with that which is your due. For the Teacher now only fills a place. For "it

is written, They shall all be taught of God." [John 6:45; Isaiah 54:13] "Neither
shall they say, Know the Lord. For all shall know Me from the least to the
greatest." [Jeremiah 31:34] Why then, you will say, does he preside? Why is he
set over us? I beseech you, let us not speak ill of our teachers, nor call them to so
strict an account, lest we bring evil upon ourselves. Let us examine ourselves,
and we shall not speak ill of others. Let us reverence that day, on which he
enlightened us. He who has a father, whatever faults he has, conceals them all.
For it is said, "Glory not in the dishonor of your father; for your father's
dishonor is no glory unto you. And if his understanding fail, have patience with
him." [Sirach 3:10-12] And if this be said of our natural fathers, much more of
our spiritual fathers. Reverence him, in that he every day ministers to you,
causes the Scriptures to be read, sets the house in order for you, watches for you,
prays for you, stands imploring God on your behalf, offers supplications for you,
for you is all his worship. Reverence all this, think of this, and approach him
with pious respect. Say not, he is wicked. What of that? He that is not wicked,
does he of himself bestow upon you these great benefits? By no means.
Everything works according to your faith. Not even the righteous man can
benefit you, if you are unfaithful, nor the unrighteous harm you, if you are
faithful. God, when He would save His people, wrought for the ark by Oxen.
[1 Samuel 6:12] Is it the good life or the virtue of the Priest that confers so much
on you? The gifts which God bestows are not such as to be effects of the virtue
of the Priest. All is of grace. His part is but to open his mouth, while God works
all: the Priest only performs a symbol. Consider how wide was the distance
between John and Jesus. Hear John saying, "I have need to be baptized by You"
[Matthew 3:14], and, "Whose shoe's latchet I am not worthy to unloose." [John
1:27] Yet notwithstanding this difference, the Spirit descended. Which John had
not. For "of His fullness," it is said, "we all have received." [John 1:16] Yet
nevertheless, It descended not till He was baptized. But neither was it John who
caused It to descend. Why then is this done? That you may learn that the Priest
performs a symbol. No man differs so widely from another man, as John from