SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.3.

For the person honored has no need to be more excellent than those
who honor him; it may suffice for him to be more excellent than
some others, or again he may be more excellent than those who
honor him in some respect and not simply.
Reply to Objection 1: The angel forbade John to pay him, not any
kind of honor, but the honor of adoration and latria, which is due to
God. Or again, he forbade him to pay the honor of dulia, in order to
indicate the dignity of John himself, for which Christ equaled him to
the angels "according to the hope of glory of the children of God":
wherefore he refused to be honored by him as though he were
superior to him.
Reply to Objection 2: A wicked superior is honored for the
excellence, not of his virtue but of his dignity, as being God's
minister, and because the honor paid to him is paid to the whole
community over which he presides. As for the demons, they are
wicked beyond recall, and should be looked upon as enemies, rather
than treated with honor.
Reply to Objection 3: In every man is to be found something that
makes it possible to deem him better than ourselves, according to
Phil. 2:3, "In humility, let each esteem others better than
themselves," and thus, too, we should all be on the alert to do honor
to one another.
Reply to Objection 4: Private individuals are sometimes honored by
kings, not that they are above them in the order of dignity but on
account of some excellence of their virtue: and in this way Tobias
and Mardochaeus were honored by kings.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether dulia is a special virtue distinct from

latria?
Objection 1. It seems that dulia is not a special virtue distinct from
latria. For a gloss on Ps. 7:1, "O Lord my God, in Thee have I put my
trust," says: "Lord of all by His power, to Whom dulia is due; God by
creation, to Whom we owe latria." Now the virtue directed to God as
Lord is not distinct from that which is directed to Him as God.
Therefore dulia is not a distinct virtue from latria.
Objection 2: Further, according to the Philosopher (Ethic. viii, 8), "to
be loved is like being honored." Now the charity with which we love
God is the same as that whereby we love our neighbor. Therefore
dulia whereby we honor our neighbor is not a distinct virtue from
latria with which we honor God.
Objection 3: Further, the movement whereby one is moved towards
an image is the same as the movement whereby one is moved
towards the thing represented by the image. Now by dulia we honor
a man as being made to the image of God. For it is written of the
wicked (Wis. 2:22,23) that "they esteemed not the honor of holy
souls, for God created man incorruptible, and to the image of His
own likeness He made him." Therefore dulia is not a distinct virtue
from latria whereby God is honored.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Civ. Dei x), that "the homage
due to man, of which the Apostle spoke when he commanded
servants to obey their masters and which in Greek is called dulia, is
distinct from latria which denotes the homage that consists in the
worship of God."
I answer that, According to what has been stated above (Question
101, Article 3), where there are different aspects of that which is due,
there must needs be different virtues to render those dues. Now
servitude is due to God and to man under different aspects: even as
lordship is competent to God and to man under different aspects.
For God has absolute and paramount lordship over the creature
wholly and singly, which is entirely subject to His power: whereas
man partakes of a certain likeness to the divine lordship, forasmuch
as he exercises a particular power over some man or creature.
Wherefore dulia, which pays due service to a human lord, is a