Matt. v. 35. Instead of placing a period here, as the editors do, it seems to us preferable to carry on the construction.

Matt. xxii. 13.

be sent into outer darkness. But it is one and the same God, the Father of our Lord, from whom
also the prophets had their mission, who does indeed, through His infinite kindness, call the
unworthy; but He examines those who are called, [to ascertain] if they have on the garment fit and
proper for the marriage of His Son, because nothing unbecoming or evil pleases Him. This is in
accordance with what the Lord said to the man who had been healed: "Behold, thou art made whole;
sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee." For he who is good, and righteous, and pure,
and spotless, will endure nothing evil, nor unjust, nor detestable in His wedding chamber. This is
the Father of our Lord, by whose providence all things consist, and all are administered by His
command; and He confers His free gifts upon those who should [receive them]; but the most
righteous Retributor metes out [punishment] according to their deserts, most deservedly, to the
ungrateful and to those that are insensible of His kindness; and therefore does He say, "He sent His
armies, and destroyed those murderers, and burned up their city." He says here, "His armies,"
because all men are the property of God. For "the earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof; the
world, and all that dwell therein." Wherefore also the Apostle Paul says in the Epistle to the
Romans, "For there is no power but of God; the powers that be are ordained of God. Whosoever
resisteth the power, resisteth the ordinance of God; and they that resist shall receive unto themselves
condemnation. For rulers are not for a terror to a good work, but to an evil. Wilt thou then not be
afraid of the power? Do that which is good, and thou shalt have praise of the same; for he is the
minister of God to thee for good. But if thou do that which is evil, be afraid; for he beareth not the
sword in vain: for he is the minister of God, the avenger for wrath upon him that doeth evil.
Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake. For this cause
pay ye tribute also; for they are God's ministers, attending continually upon this very thing."
Both the Lord, then, and the apostles announce as the one only God the Father, Him who gave the
law, who sent the prophets, who made all things; and therefore does He say, "He sent His armies,"
because every man, inasmuch as he is a man, is His workmanship, although he may be ignorant of
his God. For He gives existence to all; He, "who maketh His sun to rise upon the evil and the good,
and sendeth rain upon the just and unjust."
7. And not alone by what has been stated, but also by the parable of the two sons, the younger
of whom consumed his substance by living luxuriously with harlots, did the Lord teach one and
the same Father, who did not even allow a kid to his elder son; but for him who had been lost,