another which is more urgent for the time being. Consequently the
more continually a man can perform acts of this displeasure, the
better it is, provided he exercises the acts of other virtues when and
how he ought to. On the other hand, passions can have excess and
defect, both in intensity and in duration. Wherefore, as the passion
of sorrow, which the will takes upon itself, ought to be moderately
intense, so ought it to be of moderate duration, lest, if it should last
too long, man fall into despair, cowardice, and such like vices.
Reply to Objection 1: The sorrow of contrition is a hindrance to
worldly joy, but not to the joy which is about God, and which has
sorrow itself for object.
Reply to Objection 2: The words of Ecclesiasticus refer to worldly
joy: and the Philosopher is referring to sorrow as a passion, of which
we should make moderate use, according as the end, for which it is
assumed, demands.
Reply to Objection 3: Bernard is speaking of sorrow as a passion.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether our souls are contrite for sins even after

this life?
Objection 1: It would seem that our souls are contrite for sins even
after this life. For the love of charity causes displeasure at sin. Now,
after this life, charity remains in some, both as to its act and as to its
habit, since "charity never falleth away." Therefore the displeasure at
the sin committed, which is the essence of contrition, remains.
Objection 2: Further, we should grieve more for sin than for
punishment. But the souls in purgatory grieve for their sensible
punishment and for the delay of glory. Much more, therefore, do they
grieve for the sins they committed.
Objection 3: Further, the pain of purgatory satisfies for sin. But
satisfaction derives its efficacy from the power of contrition.
Therefore contrition remains after this life.
On the contrary, contrition is a part of the sacrament of Penance. But
the sacraments do not endure after this life. Neither, therefore, does
contrition.
Further, contrition can be so great as to blot out both guilt and
punishment. If therefore the souls in purgatory could have contrition,
it would be possible for their debt of punishment to be remitted
through the power of their contrition, so that they would be delivered
from their sensible pain, which is false.
I answer that, Three things are to be observed in contrition: first, its
genus, viz. sorrow; secondly, its form, for it is an act of virtue
quickened by charity; thirdly, its efficacy, for it is a meritorious and
sacramental act, and, to a certain extent, satisfactory. Accordingly,
after this life, those souls which dwell in the heavenly country,
cannot have contrition, because they are void of sorrow by reason of
the fulness of their joy: those which are in hell, have no contrition,
for although they have sorrow, they lack the grace which quickens
sorrow; while those which are in purgatory have a sorrow for their
sins, that is quickened by grace; yet it is not meritorious, for they are
not in the state of meriting. In this life, however, all these three can
be found.