that unto His last breath they might see that He honors His Father, and is no
adversary of God. Wherefore also He uttered a certain cry from the prophet,
even to His last hour bearing witness to the Old Testament, and not simply a cry
from the prophet, but also in Hebrew, so as to be plain and intelligible to them,
and by all things He shows how He is of one mind with Him that begot Him.
But mark herein also their wantonness, and intemperance, and folly. They
thought (it is said) that it was Elias whom He called, and straightway they gave
Him vinegar to drink. [Matthew 27:48] But another came unto Him, and
"pierced His side with a spear." What could be more lawless, what more brutal,
than these men; who carried their madness to so great a length, offering insult at
last even to a dead body?
But mark thou, I pray you, how He made use of their wickednesses for our
salvation. For after the blow the fountains of our salvation gushed forth from
thence.
"And Jesus, when He had cried with a loud voice, yielded up the Ghost."
This is what He said, "I have power to lay down my life, and I have power to
take it again," and, "I lay it down of myself." [John 10:18] So for this cause He
cried with the voice, that it might be shown that the act is done by power. Mark
at any rate says, that "Pilate marvelled if He were already dead:" [Mark 15:44]
and that the centurion for this cause above all believed, because He died with
power. [Mark 15:39]
This cry rent the veil, and opened the tombs, and made the house desolate.
And He did this, not as offering insult to the temple (for how should He, who
says, "Make not my Father's house a house of merchandise"), [John 2:16] but
declaring them to be unworthy even of His abiding there; like as also when He
delivered it over to the Babylonians. But not for this only were these things
done, but what took place was a prophecy of the coming desolation, and of the
change into the greater and higher state; and a sign of His might.
And together with these things He showed Himself also by what followed
after these things, by the raising of the dead. For in the instance of Elisha; one on

touching a dead body rose again, but now by a voice He raised them, His body
continuing up there, on the cross. And besides, those things were a type of this.
For that this might be believed, therefore is that all done. And they are not
merely raised, but also rocks are rent, and the earth shaken, that they might learn,
that He was able to strike themselves blind, and to rend them in pieces. For He
that cleft rocks asunder, and darkened the world, much more could have done
these things to them, had it been His will. But He would not, but having
discharged His wrath upon the elements, them it was His will to save by
clemency. But they abated not their madness. Such is envy, such is jealousy, it is
not easily stayed. At that time then they were impudent in setting themselves
against the actual appearances; and afterwards even against the things
themselves, when a seal being put upon Him, and soldiers watching Him, He
rose again, and they heard these things from the very guards; they even gave
money, in order both to corrupt others, and to steal away the history of the
resurrection.
Marvel not therefore if at this time also they were perverse, being thus
altogether prepared to set themselves impudently against all things; but observe
this other point, how great signs He had wrought, some from Heaven, some on
earth, some in the very temple, at once marking His indignation, and at the same
time showing that what were unapproachable are now to be entered, and that
Heaven shall be opened; and the work removed to the true Holy of Holies. And
they indeed said, "If He be the King of Israel, let Him come down now from the
cross," [Matthew 27:42] but He shows that He is King of all the world. And
whereas those men said, "Thou that destroyest this temple, and buildest it in
three days," [Matthew 27:40] He shows that it shall be made forever desolate.
Again they said, "He saved others, Himself He cannot save," [Matthew 27:42]
but He while abiding on the cross proved this most abundantly on the bodies of
His servants. For if for Lazarus to rise on the fourth day was a great thing, how
much more for all those who had long ago fallen asleep, at once to appear alive,
which was a sign of the future resurrection. For, "many bodies of the saints