are told that the Son of God is Son of David and of Abraham, doubt not any
more that thou too, the son of Adam, shall be son of God. For not at random, nor
in vain did He abase Himself so greatly, only He was minded to exalt us. Thus
He was born after the flesh, that you might be born after the Spirit; He was born
of a woman, that you might cease to be the son of a woman.
Wherefore the birth was twofold, both made like us, and also surpassing
ours. For to be born of a woman indeed was our lot, but "to be born not of blood,
nor of the will of flesh, nor of man," but of the Holy Ghost, [John 1:13] was to
proclaim beforehand the birth surpassing us, the birth to come, which He was
about freely to give us of the Spirit. And everything else too was like this. Thus
His baptism also was of the same kind, for it partook of the old, and it partook
also of the new. To be baptized by the prophet marked the old, but the coming
down of the Spirit shadowed out the new. And like as though any one were to
place himself in the space between any two persons that were standing apart, and
stretching forth both his hands were to lay hold on either side, and tie them
together; even so has He done, joining the old covenant with the new, God's
nature with man's, the things that are His with ours.
Do you see the flashing brightness of the city, with how great a splendor it
has dazzled you from the very beginning? How it has straightway shown the
King in your own form; as though in a camp? For neither there does the king
always appear bearing his proper dignity, but laying aside the purple and the
diadem, he often disguises himself in the garb of a common soldier. But there it
is, lest by being known he should draw the enemy upon himself; but here on the
contrary, lest, if He were known, He should cause the enemy to fly from the
conflict with Him, and lest He should confound all His own people: for His
purpose was to save, not to dismay.
4. For this reason he has also straightway called Him by this title, naming
Him Jesus. For this name, Jesus, is not Greek, but in the Hebrew language it is
thus called Jesus; which is, when interpreted into the Greek tongue, "A Saviour."
And He is called a Saviour, from His saving His people.

Do you see how he has given wings to the hearer, at once speaking things
familiar, and at the same time by these indicating to us things beyond all hope? I
mean that both these names were well known to the Jews. For, because the
things that were to happen were beyond expectation, the types even of the names
went before, in order that from the very first all the unsettling power of novelty
might be taken away. Thus he is called Jesus, who after Moses brought the
people into the land of promise. Have you seen the type? Behold the truth. That
led into the land of promise, this into heaven, and to the good things in the
heavens; that, after Moses was dead, this after the law had ceased; that as a
leader, this as a King.
However, lest having heard the word Jesus, you should by reason of the
identity of the name be perplexed, he has added, "Jesus Christ, Son of David."
But that other was not of David, but of another tribe.
5. But wherefore does he call it a "book of the generation of Jesus Christ,"
while yet this book has not the birth only, but the whole dispensation? Because
this is the sum of the whole dispensation, and is made an origin and root of all
our blessings. As then Moses calls it the book of heaven and earth, [Genesis 2:4]
although he has not discoursed of heaven and earth only, but also of all things
that are in the midst thereof; so also this man has named his book from that
which is the sum of all the great things done. For that which teems with
astonishment, and is beyond hope and all expectation, is that God should become
man. But this having come to pass, all afterwards follows in reasonable
consequence.
6. But wherefore did he not say, "the Son of Abraham," and then "the Son of
David?" It is not, as some suppose, that he means to proceed upward from the
lower point, since then he would have done the same as Luke, but now he does
the contrary. Why then has he made mention of David? The man was in the
mouths of all, both from his distinction, and from the time, for he had not been
so very long since dead, like Abraham. And though God made promises to both,
yet the one, as old, was passed over in silence, while the other, as fresh and