It is difficult to see the meaning of "iterum" here. Harvey begins a new paragraph with this sentence.

Zoe, and so on with the rest? And how can they themselves maintain that they tend again to unity,
and are, in fact, all at one, if indeed these very conjunctions, which are within the Pleroma, do not
preserve unity, but are separate from one another; and that to such a degree, that they both endure
passion and perform the work of generation without union one with another, just as hens do apart
from intercourse with cocks.
5. Then, again, their first and first-begotten Ogdoad will be overthrown as follows: They must
admit that Bythus and Sige, Nous and Aletheia, Logos and Zoe, Anthropos and Ecclesia, do
individually dwell in the same Pleroma. But it is impossible that Sige (silence) can exist in the
presence of Logos (speech), or again, that Logos can manifest himself in the presence of Sige. For
these are mutually destructive of each other, even as light and darkness can by no possibility exist
in the same place: for if light prevails, there cannot be darkness; and if darkness, there cannot be
light, since, where light appears, darkness is put to flight. In like manner, where Sige is, there cannot
be Logos; and where Logos is, there certainly cannot be Sige. But if they say that Logos simply
exists within (unexpressed), Sige also will exist within, and will not the less be destroyed by the
Logos within. But that he really is not merely conceived of in the mind, the very order of the
production of their (Æons) shows.
6. Let them not then declare that the first and principal Ogdoad consists of Logos and Sige, but
let them [as a matter of necessity] exclude either Sige or Logos; and then their first and principal
Ogdoad is at an end. For if they describe the conjunctions [of the Æons] as united, then their whole
argument fails to pieces. Since, if they were united, how could Sophia have generated a defect
without union with her consort? If, on the other hand, they maintain that, as in production, each of
the Æons possesses his own peculiar substance, then how can Sige and Logos manifest themselves
in the same place? So far, then, with respect to defect.
7. But again, their Triacontad is overthrown as to excess by the following considerations. They
represent Horos (whom they call by a variety of names which I have mentioned in the preceding
book) as having been produced by Monogenes just like the other Æons. Some of them maintain
that this Horos was produced by Monogenes, while others affirm that he was sent forth by the
Propator himself in His own image. They affirm further, that a production was formed by
Monogenes— Christ and the Holy Spirit; and they do not reckon these in the number of the Pleroma,
nor the Saviour either, whom they also declare to be Totum (all things). Now, it is evident even
to a blind man, that not merely thirty productions, as they maintain, were sent forth, but four more
along with these thirty. For they reckon the Propator himself in the Pleroma, and those too, who in
succession were produced by one another. Why is it, then, that those [other beings] are not reckoned
as existing with these in the same Pleroma, since they were produced in the same manner? For
what just reason can they assign for not reckoning along with the other Æons, either Christ, whom
they describe as having, according to the Father's will, been produced by Monogenes, or the Holy