said not, "They know not Me," but, "They know not what they do;" that is, the
dispensation which is being accomplished, and the mystery, they are ignorant of.
For they knew not that the Cross is to shine forth so brightly; that it is made the
salvation of the world, and the reconciliation of God unto men; that their city
should be taken; and that they should suffer the extreme of wretchedness.
By the name of "wisdom," he calls both Christ, and the Cross and the
Gospel. Opportunely also he called Him, "The Lord of glory." For seeing that the
Cross is counted a matter of ignominy, he signifies that the Cross was great
glory: but that there was need of great wisdom in order not only to know God
but also to learn this dispensation of God: and the wisdom which was without
turned out an obstacle, not to the former only, but to the latter also.

1 Corinthians 2:9-13
6. "But as it is written, Things which eye saw not and ear heard not, and
which entered not into the heart of man, whatsoever things God prepared for
them that love Him."
Where are these words written? Why, it is said to have been "written," then
also, when it is set down, not in words, but in actual events, as in the historical
books ; or when the same meaning is expressed, but not in the very same words,
as in this place: for the words, "They to whom it was not told about Him shall
see, and they who have not heard shall understand," [Isaiah 52:15; Septuagint.
Comp. Romans 15:21; Isaiah 64:4] are the same with "the things which eye has
not seen, nor ear heard." Either then this is his meaning, or probably it was
actually written in some books, and the copies have perished. For indeed many
books were destroyed, and few were preserved entire even in the first captivity.
And this is plain, in those which remain to us. For the Apostle says [Acts 3:24]
"From Samuel and the Prophets which follow after they have all spoken
concerning Him:" and these their words are not entirely extant. Paul, however, as
being learned in the law and speaking by the Spirit, would of course know all
with accuracy. And why speak I of the captivity? Even before the captivity many
books had disappeared; the Jews having rushed headlong to the last degree of
impiety: and this is plain from the end of the fourth book of Kings, [2 Kings
22:8; 2 Chronicles 34:14] for the book of Deuteronomy could hardly be found,
having been buried somewhere in a dunghill.
And besides, there are in many places double prophecies, easy to be
apprehended by the wiser sort; from which we may find out many of the things
which are obscure.
7. What then, has "eye not seen what God prepared?" No. For who among
men saw the things which were about to be dispensed? Neither then has "the ear

heard, nor has it entered into the heart of man." How is this? For if the Prophets
spoke of it, how says he, "Ear has not heard, neither has it entered into the heart
of man?" It did not enter; for not of himself alone is he speaking, but of the
whole human race. What then? The Prophets, did not they hear? Yes, they heard;
but the prophetic ear was not the ear "of man:" for not as men heard they, but as
Prophets. Wherefore he said, [Isaiah 50:4. Septuagint] "He has added unto me
an ear to hear," meaning by "addition" that which was from the Spirit. From
whence it was plain that before hearing it had not entered into the heart of man.
For after the gift of the Spirit the heart of the Prophets was not the heart of man,
but a spiritual heart; as also he says himself, "We have the mind of Christ" [1
Corinthians 2:16] as if he would say, "Before we had the blessing of the Spirit
and learned the things which no man can speak, no one of us nor yet of the
Prophets conceived them in his mind. How should we? Since not even angels
know them. For what need is there to speak," says he, "concerning 'the rulers of
this world,' seeing that no man knew them, nor yet the powers above?"
What kind of things then are these? That by what is esteemed to be the
foolishness of preaching He shall overcome the world, and the nations shall be
brought in, and there shall be reconciliation of God with men, and so great
blessings shall come upon us! How then have we "known? Unto us," he says,
"God has revealed them by His Spirit;" not by the wisdom which is without; for
this like some dishonored handmaid has not been permitted to enter in, and stoop
down and look into [see John 20:5] the mysteries pertaining to the Lord. Do you
see how great is the difference between this wisdom and that? The things which
angels knew not, these are what she has taught us: but she that is without, has
done the contrary. Not only has she failed to instruct, but she hindered and
obstructed, and after the event sought to obscure His doings, making the Cross
of none effect. Not then simply by our receiving the knowledge, does he describe
the honor vouchsafed to us, nor by our receiving it with angels, but, what is
more, by His Spirit conveying it to us.
7. Then to show its greatness, he says, If the Spirit which knows the secret