sailing over this great sea might possibly be free from despondency and cares,
and from all other such things.
And withal take this also into account, that you did not bring him forth
immortal; and that if he had not died now, he must have endured it soon after.
But is it that you had not your fill of him? But you will of a certainty enjoy him
there. But do you long to see him here also? And what is there to hinder you?
For you are permitted even here, if you be watchful; for the hope of the things to
come is clearer than sight.
But you, if he were in some king's court wouldest not ever seek to see him,
so long as you heard of his good report: and seeing him departed to the things
that are far better, are you faint-hearted about a little time; and that, when you
have in his place one to dwell with you?
But have you no husband? Yet have you a consolation, even the Father of
the orphans, and Judge of the widows. Hear even Paul pronouncing this
widowhood blessed, and saying, "Now she that is a widow indeed and desolate,
trusts in the Lord." Because such an one will appear more approved, evincing as
she does greater patience. Mourn not therefore for that which is your crown, that
for which you demand a reward.
Since you have also restored His deposit, if you have exhibited the very
thing entrusted to you. Be not in care any more, having laid up the possession in
an inviolable treasure-house.
But if you would really learn, both what is our present being, and what our
life to come; and that the one is a spider's web and a shadow, but the things
there, all of them, immoveable and immortal; you would not after that want
other arguments. For whereas now your child is delivered from all change; if he
were here, perhaps he might continue good, perhaps not so. Do you see not how
many openly cast off their own children? How many are constrained to keep
them at home, although worse than the open outcasts?
Let us make account of all these things and practise self-command; for so
shall we at once show regard to the deceased, and enjoy much praise from men,

and receive from God the great rewards of patience, and attain unto the good
things eternal; unto which may we all attain, by the grace and love towards man
of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and might forever and ever. Amen.

## Homily 32 on Matthew

Matt. IX. 27-30.
" And when Jesus departed thence, two blind men followed Him, crying,
and saying, Thou Son of David, have mercy on us. And when He had come into
the house, the blind men came to Him: and Jesus says unto them, Believe ye that
I am able to do this? They say unto Him, Yea, Lord. Then touched He their eyes,
saying, According to your faith be it unto you. And their eyes were opened."
Wherefore can it be that He puts them off, and they crying out? Here again
teaching us utterly to repel the glory that comes from the multitude. For because
the house was near, He leads them there to heal them in private. And this is
evident from the fact, that He charged them moreover to tell no man.
But this is no light charge against the Jews; when these men, though their
eyes were struck out, receive the faith by hearing alone, but they beholding the
miracles, and having their sight to witness what was happening, do all just
contrary. And see their earnestness also, both by their cry, and by their prayer
itself. For they did not merely approach Him, but with loud cries, and alleging
nought else but "mercy."
And they called Him "Son of David," because the name was thought to be
honorable. In many passages, for instance, did the prophets likewise so call the
kings, whom they wished to honor, and to declare great.
And having brought them into the house, He puts to them a further
question. For in many cases He made a point of healing on entreaty, lest any
should suppose Him to be rushing upon these miracles through vainglory: and
not on this account alone, but to indicate also that they deserve healing, and that
no one should say, "If it was of mere mercy that He saved, all men ought to be
saved." For even His love to man has a kind of proportion; depending on the
faith of them that are healed. But not for these causes only does He require faith