commanded to be burnt, and that he saw his own son burning with him, and that
the smell of his scorched flesh rose to his nostrils; would it not be of itself death
to him? No doubt. And I will tell you how it is. If those who are not suffering,
yet seeing those things are benumbed and faint with terror, much more will they
be so affected, who are themselves sufferers. Wonder not at this. Hear a certain
wise one saying, "Are you become weak as we? Are you become like us?" [Isaiah
14:10] For human nature is disposed to sympathy, and the affections of others
move us to pity. Will then a father seeing His son in the same condemnation, or a
husband his wife, or a man his fellow-man, receive consolation, and not rather
an aggravation of his sufferings? Are not we in such case the more overcome?
But there, you say, there are no such feelings. I know there are not; but there are
others much more wretched. For there will be wailing inconsolable, all
witnessing each other's torments. Do they who are furnishing derive comfort in
their distress from the participation of others? It is no consolation surely to see a
son, a father, a wife, or grandchildren, suffering the same punishment. If one
sees friends in such a case, is it any comfort? None! None! It rather adds to the
intensity of our own sufferings! Besides, there are evils, which by reason of their
severity cannot be mitigated by being common. If two men were together thrown
into the fire, would they comfort one another? Tell me; if we have ever been
attacked by a violent fever, have we not found that all consolation has failed us?
For there are calamities, so overwhelming as to leave no room for comfort in the
soul. When a wife has lost her husband, is it a lessening of her grief to number
up the many who have suffered the like loss? Let us not therefore be supported
by any such hope, rather let us find our sole consolation in repenting of our sins,
in pursuing the good path that leads to Heaven, that we may obtain the kingdom
of Heaven, by the grace and lovingkindness of Jesus Christ our Lord, with
whom, etc.

## Homily 11 on First Timothy

1 Timothy 3:8-10
"Likewise must the Deacons be grave, not doubletongued, not given much
to wine, not greedy of filthy lucre; holding the mystery of the faith in a pure
conscience. And let these also first be proved: then let them use the office of a
Deacon, being found blameless."
"Likewise the Deacons." That is, they should have the same qualities as
Bishops. And what are these same? To be blameless, sober, hospitable, patient,
not brawlers, not covetous. And that he means this when he says "likewise," is
evident from what he says in addition, "grave, not doubletongued"; that is, not
hollow or deceitful. For nothing so debases a man as deceit, nothing is so
pernicious in the Church as insincerity. "Not given to much wine, not greedy of
filthy lucre; holding the mystery of the faith in a pure conscience." Thus he
explains what he means by "blameless." And here he requires, though in other
words, that he be "not a novice," where he says, "Let these also first be proved,"
where the conjunction "also" is added, as connecting this with what had been
said before of Bishops, for nothing intervenes between. And there is the same
reason for the "not a novice" in that case. For would it not be absurd, that when a
newly purchased slave is not entrusted with anything in a house, till he has by
long trial given proofs of his character, yet that one should enter into the Church
of God from a state of heathenism, and be at once placed in a station of
preeminence?
Ver. 11. "Even so must the women be grave, not slanderers, sober, faithful in
all things."
Some have thought that this is said of women generally, but it is not so, for
why should he introduce anything about women to interfere with his subject? He
is speaking of those who hold the rank of Deaconesses.