THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.19, C.2.

different substances?"
I answer that, As was said above (Question 18, Article 1), the
aforesaid heretics who placed one will in Christ placed one operation
in Christ. Now in order better to understand their erroneous opinion,
we must bear in mind that wherever there are several mutually
ordained agents, the inferior is moved by the superior, as in man the
body is moved by the soul and the lower powers by the reason. And
thus the actions and movements of the inferior principle are things
operated rather than operations. Now what pertains to the highest
principle is properly the operation; thus we say of man that to walk,
which belongs to the feet, and to touch, which belongs to the hand,
are things operated by the man---one of which is operated by the
soul through the feet, the other through the hands. And because it is
the same soul that operates in both cases, there is only one
indifferent operation, on the part of the thing operating, which is the
first moving principle; but difference is found on the part of what is
operated. Now, as in a mere man the body is moved by the soul, and
the sensitive by the rational appetite, so in the Lord Jesus Christ the
human nature is moved and ruled by the Divine. Hence they said that
there is one indifferent operation on the part of the Godhead
operating, but divers things operated, inasmuch as the Godhead of
Christ did one thing by Itself, as to uphold all things by the word of
His power---and another thing by His human nature, as to walk in
body. Hence the Sixth Council [Third Council of Constantinople, Act.
10] quotes the words of Severus the heretic, who said: "What things
were done and wrought by the one Christ, differ greatly; for some are
becoming to God, and some are human, as to walk bodily on the
earth is indeed human, but to give hale steps to sickly limbs, wholly
unable to walk on the ground, is becoming to God. Yet one, i.e. the
Incarnate Word, wrought one and the other---neither was this from
one nature, and that from another; nor can we justly affirm that
because there are distinct things operated there are therefore two
operating natures and forms."
But herein they were deceived, for what is moved by another has a
twofold action---one which it has from its own form---the other, which
it has inasmuch as it is moved by another; thus the operation of an
axe of itself is to cleave; but inasmuch as it is moved by the
craftsman, its operation is to make benches. Hence the operation
which belongs to a thing by its form is proper to it, nor does it
belong to the mover, except in so far as he makes use of this kind of
thing for his work: thus to heat is the proper operation of fire, but not

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.19, C.2.

of a smith, except in so far as he makes use of fire for heating iron.
But the operation which belongs to the thing, as moved by another,
is not distinct from the operation of the mover; thus to make a bench
is not the work of the axe independently of the workman. Hence,
wheresoever the mover and the moved have different forms or
operative faculties, there must the operation of the mover and the
proper operation of the moved be distinct; although the moved
shares in the operation of the mover, and the mover makes use of
the operation of the moved, and, consequently, each acts in
communion with the other.
Therefore in Christ the human nature has its proper form and power
whereby it acts; and so has the Divine. Hence the human nature has
its proper operation distinct from the Divine, and conversely.
Nevertheless, the Divine Nature makes use of the operation of the
human nature, as of the operation of its instrument; and in the same
way the human nature shares in the operation of the Divine Nature,
as an instrument shares in the operation of the principal agent. And
this is what Pope Leo says (Ep. ad Flavian. xxviii): "Both forms" (i.e.
both the Divine and the human nature in Christ) "do what is proper to
each in union with the other, i.e. the Word operates what belongs to
the Word, and the flesh carries out what belongs to flesh."
But if there were only one operation of the Godhead and manhood in
Christ, it would be necessary to say either that the human nature had
not its proper form and power (for this could not possibly be said of
the Divine), whence it would follow that in Christ there was only the
Divine operation; or it would be necessary to say that from the
Divine and human power there was made up one power. Now both of
these are impossible. For by the first the human nature in Christ is
supposed to be imperfect; and by the second a confusion of the
natures is supposed. Hence it is with reason that the Sixth Council
(Act. 18) condemned this opinion, and decreed as follows: "We
confess two natural, indivisible, unconvertible, unconfused, and
inseparable operations in the same Lord Jesus Christ our true God";
i.e. the Divine operation and the human operation.
Reply to Objection 1: Dionysius places in Christ a theandric, i.e. a
God-manlike or Divino-human, operation not by any confusion of the
operations or powers of both natures, but inasmuch as His Divine
operation employs the human, and His human operation shares in
the power of the Divine. Hence, as he says in a certain epistle (Ad
Caium iv), "what is of man He works beyond man; and this is shown