Here he shows his great love, seeing that for this purpose he sent him, and
this was the cause of his journey; and so when writing to the Thessalonians, he
said, "Wherefore when we could no longer forbear, we thought it good to be left
behind at Athens alone, and sent Timothy our brother." [1 Thessalonians 3:1-2]
And to the Ephesians he sends this very same person, and for the very same
cause, "That he might know your estate, and comfort your hearts." [Ephesians
6:21-22] See what he says, not "that you might know my estate," but "that I
might know yours." So in no place does he mention what is his own. He shows
that they were in trials too, by the expression, "comfort your hearts."
Ver. 9. "With Onesimus, the beloved and faithful brother, who is one of you.
They shall make known unto you all things that are done here."
Onesimus is the one about whom, writing to Philemon, he said, "Whom I
would fain have kept with me, that in your behalf he might minister unto me in
the bonds of the Gospel: but without your mind I would do nothing." [Philemon
1-3, 14] And he adds too the praise of their city, that they might not only not be
ashamed, but even pride themselves on him. "Who is one of you," he says. "They
shall make known unto you all things that are done here."
Ver. 10. "Aristarchus my fellow-prisoner salutes you."
Nothing can surpass this praise. This is he that was brought up from
Jerusalem with him. This man has said a greater thing than the prophets; for they
call themselves "strangers and foreigners," but this one calls himself even a
prisoner. Just like a prisoner of war he was dragged up and down, and lay at
every one's will to suffer evil of them, yea rather worse even than prisoners. For
those indeed their enemies, after taking them, treat with much attention, having a
care for them as their own property: but Paul, as though an enemy and a foe, all
men dragged up and down, beating him, scourging, insulting, and maligning.
This was a consolation to those also (to whom he wrote), when their master even
is in such circumstances.
"And Mark, the cousin of Barnabas"; even this man he has praised still
from his relationship, for Barnabas was a great man; "touching whom you

received commandments; if he come unto you, receive him." Why? Would they
not have received him? Yes, but he means, with much attention; and this shows
the man to be great. Whence they received these commandments, he does not
say.
Ver. 11. "And Jesus which is called Justus."
This man was probably a Corinthian. Next, he bestows a common praise on
all, having already spoken that of each one in particular; "who are of the
circumcision: these only are my fellow-workers unto the kingdom of God, men
that have been a comfort unto me." After having said, "fellow-prisoner"; in order
that he may not therewith depress the soul of his hearers, see how by this
expression he rouses them up. "Fellow-workers," he says, "unto the kingdom of
God." So that being partakers of the trials, they become partakers of the
kingdom. "Who have been a comfort to me." He shows them to be great persons,
seeing that to Paul they have been a comfort.
But let us see the wisdom of Paul. "Walk in wisdom," he says, "towards
them that are without, redeeming the time." [Colossians 4:5] That is, the time is
not yours, but theirs. Do not then wish to have your own way, but redeem the
time. And he said not simply, "Buy," but "redeem," making it yours after another
manner. For it were the part of excessive madness, to invent occasions of war
and enmity. For over and above the undergoing of superfluous and profitless
dangers, there is this additional harm, that the Greeks will not come over to us.
For when you are among the brethren, reason is you should be bold; but when
without, you ought not to be so.
Do you see how everywhere he speaks of those without, the Greeks?
Wherefore also when writing to Timothy, he said, "Moreover, he must have good
testimony from them that are without." [1 Timothy 3:7] And again, "For what
have I to do with judging them that are without." [1 Corinthians 5:12] "Walk in
wisdom," he says, "toward them that are without." For "without," they are, even
though they live in the same world with us, seeing they are without the kingdom,
and the paternal mansion. And he comforts them withal, by calling the others