1 Corinthians 2:14-16
9. "The natural man receives not the things of the Spirit."
It is necessary then to lay it aside first. "What then," some man will say; "is
the wisdom from without stigmatized? And yet it is the work of God." How is this
clear? Since He made it not, but it was an invention of yours. For in this place he
calls by the term "wisdom" curious research and superfluous elegance of words.
But should any one say that he means the human understanding; even in this
sense the fault is yours. For you bring a bad name upon it, who makest a bad use
of it; who to the injury and thwarting of God demandest from it things which
indeed it never had. Since then you boast therein and fightest with God, He has
exposed its weakness. For strength of body also is an excellent thing, but when
Cain used it not as he ought, God disabled him and made him tremble [Genesis
4:12-14. Septuagint. "sighing and trembling," rec. ver. "fugitive and vagabond."]
Wine also is a good thing; but because the Jews indulged in it immoderately,
God prohibited the priests entirely from the use of the fruit. And since thou also
hast abused wisdom unto the rejecting of God, and hast demanded of it more
than it can do of its own strength; in order to withdraw you from human hope, he
has showed you its weakness.
For (to proceed) he is "a natural man," who attributes every thing to
reasonings of the mind and considers not that he needs help from above; which
is a mark of sheer folly. For God bestowed it that it might learn and receive help
from Him, not that it should consider itself sufficient unto itself. For eyes are
beautiful and useful, but should they choose to see without light, their beauty
profits them nothing; nor yet their natural force, but even does harm. So if you
mark it, any soul also, if it choose to see without the Spirit, becomes even an
impediment unto itself.
"How then, before this," it will be said, "did she see all things of herself?"

Never at any time did she this of herself but she had creation for a book set
before her in open view. But when men having left off to walk in the way which
God commanded them, and by the beauty of visible objects to know the Great
Artificer, had entrusted to disputations the leading-staff of knowledge; they
became weak and sank in a sea of ungodliness; for they presently brought in that
which was the abyss of all evil, asserting that nothing was produced from things
which were not, but from uncreated matter; and from this source they became
the parents of ten thousand heresies.
Moreover, in their extreme absurdities they agreed; but in those things
wherein they seemed to dream out something wholesome, though it were only as
in shadows, they fell out with one another; that on both sides they might be
laughed to scorn. For that out of things which are not nothing is produced, nearly
all with one accord have asserted and written; and this with great zeal. In these
absurdities then they were urged on by the Devil. But in their profitable sayings,
wherein they seemed, though it were but darkly, ([ἐν αἰνίγματι],) to find some
part of what they sought, in these they waged war with one another: for instance,
that the soul is immortal; that virtue needs nothing external; and that the being
good or the contrary is not of necessity nor of fate.
Do you see the craft of the Devil? If any where he saw men speaking any
thing corrupt, he made all to be of one mind; but if any where speaking any thing
sound, he raised up others against them; so that the absurdities did not fail, being
confirmed by the general consent, and the profitable parts died away, being
variously understood. Observe how in every respect the soul is unstrung,
([ἄτονος]) and is not sufficient unto herself. And this fell out as one might
expect. For if, being such as she is, she aspire to have need of nothing and
withdraw herself from God; suppose her not fallen into that condition, and into
what extreme madness would she not have insensibly sunk? If, endowed with a
mortal body, she expected greater things from the false promise of the Devil—
[for, "You shall be," said he, "as gods" Genesis 3:4]— to what extent would she
not have cast herself away, had she received her body also, from the beginning,