who were before its day fully performing, being instructed by the law of nature.
They therefore who lived under the old dispensation had no hardship done them
by so moderate a system of laws being imposed upon them. But if they were not,
on these terms, able to get the upper hand, the charge is against their own
listlessness. Wherefore Paul gives thanks, because Christ, without any
rigorousness about these things, not only demanded no account of this moderate
amount, but even made us able to have a greater race set before us. And
therefore he says, "I thank my God through Jesus Christ." And letting the
salvation which all agreed about pass, he goes from the points he had already
made good, to another further point, in which he states that it was not our former
sins only that we were freed from, but we were also made invincible for the
future. For "there is," he says, "now no condemnation to them which are in
Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh." Yet he did not say it before he had
first recalled to mind our former condition again in the words, "So then with the
mind I myself serve the law of God, but with the flesh the law of sin."
Chap. viii. ver. 1. "There is therefore no condemnation to them which are in
Christ Jesus."
Then as the fact that many fall into sin even after baptism presented a
difficulty ([ἀ] [ντέπιπτεν]), he consequently hastened to meet it, and says not
merely "to them that are in Christ Jesus," but adds, "who walk not after the
flesh;" so showing that all afterward comes of our listlessness. For now we have
the power of walking not after the flesh, but then it was a difficult task. Then he
gives another proof of it by the sequel, in the words,
Ver. 2. "For the law of the Spirit of life has made me free."
It is the Spirit he is here calling the law of the Spirit. For as he calls sin the
law of sin, so he here calls the Spirit the law of the Spirit. And yet he named that
of Moses as such, where he says, "For we know that the Law is spiritual." What
then is the difference? A great and unbounded one. For that was spiritual, but
this is a law of the Spirit. Now what is the distinction between this and that? The
other was merely given by the Spirit, but this even furnishes those that receive it

with the Spirit in large measure. Wherefore also he called it the law of life in
contradistinction to that of sin, not that of Moses. For when he says, It freed me
from the law of sin and death, it is not the law of Moses that he is here speaking
of, since in no case does he style it the law of sin: for how could he one that he
had called "just and holy" so often, and destructive of sin too? But it is that
which wars against the law of the mind. For this grievous war did the grace of
the Spirit put a stop to, by slaying sin, and making the contest light to us and
crowning us at the outstart, and then drawing us to the struggle with abundant
help. Next as it is ever his wont to turn from the Spirit to the Son and the Father,
and to reckon all our estate to lean upon the Trinity, so does he here also. For
after saying, "Who shall deliver me from the body of this death," he pointed at
the Father as doing this by the Son, then again at the Holy Spirit along with the
Son. For the law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus has made me free, he says.
Then again, at the Father and the Son;
Ver. 3. "For what the Law could not do," he says, "in that it was weak
through the flesh, God sending His own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and
for sin, condemned sin in the flesh."
Again, he seems indeed to be disparaging the Law. But if any one attends
strictly, he even highly praises it, by showing that it harmonizes with Christ, and
gives preference to the same things. For he does not speak of the badness of the
Law, but of "what it could not do;" and so again, "in that it was weak," not, "in
that it was mischievous, or designing." And even weakness he does not ascribe
to it, but to the flesh, as he says, "in that it was weak through the flesh," using
the word "flesh" here again not for the essence and subsistency itself, but giving
its name to the more carnal sort of mind. In which way he acquits both the body
and the Law of any accusation. Yet not in this way only, but by what comes next
also. For supposing the Law to be of the contrary part, how was it Christ came to
its assistance, and fulfilled its requisitions, and lent it a helping hand by
condemning sin in the flesh? For this was what was lacking, since in the soul the
Lord had condemned it long ago. What then? Is it the greater thing that the Law