Amen.

Homily 51 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts XXIV. 22, 23
"And when Felix heard these things, having more perfect knowledge of that
way, he deferred them and said, When Lysias the tribune shall come down, I will
know the uttermost of your matter. And he commanded a centurion to keep Paul,
and to let him have liberty, and that he should forbid none of his acquaintance to
minister or come unto him."
See how much close investigation is made by the many in a long course of
time, that it should not be said that the trial was hurried over. For, as the orator
had made mention of Lysias, that he took "him away with violence, Felix," he
says, "deferred them. Having knowledge of that way:" that is, he put them off on
purpose: not because he wanted to learn, but as wishing to get rid of the Jews.
On their account, he did not like to let him go: to punish him was not possible;
that would have been (too) barefaced. "And to let him have liberty, and to forbid
none of his acquaintance to minister to him." So entirely did he too acquit him of
the charges. Howbeit, to gratify them, he detained him, and besides, expecting to
receive money, he called for Paul. "And after certain days, when Felix came with
his wife Drusilla, which was a Jewess, he sent for Paul, and heard him
concerning the faith in Christ. And as he reasoned of righteousness, temperance
(i.e. self-control or chastity), and judgment to come, Felix trembled, and
answered, Go your way for this time; when I have a convenient season, I will
call for you. He hoped also that money should have been given him of Paul, that
he might loose him; wherefore he sent for him the oftener, and communed with
him. But after two years Porcius Festus came into Felix's room: and Felix,
willing to show the Jews a pleasure, left Paul bound." [Acts 24:24-27] See how
close to the truth are the things written. But he sent for him frequently, not that
he admired him, nor that he praised the things spoken, nor that he wished to

believe, but why? "Expecting," it says, "that money should have been given
him." Observe how he does not hide here the mind of the judge. "Wherefore he
sent for him," etc. And yet if he had condemned him, he would not have done
this, nor have wished to hear a man, condemned and of evil character. And
observe Paul, how, though reasoning with a ruler, he says nothing of the sort that
was likely to amuse and entertain, but ("he reasoned," it says,) "of righteousness,
and of the coming judgment," and of the resurrection. And such was the force of
his words, that they even terrified the governor. This man is succeeded in his
office by another, and he leaves Paul a prisoner: and yet he ought not to have
done this; he ought to have put an end to the business: but he leaves him, by way
of gratifying them. They however were so urgent, that they again besought the
judge. Yet against none of the Apostles had they set themselves thus
pertinaciously; there, when they had attacked, anon they desisted. So
providentially is he removed from Jerusalem, having to do with such wild beasts.
And they nevertheless request that he might be brought again there to be tried.
"Now when Festus had come into the province, after three days he ascended
from Cæsarea to Jerusalem. Then the high priest and the chief of the Jews
informed him against Paul, and besought him, and desired favor against him,
that he would send for him to Jerusalem, laying wait in the way to kill him."
[Acts 25:1-3] Here now God's providence interposed, not permitting the
governor to do this: for it was natural that he having just come to the government
would wish to gratify them: but God suffered him not. "But Festus answered,
that Paul should be kept at Cæsarea, and that he himself would depart shortly
there. Let them therefore, said he, which among you are able, go down with me,
and accuse this man, if there be any wickedness in him. And when he had tarried
among them more than ten days, he went down unto Cæsarea; and the next day
sitting on the judgment seat commanded Paul to be brought." [Acts 25:4-6] But
after they came down, they immediately made their accusations shamelessly and
with more vehemence: and not having been able to convict him on grounds
relating to the Law, they again according to their custom stirred the question