able to see the Son of God as He is in the form of God equal to the Father,
but yet it is necessary that both the just and the wicked should see the
Judge of the quick and dead, when they will be judged in His presence;
"Marvel not at this," He says, "for the hour is coming, in the which all that
are in the graves shall hear His voice, and shall come forth; they that have
done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil,
unto the resurrection of damnation." For this purpose, then, it was
necessary that He should therefore receive that power, because He is the
Son of man, in order that all in rising again might see Him in the form in
which He can be seen by all, but by some to damnation, by others to life
eternal. And what is life eternal, unless that sight which is not granted to
the ungodly? "That they might know Thee," He says, "the One true God,
and Jesus Christ, whom Thou hast sent." And how are they to know
Jesus Christ Himself also, unless as the One true God, who will show
Himself to them; not as He will show Himself, in the form of the Son of
man, to those also that shall be punished?
31. He is "good," according to that sight, according to which God appears
to the pure in heart; for "truly God is good unto Israel, even to such as are
of a clean heart." But when the wicked shall see the Judge, He will not
seem good to them; because they will not rejoice in their heart to see
Him, but all "kindreds of the earth shall then wail because of Him,"
namely, as being reckoned in the number of all the wicked and
unbelievers. On this account also He replied to him, who had called Him
Good Master, when seeking advice of Him how he might attain eternal
life, "Why askest thou me about good? there is none good but One, that
is, God." And yet the Lord Himself, in another place, calls man good: "A
good man," He says, "out of the good treasure of his heart, bringeth forth
good things: and an evil man, out of the evil treasure of his heart,
bringeth forth evil things." But because that man was seeking eternal life,
and eternal life consists in that contemplation in which God is seen, not
for punishment, but for everlasting joy; and because he did not
understand with whom he was speaking, and thought Him to be only the
Son of man:9 Why, He says, askest thou me about good? that is, with
respect to that form which thou seest, why askest thou about good, and
callest me, according to what thou seest, Good Master? This is the form of
the Son of man, the form which has been taken, the form that will appear

in judgment, not only to the righteous, but also to the ungodly; and the
sight of this form will not be for good to those who are wicked. But there
is a sight of that form of mine, in which when I was, I thought it not
robbery to be equal with God: but in order to take this form I emptied
myself. That one God, therefore, the Father and the Son and the Holy
Spirit, who will not appear, except for joy which cannot be taken away
from the just; for which future joy he sighs, who says, "One thing have I
desired of the Lord, that will I seek after; that I may dwell in the house of
the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord:" that
one God, therefore, Himself, I say, is alone good, for this reason, that no
one sees Him for sorrow and wailing, but only for salvation and true joy.
If you understand me after this latter form, then I am good; but if
according to that former only, then why askest thou me about good? If
thou art among those who "shall look upon Him whom they have
pierced," that very sight itself will be evil to them, because it will be penal.
That after this meaning, then, the Lord said, "Why askest thou me about
good? there is none good but One, that is, God," is probable upon those
proofs which I have alleged, because that sight of God, whereby we shall
contemplate the substance of God unchangeable and invisible to human
eyes (which is promised to the saints alone; which the Apostle Paul
speaks of, as "face to face;" and of which the Apostle John says, "We
shall be like Him, for we shall see Him as He is;" and of which it is said,
"One thing have I desired of the Lord, that I may behold the beauty of the
Lord," and of which the Lord Himself says, "I will both love him, and will
manifest myself to him;" and on account of which alone we cleanse our
hearts by faith, that we may be those "pure in heart who are blessed for
they shall see God:" and whatever else is spoken of that sight: which
whosoever turns the eye of love to seek it, may find most copiously
scattered through all the Scriptures),—that sight alone, I say, is our chief
good, for the attaining of which we are directed to do whatever we do
aright. But that sight of the Son of man which is foretold, when all nations
shall be gathered before Him, and shall say to Him, "Lord, when saw we
Thee an hungered, or thirsty, etc.?" will neither be a good to the ungodly,
who shall be sent into everlasting fire, nor the chief good to the righteous.
For He still goes on to call these to the kingdom which has been prepared
for them from the foundation of the world. For, as He will say to those,
"Depart into everlasting fire;" so to these, "Come, ye blessed of my