custom, demons in arms, the devil in battle array and stirring up all, kings,
rulers, peoples, nations, cities, barbarians, Greeks, philosophers, orators,
sophists, historians, laws, tribunals, various kinds of punishments, deaths
innumerable and of all sorts. But nevertheless all these were confuted and gave
way when the fisherman spoke; just like the light dust which cannot bear the
rush of violent winds. Now what I say is, let us learn thus to dispute with the
Greeks; that we be not like beasts and cattle, but prepared concerning "the hope
which is in us." [1 St. Peter 3:15] And let us pause for a while to work out this
topic, no unimportant one; and let us say to them, How did the weak overcome
the strong; the twelve, the world? Not by using the same armor, but in nakedness
contending with men in arms.
For say, if twelve men, unskilled in matters of war, were to leap into an
immense and armed host of soldiers, themselves not only unarmed but of weak
frame also; and to receive no harm from them, nor yet be wounded, though
assailed with ten thousand weapons; if while the darts were striking them, with
bare naked body they overthrew all their foes using no weapons but striking with
the hand, and in conclusion killed some, and others took captive and led away,
themselves receiving not so much as a wound; would anyone have ever said that
the thing was of man? And yet the trophy of the Apostles is much more
wonderful than that. For a naked man's escaping a wound is not so wonderful by
far as that the ordinary and unlettered person— that a fisherman— should
overcome such a degree of talent: ([δεινότητος]) and neither for fewness, nor for
poverty, nor for dangers, nor for prepossession of habit, nor for so great austerity
of the precepts enjoined, nor for the daily deaths, nor for the multitude of those
who were deceived, nor for the great reputation of the deceivers be turned from
his purpose.
9. Let this, I say, be our way of overpowering them, and of conducting our
warfare against them; and let us astound them by our way of life rather than by
words. For this is the main battle, this is the unanswerable argument, the
argument from conduct. For though we give ten thousand precepts of philosophy

in words, if we do not exhibit a life better than theirs, the gain is nothing. For it
is not what is said that draws their attention, but their enquiry is, what we do;
and they say, "First obey your own words, and then admonish others. But if
while you say, infinite are the blessings in the world to come, thou seem yourself
nailed down to this world, just as if no such things existed, your works to me are
more credible than your words. For when I see you seizing other men's goods,
weeping immoderately over the departed, doing ill in many other things, how
shall I believe you that there is a resurrection?" And what if men utter not this in
words? They think it and turn it often in their minds. And this is what stays the
unbelievers from becoming Christians.
Let us win them therefore by our life. Many, even among the untaught, have
in that way astounded the minds of philosophers, as having exhibited in
themselves also that philosophy which lies in deeds, and uttered a voice clearer
than a trumpet by their mode of life and self-denial. For this is stronger than the
tongue. But when I say, "one ought not to bear malice," and then do all manner
of evils to the Greek, how shall I be able by words to win him, while by my
deeds I am frightening him away? Let us catch them then by our mode of life;
and by these souls let us build up the Church, and of these let us amass our
wealth. There is nothing to weigh against a soul, not even the whole world. So
that although thou give countless treasure unto the poor, you will do no such
work as he who converts one soul. [Jeremiah 15:19] "For he that takes forth the
precious from the vile shall be as my mouth:" so He speaks. A great good it is, I
grant, to have pity on the poor; but it is nothing equal to the withdrawing them
from error. For he that does this resembles Paul and Peter: we being permitted to
take up their Gospel, not with perils such as theirs—with endurance of famines
and pestilences, and all other evils, (for the present is a season of peace;)— but
so as to display that diligence which comes of zeal. For even while we sit at
home we may practice this kind of fishery. Who has a friend or relation or
inmate of his house, these things let him say, these do; and he shall be like Peter
and Paul. And why do I say Peter and Paul? He shall be the mouth of Christ. For