FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.88, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether mortal and venial sin differ generically?

Objection 1: It would seem that venial and mortal sin do not differ
generically, so that some sins be generically mortal, and some
generically venial. Because human acts are considered to be
generically good or evil according to their matter or object, as stated
above (Question 18, Article 2). Now either mortal or venial sin may be
committed in regard to any object or matter: since man can love any
mutable good, either less than God, which may be a venial sin, or
more than God, which is a mortal sin. Therefore venial and mortal sin
do not differ generically.
Objection 2: Further, as stated above (Article 1; Question 72, Article
5; Question 87, Article 3), a sin is called mortal when it is irreparable,
venial when it can be repaired. Now irreparability belongs to sin
committed out of malice, which, according to some, is irremissible:
whereas reparability belongs to sins committed through weakness
or ignorance, which are remissible. Therefore mortal and venial sin
differ as sin committed through malice differs from sin committed
through weakness or ignorance. But, in this respect, sins differ not
in genus but in cause, as stated above (Question 77, Article 8, ad 1).
Therefore venial and mortal sin do not differ generically.
Objection 3: Further, it was stated above (Question 74, Article 3, ad
3; Article 10) that sudden movements both of the sensuality and of
the reason are venial sins. But sudden movements occur in every
kind of sin. Therefore no sins are generically venial.
On the contrary, Augustine, in a sermon on Purgatory (De Sanctis,
serm. xli), enumerates certain generic venial sins, and certain
generic mortal sins.
I answer that, Venial sin is so called from "venia" [pardon].
Consequently a sin may be called venial, first of all, because it has
been pardoned: thus Ambrose says that "penance makes every sin
venial": and this is called venial "from the result." Secondly, a sin is
called venial because it does not contain anything either partially or
totally, to prevent its being pardoned: partially, as when a sin
contains something diminishing its guilt, e.g. a sin committed
through weakness or ignorance: and this is called venial "from the
cause": totally, through not destroying the order to the last end,

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.88, C.3.

wherefore it deserves temporal, but not everlasting punishment. It is
of this venial sin that we wish to speak now.
For as regards the first two, it is evident that they have no
determinate genus: whereas venial sin, taken in the third sense, can
have a determinate genus, so that one sin may be venial generically,
and another generically mortal, according as the genus or species of
an act is determined by its object. For, when the will is directed to a
thing that is in itself contrary to charity, whereby man is directed to
his last end, the sin is mortal by reason of its object. Consequently it
is a mortal sin generically, whether it be contrary to the love of God,
e.g. blasphemy, perjury, and the like, or against the love of one's
neighbor, e.g. murder, adultery, and such like: wherefore such sins
are mortal by reason of their genus. Sometimes, however, the
sinner's will is directed to a thing containing a certain
inordinateness, but which is not contrary to the love of God and
one's neighbor, e.g. an idle word, excessive laughter, and so forth:
and such sins are venial by reason of their genus.
Nevertheless, since moral acts derive their character of goodness
and malice, not only from their objects, but also from some
disposition of the agent, as stated above (Question 18, Articles 4,6),
it happens sometimes that a sin which is venial generically by
reason of its object, becomes mortal on the part of the agent, either
because he fixes his last end therein, or because he directs it to
something that is a mortal sin in its own genus; for example, if a man
direct an idle word to the commission of adultery. In like manner it
may happen, on the part of the agent, that a sin generically mortal
because venial, by reason of the act being imperfect, i.e. not
deliberated by reason, which is the proper principle of an evil act, as
we have said above in reference to sudden movements of unbelief.
Reply to Objection 1: The very fact that anyone chooses something
that is contrary to divine charity, proves that he prefers it to the love
of God, and consequently, that he loves it more than he loves God.
Hence it belongs to the genus of some sins, which are of themselves
contrary to charity, that something is loved more than God; so that
they are mortal by reason of their genus.
Reply to Objection 2: This argument considers those sins which are
venial from their cause.