2. Such a true and substantial renovation of its own law, required by the decree Perfectae Caritatis of Vatican Council II, and regulated by the moto proprio Ecclesiae Sanctae of Paul VI, the Society, for its part, had actually completed by means of General Congregations 31 (1965-66) and 32 (1974-75), which thoroughly adapted the Society's life and apostolate to the new needs of the times, while at the same time retaining a genuine fidelity to its proper character and original mission. None the less, the Society had not yet been able to give a formal, normative structure to the many decrees embodying this renovation and accommodation. And thus the pressing need to undertake such a task without delay.

3. After lengthy deliberation on the part of the Superior General with his consultors about the way for the Society to accomplish this revision most effectively, the following conclusions emerged:

a. First of all, it seemed good to make every effort to see that the Constitutions of St. Ignatius, an explication of the Formula of the Institute of the Society of Jesus as approved by the supreme pontiffs Paul III (1540) and Julius III (1550) and a privileged expression of the foundational spiritual and apostolic experience of the first companions, should occupy a central and real place in our law and, through that law, should serve to inspire and govern our entire present-day lives. Thus they had to be purged of elements that were obsolete or had been formally abrogated; and it had to be determined which points in them had in the course of time been modified or authentically interpreted. This was to be done, however, with the help of notes that a general congregation authoritatively appended to the original Ignatian text, without making any changes in the latter. Thus it was hoped that the Constitutions could recover their basic and fundamental inspirational and normative force for the life of the Society, without turning out to be a document that was purely spiritual and doctrinal, tied to ages past, and consequently out of tune with the times.

b. Those things that in the course of time had been decreed by subsequent general congregations and that seemed appropriate to retain in a modern renewal of our life and apostolate as a genuine and real expression of the spirit contained in the Constitutions should, once all unnecessary or obsolete elements had been removed, be reformulated and arranged according to the order of the Constitutions themselves, and should bear a permanent relationship to those Constitutions, as their "Complementary Norms," approved by a general congregation and alterable only by such a congregation.

c. Finally, so that the living internal unity that exists between these two parts of our law might shine forth more clearly and their ongoing spiritual identity might be more obvious, the two were, in future, to be published in one and the same volume. The hope, surely, was that the Society could have available an instrument that would be at once legal and spiritual in character, authentically Ignatian, one that could help the Society "to proceed ever better in the path of the divine service, according to the nature of our Institute."