spending your money without fruit; and they again will dwell with you in
boldness and due freedom, and your house, instead of a theatre, will become to
you a church, and the devil will be put to flight, and Christ will enter, and the
choir of the angels. For where Christ is, there are the angels too, and where
Christ and the angels are, there is Heaven, there is a light more cheerful than this
of the sun.
And if you would reap yet another consolation through their means,
command them, when you are at leisure, to take their books and read the divine
law. They will have more pleasure in so ministering to you, than in the other
way. For these things add respect both to you and to them, but those bring
disgrace upon all together; upon you as an insolent person and a drunkard, upon
them as wretched and gluttonous. For if you feed in order to insult them, it is
worse than if you had put them to death; but if for their good and profit, it is
more useful again than if you had brought them back from their way to
execution. And now indeed thou dost disgrace them more than your servants,
and your servants enjoy more liberty of speech, and freedom of conscience, than
they do; but then you will make them equal to the angels.
Set free therefore both them and your own self, and take away the name of
parasite, and call them companions of your meals; cast away the appellation of
flatterers, and bestow on them that of friends. With this intent indeed did God
make our friendships, not for evil to the beloved and loving, but for their good
and profit.
But these friendships are more grievous than any enmity. For by our
enemies, if we will, we are even profited; but by these we must needs be harmed,
no question of it. Keep not then friends to teach you harm; keep not friends who
are enamored rather of your table than of your friendship. For all such persons, if
you retrench your good living, retrench their friendship too; but they that
associate with you for virtue's sake, remain continually, enduring every change.
And besides, the race of the parasites does often take revenge upon you,
and bring upon you an ill fame. Hence at least I know many respectable persons

to have got bad characters, and some have been evil reported of for sorceries,
some for adulteries and corrupting of youths. For whereas they have no work to
do, but spend their own life unprofitably; their ministry is suspected by the
multitude as being the same with that of corrupt youths.
Therefore, delivering ourselves both from evil report, and above all from
the hell that is to come, and doing the things that are well-pleasing to God, let us
put an end to this devilish custom, that "both eating and drinking we may do all
things to the glory of God," [1 Corinthians 10:31] and enjoy the glory that comes
from Him; unto which may we all attain, by the grace and love towards man of
our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and might, now and ever, and world
without end. Amen.