THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.17, C.2.

On the contrary, Boethius says (De Duab. Nat.): "Whatever is,
inasmuch as it is, is one." But we confess that Christ is. Therefore
Christ is one.
I answer that, Nature, considered in itself, as it is used in the
abstract, cannot truly be predicated of the suppositum or person,
except in God, in Whom "what it is" and "whereby it is" do not differ,
as stated in the FP, Question 29, Article 4, ad 1. But in Christ, since
there are two natures, viz. the Divine and the human, one of them,
viz. the Divine, may be predicated of Him both in the abstract and in
the concrete, for we say that the Son of God, Who is signified by the
word Christ, is the Divine Nature and is God. But the human nature
cannot be predicated of Christ in the abstract, but only in the
concrete, i.e. as it is signified by the suppositum. For we cannot truly
say that "Christ is human nature," because human nature is not
naturally predicated of its suppositum. But we say that Christ is a
man, even as Christ is God. Now God signifies one having the
Godhead, and man signifies one having manhood. Yet one having
manhood is differently signified by the word "man" and by the word
"Jesus" or "Peter." For this word "man" implies one having
manhood indistinctly, even as the word "God" implies indistinctly
one having the Godhead; but the word "Peter" or "Jesus" implies
one having manhood distinctly, i.e. with its determinate individual
properties, as "Son of God" implies one having the Godhead under a
determinate personal property. Now the dual number is placed in
Christ with regard to the natures. Hence, if both the natures were
predicated in the abstract of Christ, it would follow that Christ is two.
But because the two natures are not predicated of Christ, except as
they are signified in the suppositum, it must be by reason of the
suppositum that "one" or "two" be predicated of Christ.
Now some placed two supposita in Christ, and one Person, which, in
their opinion, would seem to be the suppositum completed with its
final completion. Hence, since they placed two supposita in Christ,
they said that God is two, in the neuter. But because they asserted
one Person, they said that Christ is one, in the masculine, for the
neuter gender signifies something unformed and imperfect, whereas
the masculine signifies something formed and perfect. on the other
hand, the Nestorians, who asserted two Persons in Christ, said that
Christ is two not only in the neuter, but also in the masculine. But
since we maintain one person and one suppositum in Christ, as is
clear from Question 2, Articles 2,3, it follows that we say that Christ
is one not merely in the masculine, but also in the neuter.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.17, C.2.

Reply to Objection 1: This saying of Augustine is not to be taken as
if "both" referred to the predicate, so as to mean that Christ is both;
but it refers to the subject. And thus "both" does not stand for two
supposita, but for two words signifying two natures in the concrete.
For I can say that "both, viz. God and Man, are God" on account of
God Who assumes; and "both, viz. God and Man," are Man on
account of the man assumed.
Reply to Objection 2: When it is said that "Christ is one thing and
another," this saying is to be explained in this sense---"having this
nature and another." And it is in this way that Augustine explains it
(Contra Felic. xi), where, after saying, "In the mediator of God and
man, the Son of God is one thing, and the Son of Man another," he
adds: "I say another thing by reason of the difference of substance,
and not another thing by reason of the unity of person." Hence
Gregory Nazianzen says (Ep. ad Chelid. ci): "If we must speak briefly,
that of which the Saviour is, is one thing and another; thus the
invisible is not the same as the visible; and what is without time is
not the same as what is in time. Yet they are not one and another: far
from it; for both these are one."
Reply to Objection 3: This is false, "Christ is only man"; because it
does not exclude another suppositum, but another nature, since
terms placed in the predicate are taken formally. But if anything is
added whereby it is drawn to the suppositum, it would be a true
proposition---for instance, "Christ is only that which is man."
Nevertheless, it would not follow that He is "any other thing than
man," because "another thing," inasmuch as it refers to a diversity of
substance, properly refers to the suppositum. even as all relative
things bearing a personal relation. But it does follow: "Therefore He
has another nature."
Reply to Objection 4: When it is said, "Christ is something that the
Father is"; "something" signifies the Divine Nature, which is
predicated even in the abstract of the Father and Son. But when it is
said: "Christ is something that is not the Father"; "something"
signifies, not the human nature as it is in the abstract, but as it is in
the concrete; not, indeed, in a distinct, but in an indistinct
suppositum, i.e. inasmuch as it underlies the nature and not the
individuating properties. Hence it does not follow that Christ is one
thing and another, or that He is two, since the suppositum of the
human nature in Christ, which is the Person of the Son of God, does