be apprehended as hot, or as having quantity, before it is actual. But
matter has actual existence by the substantial form, which makes it
to exist absolutely, as we have said above (Article 4). Wherefore it is
impossible for any accidental dispositions to pre-exist in matter
before the substantial form, and consequently before the soul.
Reply to Objection 1: As appears from what has been already said
(Article 4), the more perfect form virtually contains whatever belongs
to the inferior forms; therefore while remaining one and the same, it
perfects matter according to the various degrees of perfection. For
the same essential form makes man an actual being, a body, a living
being, an animal, and a man. Now it is clear that to every "genus"
follow its own proper accidents. Therefore as matter is apprehended
as perfected in its existence, before it is understood as corporeal,
and so on; so those accidents which belong to existence are
understood to exist before corporeity; and thus dispositions are
understood in matter before the form, not as regards all its effects,
but as regards the subsequent effect.
Reply to Objection 2: Dimensions of quantity are accidents
consequent to the corporeity which belongs to the whole matter.
Wherefore matter, once understood as corporeal and measurable,
can be understood as distinct in its various parts, and as receptive
of different forms according to the further degrees of perfection. For
although it is essentially the same form which gives matter the
various degrees of perfection, as we have said (ad 1), yet it is
considered as different when brought under the observation of
reason.
Reply to Objection 3: A spiritual substance which is united to a body
as its motor only, is united thereto by power or virtue. But the
intellectual soul is united by its very being to the body as a form; and
yet it guides and moves the body by its power and virtue.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether the soul is united to the animal body by

means of a body?
Objection 1: It seems that the soul is united to the animal body by
means of a body. For Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. vii, 19), that "the
soul administers the body by light," that is, by fire, "and by air, which
is most akin to a spirit." But fire and air are bodies. Therefore the
soul is united to the human body by means of a body.
Objection 2: Further, a link between two things seems to be that
thing the removal of which involves the cessation of their union. But
when breathing ceases, the soul is separated from the body.
Therefore the breath, which is a subtle body, is the means of union
between soul and body.
Objection 3: Further, things which are very distant from one another,
are not united except by something between them. But the
intellectual soul is very distant from the body, both because it is
incorporeal, and because it is incorruptible. Therefore it seems to be
united to the body by means of an incorruptible body, and such
would be some heavenly light, which would harmonize the elements,
and unite them together.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (De Anima ii, 1): "We need not
ask if the soul and body are one, as neither do we ask if wax and its
shape are one." But the shape is united to the wax without a body
intervening. Therefore also the soul is thus united to the body.
I answer that, If the soul, according to the Platonists, were united to
the body merely as a motor, it would be right to say that some other
bodies must intervene between the soul and body of man, or any
animal whatever; for a motor naturally moves what is distant from it
by means of something nearer.
If, however, the soul is united to the body as its form, as we have
said (Article 1), it is impossible for it to be united by means of
another body. The reason of this is that a thing is one, according as
it is a being. Now the form, through itself, makes a thing to be actual
since it is itself essentially an act; nor does it give existence by
means of something else. Wherefore the unity of a thing composed
of matter and form, is by virtue of the form itself, which by reason of