"And to the general assembly and church of the first-born which are written
in Heaven, and to God the Judge of all." They did not draw near, but stood afar
off, even Moses: but "you have come near."
Here he makes them fear, by saying, "And to God the Judge of all"; not of
the Jews alone, and the faithful, but even of the whole world.
"And to the spirits of just men made perfect." He means the souls of those
who are approved.
"And to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant: and to the blood of
sprinkling," that is, of purification, "which speaks better things than that of
Abel." And if the blood speaks, much more does He who, having been slain,
lives. But what does it speak? "The Spirit also" (he says) "speaks with groanings
which cannot be uttered." [Romans 8:26] How does He speak? Whenever He
falls into a sincere mind, He raises it up and makes it speak.
5. "See that you refuse not Him that speaks"; that is, that you reject [Him]
not. "For if they escaped not who refused Him that spoke on earth." Whom does
he mean? Moses, I suppose. But what he says is this: if they, having "refused
Him" when He gave laws "on earth, did not escape," how shall we refuse Him,
when He gives laws from Heaven? He declares here not that He is another; far
from it. He does not set forth One and Another, but He appears terrible, when
uttering His Voice "from Heaven." It is He Himself then, both the one and the
other: but the One is terrible. For he expresses not a difference of Persons but of
the gift. Whence does this appear? "For if they escaped not," he says, "who
refused Him that spoke on earth, much more shall not we escape, if we turn away
from Him that speaks from heaven." What then? Is this one different from the
other? How then does he say, "whose voice then shook the earth"? For it was the
"voice" of Him who "then" gave the Law, which "shook the earth. But now has
He promised, saying, Yet once more I shake not the earth only, but also heaven.
And this word Yet once more, signifies the removing of those things which are
shaken, as of things that are made." All things therefore will be taken away, and
will be compacted anew for the better. For this is what he suggests here. Why

then do you grieve when you suffer in a world that abides not; when you are
afflicted in a world which will very shortly have passed away? If our rest were
[to be] in the latter period of the world, then one ought to be afflicted in looking
to the end.
"That" (he says) "those which cannot be shaken may remain." But of what
sort are "those things which cannot be shaken"? The things to come.
6. Let us then do all for this, that we may attain that [rest], that we may
enjoy those good things. Yea, I pray and beseech you, let us be earnest for this.
No one builds in a city which is going to fall down. Tell me, I pray you, if any
one said that after a year, this city would fall, but such a city not at all, would
you have built in that which was about to fall? So I also now say this, Let us not
build in this world; it will fall after a little, and all will be destroyed. But why do
I say, It will fall? Before its fall we shall be destroyed, and suffer what is fearful;
we shall be removed from them.
Why build we upon the sand? Let us build upon the rock: for whatsoever
may happen, that building remains impregnable, nothing will be able to destroy
it. With good reason. For to all such attacks that region is inaccessible, just as
this is accessible. For earthquakes, and fires, and inroad of enemies, take it away
from us even while we are alive: and oftentimes destroy us with it.
And even in case it remains, disease speedily removes us, or if we stay,
suffers us not to enjoy it fairly. For what pleasure [is there], where there are
sicknesses, and false accusations, and envy, and intrigues? Or should there be
none of these things, yet oftentimes if we have no children, we are disquieted,
we are impatient, not having any to whom we may leave houses and all other
things; and thenceforward we pine away as laboring for others. Yea oftentimes
too the inheritance passes away to our enemies, not only after we are gone, but
even while we live. What is more miserable then than to toil for enemies, and
ourselves to be gathering sins together in order that they may have rest? And
many are the instances of this that are seen in our cities. And yet [I say no more]
lest I should grieve those who have been despoiled. For I could have mentioned