FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.93, C.4.

plan of government in the Chief Governor, all the plans of
government in the inferior governors must be derived from the
eternal law. But these plans of inferior governors are all other laws
besides the eternal law. Therefore all laws, in so far as they partake
of right reason, are derived from the eternal law. Hence Augustine
says (De Lib. Arb. i, 6) that "in temporal law there is nothing just and
lawful, but what man has drawn from the eternal law."
Reply to Objection 1: The "fomes" has the nature of law in man, in so
far as it is a punishment resulting from Divine justice; and in this
respect it is evident that it is derived from the eternal law. But in so
far as it denotes a proneness to sin, it is contrary to the Divine law,
and has not the nature of law, as stated above (Question 91, Article
6).
Reply to Objection 2: Human law has the nature of law in so far as it
partakes of right reason; and it is clear that, in this respect, it is
derived from the eternal law. But in so far as it deviates from reason,
it is called an unjust law, and has the nature, not of law but of
violence. Nevertheless even an unjust law, in so far as it retains
some appearance of law, though being framed by one who is in
power, is derived from the eternal law; since all power is from the
Lord God, according to Rm. 13:1.
Reply to Objection 3: Human law is said to permit certain things, not
as approving them, but as being unable to direct them. And many
things are directed by the Divine law, which human law is unable to
direct, because more things are subject to a higher than to a lower
cause. Hence the very fact that human law does not meddle with
matters it cannot direct, comes under the ordination of the eternal
law. It would be different, were human law to sanction what the
eternal law condemns. Consequently it does not follow that human
law is not derived from the eternal law, but that it is not on a perfect
equality with it.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.93, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether necessary and eternal things are subject

to the eternal law?
Objection 1: It would seem that necessary and eternal things are
subject to the eternal law. For whatever is reasonable is subject to
reason. But the Divine will is reasonable, for it is just. Therefore it is
subject to (the Divine) reason. But the eternal law is the Divine
reason. Therefore God's will is subject to the eternal law. But God's
will is eternal. Therefore eternal and necessary things are subject to
the eternal law.
Objection 2: Further, whatever is subject to the King, is subject to
the King's law. Now the Son, according to 1 Cor. 15:28,24, "shall be
subject . . . to God and the Father . . . when He shall have delivered
up the Kingdom to Him." Therefore the Son, Who is eternal, is
subject to the eternal law.
Objection 3: Further, the eternal law is Divine providence as a type.
But many necessary things are subject to Divine providence: for
instance, the stability of incorporeal substances and of the heavenly
bodies. Therefore even necessary things are subject to the eternal
law.
On the contrary, Things that are necessary cannot be otherwise, and
consequently need no restraining. But laws are imposed on men, in
order to restrain them from evil, as explained above (Question 92,
Article 2). Therefore necessary things are not subject to the eternal
law.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), the eternal law is the type
of the Divine government. Consequently whatever is subject to the
Divine government, is subject to the eternal law: while if anything is
not subject to the Divine government, neither is it subject to the
eternal law. The application of this distinction may be gathered by
looking around us. For those things are subject to human
government, which can be done by man; but what pertains to the
nature of man is not subject to human government; for instance, that
he should have a soul, hands, or feet. Accordingly all that is in
things created by God, whether it be contingent or necessary, is
subject to the eternal law: while things pertaining to the Divine
Nature or Essence are not subject to the eternal law, but are the