2. And what does he say? "For this Melchisedec, King of Salem, Priest of
the Most High God." And, what is especially noteworthy, he shows the
difference to be great by the Type itself. For as I said, he continually confirms
the truth from the Type, from things past, on account of the weakness of the
hearers. "For" (he says) "this Melchisedec, King of Salem, Priest of the Most
High God, who met Abraham returning from the slaughter of the Kings, and
blessed him, to whom also Abraham gave a tenth part of all." Having concisely
set down the whole narrative, he looked at it mystically.
And first from the name. "First" (he says) "being by interpretation King of
righteousness": for Sedec means "righteousness"; and Melchi, "King":
Melchisedec, "King of righteousness." Do you see his exactness even in the
names? But who is "King of righteousness," save our Lord Jesus Christ? "King
of righteousness. And after that also King of Salem," from his city, "that is, King
of Peace," which again is [characteristic] of Christ. For He has made us
righteous, and has "made peace" for "things in Heaven and things on earth."
[Colossians 1:20] What man is "King of Righteousness and of Peace"? None,
save only our Lord Jesus Christ.
3. He then adds another distinction, "Without father, without mother, without
genealogy, having neither beginning of days nor end of life, but made like the
Son of God, abides a Priest continually." Since then there lay in his way [as an
objection] the [words] "You are a Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedec,"
whereas he [Melchisedec] was dead, and was not "Priest for ever," see how he
explained it mystically.
'And who can say this concerning a man?' I do not assert this in fact (he
says); the meaning is, we do not know when [or] what father he had, nor what
mother, nor when he received his beginning, nor when he died. And what of this
(one says)? For does it follow, because we do not know it, that he did not die,
[or] had no parents? You say well: he both died and had parents. How then [was
he] "without father, without mother"? How "having neither beginning of days
nor end of life"? How? [Why] from its not being expressed. And what of this?

That as this man is so, from his genealogy not being given, so is Christ from the
very nature of the reality.
See the "without beginning"; see the "without end." As in case of this man,
we know not either "beginning of days," or "end of life," because they have not
been written; so we know [them] not in the case of Jesus, not because they have
not been written, but because they do not exist. For that indeed is a type, and
therefore [we say] 'because it is not written,' but this is the reality, and therefore
[we say] 'because it does not exist.' For as in regard to the names also (for there
"King of Righteousness" and "of Peace" are appellations, but here the reality) so
these too are appellations in that case, in this the reality. How then has He a
beginning? You see that the Son is "without beginning," not in respect of His not
having a cause; (for this is impossible: for He has a Father, otherwise how is He
Son?) but in respect of His "not having beginning or end of life."
"But made like the Son of God." Where is the likeness? That we know not
of the one or of the other either the end or the beginning. Of the one because
they are not written; of the other, because they do not exist. Here is the likeness.
But if the likeness were to exist in all respects, there would no longer be type
and reality; but both would be type. [Here] then just as in representations [by
painting or drawing], there is somewhat that is like and somewhat that is unlike.
By means of the lines indeed there is a likeness of features, but when the colors
are put on, then the difference is plainly shown, both the likeness and the
unlikeness.