SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.108, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether truth is a part of justice?

Objection 1: It seems that truth is not a part of justice. For it seems
proper to justice to give another man his due. But, by telling the
truth, one does not seem to give another man his due, as is the case
in all the foregoing parts of justice. Therefore truth is not a part of
justice.
Objection 2: Further, truth pertains to the intellect: whereas justice is
in the will, as stated above (Question 58, Article 4). Therefore truth is
not a part of justice.
Objection 3: Further, according to Jerome truth is threefold, namely,
"truth of life," "truth of justice," and "truth of doctrine." But none of
these is a part of justice. For truth of life comprises all virtues, as
stated above (Article 2, ad 3): truth of justice is the same as justice,
so that it is not one of its parts; and truth of doctrine belongs rather
to the intellectual virtues. Therefore truth is nowise a part of justice.
On the contrary, Tully (De Invent. Rhet. ii) reckons truth among the
parts of justice.
I answer that, As stated above (Question 80), a virtue is annexed to
justice, as secondary to a principal virtue, through having something
in common with justice, while falling short from the perfect virtue
thereof. Now the virtue of truth has two things in common with
justice. In the first place it is directed to another, since the
manifestation, which we have stated to be an act of truth, is directed
to another, inasmuch as one person manifests to another the things
that concern himself. In the second place, justice sets up a certain
equality between things, and this the virtue of truth does also, for it
equals signs to the things which concern man himself. Nevertheless
it falls short of the proper aspect of justice, as to the notion of debt:
for this virtue does not regard legal debt, which justice considers,
but rather the moral debt, in so far as, out of equity, one man owes
another a manifestation of the truth. Therefore truth is a part of
justice, being annexed thereto as a secondary virtue to its principal.
Reply to Objection 1: Since man is a social animal, one man naturally
owes another whatever is necessary for the preservation of human
society. Now it would be impossible for men to live together, unless

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.108, C.4.

they believed one another, as declaring the truth one to another.
Hence the virtue of truth does, in a manner, regard something as
being due.
Reply to Objection 2: Truth, as known, belongs to the intellect. But
man, by his own will, whereby he uses both habits and members,
utters external signs in order to manifest the truth, and in this way
the manifestation of the truth is an act of the will.
Reply to Objection 3: The truth of which we are speaking now differs
from the truth of life, as stated in the preceding Article 2, ad 3.
We speak of the truth of justice in two ways. In one way we refer to
the fact that justice itself is a certain rectitude regulated according to
the rule of the divine law; and in this way the truth of justice differs
from the truth of life, because by the truth of life a man lives aright in
himself, whereas by the truth of justice a man observes the rectitude
of the law in those judgments which refer to another man: and in this
sense the truth of justice has nothing to do with the truth of which
we speak now, as neither has the truth of life. In another way the
truth of justice may be understood as referring to the fact that, out of
justice, a man manifests the truth, as for instance when a man
confesses the truth, or gives true evidence in a court of justice. This
truth is a particular act of justice, and does not pertain directly to
this truth of which we are now speaking, because, to wit, in this
manifestation of the truth a man's chief intention is to give another
man his due. Hence the Philosopher says (Ethic. iv, 7) in describing
this virtue: "We are not speaking of one who is truthful in his
agreements, nor does this apply to matters in which justice or
injustice is questioned."
The truth of doctrine consists in a certain manifestation of truths
relating to science wherefore neither does this truth directly pertain
to this virtue, but only that truth whereby a man, both in life and in
speech, shows himself to be such as he is, and the things that
concern him, not other, and neither greater nor less, than they are.
Nevertheless since truths of science, as known by us, are something
concerning us, and pertain to this virtue, in this sense the truth of
doctrine may pertain to this virtue, as well as any other kind of truth
whereby a man manifests, by word or deed, what he knows.