Homily 50 on the Gospel of John
John 7:25-27
"Then said some of them of Jerusalem, Is not this he, whom they seek to kill?
But, lo, he speaks boldly, and they say nothing unto him. Do the rulers know
indeed that this is the very Christ? Howbeit we know this man whence he is."
1. Nothing is placed in the Holy Scriptures without a reason, for they were
uttered by the Holy Ghost, therefore let us enquire exactly into every point. For
it is possible from one expression to find out the entire meaning (of a passage),
as in the case before us. "Many of them of Jerusalem said, Is not this he, whom
they seek to kill? But, lo, he speaks boldly, and they say nothing unto him." Now
why is added, "them of Jerusalem"? The Evangelist by this shows, that they who
had most enjoyed His mighty miracles were more pitiable than any; they who
had beheld the greatest proof of His Godhead, and yet committed all to the
judgment of their corrupt rulers. For was it not a great proof of it, that men
furious and bent on murder, who went about and sought to kill Him, should be
quiet of a sudden, when they had Him in their hands? Who could have effected
this? Who thus quenched their absolute fury? Still after such proofs, observe the
folly and the madness of the men. "Is not this he, whom they seek to kill?" See
how they accuse themselves; "whom," It says, "they seek to kill, and yet they say
nothing to him." And not only do they say nothing to Him, but nothing even
when He "speaks boldly." For one who spoke boldly and with all freedom would
naturally have the more angered them; but they did nothing. "Do they know
indeed that this is the very Christ?" "What do you think? What opinion do you
give?" The contrary, It says. On which account they said, "We know this man
whence he is." What malice, what contradiction! They do not even follow the
opinion of their rulers, but bring forward another, perverse, and worthy of their
own folly; "We know him whence he is."

"But when Christ comes, no man knows whence He is." [Matthew 2:4]
"Yet your rulers when asked replied, that He should be born in Bethlehem."
And others again said, "God spoke unto Moses, but as for this fellow, we know
not from whence he is." [John 9:29] "We know whence he is," and "we know not
whence He is"; observe the words of drunken men. And again, "Does Christ
come out of Galilee?" [John 7:41] Is He not of "the town of Bethlehem"? Do you
see that theirs is the decision of madmen? "We know," and, "we know not";
"Christ comes from Bethlehem"; "When Christ comes, no man knows whence He
is." What can be plainer than this contradiction? For they only looked to one
thing, which was, not to believe. What then is Christ's reply?

John 7:28
"You both know Me, and you know whence I am: and I am not come of Myself,
but He that sent Me is true, whom you know not."
2. And again, "If you had known Me, you should have known My Father
also." [John 8:19] How then says He, that they both "know Him," and "whence
He is," and then, "that they neither know Him, nor the Father"? He does not
contradict, (away with the thought,) but is very consistent with Himself. For He
speaks of a different kind of knowledge, when He says, "ye know not"; as when
He says, "The sons of Eli were wicked sons, they knew not the Lord" [1 Samuel
2:12]; and again, "Israel does not know Me." [Isaiah 1:3] So also Paul says,
"They profess that they know God, but in works they deny Him." [Titus 1:16] It is
therefore possible, "knowing," "not to know." This then is what He says: "If you
know Me, you know that I am the Son of God." For the "whence I am" does not
here denote place. As is clear from what follows, "I am not come of Myself, but
He that sent Me is true, whom you know not," referring here to the ignorance
shown by their works. [As Paul says, "They profess that they know God, but in
works they deny Him."] For their fault came not merely of ignorance, but of
wickedness, and an evil will; because even though they knew this, they chose to
be ignorant. But what manner of connection is there here? How is it that He,
reproving them, uses their own words? For when they say, "We know this man
whence he is," He adds, "ye both know Me." Was their expression, "We know him
not"? Nay, they said, "We know him." But (observe), they by saying the, "We
know whence he is," declared nothing else than that He was "of the earth," and
that He was "the carpenter's son"; but He led them up to heaven, saying, "You
know whence I am," that is, not thence whence ye suppose, but from that place
whence He that sent Me (has sent Me). For to say, "I am not come of Myself,"
intimates to them, that they knew that He was sent by the Father, though they did
not disclose it. So that He rebukes them in a twofold manner; first, what they