streams of tears from his gentle eyes, and having reminded them of the Holy
Table to which the man had fled for refuge he succeeded at last in appeasing
their wrath.
5. Moreover let me add some arguments which concern ourselves. For what
pardon could you deserve, if the Emperor bears no resentment when he has been
insulted, but you who have experienced nothing of this kind display so much
wrath? And how after this assembly has been dissolved will you handle the holy
mysteries, and repeat that prayer by which we are commanded to say "forgive us
as we also forgive our debtors" [Matthew 6:12] when you are demanding
vengeance upon your debtor? Has he inflicted great wrongs and insults on you? I
will not deny it. Yet this is the season not for judgment but for mercy; not for
requiring an account, but for showing loving kindness: not for investigating
claims but for conceding them; not for verdicts and vengeance, but for mercy
and favour. Let no one then be irritated or vexed, but let us rather beseech the
merciful God to grant him a respite from death, and to rescue him from this
impending destruction, so that he may put off his transgression, and let us unite
to approach the merciful Emperor beseeching him for the sake of the Church, for
the sake of the altar, to concede the life of one man as an offering to the Holy
Table. If we do this the Emperor himself will accept us, and even before his
praise we shall have the approval of God, who will bestow a large recompense
upon us for our mercy. For as he rejects and hates the cruel and inhuman, so does
He welcome and love the merciful and humane man; and if such a man be
righteous, all the more glorious is the crown which is wreathed for him: and if he
be a sinner, He passes over his sins granting this as the reward of compassion
shown to his fellow-servant. "For" He says "I will have mercy and not sacrifice,"
and throughout the Scriptures you find Him always enquiring after this, and
declaring it to be the means of release from sin. Thus then we shall dispose Him
to be propitious to us, thus we shall release ourselves from our sins, thus we
shall adorn the Church, thus also our merciful Emperor, as I have already said,
will commend us, and all the people will applaud us, and the ends of the earth

will admire the humanity and gentleness of our city, and all who hear of these
deeds throughout the world will extol us. That we then may enjoy these good
things, let us fall down in prayer and supplication, let us rescue the captive, the
fugitive, the suppliant from danger that we ourselves may obtain the future
blessings by the favour and mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory
and power, now and for ever, world without end. Amen.

## Homily 2 on Eutropius

After Eutropius having been found outside the Church had been taken
captive.
1. Delectable indeed are the meadow, and the garden, but far more
delectable the study of the divine writings. For there indeed are flowers which
fade, but here are thoughts which abide in full bloom; there is the breeze of the
zephyr, but here the breath of the Spirit: there is the hedge of thorns, but here is
the guarding providence of God; there is the song of cicadæ, but here the melody
of the prophets: there is the pleasure which comes from sight, but here the profit
which comes from study. The garden is confined to one place, but the Scriptures
are in all parts of the world; the garden is subject to the necessities of the
seasons, but the Scriptures are rich in foliage, and laden with fruit alike in winter
and in summer. Let us then give diligent heed to the study of the Scriptures: for
if you do this the Scripture will expel your despondency, and engender pleasure,
extirpate vice, and make virtue take root, and in the tumult of life it will save you
from suffering like those who are tossed by troubled waves. The sea rages but
you sail on with calm weather; for you have the study of the Scriptures for your
pilot; for this is the cable which the trials of life do not break asunder. Now that I
lie not events themselves bear witness. A few days ago the Church was besieged:
an army came, and fire issued from their eyes, yet it did not scorch the olive tree;
swords were unsheathed, yet no one received a wound; the imperial gates were
in distress, but the Church was in security. And yet the tide of war flowed hither;
for here the refugee was sought, and we withstood them, not fearing their rage.
And wherefore prithee? Because we held as a sure pledge the saying "You are
Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church: and the gates of hell shall not
prevail against it." [Matthew 16:18] And when I say the Church I mean not only
a place but also a plan of life: I mean not the walls of the Church but the laws of