SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.161, C.2.

of super-abundant good. Hence a gloss of Jerome on the same
passage (Is. 61:6) says that "there is a good and an evil pride"; or "a
sinful pride which God resists, and a pride that denotes the glory
which He bestows."
It may also be replied that pride there signifies abundance of those
things in which men may take pride.
Reply to Objection 2: Reason has the direction of those things for
which man has a natural appetite; so that if the appetite wander from
the rule of reason, whether by excess or by default, it will be sinful,
as is the case with the appetite for food which man desires naturally.
Now pride is the appetite for excellence in excess of right reason.
Wherefore Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xiv, 13) that pride is the
"desire for inordinate exaltation": and hence it is that, as he asserts
(De Civ. Dei xiv, 13; xix, 12), "pride imitates God inordinately: for it
hath equality of fellowship under Him, and wishes to usurp Hi.
dominion over our fellow-creatures."
Reply to Objection 3: Pride is directly opposed to the virtue of
humility, which, in a way, is concerned about the same matter as
magnanimity, as stated above (Question 161, Article 1, ad 3). Hence
the vice opposed to pride by default is akin to the vice of
pusillanimity, which is opposed by default to magnanimity. For just
as it belongs to magnanimity to urge the mind to great things against
despair, so it belongs to humility to withdraw the mind from the
inordinate desire of great things against presumption. Now
pusillanimity, if we take it for a deficiency in pursuing great things, is
properly opposed to magnanimity by default; but if we take it for the
mind's attachment to things beneath what is becoming to a man, it is
opposed to humility by default; since each proceeds from a
smallness of mind. In the same way, on the other hand, pride may be
opposed by excess, both to magnanimity and humility, from different
points of view: to humility, inasmuch as it scorns subjection, to
magnanimity, inasmuch as it tends to great things inordinately.
Since, however, pride implies a certain elation, it is more directly
opposed to humility, even as pusillanimity, which denotes littleness
of soul in tending towards great things, is more directly opposed to
magnanimity.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.161, C.2.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.161, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether pride is a special sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that pride is not a special sin. For
Augustine says (De Nat. et Grat. xxix) that "you will find no sin that is
not labelled pride"; and Prosper says (De Vita Contempl. iii, 2) that
"without pride no sin is, or was, or ever will be possible." Therefore
pride is a general sin.
Objection 2: Further, a gloss on Job 33:17, "That He may withdraw
man from wickedness," says that "a man prides himself when he
transgresses His commandments by sin." Now according to
Ambrose [De Parad. viii], "every sin is a transgression of the Divine
law, and a disobedience of the heavenly commandments." Therefore
every sin is pride.
Objection 3: Further, every special sin is opposed to a special virtue.
But pride is opposed to all the virtues, for Gregory says (Moral.
xxxiv, 23): "Pride is by no means content with the destruction of one
virtue; it raises itself up against all the powers of the soul, and like
an all-pervading and poisonous disease corrupts the whole body";
and Isidore says (Etym.; De Summo Bono ii, 38) that it is "the
downfall of all virtues." Therefore pride is not a special sin.
Objection 4: Further, every special sin has a special matter. Now
pride has a general matter, for Gregory says (Moral. xxxiv, 23) that
"one man is proud of his gold, another of his eloquence: one is
elated by mean and earthly things, another by sublime and heavenly
virtues." Therefore pride is not a special but a general sin.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Nat. et Grat. xxix): "If he look
into the question carefully, he will find that, according to God's law,
pride is a very different sin from other vices." Now the genus is not
different from its species. Therefore pride is not a general but a
special sin.
I answer that, The sin of pride may be considered in two ways. First
with regard to its proper species, which it has under the aspect of its
proper object. In this way pride is a special sin, because it has a
special object: for it is inordinate desire of one's own excellence, as
stated (Article 1, ad 2). Secondly, it may be considered as having a
certain influence towards other sins. In this way it has somewhat of a