189. Solidarity is a spontaneous reaction by those who recognize that the social function of
property and the universal destination of goods are realities which come before private property.
The private ownership of goods is justified by the need to protect and increase them, so that they
can better serve the common good; for this reason, solidarity must be lived as the decision to
restore to the poor what belongs to them. These convictions and habits of solidarity, when they are
put into practice, open the way to other structural transformations and make them possible.
Changing structures without generating new convictions and attitudes will only ensure that those
same structures will become, sooner or later, corrupt, oppressive and ineffectual.

190. Sometimes it is a matter of hearing the cry of entire peoples, the poorest peoples of the earth,
since “peace is founded not only on respect for human rights, but also on respect for the rights of
peoples”. Sadly, even human rights can be used as a justification for an inordinate defense of

individual rights or the rights of the richer peoples. With due respect for the autonomy and culture
of every nation, we must never forget that the planet belongs to all mankind and is meant for all
mankind; the mere fact that some people are born in places with fewer resources or less
development does not justify the fact that they are living with less dignity. It must be reiterated that
“the more fortunate should renounce some of their rights so as to place their goods more
generously at the service of others”. To speak properly of our own rights, we need to broaden
our perspective and to hear the plea of other peoples and other regions than those of our own
country. We need to grow in a solidarity which “would allow all peoples to become the artisans of
their destiny”, since “every person is called to self-fulfilment”.

191. In all places and circumstances, Christians, with the help of their pastors, are called to hear
the cry of the poor. This has been eloquently stated by the bishops of Brazil: “We wish to take up
daily the joys and hopes, the difficulties and sorrows of the Brazilian people, especially of those
living in the barrios and the countryside – landless, homeless, lacking food and health care – to the
detriment of their rights. Seeing their poverty, hearing their cries and knowing their sufferings, we
are scandalized because we know that there is enough food for everyone and that hunger is the
result of a poor distribution of goods and income. The problem is made worse by the generalized
practice of wastefulness”.

192. Yet we desire even more than this; our dream soars higher. We are not simply talking about
ensuring nourishment or a “dignified sustenance” for all people, but also their “general temporal
welfare and prosperity”. This means education, access to health care, and above all
employment, for it is through free, creative,
participatory and mutually supportive labour that human beings express and enhance the dignity
of their lives. A just wage enables them to have adequate access to all the other goods which are
destined for our common use.