Or, "to that degree."

plausible or otherwise, on the subject; but what is true, sure, and incontrovertible regarding it,
belongs only to God. Then, again, the dwelling-place of birds—of those, I mean, which come to
us in spring, but fly away again on the approach of autumn—though it is a matter connected with
this world, escapes our knowledge. What explanation, again, can we give of the flow and ebb of
the ocean, although every one admits there must be a certain cause [for these phenomena]? Or what
can we say as to the nature of those things which lie beyond it?3214 What, moreover, can we say as
to the formation of rain, lightning, thunder, gatherings of clouds, vapours, the bursting forth of
winds, and such like things; or tell as to the storehouses of snow, hail, and other like things? [What
do we know respecting] the conditions requisite for the preparation of clouds, or what is the real
nature of the vapours in the sky? What as to the reason why the moon waxes and wanes, or what
as to the cause of the difference of nature among various waters, metals, stones, and such like
things? On all these points we may indeed say a great deal while we search into their causes, but
God alone who made them can declare the truth regarding them.
3. If, therefore, even with respect to creation, there are some things [the knowledge of] which
belongs only to God, and others which come within the range of our own knowledge, what ground
is there for complaint, if, in regard to those things which we investigate in the Scriptures (which
are throughout spiritual), we are able by the grace of God to explain some of them, while we must
leave others in the hands of God, and that not only in the present world, but also in that which is
to come, so that God should for ever teach, and man should for ever learn the things taught him by
God? As the apostle has said on this point, that, when other things have been done away, then these
three, "faith, hope, and charity, shall endure." For faith, which has respect to our Master,
endures unchangeably, assuring us that there is but one true God, and that we should truly love
Him for ever, seeing that He alone is our Father; while we hope ever to be receiving more and more
from God, and to learn from Him, because He is good, and possesses boundless riches, a kingdom
without end, and instruction that can never be exhausted. If, therefore, according to the rule which
I have stated, we leave some questions in the hands of God, we shall both preserve our faith
uninjured, and shall continue without danger; and all Scripture, which has been given to us by God,
shall be found by us perfectly consistent; and the parables shall harmonize with those passages
which are perfectly plain; and those statements the meaning of which is clear, shall serve to explain
hoped for shall have become a matter of fruition; neither will there be any room for faith, when the soul shall be admitted to see
God as He is." But the best modern interpreters take the same view of the passage as Irenæus. They regard the #&#' (" of St.
Paul as not being temporal, but logical, and conclude therefore the meaning to be, that faith and hope, as well as love, will, in a
sense, endure for ever. Comp., e.g., Alford, in loc.