FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.23, C.4.

repose belongs to joy, which is a passion of the concupiscible
faculty.
Accordingly no movement of the soul can be contrary to the
movement of anger, and nothing else than cessation from its
movement is contrary thereto; thus the Philosopher says (Rhet. ii, 3)
that "calm is contrary to anger," by opposition not of contrariety but
of negation or privation.
From what has been said the replies to the objections are evident.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.23, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether in the same power, there are any

passions, specifically different, but not contrary to one
another?
Objection 1: It would seem that there cannot be, in the same power,
specifically different passions that are not contrary to one another.
For the passions of the soul differ according to their objects. Now
the objects of the soul's passions are good and evil; and on this
distinction is based the contrariety of the passions. Therefore no
passions of the same power, that are not contrary to one another,
differ specifically.
Objection 2: Further, difference of species implies a difference of
form. But every difference of form is in respect of some contrariety,
as stated in Metaph. x, 8. Therefore passions of the same power, that
are not contrary to one another, do not differ specifically.
Objection 3: Further, since every passion of the soul consists in
approach or withdrawal in respect of good or evil, it seems that
every difference in the passions of the soul must needs arise from
the difference of good and evil; or from the difference of approach
and withdrawal; or from degrees in approach or withdrawal. Now the
first two differences cause contrariety in the passions of the soul, as
stated above (Article 2): whereas the third difference does not
diversify the species; else the species of the soul's passions would
be infinite. Therefore it is not possible for passions of the same
power to differ in species, without being contrary to one another.
On the contrary, Love and joy differ in species, and are in the
concupiscible power; and yet they are not contrary to one another;
rather, in fact, one causes the other. Therefore in the same power
there are passions that differ in species without being contrary to
one another.
I answer that, Passions differ in accordance with their active causes,
which, in the case of the passions of the soul, are their objects. Now,
the difference in active causes may be considered in two ways: first,
from the point of view of their species or nature, as fire differs from
water; secondly, from the point of view of the difference in their
active power. In the passions of the soul we can treat the difference
of their active or motive causes in respect of their motive power, as if

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.23, C.5.