SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.161, C.3.

generic character, inasmuch as all sins may arise from pride, in two
ways. First directly, through other sins being directed to the end of
pride which is one's own excellence, to which may be directed
anything that is inordinately desired. Secondly, indirectly and
accidentally as it were, that is by removing an obstacle, since pride
makes a man despise the Divine law which hinders him from sinning,
according to Jer. 2:20, "Thou hast broken My yoke, thou hast burst
My bands, and thou saidst: I will not serve."
It must, however, be observed that this generic character of pride
admits of the possibility of all vices arising from pride sometimes,
but it does not imply that all vices originate from pride always. For
though one may break the commandments of the Law by any kind of
sin, through contempt which pertains to pride, yet one does not
always break the Divine commandments through contempt, but
sometimes through ignorance. and sometimes through weakness:
and for this reason Augustine says (De Nat. et Grat. xxix) that "many
things are done amiss which are not done through pride."
Reply to Objection 1: These words are introduced by Augustine into
his book De Nat. et Grat., not as being his own, but as those of
someone with whom he is arguing. Hence he subsequently
disproves the assertion, and shows that not all sins are committed
through pride. We might, however, reply that these authorities must
be understood as referring to the outward effect of pride, namely the
breaking of the commandments, which applies to every sin, and not
to the inward act of pride, namely contempt of the commandment.
For sin is committed, not always through contempt, but sometimes
through ignorance, sometimes through weakness, as stated above.
Reply to Objection 2: A man may sometimes commit a sin
effectively, but not affectively; thus he who, in ignorance, slays his
father, is a parricide effectively, but not affectively, since he did not
intend it. Accordingly he who breaks God's commandment is said to
pride himself against God, effectively always, but not always
affectively.
Reply to Objection 3: A sin may destroy a virtue in two ways. In one
way by direct contrariety to a virtue, and thus pride does not corrupt
every virtue, but only humility; even as every special sin destroys
the special virtue opposed to it, by acting counter thereto. In another
way a sin destroys a virtue, by making ill use of that virtue: and thus
pride destroys every virtue, in so far as it finds an occasion of pride

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.161, C.3.

in every virtue, just as in everything else pertaining to excellence.
Hence it does not follow that it is a general sin.
Reply to Objection 4: Pride regards a special aspect in its object,
which aspect may be found in various matters: for it is inordinate
love of one's excellence, and excellence may be found in various
things.