SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.63, C.3.

killed with them, either because the wicked lie hidden among the
good, or because they have many followers, so that they cannot be
killed without danger to the good, as Augustine says (Contra
Parmen. iii, 2). Wherefore our Lord teaches that we should rather
allow the wicked to live, and that vengeance is to be delayed until the
last judgment, rather than that the good be put to death together with
the wicked. When, however, the good incur no danger, but rather are
protected and saved by the slaying of the wicked, then the latter may
be lawfully put to death.
Reply to Objection 2: According to the order of His wisdom, God
sometimes slays sinners forthwith in order to deliver the good,
whereas sometimes He allows them time to repent, according as He
knows what is expedient for His elect. This also does human justice
imitate according to its powers; for it puts to death those who are
dangerous to others, while it allows time for repentance to those
who sin without grievously harming others.
Reply to Objection 3: By sinning man departs from the order of
reason, and consequently falls away from the dignity of his
manhood, in so far as he is naturally free, and exists for himself, and
he falls into the slavish state of the beasts, by being disposed of
according as he is useful to others. This is expressed in Ps. 48:21:
"Man, when he was in honor, did not understand; he hath been
compared to senseless beasts, and made like to them," and Prov.
11:29: "The fool shall serve the wise." Hence, although it be evil in
itself to kill a man so long as he preserve his dignity, yet it may be
good to kill a man who has sinned, even as it is to kill a beast. For a
bad man is worse than a beast, and is more harmful, as the
Philosopher states (Polit. i, 1 and Ethic. vii, 6).

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.63, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether it is lawful for a private individual to kill a

man who has sinned?
Objection 1: It would seem lawful for a private individual to kill a man
who has sinned. For nothing unlawful is commanded in the Divine
law. Yet, on account of the sin of the molten calf, Moses commanded
(Ex. 32:27): "Let every man kill his brother, and friend, and
neighbor." Therefore it is lawful for private individuals to kill a
sinner.
Objection 2: Further, as stated above (Article 2, ad 3), man, on
account of sin, is compared to the beasts. Now it is lawful for any
private individual to kill a wild beast, especially if it be harmful.
Therefore for the same reason, it is lawful for any private individual
to kill a man who has sinned.
Objection 3: Further, a man, though a private individual, deserves
praise for doing what is useful for the common good. Now the
slaying of evildoers is useful for the common good, as stated above
(Article 2). Therefore it is deserving of praise if even private
individuals kill evil-doers.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Civ. Dei i) [Can. Quicumque
percutit, caus. xxiii, qu. 8]: "A man who, without exercising public
authority, kills an evil-doer, shall be judged guilty of murder, and all
the more, since he has dared to usurp a power which God has not
given him."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 2), it is lawful to kill an
evildoer in so far as it is directed to the welfare of the whole
community, so that it belongs to him alone who has charge of the
community's welfare. Thus it belongs to a physician to cut off a
decayed limb, when he has been entrusted with the care of the
health of the whole body. Now the care of the common good is
entrusted to persons of rank having public authority: wherefore they
alone, and not private individuals, can lawfully put evildoers to
death.
Reply to Objection 1: The person by whose authority a thing is done
really does the thing as Dionysius declares (Coel. Hier. iii). Hence
according to Augustine (De Civ. Dei i, 21), "He slays not who owes