This number is shown to be suitable in so far as satisfaction uproots
the causes of sin, for these are reckoned to be three (1 Jn. 2:16), viz.
"concupiscence of the flesh," "concupiscence of the eyes," and
"pride of life." Fasting is directed against concupiscence of the
"flesh," alms-deeds against concupiscence of the "eyes," and
"prayer" against "pride of life," as Augustine says (Enarr. in Ps. 42).
This number is also shown to be suitable in so far as satisfaction
does not open a way to the suggestions of sin, because every sin is
committed either against God, and this is prevented by "prayer," or
against our neighbor, and this is remedied by "alms-deeds," or
against ourselves, and this is forestalled by "fasting."
Reply to Objection 1: According to some, prayer is twofold. There is
the prayer of contemplatives whose "conversation is in heaven": and
this, since it is altogether delightful, is not a work of satisfaction. The
other is a prayer which pours forth sighs for sin; this is penal and a
part of satisfaction.
It may also be replied, and better, that every prayer has the character
of satisfaction, for though it be sweet to the soul it is painful to the
body, since, as Gregory says (Super Ezech., Hom. xiv), "doubtless,
when our soul's love is strengthened, our body's strength is
weakened"; hence we read (Gn. 32:25) that the sinew of Jacob's
thigh shrank through his wrestling with the angel.
Reply to Objection 2: Carnal sin is twofold; one which is completed
in carnal delectation, as gluttony and lust. and, another which is
completed in things relating to the flesh, though it be completed in
the delectation of the soul rather than of the flesh, as covetousness.
Hence such like sins are between spiritual and carnal sins, so that
they need a satisfaction proper to them, viz. almsdeeds.
Reply to Objection 3: Although each of these three, by a kind of
likeness, is appropriated to some particular kind of sin because it is
reasonable that, whereby a man sins, in that he should be punished,
and that satisfaction should cut out the very root of the sin
committed, yet each of them can satisfy for any kind of sin. Hence if
a man is unable to perform one of the above, another is imposed on
him, chiefly almsdeeds, which can take the place of the others, in so
far as in those to whom a man gives alms he purchases other works
of satisfaction thereby. Consequently even if almsgiving washes all

sins away, it does not follow that other works are in excess.
Reply to Objection 4: Though there are many kinds of sins, all are
reduced to those three roots or to those three kinds of sin, to which,
as we have said, the aforesaid works of satisfaction correspond.
Reply to Objection 5: Whatever relates to affliction of the body is all
referred to fasting, and whatever is spent for the benefit of one's
neighbor is a kind of alms, and whatever act of worship is given to
God becomes a kind of prayer, so that even one work can be
satisfactory in several ways.