sound.
But, as to what I was enquiring about—why, if retaliation was allowed,
were they arraigned who practiced it? Whatever can this mean? He here speaks
of vindictiveness; for on the spur of the moment he allows the sufferer to act, as I
was saying, in order to check the aggressor; but to bear a grudge he permits no
longer; because the act then is no longer one of passion, nor of boiling rage, but
of malice premeditated. Now God forgives those who may be carried away,
perhaps upon a sense of outrage, and rush out to resent it. Hence He says, "eye
for eye"; and yet again, "the ways of the revengeful lead to death." Now, if,
where it was permitted to put out eye for eye, so great a punishment is reserved
for the revengeful, how much more for those who are bidden even to expose
themselves to ill-treatment. Let us not then be revengeful, but let us quench our
anger, that we may be counted worthy of the lovingkindness, which comes from
God ("for with what measure," says Christ, "ye mete, it shall be measured unto
you, and with what judgment ye judge, you shall be judged") [Matthew 7:2], and
that we may both escape the snares of this present life, and in the day that is at
hand, may obtain pardon at His hands, through the grace and loving-kindness of
our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom, to the Father, together with the Holy Ghost,
be glory, power, honor, both now and forever and ever. Amen.

## Homily 17 on Ephesians

Ephesians 4:32 and 5:1, 2
"And be ye kind one to another, tender hearted, forgiving each other, even
as God also in Christ forgave you. Be therefore imitators of God, as beloved
children; and walk in love, even as Christ also loved you, and gave Himself up
for us, an offering and a sacrifice to God for an odor of a sweet smell."
The events which are past have greater force than those which are yet to
come, and appear to be both more wonderful and more convincing. And hence
accordingly Paul founds his exhortation upon the things which have already
been done for us, inasmuch as they, on Christ's account, have a greater force. For
to say, "Forgive, and you shall be forgiven" [Matthew 6:14], and "if you forgive
not, you shall in nowise be forgiven" [Matthew 6:15]—this addressed to men of
understanding, and men who believe in the things to come, is of great weight;
but Paul appeals to the conscience not by these arguments only, but also by
things already done for us. In the former way we may escape punishment,
whereas in this latter we may have our share of some positive good. Thou
imitatest Christ. This alone is enough to recommend virtue, that it is "to imitate
God." This is a higher principle than the other, "for He makes His sun to rise on
the evil and the good, and sends rain on the just and the unjust." [Matthew 5:45]
Because he does not merely say that we are "imitating God," but that we do so in
those things wherein we receive ourselves such benefits. He would have us
cherish the tender heart of fathers towards each other. For by heart, here, is
meant lovingkindness and compassion. For inasmuch as it cannot be that, being
men, we shall avoid either giving pain or suffering it, he does the next thing, he
devises a remedy—that we should forgive one another. And yet there is no
comparison. For if you indeed should at this moment forgive any one, he will
forgive you again in return; whereas to God you have neither given nor forgiven