THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.2, C.3.

nature in general, but 'in atomo'"---that is, in an individual---as
Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii, 11) otherwise every man would be
the Word of God, even as Christ was. Yet we must bear in mind that
not every individual in the genus of substance, even in rational
nature, is a person, but that alone which exists by itself, and not that
which exists in some more perfect thing. Hence the hand of
Socrates, although it is a kind of individual, is not a person, because
it does not exist by itself, but in something more perfect, viz. in the
whole. And hence, too, this is signified by a "person" being defined
as "an individual substance," for the hand is not a complete
substance, but part of a substance. Therefore, although this human
nature is a kind of individual in the genus of substance, it has not its
own personality, because it does not exist separately, but in
something more perfect, viz. in the Person of the Word. Therefore
the union took place in the person.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.2, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the union of the Word Incarnate took

place in the suppositum or hypostasis?
Objection 1: It would seem that the union of the Word Incarnate did
not take place in the suppositum or hypostasis. For Augustine says
(Enchiridion xxxv, xxxviii): "Both the Divine and human substance
are one Son of God, but they are one thing [aliud] by reason of the
Word and another thing [aliud] by reason of the man." And Pope Leo
says in his letter to Flavian (Ep. xxviii): "One of these is glorious with
miracles, the other succumbs under injuries." But "one" [aliud] and
"the other" [aliud] differ in suppositum. Therefore the union of the
Word Incarnate did not take place in the suppositum.
Objection 2: Further, hypostasis is nothing more than a "particular
substance," as Boethius says (De Duab. Nat.). But it is plain that in
Christ there is another particular substance beyond the hypostasis
of the Word, viz. the body and the soul and the resultant of these.
Therefore there is another hypostasis in Him besides the hypostasis
of the Word.
Objection 3: Further, the hypostasis of the Word is not included in
any genus or species, as is plain from FP, Question 3, Article 5. But
Christ, inasmuch as He is made man, is contained under the species
of man; for Dionysius says (Div. Nom. 1): "Within the limits of our
nature He came, Who far surpasses the whole order of nature
supersubstantially." Now nothing is contained under the human
species unless it be a hypostasis of the human species. Therefore in
Christ there is another hypostasis besides the hypostasis of the
Word of God; and hence the same conclusion follows as above.
On the contrary, Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii, 3,4,5): "In our
Lord Jesus Christ we acknowledge two natures and one hypostasis."
I answer that, Some who did not know the relation of hypostasis to
person, although granting that there is but one person in Christ,
held, nevertheless, that there is one hypostasis of God and another
of man, and hence that the union took place in the person and not in
the hypostasis. Now this, for three reasons, is clearly erroneous.
First, because person only adds to hypostasis a determinate nature,
viz. rational, according to what Boethius says (De Duab. Nat.), "a
person is an individual substance of rational nature"; and hence it is