those sins." And this not only manifested the lovingkindness of the Lord, but
made the man himself the more illustrious. For when you have learned who he
was before, then you will be the more astonished at him; and when you see out
of what he came to be what he was, then you will commend him the more; and if
you have greatly sinned, yet upon being changed you will conceive favourable
hopes from this instance. For in addition to what has been said, such an example
comforts those who are in despair, and causes them again to stand erect. The
same thing also will be the case with regard to our city; for all the events that
have happened serve to show your virtue, who by means of repentance have
prevailed to ward off such wrath, while at the same time they proclaim the
lovingkindness of God, who has removed the cloud that was so threatening, in
consequence of a small change of conduct, and so raises up again all those who
are sunk in despair, when they learn, from our case, that he who looks upward
for the Divine help, is not to be overwhelmed, though innumerable waves should
encompass him on all sides.
3. For who has seen, who has ever heard of sufferings such as were ours?
We were every day in expectation that our city would be overturned from its
foundations together with its inhabitants. But when the Devil was hoping to sink
the vessel, then God produced a perfect calm. Let us not then be unmindful of
the greatness of these terrors, in order that we may remember the magnitude of
the benefits received from God. He who knows not the nature of the disease will
not understand the physician's art. Let us tell these things also to our children;
and transmit them to the remotest generations, that all may learn how the Devil
had endeavoured to destroy the very foundation of the city; and how God was
able visibly to raise it up again, when it was fallen and prostrate; and did not
permit even the least injury to befall it, but took away the fear; and dispelled
with much speed the peril it had been placed in. For even through the past week
we were all expecting that our substance would be confiscated; and that soldiers
would have been let loose upon us; and we were dreaming of a thousand other
horrors. But lo! All these things have passed away, even like a cloud or a flitting

shadow; and we have been punished only in the expectation of what is dreadful;
or rather we have not been punished, but we have been disciplined, and have
become better; God having softened the heart of the Emperor. Let us then always
and every day say, "Blessed be God!" and with greater zeal let us give heed to
our assembling, and let us hasten to the church, from whence we have reaped
this benefit. For you know whither ye fled at the first; whither ye flocked
together; and from what quarter our safety came. Let us then hold fast by this
sacred anchor; and as in the season of danger it did not betray us, so now let us
not leave it in the season of relief; but let us await with exact attention the stated
assemblies and prayers; and let us every day give a hearing to the divine oracles.
And the leisure which we spent in busily running about after those who came
from the court, while we were labouring under anxiety in respect to the evils that
threatened us; this let us consume wholly in hearing the divine laws, instead of
unseasonable and senseless pastimes; lest we should again reduce ourselves to
the necessity of that sort of occupation.
4. On the three foregoing days, then, we have investigated one method of
acquiring the knowledge of God, and have brought it to a conclusion; explaining
how "the heavens declare the glory of God;" and what the meaning of that is,
which is said by Paul; viz. "That the invisible things of Him from the creation of
the world are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made."
[Romans 1:20] And we showed how from the creation of the world, and how by
heaven, and earth, the sea, the Creator is glorified. But today, after briefly
philosophising on that same subject, we will proceed to another topic. For He
not only made it, but provided also that when it was made, it should carry on its
operations; not permitting it to be all immoveable, nor commanding it to be all in
a state of motion. The heaven, for instance, has remained immoveable, according
as the prophet says, "He placed the heaven as a vault, and stretched it out as a
tent over the earth." [Isaiah 40:42] But, on the other hand, the sun with the rest
of the stars, runs on his course through every day. And again, the earth is fixed,
but the waters are continually in motion; and not the waters only, but the clouds,