Heaven itself, and had enjoined them to strive after the resemblance, not of
angels and archangels, but (as far as was possible) of the very Lord of all; and
had bidden His disciples not only themselves duly to perform all this, but also to
correct others, and to distinguish between the evil and them that are not such, the
dogs and them that are not dogs (although there be much that is hidden in men):
— that they might not say, "these things are grievous and intolerable," (for
indeed in the sequel Peter did utter some such things, saying, "Who can be
saved?" and again, If the case of the man be so, it is not good to marry): in order
therefore that they might not now likewise say so; as in the first place even by
what had gone before He had proved it all to be easy, setting down many reasons
one upon another, of power to persuade men: so after all He adds also the
pinnacle of all facility, devising as no ordinary relief to our toils, the assistance
derived from persevering prayers. Thus, we are not ourselves, says He, to strive
alone, but also to invoke the help from above: and it will surely come and be
present with us, and will aid us in our struggles, and make all easy. Therefore He
both commanded us to ask, and pledged Himself to the giving.
However, not simply to ask did He command us, but with much assiduity
and earnestness. For this is the meaning of "seek." For so he that seeks, putting
all things out of his mind, is taken up with that alone which is sought, and forms
no idea of any of the persons present. And this which I am saying they know, as
many as have lost either gold, or servants, and are seeking diligently after them.
By "seeking," then, He declared this; by "knocking," that we approach with
earnestness and a glowing mind.
Despond not therefore, O man, nor show less of zeal about virtue, than they
do of desire for wealth. For things of that kind you have often sought and not
found, but nevertheless, though thou know this, that you are not sure to find
them, you put in motion every mode of search; but here, although having a
promise that you will surely receive, thou dost not show even the smallest part of
that earnestness. And if you dost not receive straightway, do not even thus
despair. For to this end He said, "knock," to signify that even if He should not

straightway open the door, we are to continue there.
5. And if you doubt my affirmation, at any rate believe His example.
"For what man is there of you," says He, "whom if his son ask bread, will
he give him a stone?"
Because, as among men, if you keep on doing so, you are even accounted
troublesome, and disgusting: so with God, when you do not so, then thou dost
more entirely provoke Him. And if you continue asking, though thou receive not
at once, thou surely wilt receive. For to this end was the door shut, that He may
induce you to knock: to this end He does not straightway assent, that you may
ask. Continue then to do these things, and you will surely receive. For that you
might not say, "What then if I should ask and not receive?" He has blocked up
your approach with that similitude, again framing arguments, and by those
human things urging us to be confident on these matters; implying by them that
we must not only ask, but ask what we ought.
"For which of you is there, a father, of whom if his son shall ask bread, will
he give him a stone?" So that if you receive not, your asking a stone is the cause
of your not receiving. For though thou be a son, this suffices not for your
receiving: rather this very thing even hinders your receiving, that being a son,
you ask what is not profitable.
Do thou also therefore ask nothing worldly, but all things spiritual, and you
will surely receive. For so Solomon, because he asked what he ought, behold
how quickly he received. Two things now, you see, should be in him that prays,
asking earnestly, and asking what he ought: "since you too," says He, "though ye
be fathers, wait for your sons to ask: and if they should ask of you anything
inexpedient, you refuse the gifts; just as, if it be expedient, you consent and
bestow it." Do thou too, considering these things, not withdraw until thou
receive; until thou have found, retire not; relax not your diligence, until the door
be opened. For if you approach with this mind, and say, "Except I receive, I
depart not;" you will surely receive, provided thou ask such things, as are both
suitable for Him of whom you ask to give, and expedient for you the petitioner.