FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.61, C.3.

of virtue. For there are four subjects of the virtue we speak of now:
viz. the power which is rational in its essence, and this is perfected
by "Prudence"; and that which is rational by participation, and is
threefold, the will, subject of "Justice," the concupiscible faculty,
subject of "Temperance," and the irascible faculty, subject of
"Fortitude."
Reply to Objection 1: Prudence is the principal of all the virtues
simply. The others are principal, each in its own genus.
Reply to Objection 2: That part of the soul which is rational by
participation is threefold, as stated above.
Reply to Objection 3: All the other virtues among which one ranks
before another, are reducible to the above four, both as to the
subject and as to the formal principle.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.61, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether any other virtues should be called

principal rather than these?
Objection 1: It would seem that other virtues should be called
principal rather than these. For, seemingly, the greatest is the
principal in any genus. Now "magnanimity has a great influence on
all the virtues" (Ethic. iv, 3). Therefore magnanimity should more
than any be called a principal virtue.
Objection 2: Further, that which strengthens the other virtues should
above all be called a principal virtue. But such is humility: for
Gregory says (Hom. iv in Ev.) that "he who gathers the other virtues
without humility is as one who carries straw against the wind."
Therefore humility seems above all to be a principal virtue.
Objection 3: Further, that which is most perfect seems to be
principal. But this applies to patience, according to James 1:4:
"Patience hath a perfect work." Therefore patience should be
reckoned a principal virtue.
On the contrary, Cicero reduces all other virtues to these four (De
Invent. Rhet. ii).
I answer that, As stated above (Article 2), these four are reckoned as
cardinal virtues, in respect of the four formal principles of virtue as
we understand it now. These principles are found chiefly in certain
acts and passions. Thus the good which exists in the act of reason,
is found chiefly in reason's command, but not in its counsel or its
judgment, as stated above (Question 57, Article 6). Again, good as
defined by reason and put into our operations as something right
and due, is found chiefly in commutations and distributions in
respect of another person, and on a basis of equality. The good of
curbing the passions is found chiefly in those passions which are
most difficult to curb, viz. in the pleasures of touch. The good of
being firm in holding to the good defined by reason, against the
impulse of passion, is found chiefly in perils of death, which are
most difficult to withstand.
Accordingly the above four virtues may be considered in two ways.
First, in respect of their common formal principles. In this way they
are called principal, being general, as it were, in comparison with all