enemy of the world, grieving that the earth does not bear gold instead of the
grain, and the fountains instead of streams, and the mountains instead of stone;
vexed at the fruitfulness of the seasons, troubled at common benefits; shunning
every means whence one cannot obtain money; undergoing all things whence
one can scrape together so much as two farthings; hating all men, the poor and
the rich; the poor, lest they should come and beg of him; the rich, because he has
not their possessions. All men he accounts to be possessed of what is his, and as
though he had been injured by all, so is he displeased with all. He knows not
plenty, he has no experience of satiety, he is more wretched than any, even as, on
the other hand, he that is freed from these things, and practises self-restraint, is
the most enviable. For the virtuous man, though he be a servant, though a
prisoner, is the most happy of all men. For no one shall do him ill, no not though
all men should come together out of the world, setting in motion arms and
camps, and warring with him. But he that is depraved and vile, and such as we
have described, though he be a king, though he have on a thousand diadems, will
suffer the utmost extremities, even from a common hand. So feeble is vice, so
strong is virtue.
Why then do you mourn, being in a state of poverty. Why do you wail
keeping a feast, for indeed it is an occasion of feasting. Why do you weep, for
poverty is a festival, if you be wise. Why do you lament, thou little child; for
such a one we should call a little child. Did such a person strike you? What is
this, he made you more able to endure? But did he take away your money? He
has removed the greater part of your burden. But has he cut off your honor?
Again you tell me of another kind of freedom. Hear even those without teaching
wisdom touching these things, and saying, "You have suffered no ill, if you show
no regard to it." But has he taken away that great house of yours, which has
enclosures about it? But behold the whole earth is before you, the public
buildings, whether you would have them for delight, or for use. And what is
more pleasing or more beautiful than the firmament of Heaven.
How long are you poor and needy? It is not possible for him to be rich, who

is not wealthy in his soul; like as it is not possible for him to be poor, who has
not the poverty in his mind. For if the soul is a nobler thing than the body, the
less noble parts have not power to affect it after themselves; but the noble part
draws over unto herself, and changes those that are not so noble. For so the
heart, when it has received any hurt, affects the whole body accordingly; if its
temperament be disordered, it mars all, if it be rightly tempered, it profits all.
And if any of the remaining parts should have become corrupt, while this
remains sound, it easily shakes off what is evil in them also.
And that I may further make what I say more plain, what is the use, I pray
you, of verdant branches, when the root is withering? And what is the harm of
the leaves being withered above, while this is sound? So also here there is no use
of money, while the soul is poor; neither harm from poverty, when the soul is
rich. And how can a soul, one may say, be rich, being in want of money? Then
above all times might this be; for then also is it wont to be rich.
For if, as we have often shown, this is a sure proof of being rich, to despise
wealth, and to want nothing; and of poverty again, to want, and any one would
more easily despise money in poverty than in wealth, it is quite evident that to be
in poverty rather makes one to be rich. For indeed that the rich man sets his heart
on money more than the poor man, is surely plain to every one; like as the
drunken man is thirsty, rather than he that has partaken of drink sufficiently. For
neither is his desire such as to be quenched by too much; but, on the contrary, it
is its nature to be inflamed by this. For fire likewise, when it has received more
food, then most of all waxes fierce; and the tyranny of wealth, when you have
cast into it more gold, then most especially is increased.
If then the desiring more be a mark of poverty; and he that is in the
possession of riches is like this; he is especially in poverty. Do you see that the
soul then most of all is poor, when it is rich; and then is rich, when it is in
poverty?
And if you will, let us exercise our reasoning in persons also, and let there
be two, the one having ten thousand talents, the other ten, and from both let us