come up to the saying, "If we sowed unto you spiritual things:" since in saying,
"we sowed," he points out the storms, the danger, the snares, the unspeakable
evils, which they endured in preaching. Nevertheless, though the superiority was
so great, he was unwilling either to abase the things of the old law or to exalt the
things which belong to himself: nay he even contracts his own, reckoning the
superiority not from the dangers, but from the greatness of the gift. For he said
not, "if we have jeoparded ourselves" or "exposed ourselves to snares" but "if we
sowed unto you spiritual things."
And the part of the priests, as far as possible, he exalts, saying, "They which
minister about sacred things," and "they that wait upon the altar," thereby
intending to point out their continual servitude and patience. Again, as he had
spoken of the priests among the Jews, viz. both the Levites and the Chief Priests,
so he has expressed each of the orders, both the inferior and the superior; the one
by saying, "they which minister about sacred things," and the other by saying,
"they which wait upon the altar." For not to all was one work commanded; but
some were entrusted with the coarser, others with the more exalted offices.
Comprehending therefore all these, lest any should say, "why talk to us of the old
law? Do you not know that ours is the time of more perfect commandments?"
after all those topics he placed that which is strongest of all, saying,
"Even so did the Lord ordain that they who proclaim the Gospel should live
of the Gospel." [1 Corinthians 9:14]
Nor does he even here say that they are supported by men, but as in the case
of the priests, of "the temple" and "of the altar," so likewise here, "of the
Gospel;" and as there he says, "eat," so here, "live," not make merchandize nor
lay up treasures. "For the laborer," says He, "is worthy of his hire."

1 Corinthians 9:15
2. "But I have used none of these things:"
What then if you have not used them now, says one, but intendest to use
them at a future time, and on this account sayest these things. Far from it; for he
speedily corrected the notion, thus saying;
"And I write not these things that it may be so done in my case."
And see with what vehemence he disavows and repels the thing:
"For it were good for me rather to die, than that any man should make my
glorying void."
And not once nor twice, but many times he uses this expression. For above
he said, "We did not use this right:" and after this again, "that I abuse not my
right:" and here, "but I have used none of these things." "These things;" what
things? The many examples. That is to say, many things giving me license; the
soldier, the husbandman, the shepherd, the Apostles, the law, the things done by
us unto you, the things done by you unto the others, the priests, the ordinance of
Christ; by none of these have I been induced to abolish my own law, and to
receive. And speak not to me of the past: (although I could say, that I have
endured much even in past times on this account,) nevertheless I do not rest on it
alone, but likewise concerning the future I pledge myself, that I would choose
rather to die of hunger than be deprived of these crowns.
"For it were good for me rather to die," says he, "than that any man should
make my glorying void."
He said not, "that any man should abolish my law," but, "my glorying." For
lest any should say, "he does it indeed but not cheerfully, but with lamentation
and grief," willing to show the excess of his joy and the abundance of his zeal,
he even calls the matter "glorying." So far was he from vexing himself that he
even glories, and chooses rather to die than to fall from this "glorying." So much