THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.28, C.2.

Reply to Objection 1: As Bede says on Lk. 1:33: Joseph is called the
father of the Saviour, not that he really was His father, as the
Photinians pretended: but that he was considered by men to be so,
for the safeguarding of Mary's good name. Wherefore Luke adds (Lk.
3:23): "Being, as it was supposed, the son of Joseph."
Or, according to Augustine (De Cons. Evang. ii), Joseph is called the
father of Christ just as "he is called the husband of Mary, without
fleshly mingling, by the mere bond of marriage: being thereby united
to Him much more closely than if he were adopted from another
family. Consequently that Christ was not begotten of Joseph by
fleshly union is no reason why Joseph should not be called His
father; since he would be the father even of an adopted son not born
of his wife."
Reply to Objection 2: As Jerome says on Mt. 1:18: "Though Joseph
was not the father of our Lord and Saviour, the order of His
genealogy is traced down to Joseph"---first, because "the Scriptures
are not wont to trace the female line in genealogies": secondly,
"Mary and Joseph were of the same tribe"; wherefore by law he was
bound to take her as being of his kin. Likewise, as Augustine says
(De Nup. et Concup. i), "it was befitting to trace the genealogy down
to Joseph, lest in that marriage any slight should be offered to the
male sex, which is indeed the stronger: for truth suffered nothing
thereby, since both Joseph and Mary were of the family of David."
Reply to Objection 3: As the gloss says on this passage, the word
"'mulier,' is here used instead of 'femina,' according to the custom of
the Hebrew tongue: which applies the term signifying woman to
those of the female sex who are virgins."
Reply to Objection 4: This argument is true of those things which
come into existence by the way of nature: since nature, just as it is
fixed to one particular effect, so it is determinate to one mode of
producing that effect. But as the supernatural power of God extends
to the infinite: just as it is not determinate to one effect, so neither is
it determinate to one mode of producing any effect whatever.
Consequently, just as it was possible for the first man to be
produced, by the Divine power, "from the slime of the earth," so too
was it possible for Christ's body to be made, by Divine power, from a
virgin without the seed of the male.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.28, C.2.

Reply to Objection 5: According to the Philosopher (De Gener.
Animal. i, ii, iv), in conception the seed of the male is not by way of
matter, but by way of agent: and the female alone supplies the
matter. Wherefore though the seed of the male was lacking in
Christ's conception, it does not follow that due matter was lacking.
But if the seed of the male were the matter of the fetus in animal
conception, it is nevertheless manifest that it is not a matter
remaining under one form, but subject to transformation. And
though the natural power cannot transmute other than determinate
matter to a determinate form; nevertheless the Divine power, which
is infinite, can transmute all matter to any form whatsoever.
Consequently, just as it transmuted the slime of the earth into
Adam's body, so could it transmute the matter supplied by His
Mother into Christ's body, even though it were not the sufficient
matter for a natural conception.