excellent hopes; which God grant that we may all attain; by the grace and loving
kindness and compassion of our Lord Jesus Christ— with whom to the Father
together with the Holy Spirit be glory, honour, dominion, to the ages of the ages.
Amen.

## Instructions to Catechumens

First Instruction
To those about to be illuminated; and for what reason the laver is said to be
of regeneration and not of remission of sins; and that it is a dangerous thing not
only to forswear oneself, but also to take an oath, even though we swear truly.
1. How delightful and lovable is our band of young brethren! For brethren I
call you, even now before you have been brought forth, and before your birth I
welcome this relationship with you: For I know, I know clearly, to how great an
honour you are about to be led, and to how great a dignity; and those who are
about to receive dignity, all are wont to honor, even before the dignity is
conferred, laying up for themselves beforehand by their attention good will for
the future. And this also I myself now do. For you are not about to be led to an
empty dignity, but to an actual kingdom: and not simply to a kingdom, but to the
kingdom of the Heavens itself. Wherefore I beseech and entreat you that you
remember me when you come into that kingdom, and as Joseph said to the chief
butler "Remember me when it shall be well with you," [Genesis 40:14] this also I
say now to you, do ye remember me when it is well with you. I do not ask this in
return for interpreting your dreams, as he; for I have not come to interpret
dreams for you, but to discourse of matters celestial, and to convey to you glad
tidings of such good things as "eye has not seen, and ear has not heard and
which have entered not into the heart of man, such are the things which God has
prepared for them that love him." [1 Corinthians 2:9-10] Now Joseph indeed said
to that chief butler, "yet three days and Pharaoh will restore you to your chief
butlership." But I do not say, yet three days and you shall be set to pour out the
wine of a tyrant, but yet thirty days, and not Pharaoh but the king of Heaven
shall restore you to the country which is on high, Jerusalem, which is free— to

the city which is in the heavens; and he said indeed, "You shall give the cup into
the hands of Pharaoh." But I say not that you shall give the cup into the hands of
the king, but that the king shall give the cup into your hand— that dread cup, full
of much power, and more precious than any created thing. The initiated know
the virtue of this cup, and you yourselves shall know it a little while hence.
Remember me, therefore, when you come into that kingdom, when you receive
the royal robe, when you are girt with the purple dipped in the master's blood,
when you will be crowned with the diadem, which has lustre leaping forth from
it on all sides, more brilliant than the rays of the sun. Such are the gifts of the
Bridegroom, greater indeed than your worth, but worthy of his lovingkindness.
Wherefore, I count you blessed already before those sacred nuptials, and I
do not only count you blessed, but I praise your prudence in that you have not
come to your illumination as the most slothful among men, at your last breath,
but already, like prudent servants, prepared with much goodwill to obey your
master, have brought the neck of your soul with much meekness and readiness
beneath the bands of Christ, and have received His easy yoke, and have taken
His light burden. For if the grace bestowed be the same both for you and for
those who are initiated at their last hour, yet the matter of the intention is not the
same, nor yet the matter of the preparation for the rite. For they indeed receive it
on their bed, but you in the bosom of the Church, which is the common mother
of us all; they indeed with lamentation and weeping, but you rejoicing, and
exceeding glad: they sighing, you giving thanks; they indeed lethargic with
much fever, you filled with much spiritual pleasure; wherefore in your case all
things are in harmony with the gift, but in theirs all are adverse to it. For there is
wailing and much lamentation on the part of the initiated, and children stand
around crying, wife tearing her cheeks, and dejected friends and tearful servants;
the whole aspect of the house resembles some wintry and gloomy day. And if
you shall open the heart of him who is lying there, you will find it more
downcast than are these. For as winds meeting one another with many a contrary
blast, break up the sea into many parts, so too the thought of the terrors preying