THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.3, C.7.

one does not exclude another from communicating in the same
nature, but only in the same Person. Hence, since in the mystery of
the Incarnation "the whole reason of the deed is the power of the
doer," as Augustine says (Ep. ad Volusianum cxxxvii), we must
judge of it in regard to the quality of the Divine Person assuming,
and not according to the quality of the human nature assumed.
Therefore it is not impossible that two or three Divine Persons
should assume one human nature, but it would be impossible for
them to assume one human hypostasis or person; thus Anselm says
in the book De Concep. Virg. (Cur Deus Homo ii, 9), that "several
Persons cannot assume one and the same man to unity of Person."
Reply to Objection 1: In the hypothesis that three Persons assume
one human nature, it would be true to say that the three Persons
were one man, because of the one human nature. For just as it is
now true to say the three Persons are one God on account of the one
Divine Nature, so it would be true to say they are one man on
account of the one human nature. Nor would "one" imply unity of
person, but unity in human nature; for it could not be argued that
because the three Persons were one man they were one simply. For
nothing hinders our saying that men, who are many simply, are in
some respect one, e.g. one people, and as Augustine says (De Trin.
vi, 3): "The Spirit of God and the spirit of man are by nature different,
but by inherence one spirit results," according to 1 Cor. 6:17: "He
who is joined to the Lord is one spirit."
Reply to Objection 2: In this supposition the human nature would be
assumed to the unity, not indeed of one Person, but to the unity of
each Person, so that even as the Divine Nature has a natural unity
with each Person, so also the human nature would have a unity with
each Person by assumption.
Reply to Objection 3: In the mystery of the Incarnation, there results
a communication of the properties belonging to the nature, because
whatever belongs to the nature can be predicated of the Person
subsisting in that nature, no matter to which of the natures it may
apply. Hence in this hypothesis, of the Person of the Father may be
predicated what belongs to the human nature and what belongs to
the Divine; and likewise of the Person of the Son and of the Holy
Ghost. But what belongs to the Person of the Father by reason of His
own Person could not be attributed to the Person of the Son or Holy
Ghost on account of the distinction of Persons which would still
remain. Therefore it might be said that as the Father was unbegotten,

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.3, C.7.

so the man was unbegotten, inasmuch as "man" stood for the
Person of the Father. But if one were to go on to say, "The man is
unbegotten; the Son is man; therefore the Son is unbegotten," it
would be the fallacy of figure of speech or of accident; even as we
now say God is unbegotten, because the Father is unbegotten, yet
we cannot conclude that the Son is unbegotten, although He is God.