the kingdom it may be by the way of virginity. Enter it then by the way of single
marriage. Can you not enter it by one marriage? Perchance you may by means of
a second marriage. You can not enter by the way of continence: enter then by the
way of almsgiving: or you can not enter by the way of almsgiving? Then try the
way of fasting. If you can not use this way, take that— or if not that, then take
this. Therefore the prophet spoke not of a garment of gold, but of one woven
with gold. It is of silk, or purple, or gold. You can not be a golden part? Then be
a silken one. I accept you, if only you are clothed in my raiment. Therefore also
Paul says "If any man builds upon this foundation, gold, silver, precious stones."
[1 Corinthians 3:12] You can not be the precious stone? Then be the gold. You
can not be the gold? Then be the silver, if only you are resting upon the
foundation. And again elsewhere, "there is one glory of the sun, and another
glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars." [1 Corinthians 15:41] You
can not be a sun? Then be a moon. You can not be a moon? Then be a star. You
can not be a large star? Be content to be a little one if only you are in the
Heaven. You can not be a virgin? Then live continently in the married state, only
abiding in the Church. You can not be without possessions? Then give alms,
only abiding in the Church, only wearing the proper raiment, only submitting to
the queen. The raiment is woven with gold, it is manifold in texture. I do not bar
the way against you: for the abundance of virtues has rendered the dispensation
of the king easy in operation. "Clothed in a vesture woven with gold, manifold in
texture." Her vesture is manifold: unfold, if you please, the deep meaning of the
expression here used, and fix your eyes upon this garment woven with gold. For
here indeed some live celibate, others live in an honourable estate of matrimony
being not much inferior to them: some have married once, others are widows in
the flower of their age. For what purpose is a paradise? And wherefore its
variety? Having various flowers, and trees, and many pearls. There are many
stars, but only one sun: there are many ways of living, but only one paradise;
there are many temples, but only one mother of them all. There is the body, the
eye, the finger, but all these make up but one man. There is the same distinction

between the small, the great, and the less. The virgin has need of the married
woman; for the virgin also is the product of marriage, that marriage may not be
despised by her. The virgin is the root of marriage: thus all things have been
linked together, the small with the great, and the great with the small. "The queen
stood on your right hand clothed in a vesture wrought with gold, manifold in
texture." Then follows "Hearken! O daughter." The conductor of the bride says
that you are about to go forth from your home to the home of the bridegroom
who in his essential nature far surpasses you. I am the conductor of the bride.
"Hearken O daughter." Did she immediately become the wife? Yea: for here
there is nothing corporeal. For He espoused her as a wife, He loves her as a
daughter, He provides for her as a handmaid, He guards her as a virgin, He
fences her round like a garden, and cherishes her like a member: as a head He
provides for her, as a root he causes her to grow, as a shepherd He feeds her, as a
bridegroom He weds her, as a propitiation He pardons her, as a sheep He is
sacrificed, as a bridegroom He preserves her in beauty, as a husband He provides
for her support. Many are the meanings in order that we may enjoy a part if it be
but a small part of the divine economy of grace. "Hearken O daughter" and
behold, and look upon things which are bridal and yet spiritual. Hearken O
daughter. She was at first a daughter of demons, a daughter of the earth,
unworthy of the earth and now she has become a daughter of the king. And this
He wished who loved her. For he who loves does not investigate character: love
does not regard uncomeliness: on this account indeed is it called love because it
oftentimes has affection for an uncomely person. Thus also did Christ. He saw
one who was uncomely (for comely I could not call her) and He loved her, and
He makes her young, not having spot or wrinkle. Oh what a bridegroom!
adorning with grace the ungracefulness of his bride! Hearken O daughter!
Hearken and behold! Two things He says "Hearken" and "Behold," two which
depend on yourself, one on your eyes, the other on your hearing. Now since her
dowry depended on hearing (and although some of you have been acute enough
to perceive this already, let them tarry for those who are feebler: I commend