can come of it?" Of this is bred foolish jesting; from that filthy talking; then
filthy doings.
Again, another being blamed for slandering his neighbors, and reviling, and
calumniating, despised it, saying, evil-speaking is nothing. By this he begets
hatred unspeakable, revilings without end; by the revilings blows, and by the
blows oftentimes murder.
4. From these little things then that wicked spirit thus brings in the great
sins; and from the great despair; having invented this other while not less
mischievous than the former. For to sin destroys not so much as to despair. For
he that has offended, if he be vigilant, speedily by repentance amends what has
been done; but he that has learned to despond, and does not repent, by reason
thereof fails of this amendment by not applying the remedies from repentance.
And he has a third grievous snare; as when he invests the sin with a show of
devotion. And where has the devil so far prevailed as to deceive to this degree?
Hear, and beware of his devices. Christ by Paul commanded "that a woman
depart not from her husband, [1 Corinthians 7:10] and not to defraud one
another, except by consent;" [1 Corinthians 7:5] but some from a love of
continence forsooth, having withdrawn from their own husbands, as though they
were doing something devout, have driven them to adultery. Consider now what
an evil it is that they, undergoing so much toil, should be blamed as having
committed the greatest injustice, and should suffer extreme punishment, and
drive their husbands into the pit of destruction.
Others again, abstaining from meats by a rule of fasting, have by degrees
gone so far as to abhor them; which even of itself brings a very great
punishment.
But this comes to pass, when any hold fast their own prejudices contrary to
what is approved by the Scriptures. Those also among the Corinthians thought it
was a part of perfection to eat of all things without distinction, even of things
forbidden, but nevertheless this was not of perfection, but of the utmost
lawlessness. Wherefore also Paul earnestly reproves them, and pronounces them

to be worthy of extreme punishment. Others again think it a sign of piety to wear
long hair. And yet this is among the things forbidden, and carries with it much
disgrace.
Again, others follow after excessive sorrow for their sins as a profitable
thing; yet it also comes of the devil's wiles, and Judas showed it; at least in
consequence thereof he even hanged himself. Therefore Paul again was in fear
about him that had committed fornication, lest any such thing should befall him,
and persuaded the Corinthians speedily to deliver him, "lest perhaps such a one
should be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow." [2 Corinthians 2:7] Then,
indicating that such a result comes of the snares of that wicked one, he says,
"Lest Satan should get an advantage over us, for we are not ignorant of his
devices," [2 Corinthians 2:10-11] meaning that he assails us with much craft.
Since if he fought against us plainly and openly, the victory would be ready and
easy; or rather even now, if we be vigilant, victory will be ready. For indeed
against each one of those ways God has armed us.
For to persuade us not to despise even these little things, hear what warning
He gives us, saying, "He that says to his brother, thou fool, shall be in danger of
hell;" [Matthew 5:22] and he that has looked with unchaste eyes is a complete
adulterer. [Matthew 5:28] And on them that laugh he pronounces a woe, and
everywhere He removes the beginning and the seeds of evil, and says we have to
give an account of an idle word. [Matthew 12:36] Therefore also Job applied a
remedy even for the thoughts of his children. [Job 1:5]
But about not despairing, it is said, "Does he fall, and not arise? Does he
turn away, and not return?" [Jeremiah 8:4] and, "I do not will the death of the
sinner, so much as that he should turn and live:" and, "Today if you will hear His
voice:" and many other such things, both sayings and examples are set in the
Scripture. And in order not to be ruined under the guise of godly fear, hear Paul
saying, "Lest perhaps such a one be swallowed up by overmuch sorrow."
Knowing therefore these things, let us set for a barrier in all the ways that
pervert the unwary the wisdom which is drawn from the Scriptures. Neither say,