disposition whereby it is perfected by the soul; and consequently
those bodies will be impassible.
Reply to Objection 1: According to Anselm (Cur Deus Homo ii, 11),
"mortal is included in the philosophers' definition of man, because
they did not believe that the whole man could be ever immortal, for
they had no experience of man otherwise than in this state of
mortality." Or we may say that since, according to the Philosopher
(Metaph. vi, 12), essential differences are unknown to us, we
sometimes employ accidental differences in order to signify
essential differences from which the accidental differences result.
Hence "mortal" is put in the definition of man, not as though
mortality were essential to man, but because that which causes
passibility and mortality in the present state of life, namely
composition of contraries, is essential to man, but it will not cause it
then, on account of the triumph of the soul over the body.
Reply to Objection 2: Potentiality is twofold, tied and free: and this is
true not only of active but also of passive potentiality. For the form
ties the potentiality of matter, by determining it to one thing, and it is
thus that it overcomes it. And since in corruptible things form does
not perfectly overcome matter, it cannot tie it completely so as to
prevent it from sometimes receiving a disposition contrary to the
form through some passion. But in the saints after the resurrection,
the soul will have complete dominion over the body, and it will be
altogether impossible for it to lose this dominion, because it will be
immutably subject to God, which was not the case in the state of
innocence. Consequently those bodies will retain substantially the
same potentiality as they have now to another form; yet that
potentiality will remain tied by the triumph of the soul over the body,
so that it will never be realized by actual passion.
Reply to Objection 3: The elemental qualities are the instruments of
the soul, as stated in De Anima ii, text. 38, seqq., for the heat of fire
in an animal's body is directed in the act of nutrition by the soul's
power. When, however, the principal agent is perfect, and there is no
defect in the instrument, no action proceeds from the instrument,
except in accordance with the disposition of the principal agent.
Consequently in the bodies of the saints after the resurrection, no
action or passion will result from the elemental qualities that is
contrary to the disposition of the soul which has the preservation of
the body in view.

Reply to Objection 4: According to Augustine (Ep. ad Consent. cxlvi)
"the Divine power is able to remove" whatever qualities He will "from
this visible and tangible body, other qualities remaining." Hence
even as in a certain respect "He deprived the flames of the Chaldees'
furnace of the power to burn, since the bodies of the children were
preserved without hurt, while in another respect that power
remained, since those flames consumed the wood, so will He remove
passibility from the humors while leaving their nature unchanged." It
has been explained in the Article how this is brought about.
Reply to Objection 5: The scars of wounds will not be in the saints,
nor were they in Christ, in so far as they imply a defect, but as signs
of the most steadfast virtue whereby the saints suffered for the sake
of justice and faith: so that this will increase their own and others'
joy (Cf. TP, Question 54, Article 4, ad 3). Hence Augustine says (De
Civ. Dei xxii, 19): "We feel an undescribable love for the blessed
martyrs so as to desire to see in that kingdom the scars of the
wounds in their bodies, which they bore for Christ's name.
Perchance indeed we shall see them for this will not make them less
comely but more glorious. A certain beauty will shine in them, a
beauty though in the body, yet not of the body but of virtue."
Nevertheless those martyrs who have been maimed and deprived of
their limbs will not be without those limbs in the resurrection of the
dead, for to them it is said (Lk. 21:18): "A hair of your head shall not
perish."