FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.78, C.3.

good; so too it may happen sometimes that one who has a vicious
habit, acts, not from that habit, but through the uprising of a passion,
or again through ignorance. But whenever he uses the vicious habit
he must needs sin through certain malice: because to anyone that
has a habit, whatever is befitting to him in respect of that habit, has
the aspect of something lovable, since it thereby becomes, in a way,
connatural to him, according as custom and habit are a second
nature. Now the very thing which befits a man in respect of a vicious
habit, is something that excludes a spiritual good: the result being
that a man chooses a spiritual evil, that he may obtain possession of
what befits him in respect of that habit: and this is to sin through
certain malice. Wherefore it is evident that whoever sins through
habit, sins through certain malice.
Reply to Objection 1: Venial sin does not exclude spiritual good,
consisting in the grace of God or charity. Wherefore it is an evil, not
simply, but in a relative sense: and for that reason the habit thereof
is not a simple but a relative evil.
Reply to Objection 2: Acts proceeding from habits are of like species
as the acts from which those habits were formed: but they differ
from them as perfect from imperfect. Such is the difference between
sin committed through certain malice and sin committed through
passion.
Reply to Objection 3: He that sins through habit is always glad for
what he does through habit, as long as he uses the habit. But since
he is able not to use the habit, and to think of something else, by
means of his reason, which is not altogether corrupted, it may
happen that while not using the habit he is sorry for what he has
done through the habit. And so it often happens that such a man is
sorry for his sin not because sin in itself is displeasing to him, but
on account of his reaping some disadvantage from the sin.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.78, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether one who sins through certain malice,

sins through habit?
Objection 1: It would seem that whoever sins through certain malice,
sins through habit. For the Philosopher says (Ethic. v, 9) that "an
unjust action is not done as an unjust man does it," i.e. through
choice, "unless it be done through habit." Now to sin through certain
malice is to sin through making a choice of evil, as stated above
(Article 1). Therefore no one sins through certain malice, unless he
has the habit of sin.
Objection 2: Further, Origen says (Peri Archon iii) that "a man is not
suddenly ruined and lost, but must needs fall away little by little."
But the greatest fall seems to be that of the man who sins through
certain malice. Therefore a man comes to sin through certain malice,
not from the outset, but from inveterate custom, which may
engender a habit.
Objection 3: Further, whenever a man sins through certain malice,
his will must needs be inclined of itself to the evil he chooses. But by
the nature of that power man is inclined, not to evil but to good.
Therefore if he chooses evil, this must be due to something
supervening, which is passion or habit. Now when a man sins
through passion, he sins not through certain malice, but through
weakness, as stated (Question 77, Article 3). Therefore whenever
anyone sins through certain malice, he sins through habit.
On the contrary, The good habit stands in the same relation to the
choice of something good, as the bad habit to the choice of
something evil. But it happens sometimes that a man, without having
the habit of a virtue, chooses that which is good according to that
virtue. Therefore sometimes also a man, without having the habit of
a vice, may choose evil, which is to sin through certain malice.
I answer that, The will is related differently to good and to evil.
Because from the very nature of the power, it is inclined to the
rational good, as its proper object; wherefore every sin is said to be
contrary to nature. Hence, if a will be inclined, by its choice, to some
evil, this must be occasioned by something else. Sometimes, in fact,
this is occasioned through some defect in the reason, as when
anyone sins through ignorance; and sometimes this arises through