also informed them who he was, and spoke of the nature of his own baptism, that
it was but a slight and mean thing, nothing more than some water, and told of the
superiority of the Baptism given by Christ; he also cited Esaias the prophet,
testifying of old very long ago, and calling Christ "Lord" [Isaiah 40:3], but
giving him the names of "minister and servant." What after this ought they to
have done? Ought they not to have believed on Him who was witnessed of, to
have worshipped Him, to have confessed Him to be God? For the character and
heavenly wisdom of the witness showed that his testimony proceeded, not from
flattery, but from truth; which is plain also from this, that no man prefers his
neighbor to himself, nor, when he may lawfully give honor to himself, will yield
it up to another, especially when it is so great as that of which we speak. So that
John would not have renounced this testimony (as belonging) to Christ, had He
not been God. For though he might have rejected it for himself as being too great
for his own nature, yet he would not have assigned it to another nature that was
beneath it.
"But there stands One among you, whom you know not." Reasonable it was
that Christ should mingle among the people as one of the many, because
everywhere He taught men not to be puffed up and boastful. And in this place by
"knowledge" the Baptist means a perfect acquaintance with Him, who and
whence He was. And immediately next to this he puts, "Who comes after me";
all but saying, "Think not that all is contained in my baptism, for had that been
perfect, Another would not have arisen after me to offer you a different One, but
this of mine is a preparation and a clearing the way for that other. Mine is but a
shadow and image, but One must come who shall add to this the reality. So that
His very coming 'after me' especially declares His dignity: for had the first been
perfect, no place would have been required for a second." "Is before me," is
more honorable, brighter. And then, lest they should imagine that His superiority
was found by comparison, desiring to establish His incomparableness, he says,
"Whose shoe's latchet I am not worthy to unloose"; that is, who is not simply
"before me," but before me in such a way, that I am not worthy to be numbered

among the meanest of His servants. For to loose the shoe is the office of
humblest service.
Now if John was not worthy to "unloose the latchet" [Matthew 11:11],
John, than whom "among them that are born of women there has not risen a
greater," where shall we rank ourselves? If he who was equal to, or rather greater
than, all the world, (for says Paul, "the world was not worthy" of them [Hebrews
11:38] declares himself not worthy to be reckoned even among the meanest of
those who should minister unto Him, what shall we say, who are full of ten
thousand sins, and are as far from the excellence of John, as earth from heaven.
4. He then says that he himself is not "worthy so much as to unloose the
latchet of His shoe"; while the enemies of the truth are mad with such a
madness, as to assert that they are worthy to know Him even as He knows
Himself. What is worse than such insanity, what more frenzied than such
arrogance? Well has a wise man said, "The beginning of pride is not to know the
Lord."
The devil would not have been brought down and become a devil, not being
a devil before, had he not been sick of this disease. This it was that cast him out
from that confidence, this sent him to the pit of fire, this was the cause of all his
woes. For it is enough of itself to destroy every excellence of the soul, whether it
find almsgiving, or prayer, or fasting, or anything. For, says the Evangelist,
"That which is highly esteemed among men is impure before the Lord." [Luke
16:15 — not quoted exactly] Therefore it is not only fornication or adultery that
are wont to defile those who practice them, but pride also, and that far more than
those vices. Why? Because fornication though it is an unpardonable sin, yet a
man may plead the desire; but pride cannot possibly find any cause or pretext of
any sort whatever by which to obtain so much as a shadow of excuse; it is
nothing but a distortion and most grievous disease of the soul, produced from no
other source but folly. For there is nothing more foolish than a proud man,
though he be surrounded with wealth, though he possess much of the wisdom of
this world, though he be set in royal place, though he bear about with all things