2 Corinthians 2:1-2
2. "For if I make you sorry, who then is he that makes me glad, but he that
is made sorry by me?"
What is this consequence? A very just one indeed. For observe, I would not,
he says, come unto you, lest I should increase your sorrow, rebuking, showing
anger and disgust. Then seeing that even this was strong and implied accusation
that they so lived as to make Paul sorry, he applies a corrective in the words,
"For if I make you sorry, who then is he that makes me glad, but he that is made
sorry by me?"
What he says is of this kind. 'Even though I were to be in sorrow, being
compelled to rebuke you and to see you sorry, still nevertheless this very thing
would have made me glad. For this is a proof of the greatest love, that you hold
me in such esteem as to be hurt at my being displeased with you.'
Behold too his prudence. Their doing what all disciples do, namely,
smarting and feeling it when rebuked, he produces as an instance of their
gratifying him; for, says he, 'No man makes me so glad as he that gives heed to
my words, and is sorry when he sees me angry.'
Yet what followed naturally was to say, 'For if I make you sorry, who then
is he that can make you glad?' But he does not say this, but turns his speech back
again, dealing tenderly with them, and says, 'Though I make you sorry, even
herein you bestow on me a very great favor in that you are hurt at what I say.'

2 Corinthians 2:3
"And I wrote this very thing unto you."
What? That for this cause I came not, to spare you. When wrote he? In the
former Epistle when he said, "I do not wish to see you now by the way?" [1
Corinthians 16:7] I think not; but in this Epistle when he said, "Lest when I come
again, my God should humble me before you." [2 Corinthians 12:21] I have
written then towards the end this same, says he, "lest when I come, my God will
humble me, and I should mourn for many of them that have sinned heretofore."
But why did you write? "Lest when I came I should have sorrow from them
of whom I ought to rejoice, having confidence in you all, that my joy is the joy of
you all?" For whereas he said he was made glad by their sorrow, and this was
too arrogant and harsh, again he gave it a different turn and softened it by what
he subjoined. For, he says, I therefore wrote unto you before, that I might not
with anguish find you unreformed; and I said this, "lest I should have sorrow,"
out of regard not to my own interest but yours. For I know that if you see me
rejoicing you rejoice, and if you behold me sad you are sad. Observe therefore
again the connection of what he said; for so his words will be more easy to
understand. I came not, he says, lest I should cause you sorrow when finding you
unreformed. And this I did, not studying my own advantage, but yours. For as to
myself, when you are made sorry I receive no little pleasure, seeing that you care
so much about me as to be sorry and distressed at my being displeased. "For
who is he that makes me glad, but he that is made sorry by me." However,
though it be so with myself, yet because I study your advantage, I wrote this
same thing to you that I might not be made sorry, herein also again studying not
my advantage, but yours; for I know, that were ye to see me sad, you also would
be sorry; as also you are glad when you see me rejoicing. Observe now his
prudence. He said, I came not, that I might not make you sorry; although, says