more ought we so to make war with men without arms. So Hezekiah triumphed
over the Assyrian king, so Moses over Amalek, so Samuel over the men of
Ascalon, so Israel over the thirty-two kings. If where there was need of arms,
and of battle array, and of fighting, they, leaving their arms. had recourse to
prayer; here where the matter has to be accomplished by prayers alone, does it
not much more behoove us to pray?
But there, you say, the rulers entreated for the people, but you request the
people to entreat for the ruler. I also know it. For those under rule at that time
were wretched and mean persons. Wherefore they were saved by the claims and
the virtue of their commander alone; but now, when the grace of God has
prevailed, and we shall find among those who are ruled many or rather the
greater part excelling their ruler in a great degree; do not deprive us of this
succor, raise up our hands that they may not be faint, open our mouth for us, that
it may not be closed. Entreat God— for this cause entreat Him. It is in our behalf
indeed that it is done, but it is wholly for your sakes. For we are appointed for
your advantage, and for your interests we are concerned. Entreat every one of
you, both privately and publicly. Mark Paul saying, "That for the gift bestowed
upon us by means of many, thanks may be given by many persons on our behalf"
[2 Corinthians 1:11]; that is, that He may give grace to many. If in the case of
men, the people coming forward ask a pardon for persons condemned and led
away to execution, and the king from regard to the multitude revokes the
sentence, much more will God be influenced by regard to you, not by your
multitude but your virtue.
For violent is the enemy we have. For each of you indeed anxiously thinks
of his own interests, but we the concerns of all together. We stand in the part of
the battle that is pressed on. The devil is more violently armed against us. For in
wars too, he that is on the opposite side endeavors before all others to overthrow
the general. For this reason all his fellow-combatants hasten there. For this
reason there is much tumult, every one endeavoring to rescue him; they surround
him with their shields, wishing to preserve his person. Hear what all the people

say to David. (I say not this, as comparing myself to David, I am not so mad, but
because I wish to show the affection of the people for their ruler.) "You shall go
no more out with us to battle," they say, "that you quench not the lamp of Israel."
[2 Samuel 21:17] See how anxious they were to spare the old man. I am greatly
in need of your prayers. Let no one, as I have said, from an excessive humility
deprive me of this alliance and succor. If our part be well approved, your own
also will be more honorable. If our teaching flow abundantly, the riches will
redound to you. Hear the prophet saying, "Do the shepherds feed themselves?"
[From Ezekiel 34:2, Septuagint]
Do you observe Paul constantly seeking these prayers? Do you hear that
thus Peter was delivered from prison, when fervent prayer was made for him?
[Acts 12:5] I verily believe that your prayer will have great effect, offered with
so great unanimity. Do you not think that it is a matter much too great for my
littleness to draw near to God, and entreat Him for so numerous a people? For if
I have not confidence to pray for myself, much less for others. For it belongs to
men of high estimation, to beseech God to be merciful to others; it is for those
who have rendered Him favorable to themselves. But he who is himself an
offender, how shall he entreat for another? But nevertheless, because I embrace
you with a father's heart, because love dares everything, not only in the Church,
but in the house also, I make my prayer above all other things for your health
both in soul and in body. For there is no other people, before his own. For if Job
rising up immediately made so many offerings for his children in the flesh, how
much more ought we to do this for our spiritual children?
Why do I say these things? Because if we who are so far removed from the
greatness of the work, offer supplications and prayers for you, much more is it
just that you should do it. For that one should entreat for many, is exceedingly
bold, and requires much confidence: but that many having met together should
offer supplication for one, is nothing burdensome. For every one does this not
trusting to his own virtue, but to the multitude, and to their unanimity, to which
God everywhere has much respect. For He says, "where two or three are