says the apostle, "commendeth His love towards us, in that, while we
were yet sinners, Christ died for us. Much more, then, being now justified
by His blood, we shall be saved from wrath through Him." To this he goes
on to add, "For if, when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by
the death of His Son; much more, being reconciled, we shall be saved by
His life." Those whom he first calls sinners he afterwards calls the
enemies of God; and those whom he first speaks of as justified by His
blood, he afterwards speaks of as reconciled by the death of the Son of
God; and those whom he speaks of first as saved from wrath through
Him, he afterwards speaks of as saved by His life. We were not, therefore,
before that grace merely anyhow sinners, but in such sins that we were
enemies of God. But the same apostle calls us above several times by two
appellations, viz. sinners and enemies of God,—one as if the most mild,
the other plainly the most harsh,—saying, "For if when we were yet weak,
in due time Christ died for the ungodly." Those whom he called weak, the
same he called ungodly. Weakness seems something slight; but
sometimes it is such as to be called impiety. Yet except it were weakness,
it would not need a physician, who is in the Hebrew Jesus, in the Greek
Σωτήρ, but in our speech Saviour. And this word the Latin language had
not previously, but could have, seeing that it could have it when it wanted
it. And this foregoing sentence of the apostle, where he says, "For when
we were yet weak, in due time He died for the ungodly," coheres with
those two following sentences; in the one of which he spoke of sinners, in
the other of enemies of God, as though he referred each severally to each,
viz. sinners to the weak, the enemies of God to the ungodly.

### CHAP. 11.—A DIFFICULTY, HOW WE ARE JUSTITIFIED IN THE BLOOD OF THE SON OF GOD.

15. But what is meant by "justified in His blood?" What power is there in
this blood, I beseech you, that they who believe should be justified in it?
And what is meant by "being reconciled by the death of His Son?" Was it
indeed so, that when God the Father was wroth with us, He saw the death
of His Son for us, and was appeased towards us? Was then His Son
already so far appeased towards us, that He even deigned to die for us;
while the Father was still so far wroth, that except His Son died for us, He
would not be appeased? And what, then, is that which the same teacher of

the Gentiles himself says in another place: "What shall we then say to
these things? If God be for us, who can be against us? He that spared not
His own Son, but delivered Him up for us all; how has He not with Him
also freely given us all things?" Pray, unless the Father had been already
appeased, would He have delivered up His own Son, not sparing Him for
us? Does not this opinion seem to be as it were contrary to that? In the
one, the Son dies for us, and the Father is reconciled to us by His death;
in the other, as though the Father first loved us, He Himself on our
account does not spare the Son, He Himself for us delivers Him up to
death. But I see that the Father loved us also before, not only before the
Son died for us, but before He created the world; the apostle himself
being witness, who says, "According as He hath chosen us in Him before
the foundation of the world." Nor was the Son delivered up for us as it
were unwillingly, the Father Himself not sparing Him; for it is said also
concerning Him, "Who loved me, and delivered up Himself for me."
Therefore together both the Father and the Son, and the Spirit of both,
work all things equally and harmoniously; yet we are justified in the
blood of Christ, and we are reconciled to God by the death of His Son.
And I will explain, as I shall be able, here also, how this was done, as
much as may seem sufficient.