THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.18, C.2.

only one will in Him. So, too, Eutyches and all who held one
composite nature in Christ were forced to place one will in Him.
Nestorius, too, who maintained that the union of God and man was
one of affection and will, held only one will in Christ. But later on,
Macarius, Patriarch of Antioch, Cyrus of Alexandria, and Sergius of
Constantinople and some of their followers, held that there is one
will in Christ, although they held that in Christ there are two natures
united in a hypostasis; because they believed that Christ's human
nature never moved with its own motion, but only inasmuch as it
was moved by the Godhead, as is plain from the synodical letter of
Pope Agatho [Third Council of Constantinople, Act. 4].
And hence in the sixth Council held at Constantinople [Act. 18] it
was decreed that it must be said that there are two wills in Christ, in
the following passage: "In accordance with what the Prophets of old
taught us concerning Christ, and as He taught us Himself, and the
Symbol of the Holy Fathers has handed down to us, we confess two
natural wills in Him and two natural operations." And this much it
was necessary to say. For it is manifest that the Son of God
assumed a perfect human nature, as was shown above (Question 5;
Question 9, Article 1). Now the will pertains to the perfection of
human nature, being one of its natural powers, even as the intellect,
as was stated in the FP, Questions 79,80. Hence we must say that the
Son of God assumed a human will, together with human nature. Now
by the assumption of human nature the Son of God suffered no
diminution of what pertains to His Divine Nature, to which it belongs
to have a will, as was said in the FP, Question 19, Article 1. Hence it
must be said that there are two wills in Christ, i.e. one human, the
other Divine.
Reply to Objection 1: Whatever was in the human nature of Christ
was moved at the bidding of the Divine will; yet it does not follow
that in Christ there was no movement of the will proper to human
nature, for the good wills of other saints are moved by God's will,
"Who worketh" in them "both to will and to accomplish," as is
written Phil. 2:13. For although the will cannot be inwardly moved by
any creature, yet it can be moved inwardly by God, as was said in the
FP, Question 105, Article 4. And thus, too, Christ by His human will
followed the Divine will according to Ps. 39:9; "That I should do Thy
will, O my God, I have desired it." Hence Augustine says (Contra
Maxim. ii, 20): "Where the Son says to the Father, 'Not what I will, but
what Thou willest,' what do you gain by adding your own words and
saying 'He shows that His will was truly subject to His Father,' as if

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.18, C.2.

we denied that man's will ought to be subject to God's will?"
Reply to Objection 2: It is proper to an instrument to be moved by
the principal agent, yet diversely, according to the property of its
nature. For an inanimate instrument, as an axe or a saw, is moved by
the craftsman with only a corporeal movement; but an instrument
animated by a sensitive soul is moved by the sensitive appetite, as a
horse by its rider; and an instrument animated with a rational soul is
moved by its will, as by the command of his lord the servant is
moved to act, the servant being like an animate instrument, as the
Philosopher says (Polit. i, 2,4; Ethic. viii, 11). And hence it was in this
manner that the human nature of Christ was the instrument of the
Godhead, and was moved by its own will.
Reply to Objection 3: The power of the will is natural, and
necessarily follows upon the nature; but the movement or act of this
power---which is also called will---is sometimes natural and
necessary, e.g. with respect to beatitude; and sometimes springs
from free-will and is neither necessary nor natural, as is plain from
what has been stated in the FS, Question 10, Articles 1,2 [FP,
Question 82, Article 2]. And yet even reason itself, which is the
principle of this movement, is natural. Hence besides the Divine will
it is necessary to place in Christ a human will, not merely as a
natural power, or a natural movement, but even as a rational
movement.
Reply to Objection 4: When we say "to will in a certain way," we
signify a determinate mode of willing. Now a determinate mode
regards the thing of which it is the mode. Hence since the will
pertains to the nature, "to will in a certain way" belongs to the
nature, not indeed considered absolutely, but as it is in the
hypostasis. Hence the human will of Christ had a determinate mode
from the fact of being in a Divine hypostasis, i.e. it was always
moved in accordance with the bidding of the Divine will.