previously by His own actions. Where then did He confirm it by His actions?
Hear Him saying, "The Son of Man has not where to lay His head."
[Matthew 8:20] Neither is He satisfied with this only, but in His disciples also
He exhibits His full proof of these things, by fashioning them too in like manner,
yet not suffering them to be in want of anything.
But mark His tender care also, how He surpasses the affection of any father.
Thus, "This I command," says He, "for nothing else, but that I may deliver you
from superfluous anxieties. For even if today you have taken thought for
tomorrow, you will also have to take thought again tomorrow. Why then what is
over and above? Why force the day to receive more than the distress which is
allotted to it, and together with its own troubles add to it also the burden of the
following day; and this, when there is no chance of your lightening the other by
the addition so taking place, but you are merely to exhibit yourself as coveting
superfluous troubles?" Thus, that He may reprove them the more, He does all
but give life to the very time, and brings it in as one injured, and exclaiming
against them for their causeless despite. Why, you have received the day, to care
for the things thereof. Wherefore then add unto it the things of the other day
also? Hath it not then burden enough in its own anxiety? Why now, I pray, do
you make it yet heavier? Now when the Lawgiver says these things, and He that
is to pass judgment on us, consider the hopes that He suggests to us, how good
they are; He Himself testifying, that this life is wretched and wearisome, so that
the anxiety even of the one day is enough to hurt and afflict us.
6. Nevertheless, after so many and so grave words, we take thought for
these things, but for the things in Heaven no longer: rather we have reversed His
order, on either side fighting against His sayings. For mark; "Seek ye not the
things present," says He, "at all;" but we are seeking these things for ever: "seek
the things in Heaven," says He; but those things we seek not so much as for a
short hour, but according to the greatness of the anxiety we display about the
things of the world, is the carelessness we entertain in things spiritual; or rather
even much greater. But this does not prosper for ever; neither can this be for

ever. What if for ten days we think scorn? If for twenty? If for an hundred? Must
we not of absolute necessity depart, and fall into the hands of the Judge?
"But the delay has comfort." And what sort of comfort, to be every day
looking for punishment and vengeance? Nay, if you would have some comfort
from this delay, take it by gathering for yourself the fruit of amendment after
repentance. Since if the mere delay of vengeance seem to you a sort of
refreshment, far more is it gain not to fall into the vengeance. Let us then make
full use of this delay, in order to have a full deliverance from the dangers that
press upon us. For none of the things enjoined is either burdensome or grievous,
but all are so light and easy, that if we only bring a genuine purpose of heart, we
may accomplish all, though we be chargeable with countless offenses. For so
Manasses had perpetrated innumerable pollutions, having both stretched out his
hands against the saints, and brought abominations into the temple, and filled the
city with murders, and wrought many other things beyond excuse; yet
nevertheless after so long and so great wickedness, he washed away from
himself all these things. How and in what manner? By repentance, and
consideration.
For there is not, yea, there is not any sin, that does not yield and give way to
the power of repentance, or rather to the grace of Christ. Since if we would but
only change, we have Him to assist us. And if you are desirous to become good,
there is none to hinder us; or rather there is one to hinder us, the devil, yet has he
no power, so long as you choose what is best, and so attract God to your aid. But
if you are not yourself willing, but startest aside, how shall He protect you?
Since not of necessity or compulsion, but of your own will, He wills you to be
saved. For if you yourself, having a servant full of hatred and aversion for you,
and continually going off, and fleeing away from you, wouldest not choose to
keep him, and this though needing his services; much less will God, who does all
things not for His own profit, but for your salvation, choose to retain you by
compulsion; as on the other hand, if you show forth a right intention only, He
would not choose ever to give you up, no, not whatever the devil may do. So that