inasmuch as he upset you as soon as you had stripped for the contest with him,
all that he accomplished was to render you more eager to do battle with him. For
that fell pirate attacked you just as you were sailing out of the harbor, not when
you had returned from your trading voyage, bringing a full cargo. And as when
one has attempted to stay a fierce lion, and has only grazed his skin, he has done
him no injury but only stirred him up the more against himself, and rendered him
more confident and difficult to capture afterwards: even so the common enemy
of all has attempted to strike a deep blow, but has missed it, and consequently
made his antagonist more vigilant and wary for the future.
2. For human nature is a slippery thing, quick to be cheated, but quick also
to recover from deceit and as it speedily falls, so also does it readily rise. For
even that blessed man, I mean David the chosen king and prophet, after he had
accomplished many good deeds, betrayed himself to be a man, for once he fell in
love with a strange woman, nor did he stop there but he committed adultery on
account of his passion, and he committed murder on account of his adultery; but
he did not try to inflict a third blow upon himself because he had already
received two such heavy ones, but immediately hastened to the physician, and
applied the remedies, fasting, tears, lamentation, constant prayer, frequent
confession of the sin; and so by these means he propitiated God, insomuch that
he was restored to his former position, insomuch that after adultery and murder
the memory of the father was able to shield the idolatry of the son. For the son of
this David, Solomon by name, was caught by the same snare as his father, and
out of complaisance to women fell away from the God of his fathers.
[1 Kings 11:3-4] You see how great an evil it is not to master pleasure, not to
upset the ruling principle in nature, and for a man to be the slave of women. This
same Solomon then, who was formerly righteous and wise but who ran a risk of
being deprived of all the kingdom on account of his sin, God permitted to keep
the sixth part of the government on account of the renown of his father.
[1 Kings 11:12-13]
Now if your zeal had been concerned with worldly eloquence, and then you

had given it up in despair, I should have reminded you of the law courts and the
judgment seat and the victories achieved there and the former boldness of your
speech, and should have exhorted you to return to your labours in that behalf:
but inasmuch as our race is for heavenly things, and we take no account of the
things which are on earth, I put you in remembrance of another court of justice,
and of that fearful and tremendous seat of judgment; "for we must all be made
manifest before the judgment seat of Christ." [2 Corinthians 5:10] And He will
then sit as judge who is now disregarded by you. What shall we say then, let me
ask at that time? Or what defence shall we make, if we continue to disregard
Him? What shall we say then? Shall we plead the anxieties of business? Nay He
has anticipated this by saying, "What shall it profit a man if he gain the whole
world and lose his own soul?" [Matthew 16:26] Or that we have been deceived
by others? But it did not help Adam in his defence to screen himself behind his
wife, and say "the woman whom you gave me, she deceived me;" [Genesis 3:12]
even as the serpent was no excuse for the woman. Terrible, O beloved Theodore,
is that tribunal, one which needs no accusers and waits for no witnesses; for "all
things are naked and laid open to Him" [Hebrews 4:13] who judges us, and we
must submit to give an account not of deeds only but also of thoughts; for that
judge is quick to discern the thoughts and intents of the heart. [Hebrews 4:12]
But perhaps you will allege weakness of nature as the excuse, and inability to
bear the yoke. And what kind of defence is this, that you have not strength to
bear the easy yoke, that you are unable to carry the light burden? Is recovery
from fatigue a grievous and oppressive thing? For it is to this that Christ calls us,
saying, "Come unto me all you that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give
you rest; take my yoke upon you and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in
heart; for my yoke is easy and my burden is light." [Matthew 11:28] For what
can be lighter I ask, than to be released from anxieties, and business, and fears,
and labors, and to stand outside the rough billows of life, and dwell in a tranquil
haven?
3. Which of all things in the world seems to you most desirable and