1 Corinthians 9:19
4. "For though I was free from all men, I brought myself under bondage to
all, that I might gain the more."
Here again he introduces another high step in advance. For a great thing it
is even not to receive, but this which he is about to mention is much more than
that. What then is it that he says? "Not only have I not received," says he, not
only have I not used this right, but I have even made myself a slave, and in a
slavery manifold and universal. For not in money alone, but, which was much
more than money, in employments many and various have I made good this
same rule: and I have made myself a slave when I was subject to none, having
no necessity in any respect, (for this is the meaning of, "though I was free from
all men;") and not to any single person have I been a slave, but to the whole
world.
Wherefore also he subjoined, "I brought myself under bondage to all." That
is, "To preach the Gospel I was commanded, and to proclaim the things
committed to my trust; but the contriving and devising numberless things beside,
all that was of my own zeal. For I was only under obligation to invest the money,
whereas I did every thing in order to get a return for it, attempting more than
was commanded." Thus doing as he did all things of free choice and zeal and
love to Christ, he had an insatiable desire for the salvation of mankind.
Wherefore also he used to overpass by a very great deal the lines marked out, in
every way springing higher than the very heaven.
5. Next, having mentioned his servitude, he describes in what follows the
various modes of it. And what are these?

1 Corinthians 9:20
"And I became," says he, "to the Jews as a Jew, that I might gain Jews."
And how did this take place? When he circumcised that he might abolish
circumcision. Wherefore he said not, "a Jew," but, "as a Jew," which was a wise
arrangement. What do you say? The herald of the world and he who touched the
very heavens and shone so bright in grace, does he all at once descend so low?
Yea. For this is to ascend. For you are not to look to the fact only of his
descending, but also to his raising up him that was bowed down and bringing
him up to himself.
"To them that are under the law, as under the law, not being myself under
the law, that I might gain them that are under the law." Either it is the
explanation of what went before, or he hints at some other thing besides the
former: calling those Jews, who were such originally and from the first: but
"under the law," the proselytes, or those who became believers and yet adhered
to the law. For they were no longer as Jews, yet 'under the law.' And when was
he under the law? When he shaved his head; when he offered sacrifice. Now
these things were done, not because his mind changed, (since such conduct
would have been wickedness,) but because his love condescended. For that he
might bring over to this faith those who were really Jews, he became such
himself not really, showing himself such only, but not such in fact nor doing
these things from a mind so disposed. Indeed, how could he, zealous as he was
to convert others also, and doing these things only in order that he might free
others who did them from that degradation?