and the lightnings, they both forged a calf, and "were joined unto Baal-peor."
And those very persons too, who were present at the time, and saw Lazarus
arise, so far from believing in Him, who had wrought these things, repeatedly
attempted even to slay Him. Now if seeing before their eyes one rise from the
dead, they were so wicked, why marvel at their not receiving a voice wafted
from above? Since when a soul is uncandid and perverse, and possessed by the
disease of envy, it yields to none of these things; even as when it is candid it
receives all with faith, and has no great need of these.
Speak not therefore thus, "They believed not," but rather inquire, "Did not
all things take place which ought to have made them believe?" For by the
prophet also God frames this kind of defense of His own ways in general. That
is, the Jews being on the point of ruin, and of being given over to extreme
punishment; lest any from their wickedness should calumniate His providence,
He says, "What ought I to have done to this vineyard, that I have not done?" Just
so here likewise reflect; "what ought to have been done, and was not done?"
And indeed whenever arguments arise on God's Providence, make use of this
kind of defense, against those who from the wickedness of the many try to raise
a prejudice against it. See, for instance, what astonishing things are done,
preludes of those which were to come; for it is no more paradise, but Heaven
that is opened.
But let our argument with the Jews stand over unto some other time; for the
present, God working with us, we would direct our discourse to what is
immediately before us.
3. "And Jesus, when He was baptized, went up straightway out of the water;
and lo! The heavens were opened unto Him." [Matthew 3:16]
Wherefore were the heavens opened? To inform you that at your baptism
also this is done, God calling you to your country on high, and persuading you to
have nothing to do with earth. And if you see not, yet never doubt it. For so
evermore at the beginnings of all wonderful and spiritual transactions, sensible
visions appear, and such-like signs, for the sake of them that are somewhat dull

in disposition, and who have need of outward sight, and who cannot at all
conceive an incorporeal nature, but are excited only by the things that are seen:
that so, though afterward no such thing occur, what has been declared by them
once for all at the first may be received by your faith.
For in the case of the apostles too, there was a "sound of a mighty wind,"
[Acts 2:2] and visions of fiery tongues appeared, but not for the apostles' sake,
but because of the Jews who were then present. Nevertheless, even though no
sensible signs take place, we receive the things that have been once manifested
by them. Since the dove itself at that time therefore appeared, that as in place of
a finger (so to say) it might point out to them that were present, and to John, the
Son of God. Not however merely on this account, but to teach you also, that
upon you no less at your baptism the Spirit comes. But since then we have no
need of sensible vision, faith sufficing instead of all. For signs are "not for them
that believe, but for them that believe not." [1 Corinthians 14:22]
But why in the fashion of a dove? Gentle is that creature, and pure.
Forasmuch then as the Spirit too is "a Spirit of meekness," He therefore appears
in this sort. And besides, He is reminding us of an ancient history. For so, when
once a common shipwreck had overtaken the whole world, and our race was in
danger of perishing, this creature appeared, and indicated the deliverance from
the tempest, and bearing an olive branch, [Genesis viii] published the good
tidings of the common calm of the whole world; all which was a type of the
things to come. For in fact the condition of men was then much worse, and they
deserved a much sorer punishment. To prevent your despairing, therefore, He
reminds you of that history. Because then also, when things were desperate, there
was a sort of deliverance and reformation; but then by punishment, now, on the
contrary, by grace and an unspeakable gift. [2 Corinthians 9:15] Therefore the
dove also appears, not bearing an olive branch, but pointing out to us our
Deliverer from all evils, and suggesting the gracious hopes. For not from out of
an ark does she lead one man only, but the whole world she leads up into heaven
at her appearing, and instead of a branch of peace from an olive, she conveys the