[Hebrews 3:3] does he so write by way of comparison; and He Himself too, in
saying, "Behold, a greater than Solomon is here," [Matthew 12:42] speaks not as
making a comparison.
Or if we should even grant that this was said by Him in the way of
comparison, this was done in condescension, because of the weakness of the
hearers. For the men really had their gaze very much fixed upon John; and then
he was rendered the more illustrious both by his imprisonment, and by his
plainness of speech to the king; and it was a great point for the present, that even
so much should be received among the multitude. And so too, the Old Testament
uses in the same way to correct the souls of the erring, by putting together in a
way of comparison things that cannot be compared; as when it says, "Among the
gods there is none like You, O Lord:" and again, "There is no god like our God."
Now some affirm, that Christ said this of the apostles, others again, of
angels. Thus, when any have turned aside from the truth, they are wont to
wander many ways. For what sort of connection has it, to speak either of angels
or of apostles? And besides, if He were speaking of the apostles, what hindered
his bringing them forward by name? Whereas, when He is speaking of Himself,
He naturally conceals His person, because of the still prevailing suspicion, and
that He may not seem to say anything great of Himself; yea, and we often find
Him doing so.
But what is, "In the kingdom of heaven?" Among spiritual beings, and all
them that are in heaven.
And moreover His saying, "There has not risen among them that are born
of women a greater than John," suited one contrasting John with Himself, and
thus tacitly excepting Himself. For though He too were born of a woman, yet not
as John, for He was not a mere man, neither was He born in like manner as a
man, but by a strange and wondrous kind of birth.
4. "And from the days of John the Baptist," says He, "until now, the
kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force."
And what sort of connection may this have with what was said before?

Much, assuredly, and in full accordance therewith. Yea, by this topic also He
proceeds to urge and press them into the faith of Himself; and at the same time
likewise, He is speaking in agreement with what had been before said by John.
For if all things are fulfilled even down to John, I am "He that should come."
"For all the prophets," says He, "and the law prophesied until John."
[Matthew 11:13]
For the prophets would not have ceased, unless I had come. Expect
therefore nothing further, neither wait for any one else. For that I am He is
manifest both from the prophets ceasing, and from those that every day "take by
force" the faith that is in me. For so manifest is it and certain, that many even
take it by force. Why, who has so taken it? Tell me. All who approach it with
earnestness of mind.
Then He states also another infallible sign, saying, "If you will receive it, he
is Elias, which was for to come." For "I will send you," it is said, "Elias the
Tishbite, who shall turn the heart of the father to the children." This man then is
Elias, if you attend exactly, says He. For "I will send," says He, "my messenger
before Your face."
And well has He said, "If you will receive it," to show the absence of force.
For I do not constrain, says He. And this He said, as requiring a candid mind,
and showing that John is Elias, and Elias John. For both of them received one
ministry, and both of them became forerunners. Wherefore neither did He simply
say, "This is Elias," but, "If you are willing to receive it, this is he," that is, if
with a candid mind ye give heed to what is going on. And He did not stop even
at this, but to the words, "This is Elias, which was for to come," He added, to
show that understanding is needed, He that has ears to hear, let him hear.
[Matthew 11:15]
Now He used so many dark sayings, to stir them up to inquiry. And if not
even so were they awakened, much more, had all been plain and clear. For this
surely no man could say, that they dared not ask Him, and that He was difficult
of approach. For they that were asking him questions, and tempting Him about