SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.183, C.7.

disciples were made priests of the second order." Subsequently,
however, in order to avoid schism, it became necessary to
distinguish even the terms, by calling the higher ones bishops and
the lower ones priests. But to assert that priests nowise differ from
bishops is reckoned by Augustine among heretical doctrines (De
Heres. liii), where he says that the Arians maintained that "no
distinction existed between a priest and a bishop."
Reply to Objection 2: Bishops have the chief cure of the sheep of
their diocese, while parish priests and archdeacons exercise an
inferior ministry under the bishops. Hence a gloss on 1 Cor. 12:28,
"to one, helps, to another, governments," says: "Helps, namely
assistants to those who are in authority," as Titus was to the
Apostle, or as archdeacons to the bishop; "governments, namely
persons of lesser authority, such as priests who have to instruct the
people": and Dionysius says (Eccl. Hier. v) that "just as we see the
whole hierarchy culminating in Jesus, so each office culminates in
its respective godlike hierarch or bishop." Also it is said (XVI, qu. i,
can. Cunctis): "Priests and deacons must all take care not to do
anything without their bishop's permission." Wherefore it is evident
that they stand in relation to their bishop as wardens or mayors to
the king; and for this reason, just as in earthly governments the king
alone receives a solemn blessing, while others are appointed by
simple commission, so too in the Church the episcopal cure is
conferred with the solemnity of consecration, while the archdeacon
or parish priest receives his cure by simple appointment; although
they are consecrated by receiving orders before having a cure.
Reply to Objection 3: As parish priests and archdeacons have not
the chief cure, but a certain ministry as committed to them by the
bishop, so the pastoral office does not belong to them in chief, nor
are they bound to lay down their life for the sheep, except in so far
as they have a share in their cure. Hence we should say that they
have an office pertaining to perfection rather than that they attain the
state of perfection.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.183, C.8.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether the religious state is more perfect than

that of prelates?
Objection 1: It would seem that the religious state is more perfect
than that of prelates. For our Lord said (Mt. 19:21): "If thou wilt be
perfect, go" and "sell" all "thou hast, and give to the poor"; and
religious do this. But bishops are not bound to do so; for it is said
(XII, qu. i, can. Episcopi de rebus): "Bishops, if they wish, may
bequeath to their heirs their personal or acquired property, and
whatever belongs to them personally." Therefore religious are in a
more perfect state than bishops.
Objection 2: Further, perfection consists more especially in the love
of God than in the love of our neighbor. Now the religious state is
directly ordered to the love of God, wherefore it takes its name from
"service and homage to God," as Dionysius says (Eccl. Hier. vi);
whereas the bishop's state would seem to be ordered to the love of
our neighbor, of whose cure he is the "warden," and from this he
takes his name, as Augustine observes (De Civ. Dei. xix, 19).
Therefore it would seem that the religious state is more perfect than
that of bishops.
Objection 3: Further, the religious state is directed to the
contemplative life, which is more excellent than the active life to
which the episcopal state is directed. For Gregory says (Pastor. i, 7)
that "Isaias wishing to be of profit to his neighbor by means of the
active life desired the office of preaching, whereas Jeremias, who
was fain to hold fast to the love of his Creator, exclaimed against
being sent to preach." Therefore it would seem that the religious
state is more perfect than the episcopal state.
On the contrary, It is not lawful for anyone to pass from a more
excellent to a less excellent state; for this would be to look back [Lk.
9:62]. Yet a man may pass from the religious to the episcopal state,
for it is said (XVIII, qu. i, can. Statutum) that "the holy ordination
makes a monk to be a bishop." Therefore the episcopal state is more
perfect than the religious.
I answer that, As Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. xii, 16), "the agent is
ever more excellent than the patient." Now in the genus of perfection
according to Dionysius (Eccl. Hier. v, vi), bishops are in the position