spoke against Moses. What then did God do? He sent a leprosy upon her, and
made her unclean; notwithstanding that in other respects she had been meek and
modest. Afterwards, when Moses himself, the party injured, besought that the
wrath might be removed, God consented not: but what did He say? "If her father
had but spit in her face, should she not be ashamed? Let her remain," says He,
"without the camp seven days." [Numbers 12:14] But what He means is to this
effect. "If," says He, "she had a father, and he had put her away from his
presence, would she not have undergone the rebuke? I approve you indeed for
your fraternal piety, and your meekness and clemency; but I know when is the
due time to remit her punishment." Do thou then show all humanity towards your
brother; and do not pardon his offenses in the desire of a greater punishment for
him, but of your tenderness and good will; yet understand this very plainly, that
the more he shall slight you, while you are labouring to conciliate, so much the
greater punishment will he draw down upon himself.
11. What do you say? Tell me, Is he the worse for your attentions? This is
blame to him, but your praise. Your praise, that, while seeing him thus behave
himself, thou did not desist from doing God's will in conciliating him. But to him
it is blame, because he has not been made better by your clemency. But "it is far
more desirable that others should be blamed because of us, than we because of
them." Make me not this frigid reply, of saying, "I am afraid of its being thought
that I made an overture to him out of fear; and that he will therefore despise me
the more." Such a reply indicates a childish and foolish mind, agitated about
human approbation. Let him suppose, that it was out of fear you made the first
advance to him; your reward will be so much the greater; since, being aware of
this beforehand, you still consented to endure all for the fear of God. For he who
is in chase of human approbation, and seeks reconciliation for that end, curtails
the recompense of reward; but he who is quite sure of the fact, that many will
vilify and ridicule him, and even then does not desist, from the attempt at
reconciliation, will have a twofold, yea, a threefold crown. And this is indeed the
man who does it for the sake of God. Nor tell me, that the man has wronged you

in this, or in that particular; for if he has displayed, in his conduct towards you,
every kind of iniquity that is in man, yet even so God has enjoined you to forgive
him all!
12. Lo! I forewarn, and testify, and proclaim this with a voice that all may
hear! "Let no one who has an enemy draw near the sacred Table, or receive the
Lord's Body! Let no one who draws near have an enemy! Have you an enemy?
Draw not near! Will you draw near? Be reconciled, and then draw near, and
touch the Holy Thing!" Nor, indeed, is this my declaration. Rather it is that of the
Lord Himself, Who was crucified for us. That He might reconcile you to the
Father, He refused not to be sacrificed, and to shed His blood! And are you
unwilling to utter a word, or to make the first advance, that you may be
reconciled to your fellow-servant? Hear what the Lord says, concerning those
who are in this disposition; "If you bring your gift to the altar, and there
rememberest that your brother has anything against you"— He does not say,
"wait for him to come to you," nor "speak with another as mediator," nor
"entreat some other," but "do you yourself make the advance towards him." For
the exhortation is, "Go your way, first be reconciled to your brother."
[Matthew 5:23-24] O transcendent wonder! Does He Himself account it no
dishonour, that the gift should be left unoffered, and do you think it a mark of
disgrace to go first and be reconciled? And how can such a case, I ask, be
deemed worthy of pardon? Were you to see a member of yours cut off, would
you not use every exertion so that it might be reunited to the body? This do with
regard to your brethren; when you see them cut off from your friendship, make
all haste to recover them! Do not wait for them to make the first advance, but
press onward, that you may be foremost to receive the prize.
13. We are commanded to have only one enemy, the devil. With him be
thou never reconciled! But with a brother, never be at enmity in your heart. And
if there should be any narrowness of soul, let it be only an ephemeral thing, and
never last beyond a day's space. For, "let not the sun," he says, "go down upon
your wrath." [Ephesians 4:26] For if, before evening, you are reconciled, you