SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.95, C.2.

accordance with a vain observance of the notary art, but according
to the authority of the divine law, for they refused to be defiled by the
meat of Gentiles. Hence as a reward for their obedience they
received knowledge from God, according to Ps. 118:100, "I have had
understanding above the ancients, because I have sought Thy
commandments."
Reply to Objection 3: To seek knowledge of the future from the
demons is a sin not only because they are ignorant of the future, but
also on account of the fellowship entered into with them, which also
applies to the case in point.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.95, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether observances directed to the alteration of

bodies, as for the purpose of acquiring health or the like, are
unlawful?
Objection 1: It would seem that observances directed to the
alteration of bodies, as for the purpose of acquiring health, or the
like, are lawful. It is lawful to make use of the natural forces of bodies
in order to produce their proper effects. Now in the physical order
things have certain occult forces, the reason of which man is unable
to assign; for instance that the magnet attracts iron, and many like
instances, all of which Augustine enumerates (De Civ. Dei xxi, 5,7).
Therefore it would seem lawful to employ such like forces for the
alteration of bodies.
Objection 2: Further, artificial bodies are subject to the heavenly
bodies, just as natural bodies are. Now natural bodies acquire
certain occult forces resulting from their species through the
influence of the heavenly bodies. Therefore artificial bodies, e.g.
images, also acquire from the heavenly bodies a certain occult force
for the production of certain effects. Therefore it is not unlawful to
make use of them and of such like things.
Objection 3: Further, the demons too are able to alter bodies in many
ways, as Augustine states (De Trin. iii, 8,9). But their power is from
God. Therefore it is lawful to make use of their power for the purpose
of producing these alterations.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Doctr. Christ. ii, 20) that "to
superstition belong the experiments of magic arts, amulets and
nostrums condemned by the medical faculty, consisting either of
incantations or of certain cyphers which they call characters, or of
any kind of thing worn or fastened on."
I answer that, In things done for the purpose of producing some
bodily effect we must consider whether they seem able to produce
that effect naturally: for if so it will not be unlawful to do so, since it
is lawful to employ natural causes in order to produce their proper
effects. But, if they seem unable to produce those effects naturally, it
follows that they are employed for the purpose of producing those
effects, not as causes but only as signs, so that they come under the
head of "compact by tokens entered into with the