For nothing is so acceptable to God as to number one's self with the last.
This is a first principle of all practical wisdom. For he that is humbled, and
bruised in heart, will not be vainglorious, will not be wrathful, will not envy his
neighbor, will not harbor any other passion. For neither when a hand is bruised,
though we strive ten thousand times, shall we be able to lift it up on high. If
therefore we were thus to bruise our heart likewise, though it were stirred by ten
thousand swelling passions, it could not be lifted up, no, not ever so little. For if
a man, by mourning for things pertaining to this life, drives out all the diseases
of his soul, much more will he, who mourns for sins, enjoy the blessing of selfrestraint.
9. "But who," one may say, "will be able thus to bruise his own heart?"
Listen to David, who became illustrious chiefly because of this, and see the
contrition of his soul. How after ten thousand good works, and when he was on
the point of being deprived of country, and home, and life itself, at the very
season of his calamity, seeing a vile and outcast common soldier trample on the
turn of his fortunes and revile him; so far from reviling him again, he utterly
forbad one of his captains, who was desirous to have slain him, saying, "Let him
alone, for the Lord has bidden him." [2 Samuel 16:10] And again, when the
priests desired to carry about the ark of God with him, he did not permit it; but
what does he say? "Let me set it down in the temple, and if God deliver me from
the dangers that are before me, I shall see the beauty thereof; but if He say to
me, I have no delight in you, behold, here am I, let Him do to me as seems good
unto Him." And that which was done with regard to Saul, again and again, even
oftentimes, what excellence of self-restraint does it not show? Yea, for he even
surpassed the old law, and came near to the apostolic injunctions. For this cause
he bore with contentedness all that came from the Lord's hands; not contending
against what befell him, but aiming at one object alone, namely, in everything to
obey, and follow the laws set by Him. And when after so many noble deeds on
his part, he saw the tyrant, the parricide, the murderer of his own brother, that
injurious, that frenzied one, possessing in his stead his own kingdom, not even

so was he offended. But "if this please God," says he, "that I should be chased,
and wander, and flee, and that he should be in honor, I acquiesce, and accept it,
and do thank God for His many afflictions." Not like many of the shameless and
impudent ones, who when they have not done, no not the least part of his good
works, yet if they see any in prosperity, and themselves enduring a little
discouragement, ruin their own souls by ten thousand blasphemies. But David
was not such an one; rather he showed forth all modesty. Wherefore also God
said, "I have found David, the son of Jesse, a man after my own heart."
Such a spirit as this let us too acquire, and whatever we may suffer we shall
bear it easily, and before the Kingdom, we shall reap here the gain accruing from
lowliness of mind. Thus "learn," says He, "of me, for I am meek and lowly in
heart, and you shall find rest unto your souls." [Matthew 11:29] Therefore in
order that we may enjoy rest both here and hereafter, let us with great diligence
implant in our souls the mother of all things that are good, I mean humility. For
thus we shall be enabled both to pass over the sea of this life without waves, and
to end our voyage in that calm harbor; by the grace and love towards man of our
Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and might for ever and ever. Amen.