Homily 10 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts IV. 1
"And as they spoke unto the people, there came unto them the priests, and
the captain of the temple."
Ere yet they had time to take breath after their first trials, straightway they
enter into others. And observe how the events are disposed. First, they were all
mocked together; this was no small trial: secondly, they enter into dangers. And
these two things do not take place in immediate succession; but when first the
Apostles have won admiration by their two discourses, and after that have
performed a notable miracle, thereupon it is that, after they are waxen bold,
through God's disposal, they enter the lists. But I wish you to consider, how
those same persons, who in the case of Christ must need look out for one to
deliver Him up to them, now with their own hands arrest the Apostles, having
become more audacious and more impudent since the Crucifixion. In truth, sin,
while it is yet struggling to the birth, is attended with some sense of shame; but
when once fully born, it makes those more shameless who practise it. "And the
captain of the temple," it is said. The object again was to attach a public
criminality to what was doing, and not to prosecute it as the act of private
individuals: such in fact was constantly their plan of proceeding.
"Being grieved that they taught the people." [Acts 4:2] Not merely because
they taught, but because they declared, not alone that Christ Himself was risen
from the dead, but moreover, that we through Him do rise again. "Because they
taught the people, and preached through Jesus the resurrection of the dead." So
mighty was His Resurrection, that to others also He is the cause of a
resurrection. And they laid hands on them, and put them in hold unto the next
day; for it was now eventide. [Acts 4:3] What impudence! They feared not the
multitude; for this also the captain of the temple was with them: they had their

hands still reeking with the blood of the former victim. "For it was now
eventide," it is said. It was with the wish to abate their spirit that those men did
this, and guarded them; but the delay only served to make the Apostles more
intrepid. And consider who these are who are arrested. They are the chiefs of the
Apostles, who are now become a pattern to the rest, that they should no longer
crave each other's support, nor want to be together. "Howbeit, many having
heard the word, believed; and the number of the men was about five thousand."
[Acts 4:4] How was this? Did they see them in honor? Did they not behold them
put in bonds? How then did they believe? Do you see the evident efficacy? And
yet even those that believed already might well have become weaker. But no, it
is no longer so: for Peter's sermon had laid the seed deep into them, and had
taken a hold upon their understandings. Therefore were [their enemies] incensed,
that they did not fear them, that they made no account of their present troubles.
For, say they, if He that was crucified effects such great things, and makes the
lame to walk, we fear not these men either. This again is of God's ordering. For
those who now believe were more numerous than the former. Therefore it was
that in their presence they bound the Apostles, to make them also more fearful.
But the reverse took place. And they examine them not before the people, but
privately, that the hearers may not profit by their boldness.
"And it came to pass on the morrow, that their rulers, and elders, and
scribes, and Annas the High Priest, and Caiaphas, and John, and Alexander, and
as many as were of the kindred of the High Priest, were gathered together at
Jerusalem." (v. 5-6.) For now along with the other evils (of the times ), the Law
was no longer observed. And again they set off the business with the form of a
tribunal, to constitute them guilty by their iniquitous sentence. "And when they
had set them in the midst, they asked, By what power, or by what name, have ye
done this?" [Acts 4:7] And yet they knew it well; for it was because they were
"grieved that they preached through Jesus the resurrection" that they arrested
them. Then for what purpose do they question them? They expected the numbers
present would make them recant, and thought by this means to have put all right