their letters continuously, if they be examined concerning their order when they
are disarranged, naming one instead of another, make much laughter: so also ye,
when here we recount them in order, follow us in a manner; but when we ask
you out of doors and in no set order, what we ought to place first and what next
among things, and which after which; not knowing how to answer, you become
ridiculous. Is it not a matter of great laughter, tell me, that they who expect
immortality and the good "things which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither
have entered into the heart of man," should strive about things which linger here
and count them enviable? For if you have need yet to learn these things that
riches are no great thing, that things present are a shadow and a dream, that like
smoke they are dissolved and fly away: stand for the present without the
sanctuary: abide in the vestibule: since you are not yet worthy of the entrance to
the palace-courts on high. For if you know not to discern their nature which is
unstable and continually passing away, when will you be able to despise them?
But if you say you know, cease curiously to inquire and busy yourself, what
can be the reason why such an one is rich and such an one poor: for you do the
same when you ask these questions, as if you went round and enquire, why one
is fair and another black, or one hook-nosed and another flat-nosed. For as these
things make no difference to us, whether it be thus or thus; so neither poverty
nor riches, and much less than they. But the whole depends upon the way in
which we use them. Whether you are poor, you may live cheerfully denying
yourself; or rich, you are most miserable of all men if you fly from virtue. For
these are what really concern us, the things of virtue. And if these things be not
added, the rest are useless. For this cause also are those continual questions,
because the most think that indifferent things are of importance to them, but of
the important things they make no account: since that which is of importance to
us is virtue and love of wisdom.
Because then ye stand I know not where, at some far distance from her,
therefore is there confusion of thoughts, therefore the many waves, therefore the
tempest. For when men have fallen from heavenly glory and the love of heaven,

they desire present glory and become slaves and captives. "And how is it that we
desire this," say you? From the not greatly desiring that. And this very thing,
whence happens it? From negligence. And whence the negligence? From
contempt. And whence the contempt? From folly and cleaving to things present
and unwillingness to investigate accurately the nature of things. And whence
again does this latter arise? From the neither giving heed to the reading of the
Scripture nor conversing with holy men, and from following the assemblies of
the wicked.
That this therefore may not always be so, and lest wave after wave
receiving us should carry us out into the deep of miseries and altogether drown
and destroy us; while there is time, let us bear up and standing upon the rock, I
mean of the divine doctrines and words, let us look down upon the surge of this
present life. For thus shall we both ourselves escape the same, and having drawn
up others who are making shipwreck, we shall obtain the blessings which are to
come, through the grace and mercy, etc.