SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.161, C.7.

Wherefore aversion from God and His commandments, which is a
consequence as it were in other sins, belongs to pride by its very
nature, for its act is the contempt of God. And since that which
belongs to a thing by its nature is always of greater weight than that
which belongs to it through something else, it follows that pride is
the most grievous of sins by its genus, because it exceeds in
aversion which is the formal complement of sin.
Reply to Objection 1: A sin is difficult to avoid in two ways. First, on
account of the violence of its onslaught; thus anger is violent in its
onslaught on account of its impetuosity; and "still more difficult is it
to resist concupiscence, on account of its connaturality," as stated
in Ethic. ii, 3,9. A difficulty of this kind in avoiding sin diminishes the
gravity of the sin; because a man sins the more grievously,
according as he yields to a less impetuous temptation, as Augustine
says (De Civ. Dei xiv, 12,15).
Secondly, it is difficult to avoid a sin, on account of its being hidden.
In this way it is difficult to avoid pride, since it takes occasion even
from good deeds, as stated (Article 5, ad 3). Hence Augustine says
pointedly that it "lies in wait for good deeds"; and it is written (Ps.
141:4): "In the way wherein I walked, the proud have hidden a snare
for me." Hence no very great gravity attaches to the movement of
pride while creeping in secretly, and before it is discovered by the
judgment of reason: but once discovered by reason, it is easily
avoided, both by considering one's own infirmity, according to
Ecclus. 10:9, "Why is earth and ashes proud?" and by considering
God's greatness, according to Job 15:13, "Why doth thy spirit swell
against God?" as well as by considering the imperfection of the
goods on which man prides himself, according to Is. 40:6, "All flesh
is grass, and all the glory thereof as the flower of the field"; and
farther on (Is. 64:6), "all our justices" are become "like the rag of a
menstruous woman."
Reply to Objection 2: Opposition between a vice and a virtue is
inferred from the object, which is considered on the part of
conversion. In this way pride has no claim to be the greatest of sins,
as neither has humility to be the greatest of virtues. But it is the
greatest on the part of aversion, since it brings greatness upon other
sins. For unbelief, by the very fact of its arising out of proud
contempt, is rendered more grievous than if it be the outcome of
ignorance or weakness. The same applies to despair and the like.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.161, C.7.

Reply to Objection 3: Just as in syllogisms that lead to an impossible
conclusion one is sometimes convinced by being faced with a more
evident absurdity, so too, in order to overcome their pride, God
punishes certain men by allowing them to fall into sins of the flesh,
which though they be less grievous are more evidently shameful.
Hence Isidore says (De Summo Bono ii, 38) that "pride is the worst of
all vices; whether because it is appropriate to those who are of
highest and foremost rank, or because it originates from just and
virtuous deeds, so that its guilt is less perceptible. on the other
hand, carnal lust is apparent to all, because from the outset it is of a
shameful nature: and yet, under God's dispensation, it is less
grievous than pride. For he who is in the clutches of pride and feels
it not, falls into the lusts of the flesh, that being thus humbled he
may rise from his abasement."
From this indeed the gravity of pride is made manifest. For just as a
wise physician, in order to cure a worse disease, allows the patient
to contract one that is less dangerous, so the sin of pride is shown
to be more grievous by the very fact that, as a remedy, God allows
men to fall into other sins.