given, hearts were set on fire with divine love, minds were suddenly instructed in the
knowledge of divine things, and the tongues of the simple were rendered eloquent to
propose the divine truth to men (Heb. ii, 3, 4).
9. Human nature is so conditioned as not to be apt to be led to perfection at once; but it
must be led by the hand through stages of imperfection, so to arrive at perfection at last,
as we see in the training of children. If great and unheard-of truths were proposed to a
multitude, they would not grasp them immediately: their only chance is to become
accustomed to such truths by mastering lesser truths first. Thus it was fitting for the
human race to receive their first instruction in the things of salvation by light and
rudimentary lessons (levia et minora documenta), delivered by the patriarchs, the law
and the prophets; and that finally in the consummation of ages the perfect doctrine of
Christ should be set forth on earth. When the fulness of time was come, God sent his
Son (Gal. iv, 4). The law was our paedagogue unto Christ, but now we are no longer
under a paedagogue (Gal. iii, 24, 25).
12. It was not expedient for the Incarnate God in this world to live in wealth and high
honour: first, because the object of His coming was to withdraw the minds of men from
their attachment to earthly things, and to raise them to things heavenly, for which
purpose He found it necessary to draw men by His example to a contempt of riches:
secondly, because if He had abounded in riches, and had been set in some high
position, His divine doings would have been ascribed rather to secular power than to the
virtue of the Divinity. This indeed forms the most efficacious argument of His Divinity,
that without aid of secular power He has changed the whole world for the better.
13. God's commandment to men is of works of virtue; and the more perfectly any one
performs an act of virtue, the more he obeys God. Now of all virtues charity is the chief:
all others are referred to it. Christ's obedience to God consisted most of all in His perfect
fulfilment of the act of charity: for greater charity than this no man hath, that a man lay
down his life for his friends (John xv, 13).
15. Though God has no wish for the death of men, yet He has a wish for virtue; and by
virtue man meets death bravely, and exposes himself to danger of death for charity.
Thus God had a wish for the death of Christ, inasmuch as Christ took upon Himself that
death out of charity, and bravely endured it.
17. It is well said that Christ wished to suffer the death of the cross in order to give an
example of humility. The virtue of humility consists in keeping oneself within one's own
bounds, not reaching out to things above one, but submitting to one's superior. Thus
humility cannot befit God, who has no superior, but is above all. Whenever any one
subjects himself out of humility to an equal or any inferior, that is because he takes that
equal or inferior to be his superior in some respect. Though then the virtue of humility
cannot attach to Christ in His divine nature, yet it may attach to Him in his human
nature. And His divinity renders His humility all the more praiseworthy: for the dignity of
the person adds to the merit of humility; and there can be no greater dignity to a man
than his being God. Hence the highest praise attaches to the humility of the Man God,