not, to questioning and parade ([κατασκευὴν]) of argument but "to obedience."
For we were not sent, he means, to argue, but to give those things which we had
trusted to our hands. For when the Master declares anything, they that hear
should not be nice and curious handlers of what is told them, but receivers only;
for this is why the Apostles were sent, to speak what they had heard, not to add
anything from their own stock, and that we for our part should believe— that we
should believe what?— "concerning His Name." Not that we should be curious
about the essence, but that we should believe in the Name; for this it was which
also wrought the miracles. For it says, "in the Name of Jesus Christ rise up and
walk." [Acts 3:6] And this too requires faith, neither can one grasp anything of
these things by reasoning ([λογισμᾥ καταλαβεἵν]). "Among all nations, among
whom are you also the called of Jesus Christ." What? Did Paul preach then to all
the nations? Now that he ran through the whole space from Jerusalem to
Illyricum, and from thence again went forth to the very ends of the earth, is plain
from what he writes to the Romans; but even if he did not come to all, yet still
what he says is not false, for he speaks not of himself alone, but of the twelve
Apostles, and all who declared the word after them. And in another sense, one
should not see any fault to find with the phrase, if about himself, when one
considers his ready mind, and how that after death he ceases not to preach in all
parts of the world. And consider how he extols the gift, and shows that it is great
and much more lofty than the former, since the old things were with one nation,
but this gift drew sea and land to itself. And attend to this too, how free the mind
of Paul is from all flattery; for when conversing with the Romans, who were
seated as it were upon a sort of summit of the whole world, he attaches no more
to them than to the other nations, nor does he on the score of their being then in
power and ruling, say, that they have in spiritual things also any advantage. But
as (he means) we preach to all the nations, so do we to you, numbering them
with Scythians and Thracians: for if he did not wish to show this, it were
superfluous to say "Among whom are you also." And this he does to take down
their high spirit ([κενὥν τὸ φύσημα]) and to prostrate the swelling vanity of their

minds, and to teach them to honor others alike to themselves: and so he proceeds
to speak upon this very point.
Ver. 6. "Among whom are you also the called of Jesus Christ."
That is, along with whom you also are: and he does not say, that he called
the others with you, but you with the others. For if in Christ Jesus there is neither
bond nor free, much less is there king and private man. For even you were called
and did not come over of yourselves.
Ver. 7. "To all that be in Rome, beloved of God, called to be saints: grace to
you and peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ."
See how continually he puts the word "called," saying, "called to be an
Apostle; among whom you also are called; to all that be in Rome, called:" and
this he does not out of superfluity of words, but out of a wish to remind them of
the benefit. For since among them which believed, it was likely that there would
be some of the consuls ([ὑ] [πάτων]; Ben. consulares) and rulers as well as poor
and common men, casting aside the inequality of ranks, he writes to them all
under one appellation. But if in things which are more needful and which are
spiritual, all things are set forth as common both to slaves and to free, for
instance, the love from God, the calling, the Gospel, the adoption, the grace, the
peace, the sanctification, all things else, how could it be other than the uttermost
folly, whom God had joined together, and made to be of equal honor in the
greater things, those to divide on account of things on earth? On this ground, I
presume, from the very outstart, this blessed Apostle, after casting out this
mischievous disease, conducts them to the mother of blessings, humblemindedness. This made servants better, since they learned that they should take
no harm from their servitude, while they had the true freedom; this would incline
masters to be gentle, as being instructed that they have no advantage in being
free, unless the goods of faith have the first place given them. And that you may
learn that he was not doing this to work confusion, by dashing all things, but still
knew the best distinction, he wrote not simply to all that were in Rome, but with
a definition added, "beloved of God." For this is the best discrimination, and