reproach; "I am a vagabond and a servant, wandering from place to place, and
from house to house, waiting until the sun goes down, that I may rest from the
woes that encompass me." [Job 2:9, Septuagint] Why do you speak so, O foolish
woman? For is your husband to blame for these things? Nay, but the devil.
"Speak a word against God," she says, "and die";— and if thereupon the stricken
man had cursed and died, how would you be the better?— No disease you can
name is worse than that of his, though you name ten thousand. It was so
grievous, that he could no longer be in the house and under cover; such, that all
men gave him up. For if he had not been irrecoverably gone, he would never
have taken his seat without the city, a more pitiable object than those afflicted
with leprosy; for these are both admitted into houses, and they do herd together;
but he passing the night in the open air, was naked upon a dunghill, and could
not even bear a garment upon his body. How so? Perhaps there would only have
been an addition to his pangs. For "I melt the clods of the earth," he says, "while
I scrape off my sore." [Job 7:5, Septuagint] His flesh bred sores and worms in
him, and that continually. Do you see how each one of us sickens at the hearing
of these things? But if they are intolerable to hear, is the sight of them more
tolerable? And if the sight of them is intolerable, how much more intolerable to
undergo them? And yet that righteous man did undergo them, not for two or
three days, but for a long while, and he did not sin, not even with his lips. What
disease can you describe to me like this, so exquisitely painful? For was not this
worse than blindness? "I look on my food," he says, "as a fetid mass." [Job 6:7]
And not only this, but that which affords cessation to others, night and sleep,
brought no alleviation to him, nay, were worse than any torture. Hear his words:
"Why do you scare me with dreams, and terrify me through visions? If it be
morning, I say, When will it be evening?" [Job 7:14], and he murmured not. And
there was not only this; but reputation in the eyes of the world was added; for
they immediately concluded him to be guilty of endless crimes, judging from all
that he suffered. And accordingly this is the consideration, which his friends
urged upon him; "Know therefore that God exacts less of you than your

iniquities deserve." [Job 11:6] Wherefore he himself said, "But now they that are
younger than I have me in derision, whose fathers I disdained to set with the
dogs of my flock." [Job 30:1] And was not this worse than many deaths? Yet
though assaulted on all sides by a flood like this, when there raged around him a
fearful storm, clouds, rain, lightnings, whirling winds, and waterspouts, he
remained himself unmoved, seated as it were in the midst of this surge, thus
awful and overwhelming, as in a perfect calm, and no murmur escaped him; and
this before the gift of grace, before that anything was declared concerning a
resurrection, before anything concerning hell and punishment and vengeance.
Yet we, who hear both Prophets and Apostles and Evangelists speaking to us,
and have innumerable examples set before us, and have been taught the tidings
of a Resurrection, yet harbor discontent, though no man can say that such a fate
as this has been his own. For if one has lost money, yet not all that great number
of sons and daughters, or if he has, perchance it was that he had sinned; but for
him, he lost them suddenly, in the midst of his sacrifices, in the midst of the
service which he was rendering to God. And if any man has at one blow lost
property to the same amount, which can never be, yet he has not had the further
affliction of a sore all over his body, he has not scraped the humors that covered
him; or if this likewise has been his fate, yet he has not had men to upbraid and
reproach him, which is above all things calculated to wound the feelings, more
than the calamities we suffer. For if when we have persons to cheer and console
us in our misfortunes, and to hold out to us fair prospects, we yet despond,
consider what it was to have men upbraiding him. If the words, "I looked for
some to have pity, but there was no man, and for comforters, but I found none"
[Psalm 69:20], describe intolerable misery, how great an aggravation to find
revilers instead of comforters! "Miserable comforters are you all" [Job 16:2], he
says. If we did but revolve these subjects continually in our minds, if we well
weighed them, no ills of this present time could ever have force to disturb our
peace, when we turned our eyes to that athlete, that soul of adamant, that spirit
impenetrable as brass. For as though he had borne about him a body of brass or