See how he again puts his mind into confusion, while he seems to be
rebuking the other. For he intimates some such thing, as if he had said, How does
it affect you? Are you to be punished for him? But this he does not say, but hints
at it by putting it in a milder form, and saying, "For we shall all stand before the
judgment-seat of Christ:" and, "So then every one of us shall give account of
himself to God." And he introduces the prophet in witness of the subjection of all
to Him, yea a subjection extended even to those in the Old Testament, and of all
absolutely. For he does not barely say every one shall worship, but "shall
confess," that is, shall given an account of what he has done. Be in anxiety then
as seeing the Master of all sitting on his judgment-seat, and do not make schisms
and divisions in the Church, by breaking away from grace, and running over to
the Law. For the Law also is His. And why say I so of the Law? Even those in
the Law and those before the Law are His. And it is not the Law that will
demand an account of you, but Christ, of you and of all the human race. See how
he has released us from the fear of the Law. Then that he may not seem to be
saying this to frighten them for the occasion, but to have come to it in the course
he had proposed himself, he again keeps to the same subject, and says,
Ver. 13. "Let us not therefore judge one another any more: but judge this
rather, that no man put a stumbling-block or an occasion to fall in his brother's
way."
This does not apply to one less than the other: wherefore it may well fit
with both, both the advanced man that was offended at the observance of meats,
and the unadvanced that stumbled at the vehement rebuke given him. But
consider, I pray you, the great punishment we shall suffer, if we give offense at
all. For if in a case where the thing was against law, yet, as they rebuked
unseasonably, he forbade their doing it, in order that a brother might not be made
to offend and stumble; when we give an offense without having anything to set
right even, what treatment shall we deserve? For if not saving others be a crime
(and that it is so, he who buried the talent proves), what will be the effect of
giving him offense also? But what if he gives himself the offense, you may say,

by being weak? Why this is just why you ought to be patient. For if he were
strong, then he would not require so much attention. But now, since he is of the
feebler sort, he does on this ground need considerable care. Let us then yield him
this, and in all respects bear his burdens, as it is not of our own sins only that we
shall have to give an account, but for those also wherein we cause others to
offend. For if that account, were even by itself hard to pass, when these be added
too, how are we to be saved? And let us not suppose, that if we can find
accomplices in our sins, that will be an excuse; as this will prove an addition to
our punishment. Since the serpent too was punished more than the woman, as
was the woman likewise more than the man [1 Timothy 2:14]; and Jezebel also
was punished more severely than Ahab, who had seized the vineyard; for it was
she that devised the whole matter, and caused the king to offend. [1 Kings 21:2329] And therefore thou, when you are the author of destruction to others, wilt
suffer more severely than those who have been subverted by you. For sinning is
not so ruinous as leading others also into the same. Wherefore he speaks of those
who "not only do the same, but have pleasure in them that do them." [Romans
1:32] And so when we see any sinning, let us, so far from thrusting them on,
even pull them back from the pit of iniquity, that we may not have to be
punished for the ruin of others besides ourselves. And let us be continually in
mind of the awful judgment-seat, of the stream of fire, of the chains never to be
loosed, of the darkness with no light, the gnashing of teeth, and the venomous
worm. "Ah, but God is merciful!" Are these then mere words? And was not that
rich man punished for despising Lazarus? Are not the foolish virgins cast out of
the Bride-chamber? Do not they who did not feed Him go away into "the fire
prepared for the devil?" [Matthew 25:41] Will not he that has soiled garments be
"bound hand and foot" [Matthew 22:13], and go to ruin? Will, not he that
demanded the hundred pence to be paid, be given over to the tormentors? Is not
that said of the adulterers true, that "their worm shall not die, nor their fire be
quenched?" [Mark 9:43] Are these but mere threats then? Yea, it is answered.
And from what source pray do you venture to make such an assertion, and that