flesh is weak." For even although thou dost desire to despise death, yet you will
not be able, until God stretch forth His hand, for the carnal mind draws down.
And again He prayed in the same way, saying, "Father, if this cannot pass
from me except I drink it, Your will be done," showing here, that He fully
harmonizes with God's will, and that we must always follow this, and seek after
it.
"And He came and found them asleep." For besides that it was late at night,
their eyes also were weighed down by their despondency. And the third time He
went and spoke the same thing, establishing the fact, that He was become man.
For the second and third time is in the Scriptures especially indicative of truth;
like as Joseph also said to Pharaoh, "Did the dream appear to you the second
time? For truth was this done, and that you might be assured that this shall
surely be." [Genesis 41:32] Therefore He too once, and twice, and three times
spoke the same thing, for the sake of proving the incarnation.
And wherefore came He the second time? In order to reprove them, for that
they were so drowned in despondency, as not to have any sense even of His
presence. He did not however reprove them, but stood apart from them a little,
showing their unspeakable weakness, that not even when they had been rebuked,
were they able to endure. But He does not awake and rebuke them again, lest He
should smite them that were already smitten, but He went away and prayed, and
when He has come back again, He says, "Sleep on now, and take your rest." And
yet then there was need to be wakeful, but to show that they will not bear so
much as the sight of the dangers, but will be put to flight and desert Him from
their terror, and that He has no need of their succor, and that He must by all
means be delivered up, "Sleep on now," He says, "and take your rest; behold the
hour is at hand, and the Son of Man is betrayed into the hands of sinners."
[Matthew 26:45]
He shows again that what is done belongs to a divine dispensation.
2. But He does not this only, but also, by saying, "into the hands of
sinners," He cheers up their minds, showing it was the effect of their

wickedness, not of His being liable to any charge.
"Rise, let us be going; behold, he is at hand that does betray me."
[Matthew 26:46] For by all means He taught them, that the matter was not of
necessity, nor of weakness, but of some secret dispensation. For, as we see, He
foreknew that Judas would come, and so far from flying, He even went to meet
him. At any rate, "While He yet spoke, lo, Judas, one of the twelve, came, and
with him a great multitude with swords and staves, from the chief priests and
elders of the people." [Matthew 26:47] Seemly surely are the instruments of the
priests! "with swords and staves" do they come against Him! And Judas, it is
said, with them, one of the twelve. Again he calls him "of the twelve," and is not
ashamed. Now he that betrayed Him gave them a sign, saying, "Whomsoever I
shall kiss, that same is He, hold Him fast." Oh! What depravity had the traitor's
soul received. For with what kind of eyes did he then look at his Master? With
what mouth did he kiss Him? Oh! accursed purpose; what did he devise? What
did he dare? What sort of sign of betrayal did he give? Whomsoever I shall kiss,
he says. He was emboldened by his Master's gentleness, which more than all was
sufficient to shame him, and to deprive him of all excuse for that he was
betraying one so meek.
But wherefore does He say this? Because often when seized by them He
had gone out through the midst, without their knowing it. Nevertheless, then also
this would have been done, if it had not been His own will that He should be
taken. It was at least with a view to teach them this, that He then blinded their
eyes, and Himself asked, "Whom do you seek?" [John 18:4] And they knew Him
not, though being with lanterns and torches, and having Judas with them.
Afterwards, as they had said, "Jesus;" He says, "I am He" whom you seek: and
here again, "Friend, wherefore are you come?"
For after having shown His own strength, then at once He yielded Himself.
But John says, that even to the very moment He continued to reprove him,
saying, "Judas, do you betray the Son of Man with a kiss?" [Luke 22:48] Are
you not ashamed even of the form of the betrayal? Says He. Nevertheless,