that. This then is why He did all that He has done; and "spared not even His
Only-begotten Son" [Romans 8:32], that we might receive the adoption of sons,
that we might love Him, not as a Master only, but as a Father. And if He
obtained this of us He takes delight therein as one that has glory given him, and
proclaims it to all though He needs nothing of ours. This is what, in Abraham's
case for instance, He everywhere does, using these words, "I am the God of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob." And yet it was they of His household who should
have found an honor in this; but now it is the Lord evidently who does this; for
this is why He says to Peter, "Lovest thou Me more than these?" [John 21:17] to
show that He seeks nothing so much as this from us. For this too He bade
Abraham offer his son to Him, that He might make it known to all that He was
greatly beloved by the patriarch. Now this desire to be loved exceedingly comes
from loving exceedingly. For this cause too He said to the Apostles, "He that
loves father or mother more than Me, is not worthy of Me." [Matthew 10:37] For
this cause He bids us esteem that even which is in the most close connection
with us, our soul [or, life, John 12:25], as second to the love of him, since He
wishes to be beloved by us with exceeding entireness. For we too, if we have no
strong feelings about a person, have no strong desire for his friendship either,
though he be great and noble; whereas when we love any one warmly and really,
though the person loved be of low rank and humble, yet we esteem love from
him as a very great honor. And for this reason He Himself also called it glory not
to be loved by us only, but even to suffer those shameful things in our behalf.
[John 12:23] However, those things were a glory owing to love only. But
whatever we suffer for Him, it is not for love alone; but even for the sake of the
greatness and dignity of Him we long for, that it would with good reason both be
called glory, and be so indeed. Let us then incur dangers for Him as if running
for the greatest crowns, and let us esteem neither poverty, nor disease, nor
affront, nor calumny, nor death itself, to be heavy and burdensome, when it is for
Him that we suffer these things. For if we be right-minded, we are the greatest
possible gainers by these things, as neither from the contrary to these shall we if

not right-minded gain any advantage. But consider; does any one affront you and
war against you? Does he not thereby set you upon your guard, and give you an
opportunity of growing like God? For if you love him that plots against you, you
will be like Him that "makes His Sun to rise upon the evil and good." [Matthew
5:45] Does another take your money away? If you bear it nobly, you shall
receive the same reward as they who have spent all they have upon the poor. For
it says, "You took joyfully the spoiling of your goods, knowing that you have in
heaven a better and an enduring substance." [Hebrews 10:34] Has any one
reviled you and abused you, whether truly or falsely, he weaves for you a very
great crown if you bear meekly his contumely; since he too, who calumniates,
provides for us an abundant reward. For "rejoice," it says, "and be exceeding
glad, when men say all manner of evil against you falsely, because great is your
reward in Heaven." [Matthew 5:12] And he too that speaks truth against us is of
the greatest service, if we do but bear meekly what is said. For the Pharisee
spoke evil of the Publican, and with truth, still instead of a Publican he made
him a righteous man. [Luke 18:11] And what need to go into particular
instances. For any one that will go to the conflicts of Job may learn all these
points accurately. And this is why Paul said, "God for us, who against us?"
[Romans 8:31] As then by being earnest, we gain even from things that vex us,
so by being listless, we do not even improve from things that favor us. For what
did Judas profit, tell me, by being with Christ? Or what profit was the Law to the
Jew? Or Paradise to Adam? Or what did Moses profit those in the wilderness?
And so we should leave all, and look to one point only, how we may husband
aright our own resources. And if we do this, not even the devil himself will ever
get the better of us, but will make our profiting the greater, by putting us upon
being watchful. Now in this way it is that Paul rouses the Ephesians, by
describing his fierceness. Yet we sleep and snore, though we have to do with so
crafty an enemy. And if we were aware of a serpent nestling by our bed, we
should make much ado to kill him. But when the devil nestles in our souls, we
fancy that we take no harm, but lie at our ease; and the reason is, that we see him