guard against attributing want of power to Him; while, at the same time, they endow Him with
human affections and passions. But if they had known the Scriptures, and been taught by the truth,
they would have known, beyond doubt, that God is not as men are; and that His thoughts are not
like the thoughts of men. For the Father of all is at a vast distance from those affections and
passions which operate among men. He is a simple, uncompounded Being, without diverse
members, and altogether like, and equal to himself, since He is wholly understanding, and wholly
spirit, and wholly thought, and wholly intelligence, and wholly reason, and wholly hearing, and
wholly seeing, and wholly light, and the whole source of all that is good—even as the religious
and pious are wont to speak concerning God.
4. He is, however, above [all] these properties, and therefore indescribable. For He may well
and properly be called an Understanding which comprehends all things, but He is not [on that
account] like the understanding of men; and He may most properly be termed Light, but He is
nothing like that light with which we are acquainted. And so, in all other particulars, the Father of
all is in no degree similar to human weakness. He is spoken of in these terms according to the love
[we bear Him]; but in point of greatness, our thoughts regarding Him transcend these expressions.
If then, even in the case of human beings, understanding itself does not arise from emission, nor is
that intelligence which produces other things separated from the living man, while its motions and
affections come into manifestation, much more will the mind of God, who is all understanding,
never by any means be separated from Himself; nor can anything [in His case] be produced as
if by a different Being.
5. For if He produced intelligence, then He who did thus produce intelligence must be understood,
in accordance with their views, as a compound and corporeal Being; so that God, who sent forth
[the intelligence referred to], is separate from it, and the intelligence which was sent forth separate
[from Him]. But if they affirm that intelligence was sent forth from intelligence, they then cut
asunder the intelligence of God, and divide it into parts. And whither has it gone? Whence was it
sent forth? For whatever is sent forth from any place, passes of necessity into some other. But what
existence was there more ancient than the intelligence of God, into which they maintain it was sent
forth? And what a vast region that must have been which was capable of receiving and containing
the intelligence of God! If, however, they affirm [that this emission took place] just as a ray proceeds
from the sun, then, as the subjacent air which receives the ray must have had an existence prior to
it, so [by such reasoning] they will indicate that there was something in existence, into which the
intelligence of God was sent forth, capable of containing it, and more ancient than itself. Following
upon this, we must hold that, as we see the sun, which is less than all things, sending forth rays