needy, the naked, the orphans, I might receive this recompense?" But instead of
these, he offered up those words better than all sacrifice, saying, "Naked came I
out of my mother's womb, and naked shall I return there." If however he rent his
clothes and shaved his head, marvel not. For he was a father and a loving father:
and it was meet that both the compassion of his nature should be shown, and also
the self-command of his spirit. Whereas, had he not done this, perhaps one
would have thought this self-command to be of mere insensibility. Therefore he
indicates both his natural affection and the exactness of his piety, and in his grief
he was not overthrown.
5. Yea, and when his trial proceeded further, he is again adorned with other
crowns on account of his reply to his wife, saying, "If we have received good at
the hand of the Lord, shall we not endure evil?" [Job 2:10] For in fact his wife
was by this time the only one left, all his having been clean destroyed, both his
children and his possessions and his very body, and she reserved to tempt and to
ensnare him. And this indeed was the reason why the devil did not destroy her
with the children, nor asked her death, because he expected that she would
contribute much towards the ensnaring of that holy man. Therefore he left her as
a kind of implement, and a formidable one, for himself. "For if even out of
paradise," says he, "I cast mankind by her means, much more shall I be able to
trip him up on the dunghill."
And observe his craft. He did not apply this stratagem when the oxen or the
asses or the camels were lost, nor even when the house fell and the children were
buried under it, but so long looking on the combatant, he suffers her to be silent
and quiet. But when the fountain of worms gushed forth, when the skin began to
putrify and drop off, and the flesh wasting away to emit most offensive
discharge, and the hand of the devil was wearing him out with sharper pain than
gridirons and furnaces and any flame, consuming on every side and eating away
his body more grievously than any wild beast, and when a long time had been
spent in this misery ; then he brings her to him, seasoned and worn down.
Whereas if she had approached him at the beginning of his misfortune, neither

would she have found him so unnerved, nor would she have had it in her power
so to swell out and exaggerate the misfortune by her words. But now when she
saw him through the length of time thirsting for release, and desiring the
termination of what pressed on him vehemently then does she come upon him.
For to show that he was quite worn down, and by this time had become unable
even to draw breath, yea, and desired even to die, hear what he says; "For I
would I could lay hands on myself, or could request another and he should do it
for me;" And observe, I pray, the wickedness of his wife, from what topic she at
once begins: namely, from the length of time, saying, "How long will you hold
out ?"
Now, if often even when there were no realities words alone have prevailed
to unman a person, consider what it was likely he then should feel, when,
besides these words, the things themselves also were galling him; and what, as it
should seem, was worst of all, it was a wife also who spoke thus, and a wife who
had sunk down utterly and was giving herself up, and on this account was
seeking to cast him also into desperation. However, that we may see more
clearly the engine which was brought against that adamantine wall, let us listen
to the very words. What then are these? "How long will you hold out? Saying,
Lo! I wait a short time longer, expecting the hope of my salvation." "Nay," says
she, "the time has exposed the folly of your words, while it is protracted, yet
shows no mode of escape." And these things she said, not only thrusting him into
desperation, but also reproaching and jesting upon him.
For he, ever consoling her as she pressed upon him, and putting her off,
would speak as follows: "Wait a little longer, and there will soon be an end of
these things." Reproaching him therefore, she speaks: "Will you now again say
the same thing? For a long time has now run by, and no end of these things has
appeared." And observe her malice, that she makes no mention of the oxen, the
sheep or the camels, as knowing that he was not very much vexed about these;
but she goes at once to nature, and reminds him of his children. For on their
death she saw him both rending his clothes and shaving off his hair. And she said