SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.0, C.9.

the Son and Holy Ghost than about the Person of the Father, Who is
never sent, as we stated in the FP, Question 43, Article 4.
Reply to Objection 5: The sanctification of a creature by grace, and
its consummation by glory, is also effected by the gift of charity,
which is appropriated to the Holy Ghost, and by the gift of wisdom,
which is appropriated to the Son: so that each work belongs by
appropriation, but under different aspects, both to the Son and to the
Holy Ghost.
Reply to Objection 6: Two things may be considered in the
sacrament of the Eucharist. One is the fact that it is a sacrament, and
in this respect it is like the other effects of sanctifying grace. The
other is that Christ's body is miraculously contained therein and
thus it is included under God's omnipotence, like all other miracles
which are ascribed to God's almighty power.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.0, C.10.

### ARTICLE 9. Whether it is suitable for the articles of faith to be

embodied in a symbol?
Objection 1: It would seem that it is unsuitable for the articles of faith
to be embodied in a symbol. Because Holy Writ is the rule of faith, to
which no addition or subtraction can lawfully be made, since it is
written (Dt. 4:2): "You shall not add to the word that I speak to you,
neither shall you take away from it." Therefore it was unlawful to
make a symbol as a rule of faith, after the Holy Writ had once been
published.
Objection 2: Further, according to the Apostle (Eph. 4:5) there is but
"one faith." Now the symbol is a profession of faith. Therefore it is
not fitting that there should be more than one symbol.
Objection 3: Further, the confession of faith, which is contained in
the symbol, concerns all the faithful. Now the faithful are not all
competent to believe in God, but only those who have living faith.
Therefore it is unfitting for the symbol of faith to be expressed in the
words: "I believe in one God."
Objection 4: Further, the descent into hell is one of the articles of
faith, as stated above (Article 8). But the descent into hell is not
mentioned in the symbol of the Fathers. Therefore the latter is
expressed inadequately.
Objection 5: Further, Augustine (Tract. xxix in Joan.) expounding the
passage, "You believe in God, believe also in Me" (Jn. 14:1) says:
"We believe Peter or Paul, but we speak only of believing 'in' God."
Since then the Catholic Church is merely a created being, it seems
unfitting to say: "In the One, Holy, Catholic and Apostolic Church."
Objection 6: Further, a symbol is drawn up that it may be a rule of
faith. Now a rule of faith ought to be proposed to all, and that
publicly. Therefore every symbol, besides the symbol of the Fathers,
should be sung at Mass. Therefore it seems unfitting to publish the
articles of faith in a symbol.
On the contrary, The universal Church cannot err, since she is
governed by the Holy Ghost, Who is the Spirit of truth: for such was
Our Lord's promise to His disciples (Jn. 16:13): "When He, the Spirit