## Homily 54 on Matthew

MATT. XIV. 13. 'Now when Jesus had gone forth into the coastsof Caesarea
Philippi, He asked His disciples, saying, Whom do men say that I the Son of
Man am?'
Wherefore has he mentioned the founder of the city? Because there was
another besides, Cæsarea Stratonis. But not in that, but in this does He ask them,
leading them far away from the Jews, so that being freed from all alarm, they
might speak with boldness all that was in their mind.
And wherefore did He not ask them at once their own opinion, but that of
the people? In order that when they had told the people's opinion, and then were
asked, "But whom say ye that I am?" by the manner of His inquiry they might be
led up to a sublimer notion, and not fall into the same low view as the multitude.
Accordingly He asks them not at all in the beginning of His preaching, but when
He had done many miracles, and had discoursed with them of many and high
doctrines, and had afforded so many clear proofs of His Godhead, and of His
unanimity with the Father, then He puts this question to them.
And He said not, "Whom say the Scribes and Pharisees that I am?" often as
these had come unto Him, and discoursed with Him; but, "Whom do men say
that I am?" inquiring after the judgment of the people, as unbiassed. For though
it was far meaner than it should be, yet was it free from malice, but the other was
teeming with much wickedness.
And signifying how earnestly He desires His Economy to be confessed, He
says, "The Son of Man;" thereby denoting His Godhead, which He does also in
many other places. For He says, "No man has ascended up to Heaven, but the
Son of Man, which is in Heaven." [John 3:13] And again, "But when you shall
see the Son of Man ascend up, where He was before." [John 6:62]
Then, since they said, "Some John the Baptist, some Elias, some Jeremias,

or one of the prophets," [Matthew 16:14] and set forth their mistaken opinion,
He next added, "But whom say ye that I am?" [Matthew 16:15] calling them on
by His second inquiry to entertain some higher imagination concerning Him, and
indicating that their former judgment falls exceedingly short of His dignity.
Wherefore He seeks for another judgment from themselves, and puts a second
question, that they might not fall in with the multitude, who, because they saw
His miracles greater than human, accounted Him a man indeed, but one that had
appeared after a resurrection, as Herod also said. [Matthew 14:2] But He, to lead
them away from this notion, says, "But whom say ye that I am?" that is, "ye that
are with me always, and see me working miracles, and have yourselves done
many mighty works by me."
2. What then says the mouth of the apostles, Peter, the ever fervent, the
leader of the apostolic choir? When all are asked, he answers. And whereas
when He asked the opinion of the people, all replied to the question; when He
asked their own, Peter springs forward, and anticipates them, and says, "You are
the Christ, the Son of the living God." [Matthew 16:16]
What then says Christ? "Blessed are you, Simon Barjona, for flesh and
blood has not revealed it unto you." [Matthew 16:17]
Yet surely unless he had rightly confessed Him, as begotten of the very
Father Himself, this were no work of revelation; had he accounted our Lord to
be one of the many, his saying was not worthy of a blessing. Since before this
also they said, "Truly He is Son of God," [Matthew 14:33] those, I mean, who
were in the vessel after the tempest, which they saw, and were not blessed,
although of course they spoke truly. For they confessed not such a Sonship as
Peter, but accounted Him to be truly Son as one of the many, and though
peculiarly so beyond the many, yet not of the same substance.
And Nathanael too said, "Rabbi, You are the Son of God, You are the King
of Israel;" [John 1:49] and so far from being blessed, he is even reproved by
Him, as having said what was far short of the truth. He replied at least, "Because
I said unto you, I saw you under the fig-tree, do you believe? You shall see