FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.42, C.4.

men, lest he be led by them to sin. But, properly speaking, a man
thus disposed, fears the being led astray rather than the sin
considered in its proper nature, i.e. as a voluntary act; for
considered in this light it is not an object of fear to him.
Reply to Objection 1: Separation from God is a punishment resulting
from sin: and every punishment is, in some way, due to an extrinsic
cause.
Reply to Objection 2: Sorrow and fear agree in one point, since each
regards evil: they differ, however, in two points. First, because
sorrow is about present evil, whereas fear is future evil. Secondly,
because sorrow, being in the concupiscible faculty, regards evil
absolutely; wherefore it can be about any evil, great or small;
whereas fear, being in the irascible part, regards evil with the
addition of a certain arduousness or difficulty; which difficulty
ceases in so far as a thing is subject to the will. Consequently not all
things that give us pain when they are present, make us fear when
they are yet to come, but only some things, namely, those that are
difficult.
Reply to Objection 3: Hope is of good that is obtainable. Now one
may obtain a good either of oneself, or through another: and so,
hope may be of an act of virtue, which lies within our own power. On
the other hand, fear is of an evil that does not lie in our own power:
and consequently the evil which is feared is always from an extrinsic
cause; while the good that is hoped for may be both from an intrinsic
and from an extrinsic cause.
Reply to Objection 4: As stated above (Question 41, Article 4, ad 2,3),
shame is not fear of the very act of sin, but of the disgrace or
ignominy which arises therefrom, and which is due to an extrinsic
cause.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.42, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether fear itself can be feared?

Objection 1: It would seem that fear cannot be feared. For whatever
is feared, is prevented from being lost, through fear thereof: thus a
man who fears to lose his health, keeps it, through fearing its loss. If
therefore a man be afraid of fear, he will keep himself from fear by
being afraid: which seems absurd.
Objection 2: Further, fear is a kind of flight. But nothing flies from
itself. Therefore fear cannot be the object of fear.
Objection 3: Further, fear is about the future. But fear is present to
him that fears. Therefore it cannot be the object of his fear.
On the contrary, A man can love his own love, and can grieve at his
own sorrow. Therefore, in like manner, he can fear his own fear.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 3), nothing can be an object of
fear, save what is due to an extrinsic cause; but not that which
ensues from our own will. Now fear partly arises from an extrinsic
cause, and is partly subject to the will. It is due to an extrinsic cause,
in so far as it is a passion resulting from the imagination of an
imminent evil. In this sense it is possible for fear to be the object of
fear, i.e. a man may fear lest he should be threatened by the
necessity of fearing, through being assailed by some great evil. It is
subject to the will, in so far as the lower appetite obeys reason;
wherefore man is able to drive fear away. In this sense fear cannot
be the object of fear, as Augustine says (Questions. 83, qu. 33). Lest,
however, anyone make use of his arguments, in order to prove that
fear cannot be at all be the object of fear, we must add a solution to
the same.
Reply to Objection 1: Not every fear is identically the same; there are
various fears according to the various objects of fear. Nothing, then,
prevents a man from keeping himself from fearing one thing, by
fearing another, so that the fear which he has preserves him from the
fear which he has not.
Reply to Objection 2: Since fear of an imminent evil is not identical
with the fear of the fear of imminent evil; it does not follow that a
thing flies from itself, or that it is the same flight in both cases.