Church.
Reply to Objection 3: The offerings made by the people are offered
through the priest. Hence a twofold ministry is necessary with regard
to offerings. One on the part of the people: and this belongs to the
subdeacon who receives the offerings from the people and places
them on the altar or offers them to the deacon. the other is on the
part of the priest, and belongs to the deacon, who hands the
offerings to the priest. This is the principal act of both Orders, and
for this reason the deacon's Order is the higher. But to read the
epistle does not belong to a deacon, except as the acts of lower
Orders are ascribed to the higher; and in like manner to carry the
cross. Moreover, this depends on the customs of Churches, because
in secondary acts it is not unfitting for customs to vary.
Reply to Objection 4: Doctrine is a remote preparation for the
reception of a sacrament; wherefore the announcement of doctrine
is entrusted to the ministers. But the doctrine of the Old Testament
is more remote than that of the New Testament, since it contains no
instruction about this sacrament except in figures. Hence
announcing of the New Testament is entrusted to the higher
ministers, and that of the Old Testament to the lower ministers.
Moreover the doctrine of the New Testament is more perfect as
delivered by our Lord Himself, than as made known by His apostles.
Wherefore the Gospel is committed to deacons and the Epistle to
subdeacons.
This suffices for the Reply to the Fifth Objection.
Reply to Objection 6: Acolytes exercise an act over the cruet alone,
and not over the contents of the cruet; whereas the subdeacon
exercises an act over the contents of the cruet, because he handles
the water and wine to the end that they be put into the chalice, and
again he pours the water over the hands of the priest; and the
deacon, like the subdeacon, exercises an act over the chalice only,
not over its contents, whereas the priest exercises an act over the
contents. Wherefore as the subdeacon at his ordination receives an
empty chalice, while the priest receives a full chalice, so the acolyte
receives an empty cruet, but the subdeacon a full one. Thus there is
a certain connection among the Orders.
Reply to Objection 7: The bodily acts of the acolyte are more

intimately connected with the act of Holy orders than the act of the
exorcist, although the latter is, in a fashion, spiritual. For the
acolytes exercise a ministry over the vessels in which the
sacramental matter is contained, as regards the wine, which needs a
vessel to hold it on account of its humidity. Hence of all the minor
orders the Order of acolytes is the highest.
Reply to Objection 8: The act of the acolyte is more closely
connected with the principal acts of the higher ministers, than the
acts of the other minor Orders, as is self-evident; and again as
regards the secondary acts whereby they prepare the people by
doctrine. For the acolyte by bearing a light represents the doctrine of
the New Testament in a visible manner, while the reader by his
recital represents it differently, wherefore the acolyte is of higher
rank. It is the same with the exorcist, for as the act of the reader is
compared with the secondary act of the deacon and subdeacon, so
is the act of the exorcist compared with the secondary act of the
priest, namely to bind and to loose, by which man is wholly freed
from the slavery of the devil. This, too, shows the degrees of Order
to be most orderly. since only the three higher Orders co-operate
with the priest in his principal act which is to consecrate the body of
Christ, while both the higher and lower Orders co-operate with him in
his secondary act, which is to loose and bind.
Reply to Objection 9: Some say that in receiving the Order the
doorkeeper is given a Divine power to debar others from entering the
Church, even as Christ had, when He cast out the sellers from the
Temple. But this belongs to a gratuitous grace rather than to a
sacramental grace. Wherefore we should reply that he receives the
power to do this by virtue of his office, although others may do so,
but not officially. It is the case in all the acts of the minor Orders, that
they can be lawfully exercised by others, even though these have no
office to that effect: just as Mass may be said in an unconsecrated
building, although the consecration of a church is directed to the
purpose that Mass be said there.