On the other hand, those impediments which regard the essentials of
marriage make a marriage invalid, wherefore they are said not only
to hinder the contracting of marriage, but to dissolve it if contracted;
and they are contained in the following verse:
"Error,
station,
vow,
kinship,
crime,
Difference
of worship,
force, holy
orders,
Marriage
bond,
honesty,
affinity,
impotence,
All these
forbid
marriage,
and annul
it though
contracted."

The reason for this number may be explained as follows: Marriage
may be hindered either on the part of the contract or in regard to the
contracting parties. If in the first way, since the marriage contract is
made by voluntary consent, and this is incompatible with either
ignorance or violence, there will be two impediments to marriage,
namely "force," i.e. compulsion, and "error" in reference to
ignorance. Wherefore the Master pronounced on these two
impediments when treating of the cause of matrimony (Sent. iv, DD
29,30). Here, however, he is treating of the impediments as arising
from the contracting parties, and these may be differentiated as
follows. A person may be hindered from contracting marriage either
simply, or with some particular person. If simply, so that he be
unable to contract marriage with any woman, this can only be
because he is hindered from performing the marriage act. This

happens in two ways. First, because he cannot "de facto," either
through being altogether unable---and thus we have the impediment
of "impotence"---or through being unable to do so freely, and thus
we have the impediment of the "condition of slavery." Secondly,
because he cannot do it lawfully, and this because he is bound to
continence, which happens in two ways, either through his being
bound on account of the office he has undertaken to fulfill---and thus
we have the impediment of "Order"---or on account of his having
taken a vow---and thus "Vow" is an impediment.
If, however, a person is hindered from marrying, not simply but in
reference to a particular person, this is either because he is bound to
another person, and thus he who is married to one cannot marry
another, which constitutes the impediment of the "bond of
marriage"---or through lack of proportion to the other party, and this
for three reasons. First, on account of too great a distance
separating them, and thus we have "difference of worship";
secondly, on account of their being too closely related, and thus we
have three impediments, namely "kinship," then "affinity," which
denotes the close relationship between two persons, in reference to
a third united to one of them by marriage, and the "justice of public
honesty," where we have a close relationship between two persons
arising out of the betrothal of one of them to a third person; thirdly,
on account of a previous undue union between him and the woman,
and thus the "crime of adultery" previously committed with her is an
impediment.
Reply to Objection 1: There may be impediments to the other
sacraments also in the omission either of that which is essential, or
of that which pertains to the solemnization of the sacrament, as
stated above. However, impediments are assigned to matrimony
rather than to the other sacraments for three reasons. First, because
matrimony consists of two persons, and consequently can be
impeded in more ways than the other sacraments which refer to one
person taken individually; secondly, because matrimony has its
cause in us and in God, while some of the other sacraments have
their cause in God alone. Wherefore penance which in a manner has
a cause in us, is assigned certain impediments by the Master (Sent.
iv, D, 16), such as hypocrisy, the public games, and so forth; thirdly,
because other sacraments are objects of command or counsel, as
being more perfect goods, whereas marriage is a matter of
indulgence, as being a less perfect good (1 Cor. 7:6). Wherefore, in
order to afford an opportunity of proficiency towards a greater good,