God." That it is not quality of persons, but difference of actions. Which He
makes inquisition for. By so saying he shows that it was not in actions but in
persons only that the Jew differed from the Gentile. The consequence of this
would be thus expressed; For it is not because one is a Jew and the other a
Gentile, that one is honored and the other disgraced, but it is from the works that
either treatment comes. But he does not say so, since it would have roused the
anger of the Jew, but he sets down something more, so bringing their haughty
spirit yet lower, and quelling it for the admission of the other. But what is this?
The next position.
Ver. 12. "For as many," he says, "as have sinned without law shall also
perish without law: and as many as have sinned in the law shall be judged by the
law."
For here, as I said before, he shows not only the equality of the Jew and the
Gentile, but that the Jew was even much burdened by the gift of the Law. For the
Gentile is judged without law. But this "without law" (Gr. lawlessly) here
expresses not the worse plight but the easier, that is, he has not the Law to accuse
him. For "without law" (that is, without the condemnation arising from it), is he
condemned solely from the reasonings of nature, but the Jew, "in the Law," that
is, with nature and the Law too to accuse him. For the greater the attention he
enjoyed, the greater the punishment he will suffer. See how much greater is the
necessity which he lays upon the Jews of a speedy recourse to grace! For in that
they said, they needed not grace, being justified by the Law, he shows that they
need it more than the Gentiles, considering they are liable to be punished more.
Then he adds another reason again, and so farther contends for what has been
said.
Ver 13. "For not the hearers of the law are just before God."
Well does he add "before God;" for haply before men they may be able to
appear dignified and to vaunt great things, but before God it is quite otherwise—
the doers of the Law alone are justified. You see with what advantage he
combats, by turning what they said to an opposite bearing. For if it is by the Law

you claim to be saved, in this respect, says he, the Gentile will stand before you,
when seen to be a doer of what is written in the Law. And how is it possible (one
may say) for one who has not heard to be a doer? Not this only, he says, is
possible, but what is much more even than this. For not only is it possible
without hearing to be a doer, but even with hearing not to be so. Which last thing
he makes plainer, and that with a greater advantage over them, when he says,
"You that teaches another, do you not teach yourself?" [Romans 2:21] But here
he is still making the former point good.
Ver. 14. "For when the Gentiles," he says, "which have not the law, do by
nature the things contained in the law, these, having not the law, are a law unto
themselves."
I am not, he means, rejecting the Law, but even on this score I justify the
Gentiles. You see how when undermining the conceit of Judaism, he gives no
handle against himself as villifying the Law, but on the contrary by extolling it
and showing its greatness he so makes good his whole position. But whenever he
says "by nature," he means by the reasonings of nature. And he shows that
others are better than they, and, what is more better for this, that they have not
received the Law, and have not that wherein the Jews seem to have an advantage
over them. For on this ground he means they are to be admired, because they
required not a law, and yet exhibited all the doings of the Law, having the works,
not the letters, graven upon their minds. For this is what he says,
Ver. 15. "Which show the work of the Law written in their hearts, their
conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts the meanwhile accusing or
else excusing one another."
Ver. 16. "In the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus
Christ, according to my Gospel."
See how he again puts that day before them, and brings it close to them,
battering down their conceit, and showing, that those were to be the rather
honored who without the Law strove earnestly to fulfil the things of the Law. But
what is most to be marvelled at in the discretion of the Apostle, it is worth while