which concern ourselves according to our own minds; but in many cases we are
subject to their will; and should we do any thing that is contrary to their
judgment, it becomes invalid and useless. So then tell me, are we to pay so much
respect to the laws of men, and trample under foot the law of God? What
defence, or what pardon can such conduct be worthy of? He has said, "You shall
not swear." In order that you may do and speak all things with safety, do not in
practice lay down a law contrary to His.
6. But enough of these matters. Let us now proceed to lay before you one
sentence of those which have been read today, and thus end this discourse.
"Paul, a prisoner of Jesus Christ," says he, "and Timothy the brother." Great is
the designation of Paul: no title of principality and power, but he speaks of bonds
and chains! Truly great indeed! Although many other things made him
illustrious; his being caught up into the third heaven, his being transported to
Paradise, his hearing unutterable words; yet he sets down none of these, but
mentions the chain instead of all, for this made him more conspicuous and
illustrious than these. And why so? Because the one were the free gifts of the
Lord's lovingkindness; and the other the marks of the constancy and patience of
the servant. But it is customary with those who love, to glory more in the things
which they suffer for those who are beloved, than in the benefits they receive
from them. A king is not so proud of his diadem, as Paul gloried in his chains.
And very justly. For a diadem affords but an ornament to the crowned head; but
the chain is a much greater ornament as well as a security. The kingly crown
often betrays the head it encircles, and allures innumerable traitors, and invites
them to the lust of empire. And in battles this ornament is so dangerous, that it
must be hidden and laid aside. Hence kings in battle, change the outward dress,
and so mingle in the crowd of combatants; so much betrayal does there result
from the crown; but the chain will bring nothing of this kind upon those who
have it, but altogether the contrary; since if there be a war, and an engagement
with demons, and the hostile powers; the man who is thus encompassed, by
holding forth his chain, repels their assaults. And many of the secular

magistrates not only bear the name of office while they are in authority, but
when they have given up their authority. Such a one is called an ex-consul, such
a one an ex-prætor. But he, instead of all such titles, says, "Paul the prisoner."
And very rightly. For those magisterial offices are no complete evidences of
virtue in respect to the soul; for they are to be purchased by money, and obtained
by the solicitations of friends; but this distinction that is obtained by bonds is a
proof of the soul's love of wisdom, and the strongest sign of a longing for Christ.
And the former are soon gone, but this distinction has none to succeed to it.
Behold at least from that time to the present day how long a time has passed, and
yet the name of this Prisoner has become increasingly illustrious. As to all the
consuls, whoever they were, of former times, they are passed into silence; and
not even their names are known to the generality of mankind. But the name of
this Prisoner, the blessed Paul, is still great here, great in the land of the
barbarians, great also among the Scythians and Indians; and were you to go even
to the very bounds of the habitable world, you would hear of this appellation,
and wherever any one could come, he would perceive that the name of Paul was
borne in the mouths of all men. And what marvel is it, if it be so by land and sea,
when even in the heavens the name of Paul is great; with angels and archangels
and the powers above, and with the King of these, even God! "But what were the
chains," says some one, "that brought glory to him who was thus fettered? Were
they not formed of iron?" Of iron, indeed, they were formed; but they contained
the grace of the Spirit, abundantly flourishing in them; since he wore them for
Christ's sake. Oh, wonder! The servants were bound, the Master was crucified,
and yet the preaching of the Gospel every day increases! And through the means
by which it was supposed that it would be extinguished, by these very means it
was kindled; and the Cross and bonds, which were thought to be an abomination,
these are now become the symbols of salvation; and that iron was to us more
precious than all gold, not by its intrinsic nature, but for this cause and ground!
7. But here I see an enquiry arising out of this point; and if you give me
your attention, I will both state the question exactly, and will add the solution.