would show that He is of Him, he speaks of necessity lowly things. But when he
would utter high things, Marcellus takes a handle, and Sabellius; avoiding
however the excess of both, he holds a middle [way]. For neither does he dwell
on the humiliation, lest Paul of Samosata should obtain a standing place, nor yet
does he for ever abide in the high sayings; but shows on the contrary His
abundant nearness, lest Sabellius rush in upon him. He names Him "Son," and
immediately Paul of Samosata comes on him, saying that He is a son, as the
many are. But he gives him a fatal wound, calling Him "Heir." But yet, with
Arius, he is shameless. For the saying, "He appointed Him heir," they both hold:
the former one saying, it comes of weakness; the other still presses objections,
endeavoring to support himself by the clause which follows. For by saying, "by
whom also He made the worlds," he strikes backwards the impudent
Samosatene: while Arius still seems to be strong. Nevertheless see how he
smites him likewise, saying again, "who being the brightness of His glory." But
behold! Sabellius again springs on us, with Marcellus, and Photinus: but on all
these also he inflicts one blow, saying, "and the express image of His person and
upholding all things by the word of His power." Here again he wounds Marcion
too; not very severely, but however he does wound him. For through the whole
of this Epistle he is fighting against them.
But the very thing which he said, "the brightness of the glory," hear also
Christ Himself saying, "I am the Light of the world." [John 8:12] Therefore he
[the Apostle] uses the word "brightness," showing that this was said in the sense
of "Light of Light." Nor is it this alone which he shows, but also that He has
enlightened our souls; and He has Himself manifested the Father, and by "the
brightness" he has indicated the nearness of the Being [of the Father and the Son
]. Observe the subtlety of his expressions. He has taken one essence and
subsistence to indicate two subsistences. Which he also does in regard to the
knowledge of the Spirit ; for as he says that the knowledge of the Father is one
with that of the Spirit, as being indeed one, and in nought varying from itself [1
Corinthians 2:10-12]: so also here he has taken hold of one certain [thing]

whereby to express the subsistence of the Two.
And he adds that He is "the express Image." For the "express Image" is
something other than its Prototype: yet not Another in all respects, but as to
having real subsistence. Since here also the term, "express image," indicates
there is no variation from that whereof it is the "express image": its similarity in
all respects. When therefore he calls Him both Form, and express Image, what
can they say? "Yea," says he, "man is also called an Image of God." What then!
Is he so [an image of Him] as the Son is? No (says he) but because the term,
image, does not show resemblance. And yet, in that man is called an Image, it
shows resemblance, as in man. For what God is in Heaven, that man is on earth,
I mean as to dominion. And as he has power over all things on earth, so also has
God power over all things which are in heaven and which are on earth. But
otherwise, man is not called "Express image," he is not called Form: which
phrase declares the substance, or rather both substance and similarity in
substance. Therefore just as "the form of a slave" [Philippians 2:6-7] expresses
no other thing than a man without variation [from human nature], so also "the
form of God" expresses no other thing than God.
"Who being" (says he) "the brightness of His glory." See what Paul is
doing. Having said, "Who being the brightness of His glory," he added again,
"He sat down on the right hand of the Majesty": what names he has used,
nowhere finding a name for the Substance. For neither "the Majesty," nor "the
Glory" sets forth the Name, which he wishes to say, but is not able to find a
name. For this is what I said at the beginning, that oftentimes we think
something, and are not able to express [it]: since not even the word God is a
name of substance, nor is it at all possible to find a name of that Substance.
And what marvel, if it be so in respect of God, since not even in respect of
an Angel, could one find a name expressive of his substance? Perhaps too,
neither in respect of the soul. For this name [soul] does not seem to me to be
significative of the substance thereof, but of breathing. For one may see that the
same [thing] is called both Soul and Heart and Mind: for, says he, "Create in me