loves the things of the world to come, shall receive "an hundred-fold in this life
present, and shall inherit eternal life." [Matthew 19:29] If then we do not
receive the hundred-fold, it is ourselves that are to blame for not lending to Him
Who can give so much, for all who have given have received much, even though
they gave but little. For what great thing, tell me, did Peter give? Was it not a net
that was broken [Luke 5:6-11], and a rod and a hook only? Yet still God opened
to him the houses of the world, and spread before him land and sea, and all men
invited him to their possessions. Or rather they sold what was their own, and
brought it to their feet, not so much as putting it into their hands, for they dared
not, so great was the honor they paid him, as well as their profuseness. But he
was Peter, you will say! And what of this? O man! For it was not Peter only to
whom He made this promise, neither said He, You, O Peter, only art to receive
an hundred-fold, but "every one whosoever has left houses or brethren shall
receive an hundredfold." For it is not distinction of persons that He recognizes,
but actions that are rightly done. But a circle of little ones is round about me, one
will say, and I am desirous of leaving them with a good fortune. Why then do we
make them paupers? For if you leave them everything, you are still committing
your goods to a trust that may deceive you. But if you leave God their joint-heir
and guardian, you have left them countless treasures. For as when we avenge
ourselves God assists us not, but when we leave it to Him, more than we expect
comes about; so in the case of goods, if we take thought about them ourselves,
He will withdraw from any providence over them, but if we cast all upon Him,
He will place both them and our children in all safety. And why are you amazed
that this should be so with God? For even with men one may see this happening.
For if you do not when dying invite any of your relatives to the care of your
children, it often happens, that one who is abundantly willing feels reluctancy,
and is too modest to spring to the task of his own accord. But if you cast the care
upon him, as having had a very great honor shown him, he will in requital make
very great returns. If then you would leave your children much wealth, leave
them God's care. For He Who, without your having done anything, gave you a

soul, and formed you a body, and granted you life, when He sees you displaying
such munificence and distributing their goods to Himself along with them, must
surely open to them every kind of riches. For if Elijah after having been
nourished with a little meal, since he saw that that woman honored him above
her children, made threshing-floors and oil-presses appear in the little hut of the
widow, consider what loving caring the Lord of Elijah will display! Let us then
not consider how to leave our children rich, but how to leave them virtuous. For
if they have the confidence of riches, they will not mind anything besides, in that
they have the means screening the wickedness of their ways in their abundant
riches. But if they find themselves devoid of the comfort to be got from that
source, they will do all so as by virtue to find themselves abundant consolation
for their poverty. Leave them then no riches that you may leave them virtue. For
it is unreasonable in the extreme, not to make them, while we are alive, lords of
all our goods, yet after we are dead to give the easy nature of youth full
exemption from fear. And yet while we are alive we shall have power to call
them to good account, and to sober and bridle them, if they make an ill use of
their goods: but if after we are dead we afford them, at the time of the loss of
ourselves, and their own youthfulness, that power which wealth gives, endless
are the precipices into which we shall thrust those unfortunate and miserable
creatures, so heaping fuel upon flame, and letting oil drop into a fierce furnace.
And so, if you would leave them rich and safe withal, leave God a debtor to
them, and deliver the bequest to them into His hands. For if they receive the
money themselves, they will not know even who to give it to, but will meet with
many designing and unfeeling people. But if you beforehand puttest it out to
interest with God, the treasure henceforward remains unassailable, and great is
the facility wherewith that repayment will be made. For God is well pleased at
repaying us what He owes, and both looks with a more favorable eye upon those
who have lent to Him, than on those who have not; and loves those the most to
whom He owes the most. And so, if you would have Him for your Friend
continually, make Him your Debtor to a large amount. For there is no lender so