different bodies. For in some this indisposition regards something
inherent to their substance: as in these lower bodies which by being
mixed together fall away from their own purity. In others this
indisposition does not regard something inherent to their substance;
as in the heavenly bodies, wherein nothing is to be found contrary to
the final perfection of the universe, except movement which is the
way to perfection, and this not any kind of movement, but only local
movement, which changes nothing intrinsic to a thing, such as its
substance, quantity, or quality, but only its place which is extrinsic
to it. Consequently there is no need to take anything away from the
substance of the higher heavens, but only to set its movement at
rest. Now local movement is brought to rest not by the action of a
counter agent, but by the mover ceasing to move; and therefore the
heavenly bodies will not be cleansed, neither by fire nor by the
action of any creature, but in lieu of being cleansed they will be set
at rest by God's will alone.
Reply to Objection 1: As Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xx, 18,24):
"Those words of the psalm refer to the aerial heavens which will be
cleansed by the fire of the final conflagration." Or we may reply that
if they refer also to the higher heavens, these are said to perish as
regards their movement whereby now they are moved without
cessation.
Reply to Objection 2: Peter explains himself to which heavens he
refers. For before the words quoted, he had said (2 Pt. 3:5-7): "The
heavens . . . first, and the earth . . . through water . . . perished . . .
which . . . now, by the same word are kept in store, reserved unto fire
unto the day of judgment." Therefore the heavens to be cleansed are
those which before were cleansed by the waters of the deluge,
namely the aerial heavens.
Reply to Objection 3: This labor and service of the creature, that
Ambrose ascribes to the heavenly bodies, is nothing else than the
successive movements whereby they are subject to time, and the
lack of that final consummation which they will attain in the end. Nor
did the empyrean heaven contract any stain from the sin of the
demons, because they were expelled from that heaven as soon as
they sinned.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether that fire will consume the other

elements?
Objection 1: It would seem that the fire in question will consume the
other elements. For a gloss of Bede on 2 Pt. 3:12 says: "This
exceeding great fire will engulf the four elements whereof the world
consists: yet it will not so engulf all things that they will cease to be,
but it will consume two of them entirely, and will restore two of them
to a better fashion." Therefore it would seem that at least two of the
elements are to be entirely destroyed by that fire.
Objection 2: Further, it is written (Apoc. 21:1): "The first heaven and
the first earth have passed away and the sea is no more." Now the
heaven here denotes the air, as Augustine states (De Civ. Dei xx, 18);
and the sea denotes the gathering together of the waters. Therefore
it would seem that these three elements will be wholly destroyed.
Objection 3: Further, fire does not cleanse except in so far as other
things are made to be its matter. If, then, fire cleanses the other
elements, they must needs become its matter. Therefore they must
pass into its nature, and consequently be voided of their own nature.
Objection 4: Further, the form of fire is the most noble of the forms to
which elemental matter can attain. Now all things will be brought to
the most noble state by this cleansing. Therefore the other elements
will be wholly transformed into fire.
On the contrary, A gloss on 1 Cor. 7:31, "The fashion of this world
passeth away," says: "The beauty, not the substance, passeth." But
the very substance of the elements belongs to the perfection of the
world. Therefore the elements will not be consumed as to their
substance.
Further, this final cleansing that will be effected by fire will
correspond to the first cleansing which was effected by water. Now
the latter did not corrupt the substance of the elements. Therefore
neither will the former which will be the work of fire.
I answer that, There are many opinions on this question. For some
say that all the elements will remain as to their matter, while all will
be changed as regards their imperfection; but that two of them will