The honor then of the Jews is in names, their perogative is in the flesh. For
uncircumcision is nothing, and circumcision is nothing.
"By that which is called," says he, Circumcision in the flesh made by hands,
that you were at that time separate from Christ, alienated from the
commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenants of the promise,
having no hope, and without God in the world.
You, says he, who were thus called by the Jews. But why when he is about
to show that the benefit bestowed upon them consisted in this, in having
fellowship with Israel, does he disparage the Israelitish prerogative? He does not
disparage it. In essential points he enhances it, but only in these points, in which
they had no fellowship, he disparages it. For further on he says, "You are fellow
citizens of the saints and of the household of God." Mark, how far he is from
disparaging it. These points, says he, are indifferent. Never think, says he, that
because ye happen not to be circumcised, and are now in uncircumcision, that
there is any difference in this. No, the real trouble was this, the being "without
Christ," the being "aliens from the commonwealth of Israel." Whereas this
circumcision is not "the commonwealth." Again, the being strangers from the
covenants of promise, the having no hope to come, the being without God in this
world, all these were parts of their condition. He was speaking of heavenly
things; he speaks also of those which are upon earth; since the Jews had a great
opinion of these. Thus also Christ in comforting His disciples, after saying,
"Blessed are they that have been persecuted for righteousness' sake, for theirs is
the kingdom of heaven," adds the lesser point of consolation, "for so," says He,
"persecuted they the prophets which were before you." [Matthew 5:10-12] For
this, compared with the greatness of the other, is far less, yet in regard to the
being near, and believing, it is great and sufficient, and has much force. This
then was the sharing in the commonwealth. His word is not, "separated," but
"alienated from the commonwealth." His word is not, "ye took no interest in,"
but, "ye had not so much as any part in, and were strangers." The expressions
are most emphatic, and indicate the separation to be very wide. Because the

Israelites themselves were without this commonwealth, not however as aliens,
but as indifferent to it, and they fell from the covenants, not however as
strangers, but as unworthy.
But what were "the covenants of the promise?" "To you and to your seed,"
says He, "will I give this land," [Genesis 17:8] and whatever else He promised.
"Having no hope," he adds, "and without God." Though gods indeed they
worshipped, but they were no gods: "for an idol is not any thing." [1 Corinthians
10:19]
Ver. 13-15. "But now, in Christ Jesus, you that once were far off, are made
near in the blood of Christ. For He is our peace, who made both one, and broke
down the middle wall of partition, having abolished in His flesh the enmity."
Is this then the great privilege, it may be said, that we are admitted into the
commonwealth of the Jews? What are you saying? "He has summed up all
things that are in heaven, and that are in earth," and now do you tell us about
Israelites? Yes, he would say. Those higher privileges we must apprehend by
faith; these, by the things themselves. "But now," says he, "in Christ Jesus, you
that once were far off, are made near," in reference to the commonwealth. For
the "far off," and the "near," are matters of will and choice only.
"For He is our peace, Who made both one."
What is this, "both one?" He does not mean this, that He has raised us to
that high descent of theirs, but that he has raised both us and them to a yet
higher. Only that the blessing to us is greater, because to these it had been
promised, and they were nearer than we; to us it had not been promised, and we
were farther off than they. Therefore it is that he says, "And that the Gentiles
might glorify God for His mercy." [Romans 15:9] The promise indeed He gave to
the Israelites, but they were unworthy; to us He gave no promise, nay, we were
even strangers, we had nothing in common with them; yet has He made us one,
not by knitting us to them, but by knitting both them and us together into one. I
will give you an illustration. Let us suppose there to be two statues, the one of
silver, the other of lead, and then that both shall be melted down, and that the