covetousness," those of the lustful; since avarice and sensuality spring from the
same passion. But just as in the former case he took away "clamor" as being the
vehicle of "anger," so now does he "filthy talking" and "jesting" as being the
vehicle of lust; for he proceeds,
Ver. 4. "Nor filthiness, nor foolish talking, or jesting, which are not
befitting; but rather giving of thanks."
Have no witticisms, no obscenities, either in word or in deed, and you will
quench the flame— "let them not even be named," says he, "among you," that is,
let them not anywhere even make their appearance. This he says also in writing
to the Corinthians. "It is actually reported that there is fornication among you"
[1 Corinthians 5:1]; as much as to say, Be all pure. For words are the way to acts.
Then, that he may not appear a forbidding kind of person and austere, and a
destroyer of playfulness, he goes on to add the reason, by saying, "which are not
befitting," which have nothing to do with us— "but rather giving of thanks."
What good is there in uttering a witticism? thou only raisest a laugh. Tell me,
will the shoemaker ever busy himself about anything which does not belong to
or befit his trade? Or will he purchase any tool of that kind? No, never. Because
the things we do not need, are nothing to us.
Moral. Let there not be one idle word; for from idle words we fall also into
foul words. The present is no season of loose merriment, but of mourning, of
tribulation, and lamentation: and do you play the jester? What wrestler on
entering the ring neglects the struggle with his adversary, and utters witticisms?
The devil stands hard at hand, "he is going about roaring" [1 Peter 5:8] to catch
you, he is moving everything, and turning everything against your life, and is
scheming to force you from your retreat, he is grinding his teeth and bellowing,
he is breathing fire against your salvation; and do you sit uttering witticisms, and
"talking folly," and uttering things "which are not befitting." Full nobly then will
you be able to overcome him! We are in sport, beloved. Would you know the life
of the saints? Listen to what Paul says. "By the space of three years I ceased not
to admonish every one night and day with tears." [Acts 20:31] And if so great

was the zeal he exerted in behalf of them of Miletus and Ephesus, not making
pleasant speeches, but introducing his admonition with tears, what should one
say of the rest? But hearken again to what he says to the Corinthians. "Out of
much affliction and anguish of heart I wrote unto you with many tears." [2
Corinthians 2:4] And again, "Who is weak, and I am not weak?" "Who is made
to stumble, and I burn not?" [2 Corinthians 11:29] And hearken again to what he
says elsewhere, desiring every day, as one might say, to depart out of the world.
"For indeed we that are in this tabernacle do groan" [2 Corinthians 5:4]; and do
you laugh and play? It is war-time, and are you handling the dancers'
instruments? Look at the countenances of men in battle, their dark and
contracted mien, their brow terrible and full of awe. Mark the stern eye, the heart
eager and beating and throbbing, their spirit collected, and trembling and
intensely anxious. All is good order, all is good discipline, all is silence in the
camps of those who are arrayed against each other. They speak not, I do not say,
an impertinent word, but they utter not a single sound. Now if they who have
visible enemies, and who are in nowise injured by words, yet observe so great
silence, do you who hast your warfare, and the chief of your warfare in words,
do you leave this part naked and exposed? Or are you ignorant that it is here that
we are most beset with snares? Are you amusing and enjoying yourself, and
uttering witticisms and raising a laugh, and regarding the matter as a mere
nothing? How many perjuries, how many injuries, how many filthy speeches
have arisen from witticisms! "But no," you will say, "pleasantries are not like
this." Yet hear how he excludes all kinds of jesting. It is a time now of war and
fighting, of watch and guard, of arming and arraying ourselves. The time of
laughter can have no place here; for that is of the world. Hear what Christ says:
"The world shall rejoice, but you shall be sorrowful." [John 16:20] Christ was
crucified for your ills, and do you laugh? He was buffeted, and endured so great
sufferings because of your calamity, and the tempest that had overtaken you; and
do you play the reveler? And how will you not then rather provoke Him?
But since the matter appears to some to be one of indifference, which