THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.36, C.5.

afterwards He Himself manifested Himself perfectly.
Reply to Objection 2: Although hidden wisdom is useless, yet there
is no need for a wise man to make himself known at all times, but at
a suitable time; for it is written (Ecclus. 20:6): "There is one that
holdeth his peace because he knoweth not what to say: and there is
another that holdeth his peace, knowing the proper time." Hence the
wisdom given to Christ was not useless, because at a suitable time
He manifested Himself. And the very fact that He was hidden at a
suitable time is a sign of wisdom.
Reply to Objection 3: The book De Infantia Salvatoris is apocryphal.
Moreover, Chrysostom (Hom. xxi super Joan.) says that Christ
worked no miracles before changing the water into wine, according
to Jn. 2:11: "'This beginning of miracles did Jesus.' For if He had
worked miracles at an early age, there would have been no need for
anyone else to manifest Him to the Israelites; whereas John the
Baptist says (Jn. 1:31): 'That He may be made manifest in Israel;
therefore am I come baptizing with water.' Moreover, it was fitting
that He should not begin to work miracles at an early age. For people
would have thought the Incarnation to be unreal, and, out of sheer
spite, would have crucified Him before the proper time."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.36, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether Christ's birth should have been

manifested by means of the angels and the star?
Objection 1: It would seem that Christ's birth should not have been
manifested by means of the angels. For angels are spiritual
substances, according to Ps. 103:4: "Who maketh His angels,
spirits." But Christ's birth was in the flesh, and not in His spiritual
substance. Therefore it should not have been manifested by means
of angels.
Objection 2: Further, the righteous are more akin to the angels than
to any other, according to Ps. 33:8: "The angel of the Lord shall
encamp round about them that fear Him, and shall deliver them." But
Christ's birth was not announced to the righteous, viz. Simeon and
Anna, through the angels. Therefore neither should it have been
announced to the shepherds by means of the angels.
Objection 3: Further, it seems that neither ought it to have been
announced to the Magi by means of the star. For this seems to favor
the error of those who think that man's birth is influenced by the
stars. But occasions of sin should be taken away from man.
Therefore it was not fitting that Christ's birth should be announced
by a star.
Objection 4: Further, a sign should be certain, in order that
something be made known thereby. But a star does not seem to be a
certain sign of Christ's birth. Therefore Christ's birth was not
suitably announced by a star.
On the contrary, It is written (Dt. 32:4): "The works of God are
perfect." But this manifestation is the work of God. Therefore it was
accomplished by means of suitable signs.
I answer that, As knowledge is imparted through a syllogism from
something which we know better, so knowledge given by signs must
be conveyed through things which are familiar to those to whom the
knowledge is imparted. Now, it is clear that the righteous have,
through the spirit of prophecy, a certain familiarity with the interior
instinct of the Holy Ghost, and are wont to be taught thereby, without
the guidance of sensible signs. Whereas others, occupied with
material things, are led through the domain of the senses to that of