surpass Him either in magnitude. And so the Son and the Holy Spirit
together are just as great as the Father alone, since they are as truly. So
also the Trinity itself is as great as each several person therein. For where
truth itself is magnitude, that is not more great which is not more true:
since in regard to the essence of truth, to be true is the same as to be, and
to be is the same as to be great; therefore to be great is the same as to be
true. And in regard to it, therefore, what is equally true must needs also
be equally great.

### CHAP. 2.—EVERY CORPOREAL CONCEPTION MUST BE REJECTED, IN ORDER THAT IT MAY BE UNDERSTOOD HOW GOD IS TRUTH.

3. But in respect to bodies, it may be the case that this gold and that gold
may be equally true , but this may be greater than that, since
magnitude is not the same thing in this case as truth; and it is one thing
for it to be gold, another to be great. So also in the nature of the soul; a
soul is not called great in the same respect in which it is called true. For
he, too, has a true  soul who has not a great soul; since the essence
of body and soul is not the essence of the truth  itself; as is the
Trinity, one God, alone, great, true, truthful, the truth. Of whom if we
endeavor to think, so far as He Himself permits and grants, let us not
think of any touch or embrace in local space, as if of three bodies, or of
any compactness of conjunction, as fables tell of three-bodied Geryon;
but let whatsoever may occur to the mind, that is of such sort as to be
greater in three than in each singly, and less in one than in two, be
rejected without any doubt; for so everything corporeal is rejected. But
also in spiritual things let nothing changeable that may have occurred to
the mind be thought of God. For when we aspire from this depth to that
height, it is a step towards no small knowledge, if, before we can know
what God is, we can already know what He is not. For certainly He is
neither earth nor heaven; nor, as it were, earth and heaven; nor any such
thing as we see in the heaven; nor any such thing as we do not see, but
which perhaps is in heaven. Neither if you were to magnify in the
imagination of your thought the light of the sun as much as you are able,
either that it may be greater, or that it may be brighter, a thousand times
as much, or times without number; neither is this God. Neither as we
think of the pure angels as spirits animating celestial bodies, and

changing and dealing with them after the will by which they serve God;
not even if all, and there are "thousands of thousands," were brought
together into one, and became one; neither is any such thing God.
Neither if you were to think of the same spirits as without bodies—a thing
indeed most difficult for carnal thought to do. Behold and see, if thou
canst, O soul pressed down by the corruptible body, and weighed down
by earthly thoughts, many and various; behold and see, if thou canst, that
God is truth. For it is written that "God is light;" not in such way as these
eyes see, but in such way as the heart sees, when it is said, He is truth
. Ask not what is truth ; for immediately the darkness of
corporeal images and the clouds of phantasms will put themselves in the
way, and will disturb that calm which at the first twinkling shone forth to
thee, when I said truth . See that thou remainest, if thou canst, in
that first twinkling with which thou art dazzled, as it were, by a flash,
when it is said to thee, Truth . But thou canst not; thou wilt glide
back into those usual and earthly things. And what weight, pray, is it that
will cause thee so to glide back, unless it be the bird-lime of the stains of
appetite thou hast contracted, and the errors of thy wandering from the
right path?