argument has shown that the duty is most easy, if we are willing.
20. Let us not then be negligent of what is our life, but let us be in earnest;
and do every thing, in order that we may be without an enemy, and so present
ourselves at the sacred Table. For nothing—nothing, I repeat, of what God
commands will be difficult, if we give heed: and this is evident from the case of
those who are already reformed. How many used to be cheated by the habit of
using oaths, and to fancy this practice extremely difficult of reformation.
Nevertheless, through the grace of God, when you put forth but a little effort,
you for the most part washed yourselves clean of this vice. For this reason I
beseech you to lay aside also what remains, and to become teachers of others.
And to those who have not yet achieved it, but allege to us the length of time
during which they were before swearers, and say that it is impossible for them to
pluck up in a short time that which has been rooted for many years; I would
make this answer, that where any precept among those commanded by God
requires to be put in due practice, there is no need of length of time, nor of a
multitude of days, nor an interval of years; but of fear only, and reverence of
soul; and then we shall be sure to accomplish it, and that in a short time. But lest
you should suppose that I speak these things at random, take a man whom you
think much addicted to swearing; one that swears more times than he speaks;
hand this man over to me for only ten days, and if I do not rid him of all his habit
in these few days, pass the severest sentence on me.
21. And that these words are not a vain boast, shall be made manifest to you
from things that have already happened. What could be more stupid than the
Ninevites? What more devoid of understanding? Yet, nevertheless, these
barbarian, foolish people, who had never yet heard any one teaching them
wisdom, who had never received such precepts from others, when they heard the
prophet saying, "Yet three days, and Nineveh shall be overthrown," [Jonah 2:4]
laid aside, within three days, the whole of their evil customs. The fornicator
became chaste; the bold man meek; the grasping and extortionate moderate and
kind; the slothful industrious. They did not, indeed, reform one, or two, or three,

or four vices by way of remedy, but the whole of their iniquity. But whence does
this appear, says some one? From the words of the prophet; for the same who
had been their accuser, and who had said, that "the cry of their wickedness has
ascended up even to heaven:" [Jonah 1:5] himself again bears testimony of an
opposite kind, by saying, "God saw that every one departed from their own evil
ways." He does not say, from fornication, or adultery, or theft, but from their
"own evil ways." And how did they depart? As God knew, not as man judged of
the matter. After this are we not ashamed, must we not blush, if it turns out that
in three days only the barbarians laid aside all their wickedness, but that we, who
have been urged and taught during so many days, have not got the better of one
bad habit? These men had, moreover, gone to the extreme of wickedness before;
for when you hear it said, "The cry of their wickedness has come up before me;"
you can understand nothing else than the excess of their wickedness.
Nevertheless, within three days they were capable of being transformed to a state
of complete virtue. For where the fear of God is, there is no need of days, or of
an interval of time; as likewise, on the contrary, days are of no service where
there is a want of this fear. For just as in the case of rusted implements, he that
rubs them only with water, though he spend a long time on them, will not rid
them of all that foulness; but he that puts them in a furnace, will make them
presently brighter than even those newly fabricated: so too a soul, stained with
the rust of sin, if it cleanse itself slightly, and in a negligent way, and be every
day repenting, will gain no further advantage. But if it cast itself into the furnace,
as it were, of the fear of God, it will in a very short time purge all away.
22. Let us not then be procrastinating till tomorrow. For we "know not what
the next day may bring forth;" [Proverbs 27:1] nor let us say, "we shall conquer
this habit little by little;" since this little and little will never come to an end.
Wherefore, dismissing that excuse, we should say, "If we do not reform the
practice of swearing today, we will not leave off till we do, though ten thousand
things were to press us; though it were necessary to die, or to be punished, or to
lose all we have; we will not give the devil the advantage of slackness, nor the