greater difficulty to our belief, while he reserved some to be
published by the apostles, such as Extreme Unction and
Confirmation. This opinion seems so much the more probable, as
the sacraments belong to the foundation of the Law, wherefore their
institution pertains to the lawgiver; besides, they derive their efficacy
from their institution, which efficacy is given them by God alone.
Reply to Objection 1: Our Lord did and said many things which are
not related in the Gospel. For the evangelists were intent on handing
down chiefly those things that were necessary for salvation or
concerned the building of the ecclesiastical edifice. Hence they
related the institution by Christ of Baptism, Penance, the Eucharist
and orders, rather than of Extreme Unction and Confirmation, which
are not necessary for salvation, nor do they concern the building or
division of the Church. As a matter of fact however an anointing
done by the apostles is mentioned in the Gospel (Mk. 6:13) where it
is said that they "anointed the sick with oil."
Reply to Objection 2: The Master says it was instituted by the
apostles because its institution was made known to us by the
teaching of the apostles.
Reply to Objection 3: Christ did not show forth any sacrament except
such as He received by way of example: but He could not be a
recipient of Penance and Extreme Unction, since there was no sin in
Him: hence He did not show them forth.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether olive oil is a suitable matter for this

sacrament?
Objection 1: It would seem that olive oil is not a suitable matter for
this sacrament. For this sacrament is ordained immediately to the
state of incorruption. Now incorruption is signified by balsam which
is contained in chrism. Therefore chrism would be a more suitable
matter for this sacrament.
Objection 2: Further, this sacrament is a spiritual healing. Now
spiritual healing is signified by the use of wine, as may be gathered
from the parable of the wounded man (Lk. 10:34). Therefore wine
also would be more suitable a matter for this sacrament.
Objection 3: Further, where there is the greater danger, the remedy
should be a common one. But olive oil is not a common remedy,
since the olive is not found in every country. Therefore, since this
sacrament is given to the dying, who are in the greatest danger, it
seems that olive oil is not a suitable matter.
On the contrary, oil is appointed (James 5:14) as the matter of this
sacrament. Now, properly speaking, oil is none but olive oil.
Therefore this is the matter of this sacrament.
Further, spiritual healing is signified by anointing with oil, as is
evident from Is. 1:6 where we read: " . . . swelling sores: they are
not . . . dressed nor fomented with oil." Therefore the suitable matter
for this sacrament is oil.
I answer that, The spiritual healing, which is given at the end of life,
ought to be complete, since there is no other to follow; it ought also
to be gentle, lest hope, of which the dying stand in utmost need, be
shattered rather than fostered. Now oil has a softening effect, it
penetrates to the very heart of a thing, and spreads over it. Hence, in
both the foregoing respects, it is a suitable matter for this
sacrament. And since oil is, above all, the name of the liquid extract
of olives, for other liquids are only called oil from their likeness to it,
it follows that olive oil is the matter which should be employed in
this sacrament.
Reply to Objection 1: The incorruption of glory is something not