enumerated [His] praises, subjoins by name all things whatsoever I have mentioned, both the
heavens and all the powers therein: "For He commanded, and they were created; He spake, and
they were made." Whom, therefore, did He command? The Word, no doubt, "by whom," he says,
"the heavens were established, and all their power by the breath of His mouth." But that He did
Himself make all things freely, and as He pleased, again David says, "But our God is in the heavens
above, and in the earth; He hath made all things whatsoever He pleased." But the things established
are distinct from Him who has established them, and what have been made from Him who has
made them. For He is Himself uncreated, both without beginning and end, and lacking nothing. He
is Himself sufficient for Himself; and still further, He grants to all others this very thing, existence;
but the things which have been made by Him have received a beginning. But whatever things had
a beginning, and are liable to dissolution, and are subject to and stand in need of Him who made
them, must necessarily in all respects have a different term [applied to them], even by those who
have but a moderate capacity for discerning such things; so that He indeed who made all things
can alone, together with His Word, properly be termed God and Lord: but the things which have
been made cannot have this term applied to them, neither should they justly assume that appellation
which belongs to the Creator.

### Chapter IX.—One and the same God, the Creator of heaven and earth, is He whom the
prophets foretold, and who was declared by the Gospel. Proof of this, at the outset, from St.
Matthew's Gospel.
1. This, therefore, having been clearly demonstrated here (and it shall yet be so still more
clearly), that neither the prophets, nor the apostles, nor the Lord Christ in His own person, did
acknowledge any other Lord or God, but the God and Lord supreme: the prophets and the apostles
confessing the Father and the Son; but naming no other as God, and confessing no other as Lord:
and the Lord Himself handing down to His disciples, that He, the Father, is the only God and Lord,
who alone is God and ruler of all; —it is incumbent on us to follow, if we are their disciples indeed,
their testimonies to this effect. For Matthew the apostle— knowing, as one and the same God, Him
who had given promise to Abraham, that He would make his seed as the stars of heaven, and
Him who, by His Son Christ Jesus, has called us to the knowledge of Himself, from the worship
of stones, so that those who were not a people were made a people, and she beloved who was not
beloved—declares that John, when preparing the way for Christ, said to those who were boasting
of their relationship [to Abraham] according to the flesh, but who had their mind tinged and stuffed