square, or round? Who could say this? Yet with one's eyes one has seen
nothing except corporeal things. But there is nothing righteous in a man
except the mind; and when a man is called a righteous man, he is called
so from the mind, not from the body. For righteousness is in some sort
the beauty of the mind, by which men are beautiful; very many too who
are misshapen and deformed in body. And as the mind is not seen with
the eyes, so neither is its beauty. From whence then does he who is not
yet righteous know what a righteous man is, and love the righteous man
that he may become righteous? Do certain signs shine forth by the motion
of the body, by which this or that man is manifested to be righteous? But
whence does any one know that these are the signs of a righteous mind,
when he is wholly ignorant what it is to be righteous? Therefore he does
know. But whence do we know what it is to be righteous, even when we
are not yet righteous? If we know from without ourselves, we know it by
some bodily thing. But this is not a thing of the body. Therefore we know
in ourselves what it is to be righteous. For I find this nowhere else when I
seek to utter it, except within myself; and if I ask another what it is to be
righteous, he seeks within himself what to answer; and whosoever hence
can answer truly, he has found within himself what to answer. And when
indeed I wish to speak of Carthage, I seek within myself what to speak,
and I find within myself a notion or image of Carthage; but I have
received this through the body, that is, through the perception of the
body, since I have been present in that city in the body, and I saw and
perceived it, and retained it in my memory, that I might find within
myself a word concerning it, whenever I might wish to speak of it. For its
word is the image itself of it in my memory, not that sound of two
syllables when Carthage is named, or even when that name itself is
thought of silently from time to time, but that which I discern in my
mind, when I utter that dissyllable with my voice, or even before I utter it.
So also, when I wish to speak of Alexandria, which I never saw, an image
of it is present with me. For whereas I had heard from many and had
believed that city to be great, in such way as it could be told me, I formed
an image of it in my mind as I was able; and this is with me its word when
I wish to speak of it, before I utter with my voice the five syllables which
make the name that almost every one knows. And yet if I could bring
forth that image from my mind to the eyes of men who know Alexandria,
certainly all either would say, It is not it; or if they said, It is, I should

greatly wonder; and as I gazed at it in my mind, that is, at the image
which was as it were its picture, I should yet not know it to be it, but
should believe those who retained an image they had seen. But I do not so
ask what it is to be righteous, nor do I so find it, nor do I so gaze upon it,
when I utter it; neither am I so approved when I am heard, nor do I so
approve when I hear; as though I have seen such a thing with my eyes, or
learned it by some perception of the body, or heard it from those who had
so learned it. For when I say, and say knowingly, that mind is righteous
which knowingly and of purpose assigns to every one his due in life and
behavior, I do not think of anything absent, as Carthage, or imagine it as I
am able, as Alexandria, whether it be so or not; but I discern something
present, and I discern it within myself, though I myself am not that which
I discern; and many if they hear will approve it. And whoever hears me
and knowingly approves, he too discerns this same thing within himself,
even though he himself be not what he discerns. But when a righteous
man says this, he discerns and says that which he himself is. And whence
also does he discern it, except within himself? But this is not to be
wondered at; for whence should he discern himself except within
himself? The wonderful thing is, that the mind should see within itself
that which it has seen nowhere else, and should see truly, and should see
the very true righteous mind, and should itself be a mind, and yet not a
righteous mind, which nevertheless it sees within itself. Is there another
mind that is righteous in a mind that is not yet righteous Or if there is
not, what does it there see when it sees and says what is a righteous mind,
nor sees it anywhere else but in itself, when itself is not a righteous mind?
Is that which it sees an inner truth present to the mind which has power
to behold it? Yet all have not that power; and they who have power to
behold it, are not all also that which they behold, that is, they are not also
righteous minds themselves, just as they are able to see and to say what is
a righteous mind. And whence will they be able to be so, except by
cleaving to that very same form itself which they behold, so that from
thence they may be formed and may be righteous minds; not only
discerning and saying that the mind is righteous which knowingly and of
purpose assigns to every one that which is his due in life and behavior,
but so likewise that they themselves may live righteously and be righteous
in character, by assigning to every one that which is his due, so as to owe
no man anything, but to love one another. And whence can any one