assessors are said to judge. Some say that the perfect to whom
judiciary power is promised (Mt. 19:28) will judge in this sense,
namely that they will be raised to the dignity of assessors, because
they will appear above others at the judgment, and go forth "to meet
Christ, into the air." But this apparently does not suffice for the
fulfilment of our Lord's promise (Mt. 19:28): "You shall sit . . .
judging," for He would seem to make "judging" something additional
to "sitting." Hence there is a fourth way of judging, which will be
competent to perfect men as containing the decrees of Divine justice
according to which men will be judged: thus a book containing the
law might be said to judge: wherefore it is written (Apoc. 20:12):
"Judgment took her seat and the books were opened." Richard of St.
Victor expounds this judging in this way (De judic. potest.),
wherefore he says: "Those who persevere in Divine contemplation,
who read every day the book of wisdom, transcribe, so to speak, in
their hearts whatever they grasp by their clear insight of the truth";
and further on: "What else are the hearts of those who judge,
divinely instructed in all truth, but a codex of the law?" Since,
however, judging denotes an action exercised on another person, it
follows that, properly speaking, he is said to judge who pronounces
judgment on another. But this happens in two ways. First, by his
own authority: and this belongs to the one who has dominion and
power over others, and to whose ruling those who are judged are
subject, wherefore it belongs to him to pass judgment on them. In
this sense to judge belongs to God alone. Secondly, to judge is to
acquaint others of the sentence delivered by another's authority, that
is to announce the verdict already given. In this way perfect men will
judge, because they will lead others to the knowledge of Divine
justice, that these may know what is due to them on account of their
merits: so that this very revelation of justice is called judgment.
Hence Richard of St. Victor says (De judic. potest.) that for "the
judges to open the books of their decree in the presence of those
who are to be judged signifies that they open their hearts to the gaze
of all those who are below them, and that they reveal their
knowledge in whatever pertains to the judgment."
Reply to Objection 1: This objection considers the judgment of
authority which belongs to Christ alone: and the same answer
applies to the Second Objection.
Reply to Objection 3: There is no reason why some of the saints
should not reveal certain things to others, either by way of
enlightenment, as the higher angels enlighten the lower [FP,

Question 106],: or by way of speech as the lower angels speak to the
higher [FP, Question 107, Article 2].

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the judicial power corresponds to