blow to receive; but the lover of money receives daily ten thousand wounds
more grievous than his, without delivering himself from his madness, but
aggravating it more exceedingly: and the more wounds he receives, the more
does he give occasion for other more grievous blows.
Reflecting then on these things, let us flee this sword; let us flee the
madness; though late, let us become temperate. For this virtue too ought to be
called temperance, not less than that which is used to be so called among all
men. For whereas there the dominion of one lust is to be struggled against, here
we have to master many lusts, and those of all kinds.
Yea, nothing, nothing is more foolish than the slave of wealth. He thinks he
overcomes when he is overcome. He thinks he is master, when he is a slave, and
putting bonds on himself, he rejoices; making the wild beast fiercer, he is
pleased; and becoming a captive, he prides himself, and leaps for joy; and seeing
a dog rabid and flying at his soul, when he ought to bind him and weaken him by
hunger, he actually supplies him with abundance of food, that he may leap upon
him more fiercely, and be more formidable.
Reflecting then on all these things, let us loose the bonds, let us slay the
monster, let us drive away the disease, let us cast out this madness; that we may
enjoy a calm and pure health, and having with much pleasure sailed into the
serene haven, may attain unto the eternal blessings; unto which may we all
attain, by the grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be
glory and might, now and always, and world without end. Amen.

## Homily 52 on Matthew

Matthew 15:21-22.
" And Jesus went thence, and departed into the coasts of Tyre and Sidon.
And, behold, a woman of Canaan came out of the same coasts, and cried unto
Him, saying, Have mercy on me, O Lord, Thou Son of David; my daughter is
grievously vexed with a devil."
But Mark says, that "He could not be hid," [Mark 7:24] though He had
entered into the house. And why did He go at all into these parts? When He had
set them free from the observance of meats, then to the Gentiles also He goes on
to open a door, proceeding in due course; even as Peter, having been first
directed to annul this law, is sent to Cornelius.
But if any one should say, How then, while saying to His disciples, "Go not
into the way of the Gentiles," does He Himself admit her? first, this would be our
reply, that what He enjoined upon His disciples, He was not Himself also tied to;
secondly, that not in order to preach did He depart; which indeed Mark likewise
intimating said, He even hid Himself, yet was not concealed.
For as His not hastening to them first was a part of the regular course of His
proceedings, so to drive them away when coming to Him was unworthy of His
love to man. For if the flying ought to be pursued, much more ought the
pursuing not to be avoided.
See at any rate how worthy this woman is of every benefit. For she dared
not even come to Jerusalem, fearing, and accounting herself unworthy. For were
it not for this, she would have come there, as is evident both from her present
earnestness, and from her coming out of her own coasts.
And some also taking it as an allegory say, that when Christ came out of
Judea, then the church ventured to approach Him, coming out herself also from
her own coasts. For it is said, "Forget your own people and your father's house."