SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.100, C.2.

parents, according to the Philosopher (Ethic. viii, 12). The worship
given to our country includes homage to all our fellow-citizens and
to all the friends of our country. Therefore piety extends chiefly to
these.
Reply to Objection 1: The greater includes the lesser: wherefore the
worship due to God includes the worship due to our parents as a
particular. Hence it is written (Malach. 1:6): "If I be a father, where is
My honor?" Consequently the term piety extends also to the divine
worship.
Reply to Objection 2: As Augustine says (De Civ. Dei x), "the term
piety is often used in connection with works of mercy, in the
language of the common people; the reason for which I consider to
be the fact that God Himself has declared that these works are more
pleasing to Him than sacrifices. This custom has led to the
application of the word 'pious' to God Himself."
Reply to Objection 3: The relations of a man with his kindred and
fellow-citizens are more referable to the principles of his being than
other relations: wherefore the term piety is more applicable to them.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.100, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether piety provides support for our parents?

Objection 1: It seems that piety does not provide support for our
parents. For, seemingly, the precept of the decalogue, "Honor thy
father and mother," belongs to piety. But this prescribes only the
giving of honor. Therefore it does not belong to piety to provide
support for one's parents.
Objection 2: Further, a man is bound to lay up for those whom he is
bound to support. Now according to the Apostle (2 Cor. 12:14),
"neither ought the children to lay up for the parents." Therefore piety
does not oblige them to support their parents.
Objection 3: Further, piety extends not only to one's parents, but
also to other kinsmen and to one's fellow-citizens, as stated above
(Article 1). But one is not bound to support all one's kindred and
fellow-citizens. Therefore neither is one bound to support one's
parents.
On the contrary, our Lord (Mt. 15:3-6) reproved the Pharisees for
hindering children from supporting their parents.
I answer that, We owe something to our parents in two ways: that is
to say, both essentially, and accidentally. We owe them essentially
that which is due to a father as such: and since he is his son's
superior through being the principle of his being, the latter owes him
reverence and service. Accidentally, that is due to a father, which it
befits him to receive in respect of something accidental to him, for
instance, if he be ill, it is fitting that his children should visit him and
see to his cure; if he be poor, it is fitting that they should support
him; and so on in like instance, all of which come under the head of
service due. Hence Tully says (De Invent. Rhet. ii) that "piety gives
both duty and homage": "duty" referring to service, and "homage" to
reverence or honor, because, as Augustine says (De Civ. Dei x), "we
are said to give homage to those whose memory or presence we
honor."
Reply to Objection 1: According to our Lord's interpretation (Mt. 15:36) the honor due to our parents includes whatever support we owe
them; and the reason for this is that support is given to one's father
because it is due to him as to one greater.