But this, "I will never leave you," he says not concerning money only, but
concerning all other things also. "The Lord is my Helper, and I will not fear what
man shall do unto me"; with good reason.
This then also let us say in all temptations; let us laugh at human things, so
long as we have God favorable to us. For as, when He is our enemy, it is no gain,
though all men should be our friends, so when He is our friend, though all men
together war against us, there is no harm. "I will not fear what man shall do unto
me."
6. "Remember them which have the rule over you, who have spoken unto
you the word of God." In this place I think that he is speaking about assistance
also. For this is [implied in the words] "who have spoken unto you the word of
God."
"Whose faith follow considering the end of their conversation." What is,
"considering"? Continually revolving, examining it by yourselves, reasoning,
investigating accurately, testing it as you choose. "The end of their
conversation," that is, their conversation to the end: for "their conversation" had
a good end.
"Jesus Christ the same yesterday and today and for ever." Do not think that
then indeed He wrought wonders, but now works no wonders. He is the same.
This is, "remember them that have the rule over you."
"Be not carried about with various and strange doctrines." "Strange," that
is, different from those ye heard from us; ["Divers"] that is, of all sorts: for they
have no stability, but are different [one from another]. For especially manifold is
the doctrine of meats.
"For it is a good thing that the heart be established with grace; not with
meats." These are the "various," these the "strange" [doctrines]: especially as
Christ has said, "not that which enters into the mouth defiles the man, but that
which comes out." [Matthew 15:11] And observe that he does not make bold to
say this openly, but as it were by a hint. "For it is a good thing that the heart be
established with grace, not with meats."

Faith is all. If that establishes [it], the heart stands in security. It follows that
Faith establishes: consequently reasonings shake. For Faith is contrary to
reasoning.
"Which" (he says) "have not profited them that have been occupied
therein." For what is the gain from the observance [of them], tell me. Does it not
rather destroy? Does it not make such an one to be under sin? If it be necessary
to observe [them], we must guard ourselves.
"Which" (he says) "have not profited them that have been occupied
therein." That is, who have always diligently kept them.
There is one observance, abstaining from sin. For what profit is it, when
some are so polluted, as not to be able to partake of the sacrifices? So that it did
not save them at all; although they were zealous about the observances. But
because they had not faith, even thus they profited nothing.
7. In the next place he takes away the sacrifice from the type, and directs
his discourse to the prototype, saying, "The bodies of those beasts whose blood is
brought into the sanctuary by the High Priest, are burned without the camp."
Then those things were a type of these and thus Christ, suffering "without,"
fulfilled all.
Here he makes it plain too that He suffered voluntarily, showing that those
things were not accidental, but even the [Divine] arrangement itself was of a
suffering "without." [He suffered] without, but His Blood was borne up into
Heaven. You see then that we partake of Blood which has been carried into the
Holy Place, the True Holy Place; of the Sacrifice of which the Priest alone had
the privilege. We therefore partake of the Truth [the Reality]. If then we partake
not of "reproach" [only] but of sanctification, the "reproach" is the cause of the
sanctification. For as He was reproached, so also are we. If we go forth
"without" therefore, we have fellowship with Him.
But what is, "Let us go forth to Him"? Let us have fellowship with Him in
His sufferings; let us bear His reproach. For He did not simply bid us dwell
"outside the gate," but as He was reproached as a condemned person, so also we.