Susanna 56.

anything belonging to one of these men, nor have I done evil to one of them." In this way, too,
Samuel, who judged the people so many years, and bore rule over Israel without any pride, in the
end cleared himself, saying, "I have walked before you from my childhood even unto this day:
answer me in the sight of God, and before His anointed (Christi ejus); whose ox or whose ass of
yours have I taken, or over whom have I tyrannized, or whom have I oppressed? or if I have received
from the hand of any a bribe or [so much as] a shoe, speak out against me, and I will restore it to
you." And when the people had said to him, "Thou hast not tyrannized, neither hast thou oppressed
us neither hast thou taken ought of any man's hand," he called the Lord to witness, saying, "The
Lord is witness, and His Anointed is witness this day, that ye have not found ought in my hand.
And they said to him, He is witness." In this strain also the Apostle Paul, inasmuch as he had a
good conscience, said to the Corinthians: "For we are not as many, who corrupt the Word of God:
but as of sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of God speak we in Christ;" "We have injured no
man, corrupted no man, circumvented no man."
5. Such presbyters does the Church nourish, of whom also the prophet says: "I will give thy
rulers in peace, and thy bishops in righteousness." Of whom also did the Lord declare, "Who
then shall be a faithful steward (actor), good and wise, whom the Lord sets over His household, to
give them their meat in due season? Blessed is that servant whom his Lord, when He cometh, shall
find so doing." Paul then, teaching us where one may find such, says, "God hath placed in the
Church, first, apostles; secondly, prophets; thirdly, teachers." Where, therefore, the gifts of the
Lord have been placed, there it behoves us to learn the truth, [namely,] from those who possess
that succession of the Church which is from the apostles, and among whom exists that which is
sound and blameless in conduct, as well as that which is unadulterated and incorrupt in speech. For
these also preserve this faith of ours in one God who created all things; and they increase that love
[which we have] for the Son of God, who accomplished such marvellous dispensations for our
sake: and they expound the Scriptures to us without danger, neither blaspheming God, nor
dishonouring the patriarchs, nor despising the prophets.

2 Cor. vii. 2.

Chapter XXVII—The sins of the men of old time, which incurred the displeasure of God,
were, by His providence, committed to writing, that we might derive instruction thereby, and
not be filled with pride. We must not, therefore, infer that there was another God than He
whom Christ preached; we should rather fear, lest the one and the same God who inflicted
punishment on the ancients, should bring down heavier upon us.
1. As I have heard from a certain presbyter, who had heard it from those who had seen the
apostles, and from those who had been their disciples, the punishment [declared] in Scripture was
sufficient for the ancients in regard to what they did without the Spirit's guidance. For as God is
no respecter of persons, He inflicted a proper punishment on deeds displeasing to Him. As in the
case of David, when he suffered persecution from Saul for righteousness' sake, and fled from
King Saul, and would not avenge himself of his enemy, he both sung the advent of Christ, and
instructed the nations in wisdom, and did everything after the Spirit's guidance, and pleased God.
But when his lust prompted him to take Bathsheba, the wife of Uriah, the Scripture said concerning
him, "Now, the thing (sermo) which David had done appeared wicked in the eyes of the Lord;"
and Nathan the prophet is sent to him, pointing out to him his crime, in order that he, passing
sentence upon and condemning himself, might obtain mercy and forgiveness from Christ: "And
[Nathan] said to him, There were two men in one city; the one rich, and the other poor. The rich
man had exceeding many flocks and herds; but the poor man had nothing, save one little ewe-lamb,
which he possessed, and nourished up; and it had been with him and with his children together: it
did eat of his own bread, and drank of his cup, and was to him as a daughter. And there came a
guest unto the rich man; and he spared to take of the flock of his own ewe-lambs, and from the
herds of his own oxen, to entertain the guest; but he took the ewe-lamb of the poor man, and set it
before the man that had come unto him. And David's anger was greatly kindled against the man;
and he said to Nathan, As the Lord liveth, the man that hath done this thing shall surely die (filius
mortis est): and he shall restore the lamb fourfold, because he hath done this thing, and because he
had no pity for the poor man. And Nathan said unto him, Thou art the man who hast done this."
And then he proceeds with the rest [of the narrative], upbraiding him, and recounting God's benefits
towards him, and [showing him] how much his conduct had displeased the Lord. For [he declared]
that works of this nature were not pleasing to God, but that great wrath was suspended over his
house. David, however, was struck with remorse on hearing this, and exclaimed, "I have sinned
against the Lord;" and he sung a penitential psalm, waiting for the coming of the Lord, who washes
uncertainty. [Surely this testimony is a precious intimation of the apostle's meaning (Rom. ii. 12—16), and the whole chapter is
radiant with the purity of the Gospel.]