lust of these things; when shall it be possible for us to be saved, having to give
account for the perdition of others? Do you not hear Christ say, that He left us to
be for salt and for lights in this world, in order that we may both brace up those
that are melting in luxury, and enlighten them that are darkened by the care of
wealth? When therefore we even cast them into more thorough darkness, and
make them more dissolute, what hope shall we have of salvation? There is none
at all; but wailing and gnashing our teeth, and bound hand and foot, we shall
depart into the fire of hell, after being full well worn down by the cares of riches.
Considering then all these things, let us loose the bands of such deceit, that
we may not at all fall into those things which deliver us over to the
unquenchable fire. For he that is a slave to money, the chains both here and there
will have him continually liable to them; but he that is rid of this desire will
attain to freedom from both. Unto which that we also may attain, let us break in
pieces the grievous yoke of avarice, and make ourselves wings toward Heaven;
by the grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory
and might forever and ever. Amen.

## Homily 13 on Matthew

Matt. IV. 1.
"Then was Jesus led up of the Spirit into the wilderness, to be tempted of
the devil."
Then. When? After the descent of the Spirit, after the voice that was borne
from above, and said, "This is My Beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased."
And what was marvellous, it was of the Holy Spirit; for this, he here says, led
Him up. For since with a view to our instruction He both did and underwent all
things; He endures also to be led up there, and to wrestle against the devil: in
order that each of those who are baptized, if after his baptism he have to endure
greater temptations may not be troubled as if the result were unexpected, but
may continue to endure all nobly, as though it were happening in the natural
course of things.
Yea, for therefore you took up arms, not to be idle, but to fight. For this
cause neither does God hinder the temptations as they come on, first to teach you
that you have become much stronger; next, that you may continue modest
neither be exalted even by the greatness of your gifts, the temptations having
power to repress you; moreover, in order that that wicked demon, who is for a
while doubtful about your desertion of him, by the touchstone of temptations
may be well assured that you have utterly forsaken and fallen from him; fourthly,
that you may in this way be made stronger, and better tempered than any steel;
fifthly, that you may obtain a clear demonstration of the treasures entrusted to
you.
For the devil would not have assailed you, unless he had seen you brought
to greater honor. Hence, for example, from the beginning, he attacked Adam,
because he saw him in the enjoyment of great dignity. For this reason he arrayed
himself against Job, because he saw him crowned and proclaimed by the God of