power of punishing.' And he said not, "reprobate" for he would not "be"
reprobate, even though he did not punish, nay rather for this very reason he
would be "approved;" 'but even if some suspect us,' he says, 'on account of our
not displaying our power, to be contemptible and cast away, we care nothing for
this. Better we should be so deemed of by those, than display the power which
God has given to us in those stripes, and in that unreformedness of heart.'
"For we can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth." For that he may
not seem [merely] to be gratifying them, (for this is what one who was void of
vain-glory might do,) but to be doing what the nature of the thing demanded, he
added this, "for we can do nothing against the truth." 'For if we find you,' he
says, 'in good repute, having driven away your sins by repentance and having
boldness towards God; we shall not be able thereafter, were we never so willing,
to punish you, but should we attempt it even, God will not work with us. For to
this end gave He us our power that the judgment we give should be true and
righteous, not contrary to the truth.' Do you see how in every way he can, he
makes what he says void of offensiveness, and softens the harshness of his
menace? Moreover as he has eagerly endeavored this, so is he desirous also to
show that his mind was quite joined to them; wherefore also he added, "For we
rejoice when we are weak and you are strong, and this also we pray for even
your perfecting." 'For most certainly,' he says, 'we cannot do any thing against
the truth, that is, punish you if you are well pleasing [to God]; besides, because
we cannot, we therefore do not wish it, and even desire the contrary. Nay, we are
particularly glad of this very thing, when we find you giving us no occasion to
show that power of ours for punishment. For even if the doing of such things
shows men glorious and approved and strong; still we desire the contrary, that
you should be approved and unblamable, and that we should never at any time
reap the glory thence arising.' Wherefore he says, "For we are glad when we are
weak." What is, "are weak?" 'When we may be thought weak.' Not when we are
weak, but when we are thought weak; for they were thought so by their enemies,
because they displayed not their power of punishing. 'But still we are glad, when

your behavior is of such a sort as to give us no pretence for punishing you. And
it is a pleasure to us to be in this way considered weak, so that only ye be
blameless;' wherefore he adds, "and you are strong," that is, 'are approved, are
virtuous. And we do not only wish for this, but we pray for this, that you may be
blameless, perfect, and afford us no handle.'
6. This is paternal affection, to prefer the salvation of the disciples before
his own good name. This is the part of a soul free from vainglory; this best
releases from the bonds of the body and makes one to rise aloft from earth to
heaven, the being pure from vain-glory; just as therefore the contrary leads unto
many sins. For it is impossible that one who is not pure from vain-glory, should
be lofty and great and noble; but he must needs grovel on the ground, and do
much damage, while the slave of a polluted mistress, more cruel than any
barbarian. For what can be fiercer than she who, when most courted, is then
most savage? Even wild beasts are not this, but are tamed by much attention. But
vain-glory is quite the contrary, by being contemned she is made tame, by being
honored she is made savage and is armed against her honorer. The Jews honored
her and were punished with exceeding severity; the disciples slighted her and
were crowned. And why speak I of punishment and crowns? For to this very
point of being seen to be glorious, it contributes more than any thing, to spit
upon vainglory. And you shall see even in this world that they who honor it are
damaged, while those who slight it are benefited. For the disciples who slighted
it, (for there is no obstacle to our using the same example again,) and preferred
the things of God, outshine the sun, having gained themselves an immortal
memory even after their death; while the Jews who crouched to it have become
cityless, heartless, degraded, fugitives, exiles, mean, contemptible. Do thou,
therefore, if you desire to receive glory, repel glory; but if you pursue glory, you
shall miss glory. And, if you will, let us also try this doctrine in worldly matters.
For whom do we make sport of in our jests? Is it not of those whose minds are
set upon it? Certainly then, these men are the most entirely destitute of it, having
countless accusers and being slighted by all. And whom do we admire, tell me;