admonishes us; at any rate no such result follows, as that God the Father
never appeared in any such form to the Fathers. For many such
appearances happened in those times, without either the Father, or the
Son, or the Holy Spirit being expressly named and designated in them;
but yet with some intimations given through certain very probable
interpretations, so that it would be too rash to say that God the Father
never appeared by any visible forms to the fathers or the prophets. For
they gave birth to this opinion who were not able to understand in respect
to the unity of the Trinity such texts as, "Now unto the King eternal,
immortal, invisible, the only wise God;" and, "Whom no man hath seen,
nor can see." Which texts are understood by a sound faith in that
substance itself, the highest, and in the highest degree divine and
unchangeable, whereby both the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit
is the one and only God. But those visions were wrought through the
changeable creature, made subject to the unchangeable God, and did not
manifest God properly as He is, but by intimations such as suited the
causes and times of the several circumstances.

### CHAP. 18.—THE VISION OF DANIEL.

33. I do not know in what manner these men understand that the Ancient
of Days appeared to Daniel, from whom the Son of man, which He
deigned to be for our sakes, is understood to have received the kingdom;
namely, from Him who says to Him in the Psalms, "Thou art my Son; this
day have I begotten Thee; ask of me, and I shall give Thee the heathen for
Thine inheritance;" and who has "put all things under His feet." If,
however, both the Father giving the kingdom, and the Son receiving it,
appeared to Daniel in bodily form, how can those men say that the Father
never appeared to the prophets, and, therefore, that He only ought to be
understood to be invisible whom no man has seen, nor can see? For
Daniel has told us thus: "I beheld," he says, "till the thrones were set,
and the Ancient of Days did sit, whose garment was white as snow, and
the hair of His head like the pure wool: His throne was like the fiery
flame, and His wheels as burning fire; a fiery stream issued and came
forth from before Him: thousand thousands ministered unto Him, and
ten thousand times ten thousand stood before Him: the judgment was
set, and the books were opened," etc. And a little after, "I saw," he says,

"in the night visions, and behold, one like the Son of man came with the
clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient of Days, and they brought Him
near before Him. And there was given Him dominion, and glory, and a
kingdom, that all peoples, nations, and languages should serve Him: His
dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and His
kingdom that which shall not be destroyed." Behold the Father giving,
and the Son receiving, an eternal kingdom; and both are in the sight of
him who prophesies, in a visible form. It is not, therefore, unsuitably
believed that God the Father also was wont to appear in that manner to
mortals.
34. Unless, perhaps, some one shall say, that the Father is therefore not
visible, because He appeared within the sight of one who was dreaming;
but that therefore the Son and the Holy Spirit are visible, because Moses
saw all those things being awake; as if, forsooth, Moses saw the Word and
the Wisdom of God with fleshly eyes, or that even the human spirit which
quickens that flesh can be seen, or even that corporeal thing which is
called wind;—how much less can that Spirit of God be seen, who
transcends the minds of all men, and of angels, by the ineffable excellence
of the divine substance? Or can any one fall headlong into such an error
as to dare to say, that the Son and the Holy Spirit are visible also to men
who are awake, but that the Father is not visible except to those who
dream? How, then, do they understand that of the Father alone, "Whom
no man hath seen, nor can see."? When men sleep, are they then not
men? Or cannot He, who can fashion the likeness of a body to signify
Himself through the visions of dreamers, also fashion that same bodily
creature to signify Himself to the eyes of those who are awake? Whereas
His own very substance, whereby He Himself is that which He is, cannot
be shown by any bodily likeness to one who sleeps, or by any bodily
appearance to one who is awake; but this not of the Father only, but also
of the Son and of the Holy Spirit. And certainly, as to those who are
moved by the visions of waking men to believe that not the Father, but
only the Son, or the Holy Spirit, appeared to the corporeal sight of men,—
to omit the great extent of the sacred pages, and their manifold
interpretation, such that no one of sound reason ought to affirm that the
person of the Father was nowhere shown to the eyes of waking men by
any corporeal appearance;—but, as I said, to omit this, what do they say