Hebrews 13:1-2
"Let brotherly love continue. Be not forgetful of hospitality, for hereby some
have entertained angels unawares." See how he enjoins them to preserve what
they had: he does not add other things. He did not say, "Be loving as brethren,"
but, "Let brotherly love continue." And again, he did not say, "Be hospitable," as
if they were not, but, "Be not forgetful of hospitality," for this was likely to
happen owing to their afflictions.
Therefore (he says) "some have entertained angels unawares." Do you see
how great was the honor, how great the gain!
What is "unawares"? They entertained them without knowing it. Therefore
the reward also was great, because he entertained them, not knowing that they
were Angels. For if he had known it, it would have been nothing wonderful.
Some say that he here alludes to Lot also.

Hebrews 13:3-6
2. "Remember them that are in bonds, as bound with them, them which
suffer adversity as being yourselves also in the body. Marriage is honorable in
all, and the bed undefiled; but whoremongers and adulterers God will judge. Let
your conversation be without covetousness: being content with such things as
you have."
See how large is his discourse concerning chastity. "Follow peace," he said,
"and holiness; Lest there be any fornicator or profane person" [Hebrews 12:14];
and again, "Fornicators and adulterers God will judge." [Hebrews 12:16] In
every case, the prohibition is with a penalty. "Follow peace with all men," he
says, "and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord: But fornicators
and adulterers God will judge."
And having first set down "Marriage is honorable in all men, and the bed
undefiled," he shows that he rightly added what follows. For if marriage has
been conceded, justly is the fornicator punished, justly does the adulterer suffer
vengeance.
Here he strips for the heretics. He did not say again, Let no one be a
fornicator; but having said it once for all, he then went on as with a general
exhortation, and not as directing himself against them.
"Let your conversation be without covetousness," he says. He did not say,
Possess nothing, but, "Let your conversation be without covetousness": that is,
let it show forth the philosophical character of your mind. [And it will show it, if
we do not seek superfluities, if we keep only to what is necessary.] For he says
above also, "And ye took joyfully the spoiling of your goods." [Hebrews 10:34]
He gives these exhortations, that they might not be covetous.
"Being content" (he says) "with such things as you have." Then here also
the consolation; [Hebrews 13:5] "For He" (he says) "has said, I will never leave

you nor forsake you"; [Hebrews 13:6] "so that we may boldly say, the Lord is my
helper, and I will not fear what man shall do unto me." Again consolation in
their trials.