FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.29, C.5.

Wherefore the reply to the First Objection is evident.
Reply to Objection 2: No man wills and works evil to himself, except
he apprehend it under the aspect of good. For even they who kill
themselves, apprehend death itself as a good, considered as putting
an end to some unhappiness or pain.
Reply to Objection 3: The miser hates something accidental to
himself, but not for that reason does he hate himself: thus a sick
man hates his sickness for the very reason that he loves himself. Or
we may say that avarice makes man hateful to others, but not to
himself. In fact, it is caused by inordinate self-love, in respect of
which, man desires temporal goods for himself more than he should.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.29, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether a man can hate the truth?

Objection 1: It would seem that a man cannot hate the truth. For
good, true, and being are convertible. But a man cannot hate good.
Neither, therefore, can he hate the truth.
Objection 2: Further, "All men have a natural desire for knowledge,"
as stated in the beginning of the Metaphysics i, 1. But knowledge is
only of truth. Therefore truth is naturally desired and loved. But that
which is in a thing naturally, is always in it. Therefore no man can
hate the truth.
Objection 3: Further, the Philosopher says (Rhet. ii, 4) that "men love
those who are straightforward." But there can be no other motive for
this save truth. Therefore man loves the truth naturally. Therefore he
cannot hate it.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (Gal. 4:16): "Am I become your
enemy because I tell you the truth?"
I answer that, Good, true and being are the same in reality, but differ
as considered by reason. For good is considered in the light of
something desirable, while being and true are not so considered:
because good is "what all things seek." Wherefore good, as such,
cannot be the object of hatred, neither in general nor in particular.
Being and truth in general cannot be the object of hatred: because
disagreement is the cause of hatred, and agreement is the cause of
love; while being and truth are common to all things. But nothing
hinders some particular being or some particular truth being an
object of hatred, in so far as it is considered as hurtful and
repugnant; since hurtfulness and repugnance are not incompatible
with the notion of being and truth, as they are with the notion of
good.
Now it may happen in three ways that some particular truth is
repugnant or hurtful to the good we love. First, according as truth is
in things as in its cause and origin. And thus man sometimes hates a
particular truth, when he wishes that what is true were not true.
Secondly, according as truth is in man's knowledge, which hinders
him from gaining the object loved: such is the case of those who
wish not to know the truth of faith, that they may sin freely; in whose