God. By this light the blessed are made "deiform"---i.e. like to God,
according to the saying: "When He shall appear we shall be like to
Him, and we shall see Him as He is" (1 Jn. 2:2).
Reply to Objection 1: The created light is necessary to see the
essence of God, not in order to make the essence of God intelligible,
which is of itself intelligible, but in order to enable the intellect to
understand in the same way as a habit makes a power abler to act.
Even so corporeal light is necessary as regards external sight,
inasmuch as it makes the medium actually transparent, and
susceptible of color.
Reply to Objection 2: This light is required to see the divine essence,
not as a similitude in which God is seen, but as a perfection of the
intellect, strengthening it to see God. Therefore it may be said that
this light is to be described not as a medium in which God is seen,
but as one by which He is seen; and such a medium does not take
away the immediate vision of God.
Reply to Objection 3: The disposition to the form of fire can be
natural only to the subject of that form. Hence the light of glory
cannot be natural to a creature unless the creature has a divine
nature; which is impossible. But by this light the rational creature is
made deiform, as is said in this article.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether of those who see the essence of God,

one sees more perfectly than another?
Objection 1: It seems that of those who see the essence of God, one
does not see more perfectly than another. For it is written (1 Jn. 3:2):
"We shall see Him as He is." But He is only in one way. Therefore He
will be seen by all in one way only; and therefore He will not be seen
more perfectly by one and less perfectly by another.
Objection 2: Further, Augustine says (Octog. Tri. Quaest. qu. xxxii):
"One person cannot see one and the same thing more perfectly than
another." But all who see the essence of God, understand the Divine
essence, for God is seen by the intellect and not by sense, as was
shown above (Article 3). Therefore of those who see the divine
essence, one does not see more clearly than another.
Objection 3: Further, That anything be seen more perfectly than
another can happen in two ways: either on the part of the visible
object, or on the part of the visual power of the seer. On the part of
the object, it may so happen because the object is received more
perfectly in the seer, that is, according to the greater perfection of
the similitude; but this does not apply to the present question, for
God is present to the intellect seeing Him not by way of similitude,
but by His essence. It follows then that if one sees Him more
perfectly than another, this happens according to the difference of
the intellectual power; thus it follows too that the one whose
intellectual power is higher, will see Him the more clearly; and this is
incongruous; since equality with angels is promised to men as their
beatitude.
On the contrary, Eternal life consists in the vision of God, according
to Jn. 17:3: "This is eternal life, that they may know Thee the only
true God," etc. Therefore if all saw the essence of God equally in
eternal life, all would be equal; the contrary to which is declared by
the Apostle: "Star differs from star in glory" (1 Cor. 15:41).
I answer that, Of those who see the essence of God, one sees Him
more perfectly than another. This, indeed, does not take place as if
one had a more perfect similitude of God than another, since that
vision will not spring from any similitude; but it will take place
because one intellect will have a greater power or faculty to see God