is, the more like is it to God. Therefore the better things are more
loved by God.
I answer that, It must needs be, according to what has been said
before, that God loves more the better things . For it has been shown
(Articles 2,3), that God's loving one thing more than another is
nothing else than His willing for that thing a greater good: because
God's will is the cause of goodness in things; and the reason why
some things are better than others, is that God wills for them a
greater good. Hence it follows that He loves more the better things.
Reply to Objection 1: God loves Christ not only more than He loves
the whole human race, but more than He loves the entire created
universe: because He willed for Him the greater good in giving Him
"a name that is above all names," in so far as He was true God. Nor
did anything of His excellence diminish when God delivered Him up
to death for the salvation of the human race; rather did He become
thereby a glorious conqueror: "The government was placed upon His
shoulder," according to Is. 9:6.
Reply to Objection 2: God loves the human nature assumed by the
Word of God in the person of Christ more than He loves all the
angels; for that nature is better, especially on the ground of the
union with the Godhead. But speaking of human nature in general,
and comparing it with the angelic, the two are found equal, in the
order of grace and of glory: since according to Rev 21:17, the
measure of a man and of an angel is the same. Yet so that, in this
respect, some angels are found nobler than some men, and some
men nobler than some angels. But as to natural condition an angel is
better than a man. God therefore did not assume human nature
because He loved man, absolutely speaking, more; but because the
needs of man were greater; just as the master of a house may give
some costly delicacy to a sick servant, that he does not give to his
own son in sound health.
Reply to Objection 3: This doubt concerning Peter and John has
been solved in various ways. Augustine interprets it mystically, and
says that the active life, signified by Peter, loves God more than the
contemplative signified by John, because the former is more
conscious of the miseries of this present life, and therefore the more
ardently desires to be freed from them, and depart to God. God, he
says, loves more the contemplative life, since He preserves it longer.
For it does not end, as the active life does, with the life of the body.

Some say that Peter loved Christ more in His members, and
therefore was loved more by Christ also, for which reason He gave
him the care of the Church; but that John loved Christ more in
Himself, and so was loved more by Him; on which account Christ
commended His mother to his care. Others say that it is uncertain
which of them loved Christ more with the love of charity, and
uncertain also which of them God loved more and ordained to a
greater degree of glory in eternal life. Peter is said to have loved
more, in regard to a certain promptness and fervor; but John to have
been more loved, with respect to certain marks of familiarity which
Christ showed to him rather than to others, on account of his youth
and purity. While others say that Christ loved Peter more, from his
more excellent gift of charity; but John more, from his gifts of
intellect. Hence, absolutely speaking, Peter was the better and more
beloved; but, in a certain sense, John was the better, and was loved
the more. However, it may seem presumptuous to pass judgment on
these matters; since "the Lord" and no other "is the weigher of
spirits" (Prov. 16:2).
Reply to Objection 4: The penitent and the innocent are related as
exceeding and exceeded. For whether innocent or penitent, those
are the better and better loved who have most grace. Other things
being equal, innocence is the nobler thing and the more beloved.
God is said to rejoice more over the penitent than over the innocent,
because often penitents rise from sin more cautious, humble, and
fervent. Hence Gregory commenting on these words (Hom. 34 in Ev.)
says that, "In battle the general loves the soldier who after flight
returns and bravely pursues the enemy, more than him who has
never fled, but has never done a brave deed."
Or it may be answered that gifts of grace, equal in themselves, are
more as conferred on the penitent, who deserved punishment, than
as conferred on the innocent, to whom no punishment was due; just
as a hundred pounds [marcoe] are a greater gift to a poor man than
to a king.
Reply to Objection 5: Since God's will is the cause of goodness in
things, the goodness of one who is loved by God is to be reckoned
according to the time when some good is to be given to him by
divine goodness. According therefore to the time, when there is to
be given by the divine will to the predestined sinner a greater good,
the sinner is better; although according to some other time he is the