Judge, and the Just One, and Ruler over all. For He is good, and merciful, and patient, and saves
whom He ought: nor does goodness desert Him in the exercise of justice, nor is His wisdom
lessened; for He saves those whom He should save, and judges those worthy of judgment. Neither
does He show Himself unmercifully just; for His goodness, no doubt, goes on before, and takes
precedency.
4. The God, therefore, who does benevolently cause His sun to rise upon all, and sends rain
upon the just and unjust, shall judge those who, enjoying His equally distributed kindness, have
led lives not corresponding to the dignity of His bounty; but who have spent their days in wantonness
and luxury, in opposition to His benevolence, and have, moreover, even blasphemed Him who has
conferred so great benefits upon them.
5. Plato is proved to be more religious than these men, for he allowed that the same God was
both just and good, having power over all things, and Himself executing judgment, expressing
himself thus, "And God indeed, as He is also the ancient Word, possessing the beginning, the end,
and the mean of all existing things, does everything rightly, moving round about them according
to their nature; but retributive justice always follows Him against those who depart from the divine
law." Then, again, he points out that the Maker and Framer of the universe is good. "And to the
good," he says, "no envy ever springs up with regard to anything;" thus establishing the goodness
of God, as the beginning and the cause of the creation of the world, but not ignorance, nor an erring
Æon, nor the consequence of a defect, nor the Mother weeping and lamenting, nor another God
or Father.
6. Well may their Mother bewail them, as capable of conceiving and inventing such things for
they have worthily uttered this falsehood against themselves, that their Mother is beyond the
Pleroma, that is beyond the knowledge of God, and that their entire multitude became a shapeless
and crude abortion: for it apprehends nothing of the truth; it falls into void and darkness: for their
wisdom (Sophia) was void, and wrapped up in darkness; and Horos did not permit her to enter the
Pleroma: for the Spirit (Achamoth) did not receive them into the place of refreshment. For their
father, by begetting ignorance, wrought in them the sufferings of death. We do not misrepresent
[their opinions on] these points; but they do themselves confirm, they do themselves teach, they
do glory in them, they imagine a lofty [mystery] about their Mother, whom they represent as having

Matt. v. 45.
to the rhetorical syllogism.

been begotten without a father, that is, without God, a female from a female, that is, corruption
from error.
7. We do indeed pray that these men may not remain in the pit which they themselves have
dug, but separate themselves from a Mother of this nature, and depart from Bythus, and stand away
from the void, and relinquish the shadow; and that they, being converted to the Church of God,
may be lawfully begotten, and that Christ may be formed in them, and that they may know the
Framer and Maker of this universe, the only true God and Lord of all. We pray for these things on
their behalf, loving them better than they seem to love themselves. For our love, inasmuch as it is
true, is salutary to them, if they will but receive it. It may be compared to a severe remedy, extirpating
the proud and sloughing flesh of a wound; for it puts an end to their pride and haughtiness. Wherefore
it shall not weary us, to endeavour with all our might to stretch out the hand unto them. Over and
above what has been already stated, I have deferred to the following book, to adduce the words of
the Lord; if, by convincing some among them, through means of the very instruction of Christ, I
may succeed in persuading them to abandon such error, and to cease from blaspheming their Creator,
who is both God alone, and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.