materials that fall in its way; and by what things it is usually quenched, by the
same it is kindled the more (for some say that at such a time not only wood and
tow, and the other combustibles, but even water darted forth upon it does but fan
its power the more); so is it also with anger; whatever any one may say, becomes
food in a moment for this evil conflagration. All which kind of evils Christ
checking beforehand, had condemned first him that is angry without a cause to
the judgment, (this being the very reason why He said, "He that is angry shall be
in danger of the judgment"); then him that says "Raca," to the council. But as yet
these are no great things; for the punishments are here. Therefore for him who
calls "fool" He has added the fire of hell, now for the first time mentioning the
name of hell. For having before discoursed much of the kingdom, not until then
did He mention this; implying, that the former comes of His own love and
indulgence towards man, this latter of our negligence.
11. And see how He proceeds little by little in His punishments, all but
excusing Himself unto you, and signifying that His desire indeed is to threaten
nothing of the kind, but that we drag Him on to such denunciations. For observe:
"I bade you," says He, "not be angry for nought, because you are in danger of
the judgment. You have despised the former commandment: see what anger has
produced; it has led you on straightway to insult, for you have called your
brother 'Raca.' Again, I set another punishment, 'the council.' If you overlook
even this, and proceed to that which is more grievous, I visit you no longer with
these finite punishments, but with the undying penalty of hell, lest after this you
should break forth even to murder." For there is nothing, nothing in the world
more intolerable than insolence; it is what has very great power to sting a man's
soul. But when the word too which is spoken is in itself more wounding than the
insolence, the blaze becomes twice as great. Think it not then a light thing to call
another "fool." For when of that which separates us from the brutes, and by
which especially we are human beings, namely, the mind and the understanding
—when of this you have robbed your brother, you have deprived him of all his
nobleness.

Let us not then regard the words merely, but realizing the things
themselves, and his feeling, let us consider how great a wound is made by this
word, and unto how much evil it proceeds. For this cause Paul likewise cast out
of the kingdom not only "the adulterous" and "the effeminate," but "the revilers"
[1 Corinthians 6:9-10] also. And with great reason: for the insolent man mars all
the beauty of charity, and casts upon his neighbor unnumbered ills, and works up
lasting enmities, and tears asunder the members of Christ, and is daily driving
away that peace which God so desires: giving much vantage ground unto the
devil by his injurious ways, and making him the stronger. Therefore Christ
Himself, cutting out the sinews of the devil's power, brought in this law.
For indeed He makes much account of love: this being above all things the
mother of every good, and the badge of His disciples, and the bond which holds
together our whole condition. With reason therefore does He remove with great
earnestness the roots and the sources of that hatred which utterly spoils it.
Think not therefore that these sayings are in any wise hyperbolical, but
consider the good done by them, and admire the mildness of these laws. For
there is nothing for which God takes so much pains, as this; that we should be
united and knit together one with another. Therefore both in His own person, and
by His disciples, as well those in the Old, as in the New Testament, He makes so
much account of this commandment; and is a severe avenger and punisher of
those who despise the duty. For in truth nothing so effectually gives entrance and
root to all wickedness, as the taking away of love. Wherefore He also said,
"When iniquity abounds, the love of the many shall wax cold." Thus Cain
became his brother's murderer; thus Esau; thus Joseph's brethren; thus our
unnumbered crimes have come revelling in, this bond being dissevered. You see
why He Himself also roots out whatever things injure this, on every side, with
great exactness.
12. Neither does He stop at those precepts only which have been
mentioned, but adds also others more than those: whereby He signifies how
much account He makes thereof. Namely, having threatened by "the council," by