FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.5, C.2.

the truth which the rational nature reaches by the inquiry of reason,
as was made clear in the FP, Question 58, Article 3; FP, Question 79,
Article 8. Therefore reason arrives by a kind of movement at that
which the intellect grasps. Consequently the rational nature can
attain Happiness, which is the perfection of the intellectual nature:
but otherwise than the angels. Because the angels attained it
forthwith after the beginning of their creation: whereas man attains if
after a time. But the sensitive nature can nowise attain this end.
Reply to Objection 2: To man in the present state of life the natural
way of knowing intelligible truth is by means of phantasms. But after
this state of life, he has another natural way, as was stated in the FP,
Question 84, Article 7. ; FP, Question 89, Article 1.
Reply to Objection 3: Man cannot surmount the angels in the degree
of nature so as to be above them naturally. But he can surmount
them by an operation of the intellect, by understanding that there is
above the angels something that makes men happy; and when he
has attained it, he will be perfectly happy.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.5, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether one man can be happier than another?

Objection 1: It would seem that one man cannot be happier than
another. For Happiness is "the reward of virtue," as the Philosopher
says (Ethic. i, 9). But equal reward is given for all the works of virtue;
because it is written (Mt. 20:10) that all who labor in the vineyard
"received every man a penny"; for, as Gregory says (Hom. xix in
Evang.), "each was equally rewarded with eternal life." Therefore one
man cannot be happier than another.
Objection 2: Further, Happiness is the supreme good. But nothing
can surpass the supreme. Therefore one man's Happiness cannot be
surpassed by another's.
Objection 3: Further, since Happiness is "the perfect and sufficient
good" (Ethic. i, 7) it brings rest to man's desire. But his desire is not
at rest, if he yet lacks some good that can be got. And if he lack
nothing that he can get, there can be no still greater good. Therefore
either man is not happy; or, if he be happy, no other Happiness can
be greater.
On the contrary, It is written (Jn. 14:2): "In My Father's house there
are many mansions"; which, according to Augustine (Tract. lxvii in
Joan.) signify "the diverse dignities of merits in the one eternal life."
But the dignity of eternal life which is given according to merit, is
Happiness itself. Therefore there are diverse degrees of Happiness,
and Happiness is not equally in all.
I answer that, As stated above (Question 1, Article 8; Question 2,
Article 7), Happiness implies two things, to wit, the last end itself, i.e.
the Sovereign Good; and the attainment or enjoyment of that same
Good. As to that Good itself, Which is the object and cause of
Happiness, one Happiness cannot be greater than another, since
there is but one Sovereign Good, namely, God, by enjoying Whom,
men are made happy. But as to the attainment or enjoyment of this
Good, one man can be happier than another; because the more a
man enjoys this Good the happier he is. Now, that one man enjoys
God more than another, happens through his being better disposed
or ordered to the enjoyment of Him. And in this sense one man can
be happier than another.