THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.42, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether Christ should have taught all things

openly?
Objection 1: It would seem that Christ should not have taught all
things openly. For we read that He taught many things to His
disciples apart: as is seen clearly in the sermon at the Supper.
Wherefore He said: "That which you heard in the ear in the chambers
shall be preached on the housetops". Therefore He did not teach all
things openly.
Objection 2: Further, the depths of wisdom should not be expounded
save to the perfect, according to 1 Cor. 2:6: "We speak wisdom
among the perfect." Now Christ's doctrine contained the most
profound wisdom. Therefore it should not have been made known to
the imperfect crowd.
Objection 3: Further, it comes to the same, to hide the truth, whether
by saying nothing or by making use of a language that is difficult to
understand. Now Christ, by speaking to the multitudes a language
they would not understand, hid from them the truth that He
preached; since "without parables He did not speak to them" (Mt.
13:34). In the same way, therefore, He could have hidden it from
them by saying nothing at all.
On the contrary, He says Himself (Jn. 18:20): "In secret I have
spoken nothing."
I answer that, Anyone's doctrine may be hidden in three ways. First,
on the part of the intention of the teacher, who does not wish to
make his doctrine known to many, but rather to hide it. And this may
happen in two ways---sometimes through envy on the part of the
teacher, who desires to excel in his knowledge, wherefore he is
unwilling to communicate it to others. But this was not the case with
Christ, in whose person the following words are spoken (Wis. 7:13):
"Which I have learned without guile, and communicate without envy,
and her riches I hide not." But sometimes this happens through the
vileness of the things taught; thus Augustine says on Jn. 16:12:
"There are some things so bad that no sort of human modesty can
bear them." Wherefore of heretical doctrine it is written (Prov. 9:17):
"Stolen waters are sweeter." Now, Christ's doctrine is "not of error
nor of uncleanness" (1 Thess. 2:3). Wherefore our Lord says (Mk.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.42, C.4.

4:21): "Doth a candle," i.e. true and pure doctrine, "come in to be put
under a bushel?"
Secondly, doctrine is hidden because it is put before few. And thus,
again, did Christ teach nothing in secret: for He propounded His
entire doctrine either to the whole crowd or to His disciples gathered
together. Hence Augustine says on Jn. 18:20: "How can it be said
that He speaks in secret when He speaks before so many men? . . .
especially if what He says to few He wishes through them to be made
known to many?"
Thirdly, doctrine is hidden, as to the manner in which it is
propounded. And thus Christ spoke certain things in secret to the
crowds, by employing parables in teaching them spiritual mysteries
which they were either unable or unworthy to grasp: and yet it was
better for them to be instructed in the knowledge of spiritual things,
albeit hidden under the garb of parables, than to be deprived of it
altogether. Nevertheless our Lord expounded the open and unveiled
truth of these parables to His disciples, so that they might hand it
down to others worthy of it; according to 2 Tim. 2:2: "The things
which thou hast heard of me by many witnesses, the same command
to faithful men, who shall be fit to teach others." This is
foreshadowed, Num. 4, where the sons of Aaron are commanded to
wrap up the sacred vessels that were to be carried by the Levites.
Reply to Objection 1: As Hilary says, commenting on the passage
quoted, "we do not read that our Lord was wont to preach at night,
and expound His doctrine in the dark: but He says this because His
speech is darkness to the carnal-minded, and His words are night to
the unbeliever. His meaning, therefore, is that whatever He said we
also should say in the midst of unbelievers, by openly believing and
professing it."
Or, according to Jerome, He speaks comparatively---that is to say,
because He was instructing them in Judea, which was a small place
compared with the whole world, where Christ's doctrine was to be
published by the preaching of the apostles.
Reply to Objection 2: By His doctrine our Lord did not make known
all the depths of His wisdom, neither to the multitudes, nor, indeed,
to His disciples, to whom He said (Jn. 16:12): "I have yet many things
to say to you, but you cannot bear them now." Yet whatever things