two shall come out gold. Behold, thus has He made the two one. Or put the case
again in another way. Let the two be, one a slave, the other an adopted son: and
let both offend Him, the one as a disinherited child, the other as a fugitive, and
one who never knew a father. Then let both be made heirs, both trueborn sons.
Behold, they are exalted to one and the same dignity, the two have become one,
the one coming from a longer, the other from a nearer distance, and the slave
becoming more noble than he was before he offended.
"And broke down," he proceeds, "the middle wall of partition."
What the middle wall of partition is, he interprets by saying, "the enmity
having abolished in His flesh, even the law of commandments contained in
ordinances." Some indeed affirm that he means the wall of the Jews against the
Greeks, because it did not allow the Jews to hold intercourse with the Greeks. To
me, however, this does not seem to be the meaning, but rather that he calls "the
enmity in the flesh," a middle wall, in that it is a common barrier, cutting us off
alike from God. As the Prophet says, "Your iniquities separate between you and
Me;" [Isaiah 59:2] for that enmity which He had both against Jews and Gentiles
was, as it were, a middle wall. And this, while the law existed, was not only not
abolished, but rather was strengthened; "for the law," says the Apostle, "works
wrath." [Romans 4:15] Just in the same way then as when he says in that
passage, "the law works wrath," he does not ascribe the whole of this effect to
the law itself, but it is to be understood, that it is because we have transgressed
it; so also in this place he calls it a middle wall, because through being disobeyed
it wrought enmity. The law was a hedge, but this it was made for the sake of
security, and for this reason was called "a hedge," to the intent that it might form
an inclosure. For listen again to the Prophet, where he says, "I made a trench
about it." [Isaiah 5:2] And again, "You have broken down her fences, so that all
they which pass by the way do pluck her." [Psalm 80:12] Here therefore it means
security and so again, "I will take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be trodden
down." [Isaiah 5:5] And again, "He gave them the law for a defence." [Isaiah
8:20] And again, "The Lord executes righteous acts and made known His ways

unto Israel." [Psalm 103:6-7] It became, however, a middle wall, no longer
establishing them in security, but cutting them off from God. Such then is the
middle wall of partition formed out of the hedge. And to explain what this is, he
subjoins, "the enmity in His flesh having abolished, the law of commandments."
How so? In that He was slain and dissolved the enmity therein. And not in
this way only but also by keeping it. But what then, if we are released from the
former transgression, and yet are again compelled to keep it? Then were the case
the same over again, whereas He has destroyed the very law itself. For he says,
"Having abolished the law of commandments contained in ordinances." Oh!
amazing loving-kindness! He gave us a law that we should keep it, and when we
kept it not, and ought to have been punished, He even abrogated the law itself.
As if a man, who, having committed a child to a schoolmaster, if he should turn
out disobedient, should set him at liberty even from the schoolmaster, and take
him away. How great loving-kindness were this! What is meant by,
"Having abolished by ordinances?"
For he makes a wide distinction between "commandments" and
"ordinances." He either then means "faith," calling that an "ordinance," (for by
faith alone He saved us,) or he means "precept," such as Christ gave, when He
said, "But I say unto you, that you are not to be angry at all." [Matthew 5:22]
That is to say, "If you shall believe that God raised Him from the dead, you shall
be saved." [Romans 10:6-9] And again, "The word is near you, in your mouth,
and in your heart. Say not, Who shall ascend into heaven, or who shall descend
into the abyss?" or, who has "brought Him again from the dead?" Instead of a
certain manner of life, He brought in faith. For that He might not save us to no
purpose, He both Himself underwent the penalty, and also required of men the
faith that is by doctrines.
"That he might create in Himself of the two, one new man."
Observe thou, that it is not that the Gentile has become a Jew, but that both
the one and the other are entered into another condition. It was not with a view
of merely making this last other than he was, but rather, in order to create the