you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of Heaven;" and they were
emboldened. Wherefore also they ask in private; not as grudging the multitude,
but observing their Master's law. For, "To these," says He, "it is not given."
And why may it be that they let pass the parable of the leaven, and of the
mustard seed, and inquire concerning this? They let those pass, as being plainer;
but about this, as having an affinity to that before spoken, and as setting forth
something more than it, they are desirous to learn (since He would not have
spoken the same to them a second time); for indeed they saw how severe was the
threatening therein uttered. Wherefore neither does He blame them, but rather
completes His previous statements.
And, as I am always saying, the parables must not be explained throughout
word for word, since many absurdities will follow; this even He Himself is
teaching us here in thus interpreting this parable. Thus He says not at all who the
servants are that came to Him, but, implying that He brought them in, for the
sake of some order, and to make up the picture, He omits that part, and interprets
those that are most urgent and essential, and for the sake of which the parable
was spoken; signifying Himself to be Judge and Lord of all.
"And He answered," so it is said, "and said unto them, He that sows the
good seed is the Son of Man; the field is the world, the good seed, these are the
children of the kingdom, but the tares are the children of the wicked one; the
enemy that sows them is the devil; and the harvest is the end of the world, and
the reapers are angels. As therefore the tares are gathered and burned in the fire;
so shall it be in the end of this world. The Son of Man shall send His angels, and
they shall gather out of His kingdom all things that offend, and them which do
iniquity; and shall cast them into the furnace of fire, there shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth. Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the kingdom
of their Father."
For whereas He Himself is the sower, and that of His own field, and out of
His own kingdom He gathers, it is quite clear that the present world also is His.
But mark His unspeakable love to man, and His leaning to bounty, and His

disinclination to punishment; in that, when He sows, He sows in His own person,
but when He punishes, it is by others, that is, by the angels.
"Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their
Father." Not because it will be just so much only, but because this star is
surpassed in brightness by none that we know. He uses the comparisons that are
known to us.
And yet surely elsewhere He says, the harvest is already come; as when He
says of the Samaritans, "Lift up your eyes, and look on the fields; for they are
white already to harvest." [John 4:35] And again, "The harvest truly is
plenteous, but the laborers are few." How then says He there, that the harvest is
already come, while here He said, it is yet to be? According to another
signification.
And how having elsewhere said, "One sows, and another reaps,"
[John 4:37] does He here say, it is Himself that sows? Because there again, He
was speaking, to distinguish the apostles, not from Himself, but from the
prophets, and that in the case of the Jews and Samaritans. Since certainly it was
He who sowed through the prophets also.
And at times He calls this self-same thing both harvest and sowing, naming
it with relation, now to one thing, now to another. Thus when He is speaking of
the conviction and obedience of His converts, He calls the thing "a harvest," as
though He had accomplished all; but when He is seeking after the fruit of their
hearing, He calls it seed, and the end, harvest.
And how says He elsewhere, that "the righteous are caught up first?"
[1 Thessalonians 4:17] Because they are indeed caught up first, but Christ
having come, those others are given over to punishment, and then the former
depart into the kingdom of heaven. For because they must be in heaven, but He
Himself is to come and judge all men here; having passed sentence upon these,
like some king He rises with His friends, leading them to that blessed portion.
Do you see that the punishment is twofold, first to be burnt up, and then to fall
from that glory?