them to repentance, so He does here also, both to rouse them, and to render the
prophet more venerated, that in this way at least they may hear him. Then, since
they kept on in a state of incurable madness, and were not to be sobered even by
the rest being carried away, he first exhorts them to remain there. But when they
kept not up to this, but deserted to Egypt, this indeed He allowed them, but
requires of them not to desert to irreligion as well as to Egypt. [Jeremiah 43:8]
But when they did not comply in this either, He sends the prophet along with
them, so that they might not after all suffer total wreck. [Jeremiah 44:28] For
since they did not follow Him when He called, He next follows them to
discipline them, and hinder their being hurried further into vice, and as a father
full of affection does a child who takes all treatment in the same peevish way,
conducting him about everywhere with himself, and following him about. This
was the reason why He sent not Jeremiah only into Egypt, but also Ezekiel into
Babylon, and they did not refuse to go. For when they found their Master love
the people exceedingly, they continued themselves to do so likewise. Much as if
a right-minded servant were to take compassion upon an intractable son when he
saw his father grieving and lamenting about him. And what was there that they
did not suffer for them? They were sawn asunder, they were driven out, they
were reproached, they were stoned, they underwent numberless grievances. And
after all this they would run back to them. Samuel, for instance, ceased not to
mourn for Saul, miserably insulted as he was by him, and injured irreparably. [1
Samuel 15:35] Still he held none of these things in remembrance. And for the
people of the Jews, Jeremiah has composed Lamentations in writing. And when
the general of the Persians had given him liberty to dwell securely, and with
perfect freedom, wherever he pleased, he preferred above dwelling at home the
affliction of the people, and their hard durance in a strange land. [Jeremiah 11:5]
So Moses left the palace and the sort of living herein, and hasted to be among
their calamities. And Daniel abode for twenty days following without food,
pinching himself with the most severe fast, that he might reconcile God to them.
[Daniel 10:2] And the three Children too, when in the furnace, and so fierce a

fire, put up a supplication for them. For it was not on their account that they
were grieved, as they were saved; but since they considered that then was the
time for the greatest boldness of speech, they consequently prayed in their
behalf; hence too they said, "In a contrite heart and an humble spirit let us be
accepted." [Song. ver. 16] For them Joshua also rent his garments. [Joshua 7:6]
For them Ezekiel too wailed and lamented when he saw them cut down. [Ezekiel
9:8] And Jeremy said, "Let me alone, I will weep bitterly." [Isaiah 22:4] And
before this, when he did not venture openly to pray for a remittance of their sad
estate, he sought for some limited period, when he says, "How long, O, Lord?"
[Isaiah 6:11] For full of affectionateness is the whole race of the saints.
Wherefore also St. Paul says, "Put on therefore, as the elect saints of God,
bowels of mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind." [Colossians 3:12] You see the
strict propriety of the word, and how he would have us continually merciful. For
he does not say, "show mercy" only, but put it on, that like as our garment is
always with us, so may mercy be. And he does not say merely mercy, but
"bowels of mercy," that we may imitate the natural affection of relations.
But we do just the contrary, and if any one comes to ask a single penny of
us, we insult them, abuse them, call them impostors. Do you not shudder, man,
and blush to call him an impostor for bread? Why even supposing such an one is
practising imposture, he deserves to be pitied for it, because he is so pressed with
famine as to put on such a character. This then is a reproach to our cruelty. For
since we had not the heart to bestow with readiness, they are compelled to
practise a great many arts, so as to put a cheat off upon our inhumanity, and to
soften down our harshness. Now if it was gold and silver that he asked of you,
then there would be some reason in your suspicions. But if it is necessary food
that he comes to you for, why be showing yourself wise so unseasonably, and
take so over exact an account of him, accusing him of idleness and sloth? For if
we must talk in this way, it is not others but ourselves that we ought to address.
When therefore you are going to God to ask forgiveness for your sins, then call
these words to mind, and you will know you deserve to have these things said to