which is conceived in her is of the Holy Ghost.'"
A strange thing it was which he spoke of, surpassing man's reason, and
above all the laws of nature. How then is he to believe, to whom such tidings are
altogether new? "By the things that are past," says he, "by the revelations." For
with this intent he laid open all things that were in his mind, what he felt, what
he feared, what he was resolved to do—that by these he might assure himself of
this point.
Or rather, not by things past only, but like wise by things to come, he wins
him over. "And she shall bring forth," says he, "a Son, and you shall call His
name Jesus." [Matthew 1:21] For do not thou, because He is of the Holy Ghost,
imagine that you are an alien to the ministry of this dispensation. Since although
in the birth you have no part, but the Virgin abode untouched, nevertheless, what
pertains to a father, not injuring the honor of virginity, that do I give you, to set a
Name on that which is born: for "you shall call Him." For though the offspring
be not yours, yet shall you exhibit a father's care towards Him. Wherefore I do
straightway, even from the giving of the name, connect you with Him that is
born.
Then lest on the other hand any one should from this suspect him to be the
father, hear what follows, with what exact care he states it. "She shall bring
forth," he says, "a Son:" he does not say, "bring forth to you," but merely "she
shall bring forth," putting it indefinitely: since not to him did she bring forth, but
to the whole world.
13. For this cause too the angel came bringing His name from Heaven,
hereby again intimating that this is a wondrous birth: it being God Himself who
sends the name from above by the angel to Joseph. For neither was this without
an object, but a treasure of ten thousand blessings. Wherefore the angel also
interprets it, and suggests good hopes, in this way again leading him to belief.
For to these things we are wont to be more inclined, and therefore are also
fonder of believing them.
So having established his faith by all, by the past things, by the future, by

the present, by the honor given to himself, he brings in the prophet also in good
time, to give his suffrage in support of all these. But before introducing him, he
proclaims beforehand the good things which were to befall the world through
Him. And what are these? Sins removed and done away. "For He shall save His
people from their sins."
Here again the thing is signified to be beyond all expectation. For not from
visible wars, neither from barbarians, but what was far greater than these, from
sins, he declares the glad tidings of deliverance; a work which had never been
possible to any one before.
But wherefore, one may ask, did he say, "His people," and not add the
Gentiles also? That he might not startle the hearer yet a while. For to him that
listens with understanding he darkly signified the Gentiles too. For "His people"
are not the Jews only, but also all that draw near and receive the knowledge that
is from Him.
And mark how he has by the way discovered to us also His dignity, by
calling the Jewish nation "His people." For this is the word of one implying
nought else, but that He who is born is God's child, and that the King of those on
high is the subject of his discourse. As neither does forgiving sins belong to any
other power, but only to that single essence.
14. Forasmuch then as we have partaken of so great a gift, let us do
everything not to dishonor such a benefit. For if even before this honor, what
was done was worthy of punishment, much more now, after this unspeakable
benefit. And this I say not now for no cause, but because I see many after their
baptism living more carelessly than the uninitiated, and having nothing peculiar
to distinguish them in their way of life. It is, you see, for this cause, that neither
in the market nor in the Church is it possible to know quickly who is a believer
and who an unbeliever; unless one be present at the time of the mysteries, and
see the one sort put out, the others remaining within. Whereas they ought to be
distinguished not by their place, but by their way of life. For as men's outward
dignities are naturally to be discovered by the outward signs with which they are