and madness. For because he had said "through the Spirit," that you might not
suppose this word, "through," to denote inferiority or the being actuated, he
adds, that "the Spirit works," not "is worked," and works "as he will," not as he
is bidden. For as concerning the Father, the Son says that "He raises up the dead
and quickens;" in like manner also, concerning Himself, that "He quickens
whom He will:" [John 5:21] thus also of the Spirit, in another place, that He does
all things with authority and that there is nothing that hinders Him; (for the
expression, "blows where it lists" [John 3:8,] though it be spoken of the wind is
apt to establish this) but here, that "He works all things as He will." And from
another place to learn that He is not one of the things actuated, but of those that
actuate. "For who knows," says he, "the things of a man, but the spirit of the
man? Even so the things of God none knows save the Spirit of God." [1
Corinthians 2:11] Now that "the spirit of a man," i.e., the soul, requires not to be
actuated that it may know the things of itself, is, I suppose, evident to every one.
Therefore neither does the Holy Ghost, that he may "know the things of God."
For his meaning is like this, "the secret things of God" are known to the Holy
Spirit as to the soul of man the secret things of herself. But if this be not actuated
for that end, much less would That which knows the depths of God and needs no
actuation for that knowledge, require any actuating Power in order to the giving
gifts to the Apostles.
But besides these things, that also, which I before spoke of, I will mention
again now. What then is this? That if the Spirit were inferior and of another
substance, there would have been no avail in his consolation, nor in our hearing
the words, "of the same Spirit." For he who has received from the king, I grant,
may find it a very soothing circumstance, that he himself gave to him; but if it be
from the slave, he is then rather vexed, when one reproaches him with it. So that
even hence is it evident, that the Holy Spirit is not of the substance of the
servant, but of the King.
7. Wherefore as he comforted them, when he said, that "there are diversities
of ministrations, but the same Lord; and diversities of operations, but the same

God;" so also when he said above, "there are diversities of gifts, but the same
Spirit;" and after this again when he said, "But all these works the one and the
same Spirit, dividing to every man severally as he will."
"Let us not, I pray you, be at a loss," says he; "neither let us grieve, saying,
'Why have I received this and not received that?' neither let us demand an
account of the Holy Spirit. For if you know that he vouchsafed it from
providential care, consider that from the same care he has given also the
measure of it, and be content and rejoice in what you have received: but murmur
not at what you have not received; yea, rather confess God's favor that you have
not received things beyond your power."
5. And if in spiritual things one ought not to be over-curious, much more in
temporal things; but to be quiet and not nicely enquire why one is rich and
another poor. For, first of all, not every single rich man is rich from God, but
many even of unrighteousness, and rapine, and avarice. For he that forbade to be
rich, how can he have granted that which he forbade to receive?
But that I may, far above what the case requires, stop the mouths of those
who concerning these things gainsay us, come, let us carry our discourse higher
up, to the time when riches used to be given by God; and answer me. Wherefore
was Abraham rich whereas Jacob wanted even bread? Were not both the one and
the other righteous? Does He not say concerning the three alike, "I am the God
of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Jacob?" [Exodus 3:6] Wherefore then was the
one a rich man, and the other a hired servant? Or rather, why was Esau rich, who
was unrighteous and a murderer of his brother, while Jacob was in bondage for
so long a time? Wherefore again did Isaac live in ease all his time, but Jacob in
toils and miseries? For which cause also he said, "Few and evil are my days."
[Genesis 47:9]
Wherefore did David, who was both a prophet and a king, himself also live
all his time in toils? Whereas Solomon his son spent forty years in security
above all men, in the enjoyment of profound peace, glory, and honor, and going
through every kind of deliciousness? What again could be the reason, that