understood---namely, the first principles; and, again, by way of
judgment returns by analysis to first principles, in the light of which
it examines what it has found. Now it is clear that rest and movement
are not to be referred to different powers, but to one and the same,
even in natural things: since by the same nature a thing is moved
towards a certain place. Much more, therefore, by the same power do
we understand and reason: and so it is clear that in man reason and
intellect are the same power.
Reply to Objection 1: That enumeration is made according to the
order of actions, not according to the distinction of powers.
Moreover, that book is not of great authority.
Reply to Objection 2: The answer is clear from what we have said.
For eternity is compared to time as immovable to movable. And thus
Boethius compared the intellect to eternity, and reason to time.
Reply to Objection 3: Other animals are so much lower than man that
they cannot attain to the knowledge of truth, which reason seeks.
But man attains, although imperfectly, to the knowledge of
intelligible truth, which angels know. Therefore in the angels the
power of knowledge is not of a different genus fro that which is in
the human reason, but is compared to it as the perfect to the
imperfect.

### ARTICLE 9. Whether the higher and lower reason are distinct

powers?
Objection 1: It would seem that the higher and lower reason are
distinct powers. For Augustine says (De Trin. xii, 4,7), that the image
of the Trinity is in the higher part of the reason, and not in the lower.
But the parts of the soul are its powers. Therefore the higher and
lower reason are two powers.
Objection 2: Further, nothing flows from itself. Now, the lower reason
flows from the higher, and is ruled and directed by it. Therefore the
higher reason is another power from the lower.
Objection 3: Further, the Philosopher says (Ethic. vi, 1) that "the
scientific part" of the soul, by which the soul knows necessary
things, is another principle, and another part from the "opinionative"
and "reasoning" part by which it knows contingent things. And he
proves this from the principle that for those things which are
"generically different, generically different parts of the soul are
ordained." Now contingent and necessary are generically different,
as corruptible and incorruptible. Since, therefore, necessary is the
same as eternal, and temporal the same as contingent, it seems that
what the Philosopher calls the "scientific" part must be the same as
the higher reason, which, according to Augustine (De Trin. xii, 7) "is
intent on the consideration and consultation of things eternal"; and
that what the Philosopher calls the "reasoning" or "opinionative"
part is the same as the lower reason, which, according to Augustine,
"is intent on the disposal of temporal things." Therefore the higher
reason is another power than the lower.
Objection 4: Further, Damascene says (De Fide Orth. ii) that "opinion
rises from the imagination: then the mind by judging of the truth or
error of the opinion discovers the truth: whence" men's (mind) "is
derived from" metiendo [measuring]. "And therefore the intellect
regards those things which are already subject to judgment and true
decision." Therefore the opinionative power, which is the lower
reason, is distinct from the mind and the intellect, by which we may
understand the higher reason.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Trin. xii, 4) that "the higher and
lower reason are only distinct by their functions." Therefore they are