1. THE following dissertation concerning the Trinity, as the reader ought
to be informed, has been written in order to guard against the sophistries
of those who disdain to begin with faith, and are deceived by a crude and
perverse love of reason. Now one class of such men endeavor to transfer
to things incorporeal and spiritual the ideas they have formed, whether
through experience of the bodily senses, or by natural human wit and
diligent quickness, or by the aid of art, from things corporeal; so as to
seek to measure and conceive of the former by the latter. Others, again,

frame whatever sentiments they may have concerning God according to
the nature or affections of the human mind; and through this error they
govern their discourse, in disputing concerning God, by distorted and
fallacious rules. While yet a third class strive indeed to transcend the
whole creation, which doubtless is changeable, in order to raise their
thought to the unchangeable substance, which is God; but being weighed
down by the burden of mortality, whilst they both would seem to know
what they do not, and cannot know what they would, preclude themselves
from entering the very path of understanding, by an over-bold
affirmation of their own presumptuous judgments; choosing rather not to
correct their own opinion when it is perverse, than to change that which
they have once defended. And, indeed, this is the common disease of all
the three classes which I have mentioned,—viz., both of those who frame
their thoughts of God according to things corporeal, and of those who do
so according to the spiritual creature, such as is the soul; and of those
who neither regard the body nor the spiritual creature, and yet think
falsely about God; and are indeed so much the further from the truth,
that nothing can be found answering to their conceptions, either in the
body, or in the made or created spirit, or in the Creator Himself. For he
who thinks, for instance, that God is white or red, is in error; and yet
these things are found in the body. Again, he who thinks of God as now
forgetting and now remembering, or anything of the same kind, is none
the less in error; and yet these things are found in the mind. But he who
thinks that God is of such power as to have generated Himself, is so much
the more in error, because not only does God not so exist, but neither
does the spiritual nor the bodily creature; for there is nothing whatever
that generates its own existence.
2. In order, therefore, that the human mind might be purged from
falsities of this kind, Holy Scripture, which suits itself to babes, has not
avoided words drawn from any class of things really existing, through
which, as by nourishment, our understanding might rise gradually to
things divine and transcendent. For, in speaking of God, it has both used
words taken from things corporeal, as when it says, "Hide me under the
shadow of Thy wings;" and it has borrowed many things from the
spiritual creature, whereby to signify that which indeed is not so, but
must needs so be said: as, for instance, "I the Lord thy God am a jealous