6. For the strengthening of man in virtue it was requisite that he should receive doctrine
and examples of virtue from God made man, since of mere men even the holiest are
found at fault sometimes. I have given you an example, that as I have done so ye also
do (John xiii, 15).
8. The tradition of the Church teaches us that the whole human race has been infected
by sin. And it is part of the order of divine justice that sin should not be forgiven without
satisfaction. But no mere man was able to satisfy for the sin of all mankind, since every
mere man is something less than the whole multitude of mankind. For the deliverance
then of mankind from their common sin, it was requisite for one to make satisfaction,
who was at once man, so that satisfaction should be expected of him, and something
above man, so that his merit should be sufficient to satisfy for the sin of the whole
human race. Now in the order of happiness there is nothing greater than man but God
alone: for though the angels are higher in condition of nature, they are not higher in
respect to their final end, because they are made happy with the same happiness as
man. It was needful therefore for man's attainment of happiness that God should
become man, to take away the sin of the world (John i, 29: Rom. iv, 25: v, 18: Heb. ix,
28).

## CHAPTER LV--Points of Reply to Difficulties touching the Economy of the Incarnation
WE must bear in mind that, so immovable is the divine goodness in its perfection, that
nothing is lost to God, however near any creature is raised to Him: the gain is to the
creature.
3. Man being a compound of a spiritual and a corporeal nature, and thereby, we may
say, occupying the borderland of two natures, all creation seems to be interested in
whatever is done for man's salvation. Lower corporeal creatures make for his use, and
are in some sort of subjection to him: while the higher spiritual creation, the angelic, has
in common with man its attainment of the last end. This argues a certain
appropriateness in the universal Cause of all creatures taking to Himself in unity of
person that creature whereby He is more readily in touch with all the rest of creation.
4. Sin in man admits of expiation, because man's choice is not immovably fixed on its
object, but may be perverted from good to evil, and from evil brought back to good; and
the like is the case of man's reason, which, gathering the truth from sensible
appearances and signs, can find its way to either side of a conclusion. But an angel has
a fixed discernment of things through simple intuition; and as he is fixed in his
apprehension, so is he fixed also in his choice. Hence he either does not take to evil at
all; or if he does take to evil, he takes to it irrevocably, and his sin admits of no
expiation. Since then the expiation of sin was the chief cause of the Incarnation, it was
more fitting for human nature than for angelic nature to be assumed by God.
7. Though all created good is a small thing, compared with the divine goodness, still
there can be nothing greater in creation than the salvation of the rational creature, which
consists in the enjoyment of that divine goodness. And since the salvation of man has
followed from the Incarnation of God, it cannot be said that that Incarnation has brought
only slight profit to the world. Nor need all men be saved by the Incarnation, but they
only who by faith and the sacraments of faith adhere to the Incarnation.
8. The Incarnation was manifested to man by sufficient evidences. There is no more
fitting way of manifesting Godhead than by the performance of acts proper to God. Now
it is proper to God to be able to change the course of nature (naturae leges), by doing
something above that nature of which Himself is the author. Works overriding the
ordinary course of nature (opera quae supra leges naturae fiunt) are the aptest
evidences of divine being. Such works Christ did; and by these works He argued His
Divinity. When asked, Art thou he that is to come? He replied, The blind see, the lame
walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead rise again (Luke vii, 22).
And if it be said that the same miracles have been wrought by others, we must observe
that Christ worked them in a very different and more divine way. Others are said to have
wrought miracles by prayer, but Christ wrought them by command, as of His own
power. And He not only wrought them Himself, but He gave to others the power of
working the same and even greater miracles; and they worked them at the mere
invocation of the name of Christ. And not only corporal miracles, but spiritual miracles,
were wrought through Christ and at the invocation of His name: the Holy Ghost was