before the miracles, but that they did so being of Galilee, out of which "arises no
prophet," nor "can any good thing come"; for the Galilæans were somehow of a
more boorish and dull disposition than others; but even in this Christ displayed
forth His power, by selecting from a land which bore no fruit His choicest
disciples. It is then probable that Philip having seen Peter and Andrew, and
having heard what John had said, followed; and it is probable also that the voice
of Christ wrought in him somewhat; for He knew those who would be
serviceable. But all these points the Evangelist cuts short. That Christ should
come, he knew; that this was Christ, he knew not, and this I say that he heard
either from Peter or John. But John mentions his village also, that you may learn
that "God has chosen the weak things of the world." [1 Corinthians 1:27]

John 1:45
"Philip finds Nathanael, and says unto him, We have found Him of whom Moses
in the Law and the Prophets did write, Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph."
He says this, to make his preaching credible, which it must be if it rests on
Moses and the Prophets besides, and by this to abash his hearer. For since
Nathanael was an exact man, and one who viewed all things with truth, as Christ
also testified and the event showed, Philip with reason refers him to Moses and
the Prophets, that so he might receive Him who was preached. And he not
troubled though he called Him "the son of Joseph"; for still he was supposed to
be his son. "And whence, O Philip, is it plain that this is He? What proof do you
mention to us? For it is not enough merely to assert this. What sign have you
seen, what miracle? Not without danger is it to believe without cause in such
matters. What proof then have you?" "The same as Andrew," he replies; for he
though unable to produce the wealth which he had found, or to describe his
treasure in words, when he had discovered it, led his brother to it. So too did
Philip. How this is the Christ, and how the prophets proclaimed Him beforehand,
he said not; but he draws him to Jesus, as knowing that he would not afterwards
fall off, if he should once taste His words and teaching.

John 1:46-47
"And Nathanael said unto him, Can there any good thing come out of Nazareth?
Philip says unto him, Come and see. Jesus saw Nathanael coming to Him, and
says of him, Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile."
He praises and approves the man, because he had said, "Can any good thing
come out of Nazareth?" and yet he ought to have been blamed. Surely not; for
the words are not those of an unbeliever, nor deserving blame, but praise. "How
so, and in what way?" Because Nathanael had considered the writings of the
Prophets more than Philip. For he had heard from the Scriptures, that Christ
must come from Bethlehem, and from the village in which David was. This
belief at least prevailed among the Jews, and the Prophet had proclaimed it of
old, saying, "And thou, Bethlehem, art by no means the least among the princes
of Judah, for out of you shall come a Governor, that shall feed My people
Israel." [Matthew 2:6; Micah 5:2] And so when he heard that He was "from
Nazareth," he was confounded, and doubted, not finding the announcement of
Philip to agree with the prediction of the Prophet.
But observe his wisdom and candor even in his doubting. He did not at
once say, "Philip, you deceive me, and speakest falsely, I believe you not, I will
not come; I have learned from the prophets that Christ must come from
Bethlehem, you say, 'from Nazareth'; therefore this is not that Christ." He said
nothing like this; but what does he? He goes to Him himself; showing, by not
admitting that Christ was "of Nazareth," his accuracy respecting the Scriptures,
and a character not easily deceived; and by not rejecting him who brought the
tidings, the great desire which he felt for the coming of Christ. For he thought
within himself that Philip was probably mistaken about the place.
2. And observe, I pray you, his manner of declining, how gentle he has
made it, and in the form of a question. For he said not, "Galilee produces no
good"; but how said he? "Can any good thing come out of Nazareth?" Philip also