3. For this is the brilliant victory, this is the Church's trophy, thus is the
Devil overthrown when we suffer injury. For when we suffer, he is taken captive;
and himself suffers harm, when he would fain inflict it on us. And this happened
in Paul's case also; and the more he plied him with perils, the more was he
defeated. Nor did he raise up against him only one kind of trials, but various and
diverse. For some involved labor, others sorrow, others fear, others pain, others
care, others shame, others all these at once; but yet he was victorious in all. And
like as if a single soldier, having the whole world fighting against him, should
move through the mid ranks of his enemies, and suffer no harm: even so did
Paul, showing himself singly, among barbarians, among Greeks, on every land,
on every sea, abide unconquered. And as a spark, falling upon reeds and hay,
changes into its own nature the things so kindled; so also did this man setting
upon all make things change over unto the truth; like a winter torrent, sweeping
over all things and overturning every obstacle. And like some champion who
wrestles, runs, and boxes too; or soldier engaged by turns in storming , fighting
on foot, on shipboard; so did he try by turns every form of fight, and breathed
out fire, and was unapproachable by all; with his single body taking possession
of the world, with his single tongue putting all to flight. Not with such force did
those many trumpets fall upon the stones of Jericho and throw them down, as did
the sound of this man's voice both dash to the earth the devil's strong-holds and
bring over to himself those that were against him. And when he had collected a
multitude of captives, having armed the same, he made them again his own
army, and by their means conquered. Wonderful was David who laid Goliah low
with a single stone; but if you will examine Paul's achievements, that is a child's
exploit, and great as is the difference between a shepherd and a general, so great
the difference you shall see here. For this man brought down no Goliath by the
hurling of a stone, but by speaking only he scattered the whole array of the
Devil; as a lion roaring and darting out flame from his tongue, so was he found
by all irresistible; and bounded everywhere by turns continually; he ran to these,
he came to those, he turned about to these, he bounded away to others, swifter in

his attack than the wind; governing the whole world, as though a single house or
a single ship; rescuing the sinking, steadying the dizzied, cheering the sailors,
sitting at the tiller, keeping an eye to the prow, tightening the yards, handling an
oar, pulling at the mast, watching the sky; being all things in himself, both sailor,
and pilot, and pilot's mate , and sail, and ship; and suffering all things in order to
relieve the evils of others. For consider. He endured shipwreck that he might stay
the shipwreck of the world; "a day and a night he passed in the deep," that he
might draw it up from the deep of error; he was "in weariness" that he might
refresh the weary; he endured smiting that he might heal those that had been
smitten of the devil; he passed his time in prisons that he might lead forth to the
light those that were sitting in prison and in darkness; he was "in deaths oft" that
he might deliver from grievous deaths; "five times he received forty stripes save
one" that he might free those that inflicted them from the scourge of the devil; he
was "beaten with rods" that he might bring them under "the rod and the staff" of
Christ; [Psalm 23:4] he "was stoned," that he might deliver them from the
senseless stones; he "was in the wilderness ," that he might take them out of the
wilderness; "in journeying," to stay their wanderings and open the way that leads
to heaven; he "was in perils in the cities," that he might show the city which is
above; "in hunger and thirst," to deliver from a more grievous hunger; "in
nakedness," to clothe their unseemliness with the robe of Christ; set upon by the
mob, to extricate them from the besetment of fiends; he burned, that he might
quench the burning darts of the devil: "through a window was let down from the
wall," to send up from below those that lay prostrate upon the ground. Shall we
then talk any more, seeing we do not so much as know what Paul suffered? Shall
we make mention any more of goods, or even of wife, or city, or freedom, when
we have seen him ten thousand times despising even life itself? The martyr dies
once for all: but that blessed saint in his one body and one soul endured so many
perils as were enough to disturb even a soul of adamant; and what things all the
saints together have suffered in so many bodies, those all he himself endured in
one: he entered into the world as if a race-course, and stripped himself of all, and