sins."
But this He said, indicating thereby, that His passion and His cross are a
mystery, by this too again comforting His disciples. And like as Moses says,
"This shall be to you for an everlasting memorial," [Exodus 12:14] so He too,
"in remembrance of me," until I come. Therefore also He says, "With desire I
have desired to eat this passover," [Luke 22:15] that is, to deliver you the new
rites, and to give a passover, by which I am to make you spiritual.
And He Himself drank of it. For lest on hearing this, they should say, What
then? Do we drink blood, and eat flesh? And then be perplexed (for when He
began to discourse concerning these things, even at the very sayings many were
offended), therefore lest they should be troubled then likewise, He first did this
Himself, leading them to the calm participation of the mysteries. Therefore He
Himself drank His own blood. What then must we observe that other ancient rite
also? Some one may say. By no means. For on this account He said, "Do this,"
that He might withdraw them from the other. For if this works remission of sins,
as it surely does work it, the other is now superfluous.
As then in the case of the Jews, so here also He has bound up the memorial
of the benefit with the mystery, by this again stopping the mouths of heretics.
For when they say, Whence is it manifest that Christ was sacrificed? Together
with the other arguments we stop their mouths from the mysteries also. For if
Jesus did not die, of what are the rites the symbols?
2. Do you see how much diligence has been used, that it should be ever
borne in mind that He died for us? For since the Marcionists, and Valentinians,
and Manichæans were to arise, denying this dispensation, He continually
reminds us of the passion even by the mysteries, (so that no man should be
deceived); at once saving, and at the same time teaching by means of that sacred
table. For this is the chief of the blessings; wherefore Paul also is in every way
pressing this.
Then, when He had delivered it, He says, "I will not drink of the fruit of this
wine, until that day when I drink it new with you in my Father's kingdom." For

because He had discoursed with them concerning passion and cross, He again
introduces what He has to say of His resurrection, having made mention of a
kingdom before them, table, and rise up in drunkenness, whereas it were meet to
give thanks, and end with an hymn.
Hear this, as many as wait not again for the last prayer of the mysteries, for
this is a symbol of that. He gave thanks before He gave it to His disciples, that
we also may give thanks. He gave thanks, and sang an hymn after the giving,
that we also may do this selfsame thing.
But for what reason does He go forth unto the mountain? Making Himself
manifest, that He may be taken, in order not to seem to hide himself. For He
hastened to go to the place which was also known to Judas.
Then "He says unto them, All you shall be offended in me."
[Matthew 26:31] After this He mentions also a prophecy, "For it is written, I will
smite the shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered abroad:" at once persuading
them ever to give heed to the things that are written, and at same time making it
plain that He was crucified, according to God's purpose; and by everything
showing He was no alien from the old covenant, nor from the God preached
therein, but that what is done is a dispensation, and that the prophets all
proclaimed all things beforehand from the beginning that are comprised in the
matter, so that they be quite confident about the better things also.
And He teaches us to know what the disciples were before the crucifixion,
what after the crucifixion. For indeed they who, when He was crucified, were
not able so much as to stand their ground, these after His death were mighty, and
stronger than adamant.
And this self-same thing is a demonstration of His death, the fright and
cowardice, I mean, of His disciples. For if when so many things have been both
done and said, still some are shameless, and say that He was not crucified; if
none of these things had come to pass, to what pitch of wickedness would they
not have proceeded? So for this reason, not by His own sufferings only, but by
what took place with respect to the disciples, He confirms the word concerning