## Homily 1 on Galatians

Verse 1-3
"Paul, an Apostle, (not from men, neither through man, but through Jesus
Christ and God the Father, who raised Him from the dead;) and all the brethren
which are with me, unto the Churches of Galatia: Grace to you and peace from
God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ."
The exordium is full of a vehement and lofty spirit, and not the exordium
only, but also, so to speak, the whole Epistle. For always to address one's
disciples with mildness, even when they need severity is not the part of a teacher
but it would be the part of a corrupter and enemy. Wherefore our Lord too,
though He generally spoke gently to His disciples, here and there uses sterner
language, and at one time pronounces a blessing, at another a rebuke. Thus,
having said to Peter, "Blessed are you, Simon Barjona," [Matthew 16:17] and
having promised to lay the foundation of the Church upon his confession, shortly
afterwards He says, "Get behind Me, Satan: you are a stumbling block unto Me."
[Matthew 16:23] Again, on another occasion, "Are you also even yet without
understanding?" [Matthew 15:16] And what awe He inspired them with appears
from John's saying, that, when they beheld Him conversing with the Samaritan
woman, though they reminded Him to take food, no one ventured to say, "What
seekest Thou, or why do you speak with her?" [John 4:27] Thus taught, and
walking in the steps of his Master, Paul has varied his discourse according to the
need of his disciples, at one time using knife and cautery, at another, applying
mild remedies. To the Corinthians he says, "What will you? Shall I come unto
you with a rod, or in love, and in a spirit of meekness?" [1 Corinthians 6:21] but
to the Galatians, "O foolish Galatians." [Galatians 3:1] And not once only, but a
second time, also he has employed this reproof, and towards the conclusion he
says with a reproachful allusion to them, "Let no man trouble me;" [Galatians

6:17] but he soothes them again with the words, "My little children, of whom I
am again in travail:" [Galatians 4:19] and so in many other instances.
Now that this Epistle breathes an indignant spirit, is obvious to every one
even on the first perusal; but I must explain the cause of his anger against the
disciples. Slight and unimportant it could not be, or he would not have used such
vehemence. For to be exasperated by common matters is the part of the littleminded, morose, and peevish; just as it is that of the more redolent and sluggish
to lose heart in weighty ones. Such a one was not Paul. What then was the
offense which roused him? It was grave and momentous, one which was
estranging them all from Christ, as he himself says further on, "Behold, I Paul
say unto you, that if you receive circumcision, Christ will profit you nothing;"
[Galatians 5:2] and again, "You who would be justified by the Law, you are fallen
away from Grace." [Galatians 5:4] What then is this? For it must be explained
more clearly. Some of the Jews who believed, being held down by the
preposessions of Judaism, and at the same time intoxicated by vain-glory, and
desirous of obtaining for themselves the dignity of teachers, came to the
Galatians, and taught them that the observance of circumcision, sabbaths, and
new-moons, was necessary, and that Paul in abolishing these things was not to
be borne. For, said they, Peter and James and John, the chiefs of the Apostles and
the companions of Christ, forbade them not. Now in fact they did not forbid
these things, but this was not by way of delivering positive doctrine, but in
condescension to the weakness of the Jewish believers, which condescension
Paul had no need of when preaching to the Gentiles; but when he was in Judæa,
he employed it himself also. But these deceivers, by withholding the causes both
of Paul's condescension and that of his brethren, misled the simpler ones, saying
that he was not to be tolerated, for he appeared but yesterday, while Peter and his
colleagues were from the first—that he was a disciple of the Apostles, but they
of Christ—that he was single, but they were many, and pillars of the Church.
They accused him too of acting a part; saying, that this very man who forbids
circumcision observes the rite elsewhere, and preaches one way to you and