THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.41, C.2.

Thirdly, in order to give us an example: to teach us, to wit, how to
overcome the temptations of the devil. Hence Augustine says (De
Trin. iv) that Christ "allowed Himself to be tempted" by the devil,
"that He might be our Mediator in overcoming temptations, not only
by helping us, but also by giving us an example."
Fourthly, in order to fill us with confidence in His mercy. Hence it is
written (Heb. 4:15): "We have not a high-priest, who cannot have
compassion on our infirmities, but one tempted in all things like as
we are, without sin."
Reply to Objection 1: As Augustine says (De Civ. Dei ix): "Christ was
known to the demons only so far as He willed; not as the Author of
eternal life, but as the cause of certain temporal effects," from which
they formed a certain conjecture that Christ was the Son of God. But
since they also observed in Him certain signs of human frailty, they
did not know for certain that He was the Son of God: wherefore (the
devil) wished to tempt Him. This is implied by the words of Mt. 4:2,3,
saying that, after "He was hungry, the tempter" came "to Him,"
because, as Hilary says (Super Matth., cap. iii), "Had not Christ's
weakness in hungering betrayed His human nature, the devil would
not have dared to tempt Him." Moreover, this appears from the very
manner of the temptation, when he said: "If Thou be the Son of God."
Which words Ambrose explains as follows (In Luc. iv): "What means
this way of addressing Him, save that, though he knew that the Son
of God was to come, yet he did not think that He had come in the
weakness of the flesh?"
Reply to Objection 2: Christ came to destroy the works of the devil,
not by powerful deeds, but rather by suffering from him and his
members, so as to conquer the devil by righteousness, not by
power; thus Augustine says (De Trin. xiii) that "the devil was to be
overcome, not by the power of God, but by righteousness." And
therefore in regard to Christ's temptation we must consider what He
did of His own will and what He suffered from the devil. For that He
allowed Himself to be tempted was due to His own will. Wherefore it
is written (Mt. 4:1): "Jesus was led by the Spirit into the desert, to be
tempted by the devil"; and Gregory (Hom. xvi in Evang.) says this is
to be understood of the Holy Ghost, to wit, that "thither did His Spirit
lead Him, where the wicked spirit would find Him and tempt Him."
But He suffered from the devil in being "taken up" on to "the
pinnacle of the Temple" and again "into a very high mountain." Nor
is it strange, as Gregory observes, "that He allowed Himself to be

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.41, C.2.

taken by him on to a mountain, who allowed Himself to be crucified
by His members." And we understand Him to have been taken up by
the devil, not, as it were, by force, but because, as Origen says (Hom.
xxi super Luc.), "He followed Him in the course of His temptation like
a wrestler advancing of his own accord."
Reply to Objection 3: As the Apostle says (Heb. 4:15), Christ wished
to be "tempted in all things, without sin." Now temptation which
comes from an enemy can be without sin: because it comes about
by merely outward suggestion. But temptation which comes from the
flesh cannot be without sin, because such a temptation is caused by
pleasure and concupiscence; and, as Augustine says (De Civ. Dei
xix), "it is not without sin that 'the flesh desireth against the spirit.'"
And hence Christ wished to be tempted by an enemy, but not by the
flesh.