will not judge, that the text may be true which says, "I will not judge
him;" and, "I seek not mine own glory: there is One that seeketh and
judgeth." For in respect to this, that in the judgment, not the form of
God, but the form of the Son of man will appear, the Father Himself will
not judge; for according to this it is said, "For the Father judgeth no man,
but hath committed all judgment unto the Son." Whether this is said after
that mode of speech which we have mentioned above, where it is said, "So
hath He given to the Son to have life in Himself," that it should signify
that so He begat the Son; or, whether after that of which the apostle
speaks, saying, "Wherefore God also hath highly exalted Him, and given
Him a name which is above every name:"—(For this is said of the Son of
man, in respect to whom the Son of God was raised from the dead; since
He, being in the form of God equal to the Father, wherefrom He
"emptied" Himself by taking the form of a servant, both acts and suffers,
and receives, in that same form of a servant, what the apostle goes on to
mention: "He humbled Himself, and became obedient unto death, even
the death of the cross; wherefore God also hath highly exalted Him, and
given Him a name which is above every name; that at the name of Jesus
every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and
things under the earth; and that every tongue should confess that Jesus
Christ is Lord, in the Glory of God the Father:")—whether then the
words, "He hath committed all judgment unto the Son," are said
according to this or that mode of speech; it sufficiently appears from this
place, that if they were said according to that sense in which it is said, "He
hath given to the Son to have life in Himself," it certainly would not be
said, "The Father judgeth no man." For in respect to this, that the Father
hath begotten the Son equal to Himself, He judges with Him. Therefore it
is in respect to this that it is said, that in the judgment, not the form of
God, but the form of the Son of man will appear. Not that He will not
judge, who hath committed all judgment unto the Son, since the Son
saith of Him, "There is One that seeketh and judgeth:" but it is so said,
"The Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment unto the
Son;" as if it were said, No one will see the Father in the judgment of the
quick and the dead, but all will see the Son: because He is also the Son of
man, so that He can be seen even by the ungodly, since they too shall see
Him whom they have pierced.

30. Lest, however, we may seem to conjecture this rather than to prove it
clearly, let us produce a certain and plain sentence of the Lord Himself,
by which we may show that this was the cause why He said, "The Father
judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment unto the Son," viz.
because He will appear as Judge in the form of the Son of man, which is
not the form of the Father, but of the Son; nor yet that form of the Son in
which He is equal to the Father, but that in which He is less than the
Father; in order that, in the judgment, He may be visible both to the good
and to the bad. For a little while after He says, "Verily, verily, I say unto
you, He that heareth my word, and believeth on Him that sent me, hath
everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation; but shall pass
from death unto life." Now this life eternal is that sight which does not
belong to the bad. Then follows, "Verily, verily, I say unto you, The hour
is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of
God, and they that hear shall live." And this is proper to the godly, who
so hear of His incarnation, as to believe that He is the Son of God, that is,
who so receive Him, as made for their sakes less than the Father, in the
form of a servant, that they believe Him equal to the Father, in the form
of God. And thereupon He continues, enforcing this very point, "For as
the Father hath life in Himself, so hath He given to the Son to have life in
Himself." And then He comes to the sight of His own glory, in which He
shall come to judgment; which sight will be common to the ungodly and
to the just. For He goes on to say, "And hath given Him authority to
execute judgment also, because He is the Son of man." I think nothing
can be more clear. For inasmuch as the Son of God is equal to the Father,
He does not receive this power of executing judgment, but He has it with
the Father in secret; but He receives it, so that the good and the bad may
see Him judging, inasmuch as He is the Son of man. Since the sight of the
Son of man will be shown to the bad also: for the sight of the form of God
will not be shown except to the pure in heart, for they shall see God; that
is, to the godly only, to whose love He promises this very thing, that He
will show Himself to them. And see, accordingly, what follows: "Marvel
not at this," He says. Why does He forbid us to marvel, unless it be that,
in truth, every one marvels who does not understand, that therefore He
said the Father gave Him power also to execute judgment, because He is
the Son of man; whereas, it might rather have been anticipated that He
would say, since He is the Son of God? But because the wicked are not