John 7:3-5
For, says he, "His brethren said unto Him, Depart hence, and go into Judæa, that
Your disciples also may see the works that You do; for there is no man that does
anything in secret, and he himself seeks to be known openly. Show yourself to the
world. For neither did His brethren believe in Him."
2. What unbelief, says some one, is here? They exhort Him to work
miracles. It is great deed; for of unbelief come their words, and their insolence,
and their unseasonable freedom of speech. For they thought, that owing to their
relationship, it was lawful for them to address Him boldly. And their request
seems forsooth to be that of friends, but the words were those of great
maliciousness. For in this place they reproach Him with cowardice and
vainglory: since to say, "no man does anything in secret," is the expression of
persons charging Him with cowardice, and suspecting the things done by Him as
being not really done; and to add, that "he seeks to be known," was to accuse
Him of vainglory. But observe, I pray you, the power of Christ. Of those who
said these things, one became first Bishop of Jerusalem, the blessed James, of
whom Paul says, "Other of the Apostles saw I none, save James, the Lord's
brother"; and Judas also is said to have been a marvelous man. And yet these
persons had been present also at Cana, when the wine was made, but as yet they
profited nothing. Whence then had they so great unbelief? From their evil mind,
and from envy; for superiority among kindred is wont somehow to be envied by
such as are not alike exalted. But who are those that they call disciples here? The
crowd that followed Him, not the twelve. What then says Christ? Observe how
mildly He answered; He said not, "Who are you that counsel and instruct Me
thus?" but,

John 7:6
"My time is not yet come."
He here seems to me to hint at something other than He expresses; perhaps
in their envy they designed to deliver Him up to the Jews; and pointing out this
to them, He says, "My time is not yet come," that is, "the time of the Cross and
the Death, why then hasten ye to slay Me before the time?"
"But your time is always ready."
As though He had said, "Though you be ever with the Jews, they will not
slay you who desire the same things with them; but Me they will straightway
wish to kill. So that it is ever your time to be with them without danger, but My
time is when the season of the Cross is at hand, when I must die." For that this
was His meaning, He showed by what followed.

John 7:7
"The world cannot hate you;" (how should it hate those who desire, and who run
for the same objects as itself?) "but Me it hates, because I testify of it, that the
works thereof are evil."
"That is, because I upbraid and rebuke it, therefore I am hated." From this
let us learn to master our anger, and not to give way to unworthy passion, though
they be mean men who give us counsel. For if Christ meekly bore with
unbelievers counseling Him, when their counsel was improper and not from any
good intention, what pardon shall we obtain, who being but dust and ashes, yet
are annoyed with those who counsel us, and deem that we are unworthily
treated, although the persons who do this may be but a little humbler than
ourselves? Observe in this instance how He repels their accusation with all
gentleness; for when they say, "Show Yourself to the world," He replies, "The
world cannot hate you, but Me the world hates"; thus removing their accusation.
"So far," He says, "am I from seeking honor from men, that I cease not to reprove
them, and this when I know that by this course hatred is produced against and
death prepared for Me." "And where," asks some one, "did He rebuke men?"
When did He ever cease to do so? Did He not say, "Think not that I will accuse
you to the Father? There is one that accuses you, even Moses." [John 5:45] And
again; "I know you, that you have not the love of God in you": and "How can you
believe, who receive honor from men, and seek not the honor that comes from
God only?" Do you see how He has everywhere shown, that it was the open
rebuke, not the violation of the Sabbath, which caused the hatred against Him?
And wherefore does He send them to the feast, saying,