that commanded them. And once more they confirm the fact of His Resurrection.
"For we cannot but speak the things we have seen and heard:" so that we are
witnesses who have a right to be believed. "So when they had further threatened
them." [Acts 4:21] Again they threatened in vain. "They let them go, finding
nothing how they might punish them, because of the people: for all men glorified
God for that which was done." So then the people glorified God, but these
endeavored to destroy them: such fighters against God were they! Whereby they
made them more conspicuous and illustrious. "For My strength," it is said, "is
made perfect in weakness." [2 Corinthians 12:9]
Already these as martyrs have borne testimony: set in the battle against all,
they said, "We cannot but speak the things we have seen and heard." If the things
we speak be false, reprehend them; if true, why do you hinder? Such is
philosophy! Those, in perplexity, these in gladness: those covered with
exceeding shame, these doing all with boldness: those in fear, these in
confidence. For who, I would ask, were the frightened? Those who said, "That it
spread no further among people," or these who said, "we cannot but speak the
things we have seen and heard?" And these had a delight, a freedom of speech, a
joy surpassing all; those a despondency, a shame, a fear; for they feared the
people. But these were not afraid of those; on the contrary, while these spoke
what they would, those did not what they would. Which were in chains and
dangers? Was it not these last?
Let us then hold fast to virtue; let not these words end only in delight, and
in a certain elevation of the spirits. This is not the theatre, for singers
([κιθαρώδων]), and tragedians, and musicians ([κιθαριστὥν]), where the fruit
consists only in the enjoyment and where the enjoyment itself passes with the
passing day. Nay, would that it were enjoyment alone, and not mischief also with
the enjoyment! But so it is: each man carries home with him much of what he
has witnessed there, sticking to him like the infection of a plague: and one
indeed, of the younger sort, having culled such snatches of song here and there
of those satanic plays, as he could fix in his memory, goes singing them about

the house: while another, a senior, and forsooth too staid for such levity, does not
this indeed, but what is there spoken, both the preachments and the very words,
he remembers it all; and another again, some filthy and absurd ditty. From this
place you depart, taking nothing with you.— We have laid down a law— nay,
not we: God forbid! For it is said, "Call no man your master upon the earth"
[Matthew 23:8]; Christ has laid down a law that none should swear. Now, say,
what has been done with regard to this law? For I will not cease speaking of it;
"lest," as the Apostle says, "if I come again, I must not spare." [2 Corinthians
13:2] I ask then, have you laid the matter to heart? Have you thought of it
seriously? Have you been in earnest about it, or must we again take up the same
subject? Nay, rather, whether you have or not, we will resume it, that you may
think seriously about it, or, if you have laid it to heart, may again do this the
more surely, and exhort others also. With what then, I pray you, with what shall
we begin? Shall it be with the Old Testament? For indeed this also is to our
shame, that the precepts of the Law, which we ought to surpass, we do not even
thus observe! For we ought not to be hearing such matters as these: these are
precepts adapted to the poor Jewish level ([τἥς ᾿Ιουδαἲκἥς εὐτελείας]): we ought
to be hearing those counsels of perfection; "Cast away your property, stand
courageously, and give up your life in behalf of the Gospel, scorn all the goods
of earth, have nothing in common with this present life; if any wrong you, do him
good; if any defraud you, bless him; if any revile you, show him honor; be above
everything." (S. Ambros. de Off. i. 2.) These and such as these are what we ought
to be hearing. But here are we discoursing about swearing; and our case is just
the same as if, when a person ought to be a philosopher, one should take him
away from the great masters, and set him to spell syllables letter by letter! Just
think now what a disgrace it would be for a man having a flowing beard, and
with staff in hand, and cope on shoulders, to go to school with children, and be
set the same tasks with them: would it not be above measure ridiculous? And yet
the ridicule which belongs to us is even greater. For not as the difference
between philosophy and the spelling-lesson, so is that between the Jewish polity