John 3:19-20
"Because their deeds were evil. For every one that does evil, hates the light,
neither comes to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved."
Yet he came not to judge or to enquire, but to pardon and remit
transgressions, and to grant salvation through faith. How then fled they? Had He
come and sat in His Judgment seat, what He said might have seemed reasonable;
for he that is conscious to himself of evil deeds, is wont to fly his judge. But, on
the contrary, they who have transgressed even run to one who is pardoning. If
therefore He came to pardon, those would naturally most hasten to Him who
were conscious to themselves of many transgressions; and indeed this was the
case with many, for even publicans and sinners sat at meat with Jesus. What then
is this which He says? He says this of those who choose always to remain in
wickedness. He indeed came, that He might forgive men's former sins, and
secure them against those to come; but since there are some so relaxed, so
powerless for the toils of virtue, that they desire to abide by wickedness till their
latest breath, and never cease from it, He speaks in this place reflecting upon
these. "For since," He says, "the profession of Christianity requires besides right
doctrine a sound conversation also, they fear to come over to us, because they
like not to show forth a righteous life. Him that lives in heathenism none would
blame, because with gods such as he has, and with rites as foul and ridiculous as
his gods, he shows forth actions that suit his doctrines; but those who belong to
the True God, if they live a careless life, have all men to call them to account,
and to accuse them. So greatly do even its enemies admire the truth." Observe,
then, how exactly He lays down what He says. His expression is, not "He that
has done evil comes not to the light," but "he that does it always, he that desires
always to roll himself in the mire of sin, he will not subject himself to My laws,
but chooses to stay without, and to commit fornication without fear, and to do all
other forbidden things. For if he comes to Me, he becomes manifest as a thief in

the light, and therefore he avoids My dominion." For instance, even now one
may hear many heathen say, "that they cannot come to our faith, because they
cannot leave off drunkenness and fornication, and the like disorders."
"Well," says some one, "but are there no Christians that do evil, and
heathens that live discreetly?" That there are Christians who do evil, I know; but
whether there are heathens who live a righteous life, I do not yet know assuredly.
For do not speak to me of those who by nature are good and orderly, (this is not
virtue,) but tell me of the man who can endure the exceeding violence of his
passions and (yet) be temperate. You cannot. For if the promise of a Kingdom,
and the threat of hell, and so much other provision, can scarcely keep men in
virtue, they will hardly go after virtue who believe in none of these things. Or, if
any pretend to do so, they do it for show; and he who does so for show, will not,
when he may escape observation, refrain from indulging his evil desires.
However, that we may not seem to any to be contentious, let us grant that there
are right livers among the heathen; for neither does this go against my argument,
since I spoke of that which occurs in general, not of what happens rarely.
And observe how in another way He deprives them of all excuse, when He
says that, "the light came into the world." "Did they seek it themselves," He says,
"did they toil, did they labor to find it? The light itself came to them, and not
even so would they hasten to it." And if there be some Christians who live
wickedly, I would argue that He does not say this of those who have been
Christians from the beginning, and who have inherited true religion from their
forefathers, (although even these for the most part have been shaken from right
doctrine by their evil life,) yet still I think that He does not now speak
concerning these, but concerning the heathen and the Jews who ought to have
come to the right faith. For He shows that no man living in error would choose
to come to the truth unless he before had planned for himself a righteous life,
and that none would remain in unbelief unless he had previously chosen always
to be wicked.
Do not tell me that a man is temperate, and does not rob; these things by