FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.56, C.4.

Reply to Objection 1: The saying of Augustine is to be understood of
virtue simply so called: not that every virtue is love simply: but that it
depends in some way on love, in so far as it depends on the will,
whose first movement consists in love, as we have said above
(Question 25, Articles 1,2,3; Question 27, Article 4; FP, Question 20,
Article 1).
Reply to Objection 2: The good of each thing is its end: and
therefore, as truth is the end of the intellect, so to know truth is the
good act of the intellect. Whence the habit, which perfects the
intellect in regard to the knowledge of truth, whether speculative or
practical, is a virtue.
Reply to Objection 3: This objection considers virtue simply so
called.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.56, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the irascible and concupiscible powers

are the subject of virtue?
Objection 1: It would seem that the irascible and concupiscible
powers cannot be the subject of virtue. For these powers are
common to us and dumb animals. But we are now speaking of virtue
as proper to man, since for this reason it is called human virtue. It is
therefore impossible for human virtue to be in the irascible and
concupiscible powers which are parts of the sensitive appetite, as
we have said in the FP, Question 81, Article 2.
Objection 2: Further, the sensitive appetite is a power which makes
use of a corporeal organ. But the good of virtue cannot be in man's
body: for the Apostle says (Rm. 7): "I know that good does not dwell
in my flesh." Therefore the sensitive appetite cannot be the subject
of virtue.
Objection 3: Further, Augustine proves (De Moribus Eccl. v) that
virtue is not in the body but in the soul, for the reason that the body
is ruled by the soul: wherefore it is entirely due to his soul that a
man make good use of his body: "For instance, if my coachman,
through obedience to my orders, guides well the horses which he is
driving; this is all due to me." But just as the soul rules the body, so
also does the reason rule the sensitive appetite. Therefore that the
irascible and concupiscible powers are rightly ruled, is entirely due
to the rational powers. Now "virtue is that by which we live rightly,"
as we have said above (Question 55, Article 4). Therefore virtue is
not in the irascible and concupiscible powers, but only in the rational
powers.
Objection 4: Further, "the principal act of moral virtue is
choice" (Ethic. viii, 13). Now choice is not an act of the irascible and
concupiscible powers, but of the rational power, as we have said
above (Question 13, Article 2). Therefore moral virtue is not in the
irascible and concupiscible powers, but in the reason.
On the contrary, Fortitude is assigned to the irascible power, and
temperance to the concupiscible power. Whence the Philosopher
(Ethic. iii, 10) says that "these virtues belong to the irrational part of
the soul."