order to be good, to be conformed to the Divine will, as
regards the thing willed?
Objection 1: It would seem that the human will need not always be
conformed to the Divine will, as regards the thing willed. For we
cannot will what we know not: since the apprehended good is the
object of the will. But in many things we know not what God wills.
Therefore the human will cannot be conformed to the Divine will as
to the thing willed.
Objection 2: Further, God wills to damn the man whom He foresees
about to die in mortal sin. If therefore man were bound to conform
his will to the Divine will, in the point of the thing willed, it would
follow that a man is bound to will his own damnation. Which is
inadmissible.
Objection 3: Further, no one is bound to will what is against filial
piety. But if man were to will what God wills, this would sometimes
be contrary to filial piety: for instance, when God wills the death of a
father: if his son were to will it also, it would be against filial piety.
Therefore man is not bound to conform his will to the Divine will, as
to the thing willed.
On the contrary, (1) On Ps. 32:1, "Praise becometh the upright," a
gloss says: "That man has an upright heart, who wills what God
wills." But everyone is bound to have an upright heart. Therefore
everyone is bound to will what God wills.
(2) Moreover, the will takes its form from the object, as does every
act. If therefore man is bound to conform his will to the Divine will, it
follows that he is bound to conform it, as to the thing willed.
(3) Moreover, opposition of wills arises from men willing different
things. But whoever has a will in opposition to the Divine will, has an
evil will. Therefore whoever does not conform his will to the Divine
will, as to the thing willed, has an evil will.
I answer that, As is evident from what has been said above (Articles
3,5), the will tends to its object, according as it is proposed by the
reason. Now a thing may be considered in various ways by the

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.19, C.11.

reason, so as to appear good from one point of view, and not good
from another point of view. And therefore if a man's will wills a thing
to be, according as it appears to be good, his will is good: and the
will of another man, who wills that thing not to be, according as it
appears evil, is also good. Thus a judge has a good will, in willing a
thief to be put to death, because this is just: while the will of
another---e.g. the thief's wife or son, who wishes him not to be put to
death, inasmuch as killing is a natural evil, is also good.
Now since the will follows the apprehension of the reason or
intellect; the more universal the aspect of the apprehended good, the
more universal the good to which the will tends. This is evident in
the example given above: because the judge has care of the
common good, which is justice, and therefore he wishes the thief's
death, which has the aspect of good in relation to the common
estate; whereas the thief's wife has to consider the private, the good
of the family, and from this point of view she wishes her husband,
the thief, not to be put to death. Now the good of the whole universe
is that which is apprehended by God, Who is the Maker and
Governor of all things: hence whatever He wills, He wills it under the
aspect of the common good; this is His own Goodness, which is the
good of the whole universe. On the other hand, the apprehension of
a creature, according to its nature, is of some particular good,
proportionate to that nature. Now a thing may happen to be good
under a particular aspect, and yet not good under a universal aspect,
or vice versa, as stated above. And therefore it comes to pass that a
certain will is good from willing something considered under a
particular aspect, which thing God wills not, under a universal
aspect, and vice versa. And hence too it is, that various wills of
various men can be good in respect of opposite things, for as much
as, under various aspects, they wish a particular thing to be or not to
be.
But a man's will is not right in willing a particular good, unless he
refer it to the common good as an end: since even the natural
appetite of each part is ordained to the common good of the whole.
Now it is the end that supplies the formal reason, as it were, of
willing whatever is directed to the end. Consequently, in order that a
man will some particular good with a right will, he must will that
particular good materially, and the Divine and universal good,
formally. Therefore the human will is bound to be conformed to the
Divine will, as to that which is willed formally, for it is bound to will
the Divine and universal good; but not as to that which is willed