But because falsity of the intellect is concerned essentially only with
the composition of the intellect, falsity occurs also accidentally in
that operation of the intellect whereby it knows the essence of a
thing, in so far as composition of the intellect is mixed up in it. This
can take place in two ways. In one way, by the intellect applying to
one thing the definition proper to another; as that of a circle to a
man. Wherefore the definition of one thing is false of another. In
another way, by composing a definition of parts which are mutually
exclusive. For thus the definition is not only false of the thing, but
false in itself. A definition such as " a reasonable four-footed animal"
would be of this kind, and the intellect false in making it; for such a
statement as "some reasonable animals are four-footed" is false in
itself. For this reason the intellect cannot be false in its knowledge of
simple essences; but it is either true, or it understands nothing at all.
Reply to Objection 1: Because the essence of a thing is the proper
object of the intellect, we are properly said to understand a thing
when we reduce it to its essence, and judge of it thereby; as takes
place in demonstrations, in which there is no falsity. In this sense
Augustine's words must be understood, "that he who is deceived,
understands not that wherein he is deceived;" and not in the sense
that no one is ever deceived in any operation of the intellect.
Reply to Objection 2: The intellect is always right as regards first
principles; since it is not deceived about them for the same reason
that it is not deceived about what a thing is. For self-known
principles are such as are known as soon as the terms are
understood, from the fact that the predicate is contained in the
definition of the subject.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether true and false are contraries?

Objection 1: It seems that true and false are not contraries. For true
and false are opposed, as that which is to that which is not; for
"truth," as Augustine says (Soliloq. ii, 5), "is that which is." But that
which is and that which is not are not opposed as contraries.
Therefore true and false are not contrary things.
Objection 2: Further, one of two contraries is not in the other. But
falsity is in truth, because, as Augustine says, (Soliloq. ii, 10), "A
tragedian would not be a false Hector, if he were not a true
tragedian." Therefore true and false are not contraries.
Objection 3: Further, in God there is no contrariety, for "nothing is
contrary to the Divine Substance," as Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xii,
2). But falsity is opposed to God, for an idol is called in Scripture a
lie, "They have laid hold on lying" (Jer. 8:5), that is to say, "an idol,"
as a gloss says. Therefore false and true are not contraries.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Peri Herm. ii), that a false
opinion is contrary to a true one.
I answer that, True and false are opposed as contraries, and not, as
some have said, as affirmation and negation. In proof of which it
must be considered that negation neither asserts anything nor
determines any subject, and can therefore be said of being as of notbeing, for instance not-seeing or not-sitting. But privation asserts
nothing, whereas it determines its subject, for it is "negation in a
subject," as stated in Metaph. iv, 4: v. 27; for blindness is not said
except of one whose nature it is to see. Contraries, however, both
assert something and determine the subject, for blackness is a
species of color. Falsity asserts something, for a thing is false, as
the Philosopher says (Metaph. iv, 27), inasmuch as something is said
or seems to be something that it is not, or not to be what it really is.
For as truth implies an adequate apprehension of a thing, so falsity
implies the contrary. Hence it is clear that true and false are
contraries.
Reply to Objection 1: What is in things is the truth of the thing; but
what is apprehended, is the truth of the intellect, wherein truth
primarily resides. Hence the false is that which is not as