that we should hear this fatal and terrible utterance. For if they who cast out
demons and prophesied, were denied, because their life was not suitable thereto;
how much more we!
8. And how (you ask) is it possible that they should be denied, who have
shown prophetic powers, and wrought miracles, and cast out demons? Is it
probable they were afterwards changed, and became wicked; and therefore were
nothing benefited, even by their former virtue. For not only ought we to have our
beginnings splendid, but the end also more splendid still.
For tell me, does not the Orator take pains to make the end of his speech
splendid, that he may retire with applause? Does not the public officer make the
most splendid display at the close of his administration? The wrestler, if he do
not make a more splendid display and conquer unto the end, and if after
vanquishing all he be vanquished by the last, is not all unprofitable to him?
Should the pilot have crossed the whole ocean, yet if he wreck his vessel at the
port, has he not lost all his former labor? And what [of] the Physician? If, after
he has freed the sick man from his disease, when he is on the point of
discharging him cured, he should then destroy him, has he not destroyed
everything? So too in respect of Virtue, as many as have not added an end
suitable to the beginning, and in unison and harmony with it, are ruined, and
undone. Such are they who have sprung forth from the starting place bright and
exulting, and afterwards have become faint and feeble. Therefore they are both
deprived of the prize, and are not acknowledged by their master.
Let us listen to these things, those of us who are in love of wealth: for this is
the greatest iniquity. "For the love of money is the root of all evil." [1 Timothy
6:10] Let us listen, those of us who wish to make our present possessions greater,
let us listen and sometime cease from our covetousness, that we may not hear the
same things as they [will hear]. Let us listen to them now, and be on our guard,
that we may not hear them then. Let us listen now with fear, that we may not
then listen with vengeance: "Depart from Me" (He says); "I never knew you"
[Matthew 7:23], no not even then (He means) when you made a display of

prophesyings, and were casting out demons.
It is probable that He also here hints at something else, that even then they
were wicked; and from the beginning, grace wrought even by the unworthy. For
if it wrought through Balaam, much more through the unworthy, for the sake of
those who shall profit [by it].
But if even signs and wonders did not avail to deliver from punishment;
much more, if a man happen to be in the priestly dignity: even if he reach the
highest honor, even if grace work in him to ordination, even if unto all the other
things, for the sake of those who need his leadership, he also shall hear, "I never
knew you," no, not even then when grace wrought in you.
9. O! How strict shall the search be there as to purity of life! How does that,
of itself, suffice to introduce us into the kingdom? While the absence of it gives
up the man [to destruction], though he have ten thousand miracles and signs to
show. For nothing is so pleasing to God as an excellent course of life. "If you
love Me" [John 14:15], He declares; He did not say, "work miracles," but what?
"Keep My commandments." And again, "I call you friends" [John 15:14], not
when you cast out demons, but "if you keep My words." For those things come of
the gift of God: but these after the gift of God, of our own diligence also. Let us
strive to become friends of God, and not remain enemies to Him.
These things we are ever saying, these exhortations we are ever giving, both
to ourselves and to you: but nothing more is gained. Wherefore also I am afraid.
And I would have wished indeed to be silent, so as not to increase your danger.
For when a person often hears, and even so does not act, this is to provoke the
Lord to anger. But I fear also myself that other danger, that of silence, if when I
am ap pointed to the ministering of the word, I should hold my peace.
What shall we then do that we may be saved? Let us begin [the practice of]
virtue, as we have opportunity: let us portion out the virtues to ourselves, as
laborers do their husbandry; in this month let us master evil-speaking,
injuriousness, unjust anger; and let us lay down a law for ourselves, and say,
Today let us set this right. Again, in this month let us school ourselves in