## Homily 89 on Matthew

Matt. XXVII. 62-64.
" Now the next day, that followed the day of the preparation, the chief
priests and Pharisees came together unto Pilate, saying, Sir, we remember that
that deceiver said, while He was yet alive, After three days I will rise again.
Command therefore that the sepulchre be made sure until the third day, lest His
disciples come and steal Him away, and say to the people, He is risen from the
dead: so the last error should be worse than the first."
Everywhere deceit recoils upon itself, and against its will supports the truth.
And observe. It was necessary for it to be believed that He died, and that He rose
again, and that He was buried, and all these things are brought to pass by His
enemies. See, at any rate, these words bearing witness to every one of these
facts. "We remember," these are the words, "that that deceiver said, when He was
yet alive," (He was therefore now dead), "After three days I rise again.
Command therefore that the sepulchre be sealed," (He was therefore buried),
"lest His disciples come and steal Him away." So that if the sepulchre be sealed,
there will be no unfair dealing. For there could not be. So then the proof of His
resurrection has become incontrovertible by what you have put forward. For
because it was sealed, there was no unfair dealing. But if there was no unfair
dealing, and the sepulchre was found empty, it is manifest that He is risen,
plainly and incontrovertibly. Do you see, how even against their will they
contend for the proof of the truth?
But mark thou, I pray you, the disciples' love of truth, how they conceal
from us none of the things that are said by His enemies, though they use
opprobrious language. Behold, at any rate, they even call Him a deceiver, and
these men are not silent about that.
But these things show also their savageness (that not even at His death did

they let go their anger), and these men's simple and truthful disposition.
But it were worth while to inquire concerning that point also, where He
said, "After three days I rise again?" For one would not find this thus distinctly
stated, but rather the example of Jonah. So that they understood His saying, and
of their own will dealt unfairly.
What then says Pilate? "You have a watch; make it as sure as you can. And
they made it sure, sealing the sepulchre, and setting the watch." He suffers not
the soldiers alone to seal, for as having learned the things concerning Christ, he
was no longer willing to co-operate with them. But in order to be rid of them, he
endures this also, and says, "Do ye seal it as you will, that you may not have it in
your power to blame others." For if the soldiers only had sealed, they might have
said (although the saying would have been improbable and false, yet
nevertheless as in the rest they cast aside shame, so in this too they might have
been able to say), that the soldiers, having given up the body to be stolen, gave
His disciples opportunity to feign the history concerning His resurrection, but
now having themselves made it sure, they are not able to say so much as this.
Do you see how they labor for the truth against their will? For they
themselves came to Pilate, themselves asked, themselves sealed, setting the
watch, so as to be accusers, and refuters one of another. And indeed when should
they have stolen Him? On the Sabbath? And how? For it was not lawful so much
as to go out. [Exodus 16:29] And even if they transgressed the law, how should
they have dared, who were so timid, to come forth? And how could they also
have been able to persuade the multitude? By saying what? By doing what? And
from what sort of zeal could they have stood in behalf of the dead? Expecting
what recompense? What requital? Seeing Him yet alive and merely seized, they
had fled; and after His death were they likely to speak boldly in His behalf,
unless He had risen again? And how should these things be reasonable? For that
they were neither willing nor able to feign a resurrection, that did not take place,
is plain from hence. He discoursed to them much of a resurrection, and
continually said, as indeed these very men have stated, "After three days I rise