brings them near to these whom they ought to imitate. If any one, says he,
wishes to imitate me, if any one wishes to walk the same road, let him take heed
to them; though I am not present, you know the manner of my walk, that is, my
conduct in life. For not by words only did he teach, but by deeds too; as in the
chorus, and the army, the rest must imitate the leader of the chorus or the army,
and thus advance in good order. For it is possible that the order may be dissolved
by sedition.
The Apostles therefore were a type, and kept throughout a certain
archetypal model. Consider how entirely accurate their life was, so that they are
proposed as an archetype and example, and as living laws. For what was said in
their writings, they manifested to all in their actions. This is the best teaching;
thus he will be able to carry on his disciple. But if he indeed speaks as a
philosopher, yet in his actions does the contrary, he is no longer a teacher. For
mere verbal philosophy is easy even for the disciple: but there is need of that
teaching and leading which comes of deeds. For this both makes the teacher to
be reverenced, and prepares the disciple to yield obedience. How so? When one
sees him delivering philosophy in words, he will say he commands
impossibilities; that they are impossibilities, he himself is the first to show, who
does not practice them. But if he sees his virtue fully carried out in action, he
will no longer be able to speak thus. Yet although the life of our teacher be
careless, let us take heed to ourselves, and let us listen to the words of the
prophet; "They shall be all taught of God." [Isaiah 54:13] "And they shall teach
no more every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord, for they shall all know
me from the least of them to the greatest of them." [Jeremiah 31:34] Have you a
teacher who is not virtuous? Still you have Him who is truly a Teacher, whom
alone you should call a Teacher. Learn from Him: He has said, "Learn of Me, for
I am meek." [Matthew 11:29] Take not heed, then, to your teacher, but to Him
and to His lessons. Take thence your examples, you have a most excellent
model, to it conform yourself. There are innumerable models laid before you in
the Scriptures of virtuous lives; whichsoever you will, come, and after the

Master find it in the disciples. One has shown forth through poverty, another
through riches; for example, Elijah through poverty, Abraham through riches. Go
to that example, which you esteem most easy, most befitting yourself to practice.
Again, one by marriage, the other by virginity; Abraham by marriage, the other
by virginity. Follow whichever you will: for both lead to heaven. One shone
forth by fasting, as John, another without fasting, as Job. Again, this latter had a
care for his wife, his children, his daughters, his family, and possessed great
wealth; the other possessed nothing but the garment of hair. And why do I make
mention of family, or wealth, or money, when it is possible that even one in a
kingdom should lay hold on virtue, for the house of a king would be found more
full of trouble than any private family. David then shone forth in his kingdom;
the purple and the diadem rendered him not at all remiss. To another it was
entrusted to preside over a whole people, I mean Moses, which was a more
difficult task, for there the power was greater, whence the difficulty too became
greater. You have seen men approved in wealth, you have seen them in poverty
also, you have seen them in marriage, you have seen them in virginity too; on the
contrary, behold some lost in marriage and in virginity, in wealth and in poverty.
For example, many men have perished in marriage, as Samson, yet not from
marriage, but from their own deliberate choice. Likewise in virginity, as the five
virgins. In wealth, as the rich man, who disregarded Lazarus: in poverty,
innumerable poor men even now are lost. In a kingdom, I can point to many who
have perished, and in ruling the people. Would you see men saved in the rank of
a soldier? There is Cornelius; and in the government of a household? There is
the eunuch of the Ethiopian Queen. Thus is it universally. If we use our wealth as
is fit, nothing will destroy us; but if not, all things will destroy us, whether a
kingdom, or poverty, or wealth. But nothing will have power to hurt the man,
who keeps well awake.
For tell me, was captivity any harm? None at all. For consider, I pray you,
Joseph, who became a slave, and preserved his virtue. Consider Daniel, and the
Three Children, who became captives, and how much the more they shone forth,