have been probable that the apostle spoke of another. But if the Word of the Father who descended
is the same also that ascended, He, namely, the Only-begotten Son of the only God, who, according
to the good pleasure of the Father, became flesh for the sake of men, the apostle certainly does not
speak regarding any other, or concerning any Ogdoad, but respecting our Lord Jesus Christ. For,
according to them, the Word did not originally become flesh. For they maintain that the Saviour
assumed an animal body, formed in accordance with a special dispensation by an unspeakable
providence, so as to become visible and palpable. But flesh is that which was of old formed for
Adam by God out of the dust, and it is this that John has declared the Word of God became. Thus
is their primary and first-begotten Ogdoad brought to nought. For, since Logos, and Monogenes,
and Zoe, and Ph s, and Soter, and Christus, and the Son of God, and He who became incarnate for
us, have been proved to be one and the same, the Ogdoad which they have built up at once falls to
pieces. And when this is destroyed, their whole system sinks into ruin,—a system which they
falsely dream into existence, and thus inflict injury on the Scriptures, while they build up their own
hypothesis.
4. Then, again, collecting a set of expressions and names scattered here and there [in Scripture],
they twist them, as we have already said, from a natural to a non-natural sense. In so doing, they
act like those who bring forward any kind of hypothesis they fancy, and then endeavour to support
them out of the poems of Homer, so that the ignorant imagine that Homer actually composed the
verses bearing upon that hypothesis, which has, in fact, been but newly constructed; and many
others are led so far by the regularly-formed sequence of the verses, as to doubt whether Homer
may not have composed them. Of this kind is the following passage, where one, describing
Hercules as having been sent by Eurystheus to the dog in the infernal regions, does so by means
of these Homeric verses,—for there can be no objection to our citing these by way of illustration,
since the same sort of attempt appears in both:—
"Thus saying, there sent forth from his house deeply groaning."—Od., x. 76.
"The hero Hercules conversant with mighty deeds."—Od., xxi. 26.
"Eurystheus, the son of Sthenelus, descended from Perseus."—Il., xix. 123.
"That he might bring from Erebus the dog of gloomy Pluto."—Il., viii. 368.
"And he advanced like a mountain-bred lion confident of strength."—Od., vi. 130.
"Rapidly through the city, while all his friends followed." —Il., xxiv. 327.
"Both maidens, and youths, and much-enduring old men."—Od., xi. 38.
"Mourning for him bitterly as one going forward to death." —Il., xxiv. 328.
"But Mercury and the blue-eyed Minerva conducted him."—Od., xi. 626.
"For she knew the mind of her brother, how it laboured with grief."—Il., ii. 409.
Massuet proposes to render "skilfully to fit."
stands in the original: the text followed by Irenæus differs slightly from the received text.