SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.1, C.4.

Divine goodness either in "being" only, as inanimate things, or also
in "living," and in "knowing singulars," as plants and animals;
whereas the rational nature, in as much as it apprehends the
universal notion of good and being, is immediately related to the
universal principle of being.
Consequently the perfection of the rational creature consists not
only in what belongs to it in respect of its nature, but also in that
which it acquires through a supernatural participation of Divine
goodness. Hence it was said above (FS, Question 3, Article 8) that
man's ultimate happiness consists in a supernatural vision of God:
to which vision man cannot attain unless he be taught by God,
according to Jn. 6:45: "Every one that hath heard of the Father and
hath learned cometh to Me." Now man acquires a share of this
learning, not indeed all at once, but by little and little, according to
the mode of his nature: and every one who learns thus must needs
believe, in order that he may acquire science in a perfect degree;
thus also the Philosopher remarks (De Soph. Elench. i, 2) that "it
behooves a learner to believe."
Hence in order that a man arrive at the perfect vision of heavenly
happiness, he must first of all believe God, as a disciple believes the
master who is teaching him.
Reply to Objection 1: Since man's nature is dependent on a higher
nature, natural knowledge does not suffice for its perfection, and
some supernatural knowledge is necessary, as stated above.
Reply to Objection 2: Just as man assents to first principles, by the
natural light of his intellect, so does a virtuous man, by the habit of
virtue, judge aright of things concerning that virtue; and in this way,
by the light of faith which God bestows on him, a man assents to
matters of faith and not to those which are against faith.
Consequently "there is no" danger or "condemnation to them that
are in Christ Jesus," and whom He has enlightened by faith.
Reply to Objection 3: In many respects faith perceives the invisible
things of God in a higher way than natural reason does in
proceeding to God from His creatures. Hence it is written (Ecclus.
3:25): "Many things are shown to thee above the understandings of
man."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.1, C.4.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.1, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether it is necessary to believe those things

which can be proved by natural reason?
Objection 1: It would seem unnecessary to believe those things
which can be proved by natural reason. For nothing is superfluous in
God's works, much less even than in the works of nature. Now it is
superfluous to employ other means, where one already suffices.
Therefore it would be superfluous to receive by faith, things that can
be known by natural reason.
Objection 2: Further, those things must be believed, which are the
object of faith. Now science and faith are not about the same object,
as stated above (Question 1, Articles 4,5). Since therefore all things
that can be known by natural reason are an object of science, it
seems that there is no need to believe what can be proved by natural
reason.
Objection 3: Further, all things knowable scientifically would seem to
come under one head: so that if some of them are proposed to man
as objects of faith, in like manner the others should also be believed.
But this is not true. Therefore it is not necessary to believe those
things which can be proved by natural reason.
On the contrary, It is necessary to believe that God is one and
incorporeal: which things philosophers prove by natural reason.
I answer that, It is necessary for man to accept by faith not only
things which are above reason, but also those which can be known
by reason: and this for three motives. First, in order that man may
arrive more quickly at the knowledge of Divine truth. Because the
science to whose province it belongs to prove the existence of God,
is the last of all to offer itself to human research, since it
presupposes many other sciences: so that it would not by until late
in life that man would arrive at the knowledge of God. The second
reason is, in order that the knowledge of God may be more general.
For many are unable to make progress in the study of science, either
through dullness of mind, or through having a number of
occupations, and temporal needs, or even through laziness in
learning, all of whom would be altogether deprived of
the knowledge of God, unless Divine things were brought to their