the essence of a thing, but is caused by the essential principles of
the species; wherefore it is a medium between the essence and
accident thus understood. In this sense the powers of the soul may
be said to be a medium between substance and accident, as being
natural properties of the soul. When Augustine says that knowledge
and love are not in the soul as accidents in a subject, this must be
understood in the sense given above, inasmuch as they are
compared to the soul, not as loving and knowing, but as loved and
known. His argument proceeds in this sense; for if love were in the
soul loved as in a subject, it would follow that an accident
transcends its subject, since even other things are loved through the
soul.
Reply to Objection 6: Although the soul is not composed of matter
and form, yet it has an admixture of potentiality, as we have said
above (Question 75, Article 5, ad 4); and for this reason it can be the
subject of an accident. The statement quoted is verified in God, Who
is the Pure Act; in treating of which subject Boethius employs that
phrase (De Trin. i).
Reply to Objection 7: Rational and sensitive, as differences, are not
taken from the powers of sense and reason, but from the sensitive
and rational soul itself. But because substantial forms, which in
themselves are unknown to us, are known by their accidents;
nothing prevents us from sometimes substituting accidents for
substantial differences.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether there are several powers of the soul?

Objection 1: It would seem that there are not several powers of the
soul. For the intellectual soul approaches nearest to the likeness of
God. But in God there is one simple power: and therefore also in the
intellectual soul.
Objection 2: Further, the higher a power is, the more unified it is. But
the intellectual soul excels all other forms in power. Therefore above
all others it has one virtue or power.
Objection 3: Further, to operate belongs to what is in act. But by the
one essence of the soul, man has actual existence in the different
degrees of perfection, as we have seen above (Question 76, Articles
3,4). Therefore by the one power of the soul he performs operations
of various degrees.
On the contrary, The Philosopher places several powers in the soul
(De Anima ii, 2,3).
I answer that, Of necessity we must place several powers in the soul.
To make this evident, we observe that, as the Philosopher says (De
Coelo ii, 12), the lowest order of things cannot acquire perfect
goodness, but they acquire a certain imperfect goodness, by few
movements; and those which belong to a higher order acquire
perfect goodness by many movements; and those yet higher acquire
perfect goodness by few movements; and the highest perfection is
found in those things which acquire perfect goodness without any
movement whatever. Thus he is least of all disposed of health, who
can only acquire imperfect health by means of a few remedies; better
disposed is he who can acquire perfect health by means of many
remedies; and better still, he who can by few remedies; best of all is
he who has perfect health without any remedies. We conclude,
therefore, that things which are below man acquire a certain limited
goodness; and so they have a few determinate operations and
powers. But man can acquire universal and perfect goodness,
because he can acquire beatitude. Yet he is in the last degree,
according to his nature, of those to whom beatitude is possible;
therefore the human soul requires many and various operations and
powers. But to angels a smaller variety of powers is sufficient. In
God there is no power or action beyond His own Essence.