SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.143, C.3.

any kind of defect. Hence a man is ashamed of poverty, disrepute,
servitude, and the like.
Reply to Objection 3: Shamefacedness does not regard virtuous
deeds as such. Yet it happens accidentally that a man is ashamed of
them either because he looks upon them as vicious according to
human opinion, or because he is afraid of being marked as
presumptuous or hypocritical for doing virtuous deeds.
Reply to Objection 4: Sometimes more grievous sins are less
shameful, either because they are less disgraceful, as spiritual sins
in comparison with sins of the flesh, or because they connote a
certain abundance of some temporal good; thus a man is more
ashamed of cowardice than of daring, of theft than of robbery, on
account of a semblance of power. The same applies to other sins.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.143, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether man is more shamefaced of those who

are more closely connected with him?
Objection 1: It would seem that man is not more shamefaced of
those who are more closely connected with him. For it is stated in
Rhet. ii, 6 that "men are more shamefaced of those from whom they
desire approbation." Now men desire this especially from people of
the better sort who are sometimes not connected with them.
Therefore man is not more shamefaced of those who are more
closely connected with him.
Objection 2: Further, seemingly those are more closely connected
who perform like deeds. Now man is not made ashamed of his sin by
those whom he knows to be guilty of the same sin, because
according to Rhet. ii, 6, "a man does not forbid his neighbor what he
does himself." Therefore he is not more shamefaced of those who
are most closely connected with him.
Objection 3: Further, the Philosopher says (Rhet. ii, 6) that "men take
more shame from those who retail their information to many, such as
jokers and fable-tellers." But those who are more closely connected
with a man do not retail his vices. Therefore one should not take
shame chiefly from them.
Objection 4: Further, the Philosopher says (Rhet. ii, 6) that "men are
most liable to be made ashamed by those among whom they have
done nothing amiss; by those of whom they ask something for the
first time; by those whose friends they wish to become." Now these
are less closely connected with us. Therefore man is not made most
ashamed by those who are more closely united to him.
On the contrary, It is stated in Rhet. ii, 6 that "man is made most
ashamed by those who are to be continually with him."
I answer that, Since reproach is opposed to honor, just as honor
denotes attestation to someone's excellence, especially the
excellence which is according to virtue, so too reproach, the fear of
which is shamefacedness, denotes attestation to a person's defect,
especially that which results from sin. Hence the more weighty a
person's attestation is considered to be, the more does he make
another person ashamed. Now a person's attestation may be