FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.60, C.3.

selling, and all such operations in which there is an element of
something due or undue to another. For this reason justice and its
parts are properly about operations as their proper matter. On the
other hand, in some operations, good and evil depend only on
commensuration with the agent. Consequently good and evil in
these operations depend on the way in which man is affected to
them. And for this reason in such like operations virtue must needs
be chiefly about internal emotions which are called the passions of
the soul, as is evidently the case with temperance, fortitude and the
like.
It happens, however, in operations which are directed to another,
that the good of virtue is overlooked by reason of some inordinate
passion of the soul. In such cases justice is destroyed in so far as
the due measure of the external act is destroyed: while some other
virtue is destroyed in so far as the internal passions exceed their due
measure. Thus when through anger, one man strikes another, justice
is destroyed in the undue blow; while gentleness is destroyed by the
immoderate anger. The same may be clearly applied to other virtues.
This suffices for the Replies to the Objections. For the first considers
operations as the effect of virtue, while the other two consider
operation and passion as concurring in the same effect. But in some
cases virtue is chiefly about operations, in others, about passions,
for the reason given above.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.60, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether there is only one moral virtue about

operations?
Objection 1: It would seem that there is but one moral virtue about
operations. Because the rectitude of all external operations seems to
belong to justice. Now justice is but one virtue. Therefore there is but
one virtue about operations.
Objection 2: Further, those operations seem to differ most, which are
directed on the one side to the good of the individual, and on the
other to the good of the many. But this diversity does not cause
diversity among the moral virtues: for the Philosopher says (Ethic. v,
1) that legal justice, which directs human acts to the common good,
does not differ, save logically, from the virtue which directs a man's
actions to one man only. Therefore diversity of operations does not
cause a diversity of moral virtues.
Objection 3: Further, if there are various moral virtues about various
operations, diversity of moral virtues would needs follow diversity of
operations. But this is clearly untrue: for it is the function of justice
to establish rectitude in various kinds of commutations, and again in
distributions, as is set down in Ethic. v, 2. Therefore there are not
different virtues about different operations.
On the contrary, Religion is a moral virtue distinct from piety, both of
which are about operations.
I answer that, All the moral virtues that are about operations agree in
one general notion of justice, which is in respect of something due
to another: but they differ in respect of various special notions. The
reason for this is that in external operations, the order of reason is
established, as we have stated (Article 2), not according as how man
is affected towards such operations, but according to the
becomingness of the thing itself; from which becomingness we
derive the notion of something due which is the formal aspect of
justice: for, seemingly, it pertains to justice that a man give another
his due. Wherefore all such virtues as are about operations, bear, in
some way, the character of justice. But the thing due is not of the
same kind in all these virtues: for something is due to an equal in
one way, to a superior, in another way, to an inferior, in yet another;
and the nature of a debt differs according as it arises from a