waters which are salt are alone those which are derived from her tears. But it is probable that she,
in her intense agony and perplexity, was covered with perspiration. And hence, following out their
notion, we may conceive that fountains and rivers, and all the fresh water in the world, are due to
this source. For it is difficult, since we know that all tears are of the same quality, to believe that
waters both salt and fresh proceeded from them. The more plausible supposition is, that some are
from her tears, and some from her perspiration. And since there are also in the world certain waters
which are hot and acrid in their nature, thou must be left to guess their origin, how and whence.
Such are some of the results of their hypothesis.
5. They go on to state that, when the mother Achamoth had passed through all sorts of passion,
and had with difficulty escaped from them, she turned herself to supplicate the light which had
forsaken her, that is, Christ. He, however, having returned to the Pleroma, and being probably
unwilling again to descend from it, sent forth to her the Paraclete, that is, the Saviour. This being
was endowed with all power by the Father, who placed everything under his authority, the Æons
doing so likewise, so that "by him were all things, visible and invisible, created, thrones, divinities,
dominions." He then was sent to her along with his contemporary angels. And they related that
Achamoth, filled with reverence, at first veiled herself through modesty, but that by and by, when
she had looked upon him with all his endowments, and had acquired strength from his appearance,
she ran forward to meet him. He then imparted to her form as respected intelligence, and brought
healing to her passions, separating them from her, but not so as to drive them out of thought
altogether. For it was not possible that they should be annihilated as in the former case, because
they had already taken root and acquired strength [so as to possess an indestructible existence]. All
that he could do was to separate them and set them apart, and then commingle and condense them,
so as to transmute them from incorporeal passion into unorganized matter. He then by this process
conferred upon them a fitness and a nature to become concretions and corporeal structures, in order
that two substances should be formed,—the one evil, resulting from the passions, and the other
subject indeed to suffering, but originating from her conversion. And on this account (i.e., on
account of this hypostatizing of ideal matter) they say that the Saviour virtually created the world.
But when Achamoth was freed from her passion, she gazed with rapture on the dazzling vision of
the angels that were with him; and in her ecstasy, conceiving by them, they tell us that she brought