SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.177, C.3.

Both of these can be done by the demons, as stated above (Article 1,
ad 2).
True miracles cannot be wrought save by the power of God, because
God works them for man's benefit, and this in two ways: in one way
for the confirmation of truth declared, in another way in proof of a
person's holiness, which God desires to propose as an example of
virtue. In the first way miracles can be wrought by any one who
preaches the true faith and calls upon Christ's name, as even the
wicked do sometimes. In this way even the wicked can work
miracles. Hence Jerome commenting on Mt. 7:22, "Have not we
prophesied in Thy name?" says: "Sometimes prophesying, the
working of miracles, and the casting out of demons are accorded not
to the merit of those who do these things, but to the invoking of
Christ's name, that men may honor God, by invoking Whom such
great miracles are wrought."
In the second way miracles are not wrought except by the saints,
since it is in proof of their holiness that miracles are wrought during
their lifetime or after death, either by themselves or by others. For we
read (Acts 19:11,12) that "God wrought by the hand of Paul . . .
miracles" and "even there were brought from his body to the sick,
handkerchiefs . . . and the diseases departed from them." In this way
indeed there is nothing to prevent a sinner from working miracles by
invoking a saint; but the miracle is ascribed not to him, but to the
one in proof of whose holiness such things are done.
Reply to Objection 1: As stated above (Question 83, Article 16) when
we were treating of prayer, the prayer of impetration relies not on
merit but on God's mercy, which extends even to the wicked,
wherefore the prayers even of sinners are sometimes granted by
God. Hence Augustine says (Tract. xliv in Joan.) that "the blind man
spoke these words before he was anointed," that is, before he was
perfectly enlightened; "since God does hear sinners." When it is said
that the prayer of one who hears not the law is an abomination, this
must be understood so far as the sinner's merit is concerned; yet it
is sometimes granted, either for the spiritual welfare of the one who
prays---as the publican was heard (Lk. 18:14)---or for the good of
others and for God's glory.
Reply to Objection 2: Faith without works is said to be dead, as
regards the believer, who lives not, by faith, with the life of grace.
But nothing hinders a living thing from working through a dead

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.177, C.3.

instrument, as a man through a stick. It is thus that God works while
employing instrumentally the faith of a sinner.
Reply to Objection 3: Miracles are always true witnesses to the
purpose for which they are wrought. Hence wicked men who teach a
false doctrine never work true miracles in confirmation of their
teaching, although sometimes they may do so in praise of Christ's
name which they invoke, and by the power of the sacraments which
they administer. If they teach a true doctrine, sometimes they work
true miracles as confirming their teaching, but not as an attestation
of holiness. Hence Augustine says (Questions. lxxxiii, qu. 79):
"Magicians work miracles in one way, good Christians in another,
wicked Christians in another. Magicians by private compact with the
demons, good Christians by their manifest righteousness, evil
Christians by the outward signs of righteousness."
Reply to Objection 4: As Augustine says (Questions. lxxxiii, qu. 79),
"the reason why these are not granted to all holy men is lest by a
most baneful error the weak be deceived into thinking such deeds to
imply greater gifts than the deeds of righteousness whereby eternal
life is obtained."