not without mischief, because this is done after many have been injured. But
how far shall I continue pursuing the unattainable? For to enumerate all the
difficulties in this direction, is nothing more nor less than measuring the ocean.
Even when any one should clear himself from every passion (which is a thing
impossible) in order to correct the failings of others, he is forced to undergo
countless trials, and when his own infirmities are added, behold, an abyss of toil
and care, and all that he must suffer, who wishes to subdue the evils in himself
and in those around him.
10. Basil: And now, art thou free from toils? Have you no cares while you
live by yourself?
Chrysostom: I have indeed even now. For how is it possible for one who is
a man, and who is living this toilsome life of ours, to be free from cares and
conflict? But it is not quite the same thing for man to plunge into a boundless
ocean and to cross a river, so great is the difference between these cares and
those. For now, indeed, if I were able to become serviceable to others, I should
wish it myself, and this would be a matter of prayer with me. But if it is not
possible to help another, yet if it be practicable to save and rescue myself from
the waves, I shall be contented.
Basil: Do you then think this to be a great thing? And do you fancy that you
will be saved when you are not profitable to any other?
Chrysostom: You have spoken well and nobly, for I am not myself able to
believe that it is possible for one who has not labored for the salvation of his
fellow to be saved, nor did it at all profit the wretched man in the Gospel that he
had not diminished his talent; but he perished through not increasing it and
bringing it doubled to his master. [Matthew 25:24] Nevertheless, I think that my
punishment will be milder when I am called to account, because I have not saved
others, than it would be if I should destroy myself and others too by becoming
far worse after so great an honor. For now I trust that my chastisement will be
proportioned to the amount of my sins, but after receiving this office, I fear it
would be not double, or threefold, but manifold, because I should have caused

very many to stumble, and after additional honor should have offended the God
who honored me.
11. For this very cause God accuses the Israelites more vehemently, and
shows that they were worthy of greater chastisement, because they sinned after
so many honors had come to them from Him, saying in one place: "But you only
have I known of all the families of the earth, therefore will I punish you for your
iniquities," [Amos 3:2] and again, "and I raised up of your sons for prophets,
and of your young men for Nazarites;" [Amos 2:11] and before the times of the
prophets, wishing to show that sins receive sorer punishment by far when they
occur in the case of the Priest than in the case of the laity, He enjoins as great a
sacrifice to be offered for the Priest as for the whole people, and this amounts to
a proof on his part, that the wounds of the Priesthood need more assistance—
that is, as great as those of all the people together, and they would not have
needed a greater, except they were worse; and they are not worse in their nature,
but are aggravated through the dignity of the Priest, who dares to commit them.
And why do I speak of the men who follow this ministration. For the daughters
of the Priests, [Leviticus 21:9] who have no part in the Priestly office, yet on
account of their father's dignity undergo a far bitterer punishment for the same
sins as others, and the offense is the same in their case and in the daughters of
the laity; namely, fornication in both; yet the penalty is far severer for the former.
Do you see with what abundant proof God shows you that he demands much
greater punishment for the ruler than for the ruled? For no doubt he who
punishes to a greater degree than others the daughter of a certain man for that
man's sake, will not exact the same penalty from the man who is the cause of her
additional chastisement as from others, but a much heavier one; and very
reasonably; for the mischief does not merely involve himself, but it destroys the
souls of the weaker brethren and of them who look up to him, and Ezekiel,
writing to show this, distinguishes from one another the judgment of the rams
and of the sheep. [Ezekiel 34:17]
12. Do we then seem to you to entertain a reasonable fear? For in addition