Matt. xxi. 23.

these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them to babes. Even so, my Father; for
so it seemed good in Thy sight. All things have been delivered to Me by My Father; and no one
knoweth the Father but the Son, or the Son but the Father, and he to whom the Son will reveal
Him." In these words they affirm that He clearly showed that the Father of truth, conjured into
existence by them, was known to no one before His advent. And they desire to construe the passage
as if teaching that the Maker and Framer [of the world] was always known by all, while the Lord
spoke these words concerning the Father unknown to all, whom they now proclaim.

### Chapter XXI.—The views of redemption entertained by these heretics.
1. It happens that their tradition respecting redemption is invisible and incomprehensible, as
being the mother of things which are incomprehensible and invisible; and on this account, since it
is fluctuating, it is impossible simply and all at once to make known its nature, for every one of
them hands it down just as his own inclination prompts. Thus there are as many schemes of
"redemption" as there are teachers of these mystical opinions. And when we come to refute them,
we shall show in its fitting-place, that this class of men have been instigated by Satan to a denial
of that baptism which is regeneration to God, and thus to a renunciation of the whole [Christian]
faith.
2. They maintain that those who have attained to perfect knowledge must of necessity be
regenerated into that power which is above all. For it is otherwise impossible to find admittance
within the Pleroma, since this [regeneration] it is which leads them down into the depths of Bythus.
For the baptism instituted by the visible Jesus was for the remission of sins, but the redemption
brought in by that Christ who descended upon Him, was for perfection; and they allege that the
former is animal, but the latter spiritual. And the baptism of John was proclaimed with a view to
repentance, but the redemption by Jesus was brought in for the sake of perfection. And to this
He refers when He says, "And I have another baptism to be baptized with, and I hasten eagerly
towards it." Moreover, they affirm that the Lord added this redemption to the sons of Zebedee,
when their mother asked that they might sit, the one on His right hand, and the other on His left,
in His kingdom, saying, "Can ye be baptized with the baptism which I shall be baptized with?"

Luke xii. 50. The text was probably thus corrupted by the heretics.

Paul, too, they declare, has often set forth, in express terms, the redemption which is in Christ
Jesus; and this was the same which is handed down by them in so varied and discordant forms.
3. For some of them prepare a nuptial couch, and perform a sort of mystic rite (pronouncing
certain expressions) with those who are being initiated, and affirm that it is a spiritual marriage
which is celebrated by them, after the likeness of the conjunctions above. Others, again, lead them
to a place where water is, and baptize them, with the utterance of these words, "Into the name of
the unknown Father of the universe— into truth, the mother of all things—into Him who descended
on Jesus—into union, and redemption, and communion with the powers." Others still repeat certain
Hebrew words, in order the more thoroughly to bewilder those who are being initiated, as follows:
"Basema, Chamosse, BaÏnaora, Mistadia, Ruada, Kousta, Babaphor, Kalachthei." The
interpretation of these terms runs thus: "I invoke that which is above every power of the Father,
which is called light, and good Spirit, and life, because Thou hast reigned in the body." Others,
again, set forth the redemption thus: The name which is hidden from every deity, and dominion,
and truth which Jesus of Nazareth was clothed with in the lives of the light of Christ—of Christ,
who lives by the Holy Ghost, for the angelic redemption. The name of restitution stands thus:
Messia, Uphareg, NamempsÏman, ChaldÏaur, MosomedÏa, AcphranÏ, Psaua, Jesus Nazaria.
The interpretation of these words is as follows: "I do not divide the Spirit of Christ, neither the
heart nor the supercelestial power which is merciful; may I enjoy Thy name, O Saviour of truth!"
Such are words of the initiators; but he who is initiated, replies, "I am established, and I am
redeemed; I redeem my soul from this age (world), and from all things connected with it in the
name of Iao, who redeemed his own soul into redemption in Christ who liveth." Then the bystanders
add these words, "Peace be to all on whom this name rests." After this they anoint the initiated
person with balsam; for they assert that this unguent is a type of that sweet odour which is above
all things.
4. But there are some of them who assert that it is superfluous to bring persons to the water,
but mixing oil and water together, they place this mixture on the heads of those who are to be
initiated, with the use of some such expressions as we have already mentioned. And this they
maintain to be the redemption. They, too, are accustomed to anoint with balsam. Others, however,
reject all these practices, and maintain that the mystery of the unspeakable and invisible power
ought not to be performed by visible and corruptible creatures, nor should that of those [beings]
who are inconceivable, and incorporeal, and beyond the reach of sense, [be performed] by such as
are the objects of sense, and possessed of a body. These hold that the knowledge of the unspeakable
Greatness is itself perfect redemption. For since both defect and passion flowed from ignorance,
the whole substance of what was thus formed is destroyed by knowledge; and therefore knowledge