sobriety. In Antioch he is ordained, where he preaches. Why did He not say,
Separate for the Lord, but, "For me?" It shows that He is of one authority and
power. "And when they had fasted," etc. Do you see what a great thing fasting is?
"So they being sent forth by the Holy Ghost:" it shows that the Spirit did all.
A great, yes a great good is fasting: it is circumscribed by no limits. When
need was to ordain, then they fast: and to them while fasting, the Spirit spoke.
Thus much only do I enjoin: (I say) not fast, but abstain from luxury. Let us seek
meats to nourish, not things to ruin us; seek meats for food, not occasions of
diseases, of diseases both of soul and body: seek food which has comfort, not
luxury which is full of discomfort: the one is luxury, the other mischief; the one
is pleasure, the other pain; the one is agreeable to nature, the other contrary to
nature. For say, if one should give you hemlock juice to drink, would it not be
against nature? If one should give you logs and stones, would you not reject
them? Of course, for they are against nature. Well, and so is luxury. For just as in
a city, under an invasion of enemies when there has been siege and tumult, great
is the uproar, so is it in the soul, under invasion of wine and luxury. "Who has
woe? Who has tumults? Who has discomforts and babblings? Are they not they
that tarry long at the wine? Whose are bloodshot eyes?" [Proverbs 23:29-30]
But yet, say what we will, we shall not bring off those who give themselves up
to luxury, unless we bring into conflict therewith a different affection. And first,
let us address ourselves to the women. Nothing uglier than a woman given to
luxury, nothing uglier than a woman given to drink. The bloom of her
complexion is faded: the calm and mild expression of the eyes is rendered turbid,
as when a cloud intercepts the rays of the sunshine. It is a vulgar, ([ἀ]
[νελεύθερον]) slave-like, thoroughly low-lived habit. How disgusting is a
woman when from her breath you catch sour whiffs of fetid wine: a woman
belching, giving out a fume ([χυμὸν]) of decomposing meats; herself weighed
down, unable to keep upright; her face flushed with an unnatural red; yawning
incessantly, and everything swimming in a mist before her eyes! But not such,
she that abstains from luxurious living: no (this abstinence makes her look) a

more beautiful, well-bred ([σωφρονεστέρα]) woman. For even to the body, the
composure of the soul imparts a beauty of its own. Do not imagine that the
impression of beauty results only from the bodily features. Give me a handsome
girl, but turbulent ([τεταραγμένην]), loquacious, railing, given to drink,
extravagant, (and tell me) if she is not worse-looking than any ugly woman? But
if she were bashful, if she would hold her peace, if she learned to blush, if to
speak modestly ([συμμέτρως]), if to find time for fastings; her beauty would be
twice as great, her freshness would be heightened, her look more engaging,
fraught with modesty and good breeding ([σωφροσύνης καὶ κοσμιότητος]). Now
then, shall we speak of men? What can be uglier than a man in drink? He is an
object of ridicule to his servants, of ridicule to his enemies, of pity to his friends;
deserving condemnation without end: a wild beast rather than a human being; for
to devour much food is proper to panther, and lion, and bear. No wonder (that
they do so), for those creatures have not a reasonable soul. And yet even they, if
they be gorged with food more than they need, and beyond the measure
appointed them by nature, get their whole body ruined by it: how much more
we? Therefore has God contracted our stomach into a small compass; therefore
has He marked out a small measure of sustenance, that He may instruct us to
attend to the soul.
Let us consider our very make, and we shall see there is in us but one little
part that has this operation— for our mouth and tongue are meant for singing
hymns, our throat for voice— therefore the very necessity of nature has tied us
down, that we may not, even involuntarily, get into much trouble
([πραγματείαν]) (in this way). Since, if indeed luxurious living had not its pains,
nor sickness and infirmities, it might be tolerated: but as the case is, He has
stinted you by restrictions of nature, that even if you wish to exceed, you may
not be able to do so. Is not pleasure your object, beloved? This you shall find
from moderation. Is not health? This too you shall so gain. Is not easiness of
mind? This too. Is not freedom? Is not vigor and good habit of body, is not
sobriety and alertness of mind? (All these you shall find); so entirely are all good