2 Corinthians 5:14
"For the love of God constrains us, because we thus judge."
'For not the fear of things to come only,' he says, 'but also those which have
already happened allow us not to be slothful nor to slumber; but stir us up and
impel us to these our labors on your behalf.' And what are those things which
have already happened?
"That if one died for all, then all died." 'Surely then it was because all were
lost,' says he. For except all were dead, He had not died for all. For here the
opportunities of salvation exist; but there are found no longer. Therefore, he
says, "The love of God constrains us," and allows us not to be at rest. For it
comes of extreme wretchedness and is worse than hell itself, that when He has
set forth an act so mighty, any should be found after so great an instance of His
provident care reaping no benefit. For great was the excess of that love, both to
die for a world of such extent , and dying for it when in such a state.

2 Corinthians 5:15
"That they which live should no longer live unto themselves, but unto Him
who for their sakes died and rose again."
If therefore we ought not to live unto ourselves, 'be not troubled,' says he,
'nor be confounded when dangers and deaths assail you.' And he assigns besides
an indubitable argument by which he shows that the thing is a debt. For if
through Him we live who were dead; to Him we ought to live through Whom we
live. And what is said appears indeed to be one thing, but if any one accurately
examine it, it is two: one that we live by Him, another that He died for us: either
of which even by itself is enough to make us liable; but when even both are
united consider how great the debt is. Yea, rather, there are three things here. For
the First-fruits also for your sake He raised up, and led up to heaven: wherefore
also he added, "Who for our sakes died and rose again."

2 Corinthians 5:16
3. "Wherefore we henceforth know no man after the flesh."
For if all died and all rose again; and in such sort died as the tyranny of sin
condemned them; but rose again "through the laver of regeneration and the
renewing of the Holy Ghost;" [Titus 3:5] he says with reason, "we know none" of
the faithful "after the flesh." For what if even they be in the flesh? Yet is that
fleshly life destroyed, and we are born again by the Spirit, and have learned
another deportment and rule and life and condition , that, namely, in the heavens.
And again of this itself he shows Christ to be the Author. Wherefore also he
added,
"Even though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now we know Him
so no more."
What then? Tell me. Did He put away the flesh, and is He now not with that
body? Away with the thought, for He is even now clothed in flesh; for this Jesus
Who is taken up from you into Heaven shall so come. So? How? In flesh, with
His body. How then does he say, "Even though we have known Christ after the
flesh, yet now henceforth no more?" [Acts 1:11] For in us indeed "after the flesh"
is being in sins, and "not after the flesh" not being in sins; but in Christ, "after
the flesh" is His being subject to the affections of nature, such as to thirst, to
hunger, to weariness, to sleep. For "He did no sin, neither was guile found in His
mouth." [1 Peter 2:22] Wherefore He also said, "Which of you convicts Me of
sin?" [John 8:46] and again, "The prince of this world comes, and he has nothing
in Me." [John 14:30] And "not after the flesh" is being thenceforward freed even
from these things, not the being without flesh. For with this also He comes to
judge the world, His being impassible and pure. Whereunto we also shall
advance when "our body" has been "fashioned like His glorious body."
[Philippians 3:21]