although they have the office of preaching, unless they actually
preach, since a crown is due not to the habit, but to the actual strife,
according to 2 Tim. 2:5, "He . . . shall not be crowned, except he
strive lawfully."
Reply to Objection 1: Preaching and teaching are acts of a virtue,
namely mercy, wherefore they are reckoned among the spiritual alms
deeds [SS, Question 32, Article 2].
Reply to Objection 2: Although ability to preach and teach is
sometimes the outcome of study, the practice of teaching comes
from the will, which is informed with charity infused by God: and
thus its act can be meritorious.
Reply to Objection 3: Exaltation in this life does not lessen the
reward of the other life, except for him who seeks his own glory from
that exaltation: whereas he who turns that exaltation to the profit of
others acquires thereby a reward for himself. Still, when it is stated
that an aureole is due to teaching, this is to be understood of the
teaching of things pertaining to salvation, by which teaching the
devil is expelled from men's hearts, as by a kind of spiritual weapon,
of which it is said (2 Cor. 10:4): "The weapons of our warfare are not
carnal but spiritual".

### ARTICLE 8. Whether an aureole is due to Christ?

Objection 1: It would seem that an aureole is due to Christ. For an
aureole is due to virginity, martyrdom, and teaching. Now these three
were pre-eminently in Christ. Therefore an aureole is especially due
to Him.
Objection 2: Further, whatever is most perfect in human things must
ne especially ascribed to Christ. Now an aureole is due as the reward
of most excellent merits. Therefore it is also due to Christ.
Objection 3: Further, Cyprian says (De Habit. Virg.) that "virginity
bears a likeness to God." Therefore the exemplar of virginity is in
God. Therefore it would seem that an aureole is due to Christ even
as God.
On the contrary, An aureole is described as "joy in being conformed
to Christ." Now no one is conformed or likened to himself, as the
Philosopher says (Metaph., lib. ix, 3). Therefore an aureole is not due
to Christ.
Further, Christ's reward was never increased. Now Christ had no
aureole from the moment of His conception, since then He had never
fought. Therefore He never had an aureole afterwards.
I answer that, There are two opinions on this point. For some say
that Christ has an aureole in its strict sense, seeing that in Him there
is both conflict and victory, and consequently a crown in its proper
acceptation. But if we consider the question carefully, although the
notion of aurea or crown is becoming to Christ, the notion of aureole
is not. For from the very fact that aureole is a diminutive term it
follows that it denotes something possessed by participation and
not in its fulness. Wherefore an aureole is becoming to those who
participate in the perfect victory by imitating Him in Whom the
fulness of perfect victory is realized. And therefore, since in Christ
the notion of victory is found chiefly and fully, for by His victory
others are made victors---as shown by the words of Jn. 16:33, "Have
confidence, I have overcome the world," and Apoc. 5:5, "Behold the
lion of the tribe of Juda . . . hath prevailed"---it is not becoming for
Christ to have an aureole, but to have something from which all
aureoles are derived. Hence it is written (Apoc. 3:21): "To him that