obscurely. For those are indeed times of refreshing, which Paul also looked for,
when he said, "We that are in this tabernacle do groan, being burthened." [2
Corinthians 5:4] Then to prove that Christ is the cause of the days of refreshing,
he says, "And He shall send Jesus Christ, which before was for you ordained."
[Acts 3:20] He said not, "That your sin may be blotted out," but, "your sins;" for
he hints at that sin also. "He shall send." And whence? "Whom the heaven must
receive." [Acts 3:21] Still ["must"] "receive?" And why not simply, Whom the
heaven has received? This, as if discoursing of old times: so, he says, it is
divinely ordered, so it is settled: not a word yet of His eternal subsistence.—
"For Moses indeed said unto the fathers, A Prophet shall the Lord raise up for
you:" "Him shall you hear in all things that He shall speak unto you:" and
having said, "All things which God has spoken by the mouth of all His holy
Prophets," [Acts 3:22] now indeed he brings in Christ Himself. For, if He
predicted many things and it is necessary to hear Him, one would not be wrong
in saying that the Prophets have spoken these things. But, besides, he wishes to
show that the Prophets did predict the same things. And, if any one will look
closely into the matter, he will find these things spoken in the Old Testament,
obscurely indeed, but nevertheless spoken. "Who was purposely designed," says
he: in Whom there is nothing novel. Here he also alarms them, by the thought
that much remains to be fulfilled. But if so, how says he, "Hath fulfilled?" [Acts
3:18] The things which it was necessary "that Christ should suffer," are fulfilled:
the things which must come to pass, not yet. "A prophet shall the Lord God raise
up for you from among your brethren, like me." This would most conciliate
them. Do you observe the sprinkling of low matters and high, side by side—that
He Who was to go up into the heavens should be like Moses? And yet it was a
great thing too. For in fact He was not simply like Moses, if so be that "every
soul which will not hear shall be destroyed." And one might mention numberless
other things which show that He was not like Moses; so that it is a mighty text
that he has handled. "God shall raise Him up unto you," says Moses, "from
among your brethren," etc.: consequently Moses himself threatens those that

should not hear. "Yea, and all the prophets," etc.: all this is calculated to attract
"Yea, and all the prophets," says the Apostle, "from Samuel." He refrains from
enumerating them singly, not to make his discourse too long; but having alleged
that decisive testimony of Moses, he passes by the rest. "You," he says, "are the
children of the Prophets, and of the covenant which God made." [Acts 3:25]
"Children of the covenant;" that is, heirs. For lest they should think that they
received this offer from the favor of Peter, he shows, that of old it was due to
them, in order that they may the rather believe that such also is the will of God.
"Unto you first," he continues, "God having raised up His Son Jesus, sent Him."
[Acts 3:26] He does not say simply, "Unto you He sent His Son," but also, after
the resurrection, and when He had been crucified. For that they may not suppose
that he himself granted them this favor, and not the Father, he says, "To bless
you." For if He is your Brother, and blesses you, the affair is a promise. "Unto
you first." That is, so far are you from having no share in these blessings, that He
would have you become moreover promoters and authors of them to others. For
you are not to feel like castaways. "Having raised up": again, the Resurrection.
"In turning away," he says, "every one of you from his iniquities." In this way He
blesses you: not in a general way. And what kind of blessing is this? A great one.
For of course not the turning a man away from his iniquities is itself sufficient to
remit them also. And if it is not sufficient to remit, how should it be to confer a
blessing? For it is not to be supposed that the transgressor becomes immediately
also blessed; he is simply released from his sins. But this, "Like unto me," would
no wise apply. "Hear ye Him," he says; and not this alone, but he adds, "And it
shall come to pass, that every soul, which will not hear that Prophet, shall be
destroyed from among the people." When he has shown them that they had
sinned, and has imparted forgiveness to them, and promised good things, then
indeed, then he says, "Moses also says the same thing." What sort of connection
is this: "Until the times of the restitution;" and then to introduce Moses, saying,
that all that Christ said shall come to pass? Then also, on the other hand, he says,
as matter of encomium (so that for this reason also ye ought to obey): "You are