thing is that? "He who takes forth the precious from the vile," says He, "shall be
as my mouth." [Jeremiah 15:19] What can be equal to this in point of honour or
security? What kind of excuse or pardon can be left to those, who after so great a
promise neglect their neighbour's safety? Now if you see a blind man falling into
a pit, you stretch forth a hand, and think it a disgraceful thing to overlook one
who is about to perish? But daily beholding all your brethren precipitated into
the wicked custom of oaths, do you not dare even to utter a word? You have
spoken once, perhaps, and he has not heard. Speak therefore twice, and thrice,
and as often as it may be, till you have persuaded him. Every day God is
addressing us, and we do not hear; and yet He does not leave off speaking. Do
thou, therefore, imitate this tender care towards your neighbour. For this reason
it is that we are placed with one another; that we inhabit cities, and that we meet
together in churches, in order that we may bear one another's burdens, that we
may correct one another's sins. And in the same manner as persons inhabiting the
same shop, carry on a separate traffic, yet put all afterwards into the common
fund, so also let us act. Whatever advantages each man is able to confer upon his
neighbour, let him not grudge, nor shrink from doing it, but let there be some
such kind of spiritual commerce, and reciprocity; in order that having deposited
every thing in the common store, and obtained great riches, and procured a large
treasure, we may be all together partakers of the kingdom of heaven; through the
grace and loving-kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, by Whom and with Whom,
to the Father, with the Holy Ghost, be glory, both now and ever, and world
without end. Amen.

## Homily 17 on the Statues
Of the Commissioners (Hellebichus Commander of the Troops, and
Cæsarius Master of the Offices ) sent by the Emperor Theodosius for the
inquisition of the offenders, on account of the overturning of the Statues.
1. Most opportunely have we all this day sung together, "Blessed be the
Lord God of Israel, who only does wondrous things." For marvellous, and
beyond all expectation, are the things which have happened? A whole city, and
so great a population, when just about to be overwhelmed— to sink under the
waves, and to be utterly and instantly destroyed— He has entirely rescued from
shipwreck in a single moment of time! Let us give thanks then, not only that God
has calmed the tempest, but that He suffered it to take place; not only that He
rescued us from shipwreck, but that He allowed us to fall into such distress; and
such an extreme peril to hang over us. Thus also Paul bids us "in every thing give
thanks." [1 Thessalonians 5:18] But when he says, "In every thing give thanks,"
he means not only in our deliverance from evils, but also at the time when we
suffer those evils. "For all things work together for good to them that love God."
[Romans 8:28] Let us be thankful to Him for this deliverance from trials; and let
us never forget them. Let us devote ourselves to prayer, to continual
supplications, and to much piety.
2. When the sad conflagration of these calamities was first kindled, I said,
that it was a season not for doctrine, but for prayer. The very same thing I now
repeat, when the fire has been extinguished— that it is now especially, and more
than before, a time for prayer; that now is the season especially for tears and
compunction, for an anxious soul, for much diligence, and for much caution. For
at that time the very nature of our tribulation restrained us, however unwillingly,
and disposed us to sobriety; and led us to become more religious; but now when
the bridle is removed, and the cloud has passed away, there is fear lest we should