FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.65, C.3.

which is the effect of charity, than that he be well disposed in
respect of other ends, which is the effect of moral virtue: just as in
speculative matters right reason has greatest need of the first
indemonstrable principle, that "contradictories cannot both be true
at the same time." It is therefore evident that neither can infused
prudence be without charity; nor, consequently, the other moral
virtues, since they cannot be without prudence.
It is therefore clear from what has been said that only the infused
virtues are perfect, and deserve to be called virtues simply: since
they direct man well to the ultimate end. But the other virtues, those,
namely, that are acquired, are virtues in a restricted sense, but not
simply: for they direct man well in respect of the last end in some
particular genus of action, but not in respect of the last end simply.
Hence a gloss of Augustine [Lib. Sentent. Prosperi cvi.] on the
words, "All that is not of faith is sin" (Rm. 14:23), says: "He that fails
to acknowledge the truth, has no true virtue, even if his conduct be
good."
Reply to Objection 1: Virtue, in the words quoted, denotes imperfect
virtue. Else if we take moral virtue in its perfect state, "it makes its
possessor good," and consequently cannot be in the wicked.
Reply to Objection 2: This argument holds good of virtue in the
sense of acquired virtue.
Reply to Objection 3: Though charity surpasses science and
prudence, yet prudence depends on charity, as stated: and
consequently so do all the infused moral virtues.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.65, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether charity can be without moral virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem possible to have charity without the
moral virtues. For when one thing suffices for a certain purpose, it is
superfluous to employ others. Now charity alone suffices for the
fulfilment of all the works of virtue, as is clear from 1 Cor. 13:4,
seqq.: "Charity is patient, is kind," etc. Therefore it seems that if one
has charity, other virtues are superfluous.
Objection 2: Further, he that has a habit of virtue easily performs the
works of that virtue, and those works are pleasing to him for their
own sake: hence "pleasure taken in a work is a sign of habit" (Ethic.
ii, 3). Now many have charity, being free from mortal sin, and yet
they find it difficult to do works of virtue; nor are these works
pleasing to them for their own sake, but only for the sake of charity.
Therefore many have charity without the other virtues.
Objection 3: Further, charity is to be found in every saint: and yet
there are some saints who are without certain virtues. For Bede says
(on Lk. 17:10) that the saints are more humbled on account of their
not having certain virtues, than rejoiced at the virtues they have.
Therefore, if a man has charity, it does not follow of necessity that he
has all the moral virtues.
On the contrary, The whole Law is fulfilled through charity, for it is
written (Rm. 13:8): "He that loveth his neighbor, hath fulfilled the
Law." Now it is not possible to fulfil the whole Law, without having
all the moral virtues: since the law contains precepts about all acts
of virtue, as stated in Ethic. v, 1,2. Therefore he that has charity, has
all the moral virtues. Moreover, Augustine says in a letter (Epis.
clxvii) [Serm. xxxix and xlvi de Temp.] that charity contains all the
cardinal virtues.
I answer that, All the moral virtues are infused together with charity.
The reason for this is that God operates no less perfectly in works of
grace than in works of nature. Now, in the works of nature, we find
that whenever a thing contains a principle of certain works, it has
also whatever is necessary for their execution: thus animals are
provided with organs whereby to perform the actions that their souls
empower them to do. Now it is evident that charity, inasmuch as it
directs man to his last end, is the principle of all the good works that