## CHAPTER XCVI--That Intelligences subsisting apart do not gather their Knowledge
from Objects of Sense
A HIGHER power must have a higher object. But the intellectual power of a separately
subsisting intelligence is higher than the intellectual power of the human soul, the latter
being lowest in the order of intelligences (Chap.LXXVII). Now the object of the
intelligence of the human soul is a phantasm (Chap.LX), which is higher in the
order of objects than the sensible thing existing outside and apart from the soul.
The object therefore of a separately subsisting intelligence cannot be an objective
reality (res) existing outside the soul, as though it could get knowledge immediately from
that; nor can it be a phantasm: it must then be something higher than a phantasm. But
nothing is higher than a phantasm in the order of knowable objects except that which is
an actual term of intelligence. Intelligences subsisting apart therefore do not gather their
intellectual knowledge from objects of sense, but understand objects which are of
themselves terms of intelligence.
3. According to the order of intelligences is the order of terms of intelligence. But objects
that are of themselves terms of intelligence are higher in order than objects that are
terms of intelligence only because we make them so. Of this latter sort are all terms of
intelligence borrowed from sensible things: for sensible things are not of themselves
intelligible: yet these sensible things are the sort of intelligible things that our intellect
understands. A separately subsisting intelligence therefore, being superior to our
intelligence, does not understand the intellectual aspects of things by gathering them
from objects of sense: it seizes upon those aspects as they are in themselves.
4. The manner of activity proper to a thing corresponds to the manner and nature of its
substance. But an intelligence subsisting apart is by itself, away from any body.
Therefore its intellectual activity will be conversant with objects not based upon anything
corporeal.
From these considerations it appears that in intelligences subsisting apart there is no
such thing as active and potential intellect, except perchance by an improper use of
those terms. The reason why potential and active intellect are found in our intelligent
soul is because it has to gather intellectual knowledge from sensible things: for the
active intellect it is that turns the impressions, gathered from sensible things, into terms
of intellect: while the potential intellect is in potentiality to the knowledge of all forms of
sensible things. Since then separately subsisting intellects do not gather their
knowledge from sensible things, there is in them no active and potential intellect.
Nor again can distance in place hinder the knowledge of a disembodied soul (animae
separatae). Distance in place ordinarily affects sense, not intellect, except incidentally,
where intellect has to gather its data from sense. For while there is a definite law of
distance according to which sensible objects affect sense, terms of intellect, as they
impress the intellect, are not in place, but are separate from bodily matter. Since then
separately subsistent intelligences do not gather their intellectual knowledge from
sensible things, distance in place has no effect upon their knowledge.