much honor, he suffered all that he did suffer. And what seemed hardest to bear
in the case of the apostles, this same he also underwent, being hated of friends,
of servants, of enemies, of them who had received kindness of him: and the
sacred anchor, the harbor without waves, namely, that which was said to the
apostles, "for my sake," of this he had no sight.
I admire again the three children, for that they dared the furnace, that they
stood up against a tyrant. But hear what they say, "We serve not your Gods, nor
worship the image which you have set up." [Daniel 3:18] A thing which was the
greatest encouragement to them, to know of a certainty that for God they are
suffering all whatsoever they suffer. But this man knew not that it was all
conflicts, and a wrestling; for had he known it, he would not have felt what was
happening. At any rate, when he heard, "Do you think that I have uttered to you
mine oracles for nought, or that you might be proved righteous?" consider how
straightway, at a bare word, he breathed again, how he made himself of no
account, how he accounted himself not so much as to have suffered what he had
suffered, thus saying, "Why do I plead any more, being admonished and
reproved of the Lord, hearing such things, I being nothing?" And again, "I have
heard of You before, as far as hearing of the ear; but now my eye has seen You;
wherefore I have made myself vile, and have melted away; and I accounted
myself earth and ashes."
This fortitude then, this moderation, of him that was before law and grace,
let us also emulate, who are after law and grace; that we may also be able to
share with him the eternal tabernacles; unto which may we all attain, by the
grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be the glory and
the victory forever and ever. Amen.

## Homily 34 on Matthew

Matt. X. 23.
"But when they persecute you in this city, flee ye into the other; for verily I
say unto you, you shall not have gone over the cities of Israel, till the Son of Man
be come."
Having spoken of those fearful and horrible things, enough to melt very
adamant, which after His cross, and resurrection, and assumption, were to befall
them, He directs again His discourse to what was of more tranquil character,
allowing those whom He is training to recover breath, and affording them full
security. For He did not at all command them, when persecuted, to close with the
enemy, but to fly. That is, it being so far but a beginning, and a prelude, He gave
His discourse a very condescending turn. For not now of the ensuing
persecutions is He speaking, but of those before the cross and the passion. And
this He showed by saying, "You shall not have gone over the cities of Israel, till
the Son of Man be come." That is, lest they should say, "What then, if when
persecuted we flee, and there again they overtake us, and drive us out?"— to
destroy this fear, He says, "You shall not have gone round Palestine first, but I
will straightway come upon you."
And see how here again He does not away with the terrors, but stands by
them in their perils. For He said not, "I will snatch you out, and will put an end
to the persecutions;" but what? "You shall not have gone over the cities of Israel,
till the Son of Man be come." Yea, for it sufficed for their consolation, simply to
see Him.
But do thou observe, I pray you, how He does not on every occasion leave
all to grace, but requires something also to be contributed on their part. "For if
you fear," says He, "flee," for this He signified by saying, "flee ye," and "fear
not." [Matthew 10:26] And He did not command them to flee at first, but when