will question, and say, "if to depart and to be with Christ is far better," how says
he that he has obtained mercy? I would ask why the same Apostle says, that "it is
more needful to abide with you"? For as it was needful for him, so too for this
man, who would hereafter depart to God with more exceeding riches, and greater
boldness. Hereafter that would take place, even if it did not now, but the winning
souls is at an end for those who have once departed there. In many places too,
Paul speaks according to the common habits of his hearers, and not every where
in accordance with his own heavenly wisdom: for he had to speak to men of the
world who still feared death. Then he shows how he esteemed Epaphroditus, and
thence he gets for him respect, by saying, that his preservation was so useful to
himself, that the mercy which had been shown to Epaphroditus reached him also.
Moreover, without this the present life is a good; were it not so, why does Paul
rank with punishment untimely deaths? As when he says, "For this cause many
are weak and sickly among you, and not a few sleep" [1 Corinthians 11:30]; for
the future life is not (merely) better than an evil state, since (then) it were not
good, but better than a good state.
"Lest I should have," he says, "sorrow upon sorrow"; sorrow from his death
in addition to that which sprung from his sickness. By this he shows how much
he prized Epaphroditus.
Ver. 28. "I have sent him therefore the more diligently." What means "more
diligently"? It is, without procrastination, without delay, with much speed,
having bidden him lay all aside, and to go to you, that he might be freed from
heaviness; for we rejoice not on hearing of the health of those we love, so much
as when we see them, and chiefly so when this happens contrary to hope, as it
was in the case of Epaphroditus.
"I have sent him therefore the more diligently, that when you see him again,
you may rejoice, and that I may be the less sorrowful." How "less sorrowful"?
Because if you rejoice, I too rejoice, and he too joys at a pleasure of such sort,
and I shall be "less sorrowful." He said not sorrowless, but "less sorrowful," to
show that his soul never was free from sorrow: for he who said, "Who is weak,

and I am not weak? Who is made to stumble, and I burn not?" [2 Corinthians
11:29], when could such an one be free from sorrow? That is, this despondency I
now cast off.
Ver. 29. "Receive him therefore in the Lord with all joy."
"In the Lord" either means spiritually and with much zeal, or rather "in the
Lord" means God willing. Receive him in a manner worthy of saints, as saints
should be received with all joy.
All this he does for their sakes, not for that of his messengers, for greater
gain has the doer than the receiver of a good deed. "And such hold in honor," that
is, receive him in a manner worthy of saints.
Ver. 30. "Because for the work of Christ he came near unto death,
hazarding his life, to supply that which was lacking in your service towards me."
This man had been publicly sent by the city of the Philippians, who had
come as minister to Paul, and perchance bringing him some contribution, for
toward the end of the Epistle he shows that he also brought him money, when he
says, "Having received of Epaphroditus the things that came from you."
[Philippians 4:18]
It is probable then, that on his arrival at the city of Rome, he found Paul in
great and urgent peril, so that those who were accustomed to resort to him were
unable safely to do so, but were themselves in peril by their very attendance;
which is wont to happen chiefly in very great dangers, and the exceeding wrath
of kings, (for when any one has offended the king, and is cast into prison, and is
strictly guarded, then even his servants are debarred from access, which
probably then befell Paul,) and that Epaphroditus, being of a noble nature,
despised all danger, that he might go in unto him, and minister unto him, and do
everything which need required. He therefore sets forth two facts, by which he
gains for him their respect; the one, that he was in jeopardy well near unto death,
he says, for my sake; the other, that in so suffering he was representing their city,
so that the recompense for that his peril would be accounted to those who sent
him, as if the city had sent him as their ambassador, so that a kind reception of