([δοκῶ]) to have the Spirit of God," thereby not denying the fact, but stating it
modestly. And here the phrase implies his own assent to the common opinion.
Ver. 3. "But not even Titus, who was with me, being a Greek, was compelled
to be circumcised."
What means, "being a Greek?" Of Greek extraction, and not circumcised;
for not only did I so preach but Titus so acted, nor did the Apostles compel him
to be circumcised. A plain proof this that the Apostles did not condemn Paul's
doctrine or his practice. Nay more, even the urgent representations of the adverse
party, who were aware of these facts, did not oblige the Apostles to enjoin
circumcision, as appears by his own words—
Ver. 4. "And that because of the false brethren, privily brought in."
Here arises a very important question, Who were these false brethren? If the
Apostles permitted circumcision at Jerusalem, why are those who enjoined it, in
accordance with the Apostolic sentence, to be called false brethren? First;
because there is a difference between commanding an act to be done, and
allowing it after it is done. He who enjoins an act, does it with zeal as necessary,
and of primary importance; but he who, without himself commanding it, allows
another to do it who wishes yields not from a sense of its being necessary but in
order to subserve some purpose. We have a similar instance, in Paul's Epistle to
the Corinthians, in his command to husbands and wives to come together again.
To which, that he might not be thought to be legislating for them, he subjoins,
"But this I say by way of permission, not of commandment." [1 Corinthians 7:5]
For this was not a judgment authoritatively given but an indulgence to their
incontinence; as he says, "for your incontinency." Would you know Paul's
sentence in this matter? Hear his words, "I would that all men were even as I
myself," [1 Corinthians 7:7] in continence. And so here, the Apostles made this
concession, not as vindicating the law, but as condescending to the infirmities of
Judaism. Had they been vindicating the law, they would not have preached to the
Jews in one way, and to the Gentiles in another. Had the observance been
necessary for unbelievers, then indeed it would plainly have likewise been

necessary for all the faithful. But by their decision not to harass the Gentiles on
this point, they showed that they permitted it by way of condescension to the
Jews. Whereas the purpose of the false brethren was to cast them out of grace,
and reduce them under the yoke of slavery again. This is the first difference, and
a very wide one. The second is, that the Apostles so acted in Judæa, where the
Law was in force, but the false brethren, every where, for all the Galatians were
influenced by them. Whence it appears that their intention was, not to build up,
but entirely to pull down the Gospel, and that the thing was permitted by the
Apostles on one ground and zealously practiced by the false brethren on another.
Ver. 4. "Who came in privily to spy out our liberty, which we have in Christ
Jesus, that they might bring us into bondage."
He points out their hostility by calling them spies; for the sole object of a
spy is to obtain for himself facilities of devastation and destruction, by becoming
acquainted with his adversary's position. And this is what those did, who wished
to bring the disciples back to their old servitude. Hence too appears how very
contrary their purpose was to that of the Apostles; the latter made concessions
that they might gradually extricate them from their servitude, but the former
plotted to subject them to one more severe. Therefore they looked round and
observed accurately and made themselves busybodies to find out who were
uncircumcised; as Paul says, "they came in privily to spy out our liberty," thus
pointing out their machinations not only by the term "spies," but by this
expression of a furtive entrance and creeping in.
Ver. 5. "To whom we gave place in the way of subjection, no, not for an
hour."
Observe the force and emphasis of the phrase; he says not, "by argument,"
but, "by subjection," for their object was not to teach good doctrine, but to
subjugate and enslave them. Wherefore, says he, we yielded to the Apostles, but
not to these.
Ver. 5. "That the truth of the Gospel might continue with you."
That we may confirm, says he, by our deeds what we have already declared