heart, to have brought him to confess himself overcome ([ὅ] [τι ἐ&
128confession that he has done wrong. Observe him, what a miscreant he is;
when he was convicted, then he believed: when again he was convicted, then he
became humble. "Seeing his miracles," ["he was amazed," and came over.] He
thought to be able to escape detection: he thought the thing was an art: but when
he had not power to defeat (ἑ] [λεἵν]) the Apostles, * * *. (b) Again, he fears the
multitude, and is afraid to deny it; and yet he might have said, I did not know: I
did it in simplicity: but he was struck with dismay first by the former
circumstance, that he was overcome ([ὅ] τι ἐ& 128wayoff, to Rome, thinking the
Apostle would not soon come there.
And they, when they had testified, and preached the word of the Lord,
returned to Jerusalem. [Acts 8:25] "Testified," probably because of him (Simon),
that they may not be deceived; that thenceforth they may be safe. "Having
preached," it says, "the word of the Lord, they returned to Jerusalem." Why do
they go there again where was the tyranny of the bad, where were those most
bent upon killing them? Just as generals do in wars, they occupy that part of the
scene of war which is most distressed. "And preached the Gospel in many
villages of the Samaritans." Observe them again, how they do not
([προηγουμένως]) of set purpose come to Samaria, but driven by stress of
persecution, just as it was in the case of Christ; and how when the Apostles go
there, it is to men now believers, no longer Samaritans. "But when the Apostles,"
it says, "which were at Jerusalem heard this, they sent unto them Peter and John.
Sent" them, again, to rid them of magic. And besides, (the Lord) had given them
a pattern at the time when the Samaritans believed. "And in many villages," it
says, "of the Samaritans, they preached the Gospel." [John 4:39] Observe how
actively employed even their journeys were, how they do nothing without a
purpose.
Such travels should we also make. And why do I speak of travels? Many
possess villages and lands, and give themselves no concern, nor make any
account of this. That baths may be provided, their revenues increased, courts and

buildings erected, for this they take plenty of pains: but for the husbandry of
souls, not so. When you see thorns— answer me— you cut them up, you burn,
you utterly destroy them, to rid your land of the hurt thence arising. And do you
see the laborers themselves overrun with thorns, and dost not cut them up, and
are you not afraid of the Owner Who shall call you to account? For ought not
each individual believer to build a Church, to get a Teacher, to cooperate
([συναίconvert (πεῖσαι]) him. By the means which are in your power, convert
him; by kindness, by good offices, by gentleness, by courting (κολακεί&
139Churches: nay, sooner everything than this! Wherefore I beseech and
implore, as a favor I entreat, yea as a law I lay it down, that there be no estate to
be seen destitute of a Church. Tell not me, There is one hard by; there is one in
the neighboring properties; the expense is great, the income not great. If you
have anything to expend upon the poor, expend it there: better there than here.
Maintain a Teacher, maintain a Deacon, and a sacerdotal body complete. As by a
bride, whether a wife whom you take, or a daughter whom you give in marriage,
so act by the Church: give her a dowry. So shall your estate be filled with
blessing. For what shall not be there of all that is good? Is it a small thing, tell
me, that your wine-press should be blessed; a small thing, tell me, that of your
fruits God is the first to taste, and that the first fruits are there (with Him)? And
then even for the peace of the laboring people this is profitable. Then as one
whom they must respect, there will be the presbyter among them and this will
contribute to the security of the estate. There will be constant prayers there
through you (infra, note 1, p. 119) hymns and Communions through you; the
Oblation on each Lord's Day. For only consider what a praise it will be, that,
whereas others have built splendid tombs, to have it said hereafter: "Such a one
built this," you have reared Churches! Bethink you that even until the coming of
Christ you shall have your reward, who hast reared up the altars of God.
Suppose an Emperor had ordered you to build an house that he might lodge
there, would you not have done everything to please him? And here now it is
palace of Christ, the Church, the Church which you build. Look not at the cost,