Moreover, matter is not divisible except by quantity. Therefore the Philosopher says in I Physic.,
that if quantity were removed, a substance would remain indivisible: hence matter is made to be
this matter and is signate inasmuch as it exists under dimensions. Dimensions, however, can be
considered in two ways.

1. In one way according to their termination, and I say that they are terminated according to
limited measure and figure; and so, as complete beings, dimensions are classed in the genus of
quantity, and thus they cannot be the principle of individuation: because such termination of
dimensions may frequently vary in regard to the same individual, and in such case it would
follow that the individual would not remain numerically the same.

2. In another way, dimensions may be considered without this certain determination, merely in
the nature of dimension, although they never could exist without some kind of determination; just
as the nature of color cannot exist without determination to white or black; and according to this
aspect dimensions are classed in the genus of quantity as imperfect. And by these indeterminate
dimensions matter is made to be this signate matter, and thus gives individuality to a form, and
thus also by matter there is caused the numerical diversity of things in the same species.

Therefore it is evident that matter, according as it is considered in itself, is not the principle of
diversity, either according to species or according to number; but as it is the principle of generic
diversity inasmuch as it is considered the subject of a common form, so it is the principle of
numerical diversity inasmuch as it is considered as subject to indeterminate dimensions.
Therefore also, since these dimensions are in the genus of accidents, diversity according to
number is reduced to diversity of matter, or to accidental diversity, according to the nature of the
aforesaid dimensions. Other accidents, however, are not principles of individuation, but they are
the principle of knowing the individual to be distinct. In this way individuation is also attributed

to other accidents.

#### Answers to objections

1. It may be said: When the Philosopher says that those things are numerically one in which the
matter is one, this must be understood of signate matter which is the subject of dimensions;
otherwise it would be necessary to say that all generable and corruptible things are numerically
one, since their matter is one.

2. It may be answered: Since dimensions are accidents, they cannot per se be the principle of the
unity of an individual substance; but matter, inasmuch as it underlies such and such dimensions,
is understood to be the principle of this unity and of this multitude.

3. It may be said: It is according to the nature of an individual thing that it be undivided in itself,
and divided from other things by an ultimate division. No accident, however, has in itself the
proper nature of division, unless it is quantity; therefore dimensions of themselves have a certain
nature of individuation according to a determined place, inasmuch as place is a difference of
quantity. Thus there is a twofold meaning of individuation: the one on the part of a subject, and
this is the same for any accident; the other meaning, on the part of individuation itself, inasmuch
as it has place, by reason of which, in abstracting from sensible matter, we may imagine this line
and this circle. Hence it rightly pertains to matter to individuate all other forms, because it gives
to this form, which of itself has the nature of individuation, that it also be terminated by those
dimensions that are found in a subject now made complete; accordingly they are individuated by
matter which is individuated by indeterminate dimensions conceived of as in matter.