"But when the fullness of the time was come, God sent forth His Son,
made of a woman, made under the law, to redeem them that were under
the law." "He sent," he says, "His Son, made of a woman." And by this
term, woman,9 what Catholic does not know that he did not wish to
signify the privation of virginity; but, according to a Hebraism, the
difference of sex? When, therefore, he says, "God sent His Son, made of a
woman," he sufficiently shows that the Son was "sent" in this very way, in
that He was "made of a woman." Therefore, in that He was born of God,
He was in the world; but in that He was born of Mary, He was sent and
came into the world. Moreover, He could not be sent by the Father
without the Holy Spirit, not only because the Father, when He sent Him,
that is, when He made Him of a woman, is certainly understood not to
have so made Him without His own Spirit; but also because it is most
plainly and expressly said in the Gospel in answer to the Virgin Mary,
when she asked of the angel, "How shall this be?" "The Holy Ghost shall
come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee."
And Matthew says, "She was found with child of the Holy Ghost."
Although, too, in the prophet Isaiah, Christ Himself is understood to say
of His own future advent, "And now the Lord God and His Spirit hath
sent me.". Perhaps some one may wish to drive us to say, that the Son is sent also
by Himself, because the conception and childbirth of Mary is the working
of the Trinity, by whose act of creating all things are created. And how, he
will go on to say, has the Father sent Him, if He sent Himself? To whom I
answer first, by asking him to tell me, if he can, in what manner the
Father hath sanctified Him, if He hath sanctified Himself? For the same
Lord says both; "Say ye of Him," He says, "whom the Father hath
sanctified and sent into the world, Thou blasphemest, because I said, I
am the Son of God;" while in another place He says, "And for their sake I
sanctify myself." I ask, also, in what manner the Father delivered Him, if
He delivered Himself? For the Apostle Paul says both: "Who," he says,
"spared not His own Son, but delivered Him up for us all;" while
elsewhere he says of the Saviour Himself, "Who loved me, and delivered
Himself for me." He will reply, I suppose, if he has a right sense in these
things, Because the will of the Father and the Son is one, and their
working indivisible. In like manner, then, let him understand the

incarnation and nativity of the Virgin, wherein the Son is understood as
sent, to have been wrought by one and the same operation of the Father
and of the Son indivisibly; the Holy Spirit certainly not being thence
excluded, of whom it is expressly said, "She was found with child by the
Holy Ghost." For perhaps our meaning will be more plainly unfolded, if
we ask in what manner God sent His Son. He commanded that He should
come, and He, complying with the commandment, came. Did He then
request, or did He only suggest? But whichever of these it was, certainly it
was done by a word, and the Word of God is the Son of God Himself.
Wherefore, since the Father sent Him by a word, His being sent was the
work of both the Father and His Word; therefore the same Son was sent
by the Father and the Son, because the Son Himself is the Word of the
Father. For who would embrace so impious an opinion as to think the
Father to have uttered a word in time, in order that the eternal Son might
thereby be sent and might appear in the flesh in the fullness of time? But
assuredly it was in that Word of God itself which was in the beginning
with God and was God, namely, in the wisdom itself of God, apart from
time, at what time that wisdom must needs appear in the flesh.
Therefore, since without any commencement of time, the Word was in
the beginning, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God, it was
in the Word itself without any time, at what time the Word was to be
made flesh and dwell among us. And when this fullness of time had come,
"God sent His Son, made of a woman," that is, made in time, that the
Incarnate Word might appear to men; while it was in that Word Himself,
apart from time, at what time this was to be done; for the order of times is
in the eternal wisdom of God without time. Since, then, that the Son
should appear in the flesh was wrought by both the Father and the Son, it
is fitly said that He who appeared in that flesh was sent, and that He who
did not appear in it, sent Him; because those things which are transacted
outwardly before the bodily eyes have their existence from the inward
structure (apparatu) of the spiritual nature, and on that account are fitly
said to be sent. Further, that form of man which He took is the person of
the Son, not also of the Father; on which account the invisible Father,
together with the Son, who with the Father is invisible, is said to have
sent the same Son by making Him visible. But if He became visible in
such way as to cease to be invisible with the Father, that is, if the
substance of the invisible Word were turned by a change and transition