6. There are Christians whose lives seem like Lent without Easter. I realize of course that joy is not
expressed the same way at all times in life, especially at moments of great difficulty. Joy adapts
and changes, but it always endures, even as a flicker of light born of our personal certainty that,
when everything is said and done, we are infinitely loved. I understand the grief of people who
have to endure great suffering, yet slowly but surely we all have to let the joy of faith slowly revive
as a quiet yet firm trust, even amid the greatest distress: “My soul is bereft of peace; I have
forgotten what happiness is… But this I call to mind, and therefore I have hope: the steadfast love
of the Lord never ceases, his mercies never come to an end; they are new every morning. Great is
your faithfulness… It is good that one should wait quietly for the salvation of the Lord” (Lam 3:17,
21-23, 26).

7. Sometimes we are tempted to find excuses and complain, acting as if we could only be happy if
a thousand conditions were met. To some extent this is because our “technological society has
succeeded in multiplying occasions of pleasure, yet has found it very difficult to engender joy”. I

can say that the most beautiful and natural expressions of joy which I have seen in my life were in
poor people who had little to hold on to. I also think of the real joy shown by others who, even
amid pressing professional obligations, were able to preserve, in detachment and simplicity, a
heart full of faith. In their own way, all these instances of joy flow from the infinite love of God, who
has revealed himself to us in Jesus Christ. I never tire of repeating those words of Benedict XVI
which take us to the very heart of the Gospel: “Being a Christian is not the result of an ethical
choice or a lofty idea, but the encounter with an event, a person, which gives life a new horizon
and a decisive direction”.

8. Thanks solely to this encounter – or renewed encounter – with God’s love, which blossoms into
an enriching friendship, we are liberated from our narrowness and self-absorption. We become
fully human when we become more than human, when we let God bring us beyond ourselves in
order to attain the fullest truth of our being. Here we find the source and inspiration of all our
efforts at evangelization. For if we have received the love which restores meaning to our lives, how
can we fail to share that love with others?

### II. The delightful and comforting joy of evangelizing

9. Goodness always tends to spread. Every authentic experience of truth and goodness seeks by
its very nature to grow within us, and any person who has experienced a profound liberation
becomes more sensitive to the needs of others. As it expands, goodness takes root and develops.
If we wish to lead a dignified and fulfilling life, we have to reach out to others and seek their good.
In this regard, several sayings of Saint Paul will not surprise us: “The love of Christ urges us on” (2
Cor 5:14); “Woe to me if I do not proclaim the Gospel” (1 Cor 9:16).