SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.188, C.4.

Moreover it may be reasonably stated that also by entrance into
religion a man obtains remission of all his sins. For if by giving alms
a man may forthwith satisfy for his sins, according to Dan. 4:24,
"Redeem thou thy sins with alms," much more does it suffice to
satisfy for all his sins that a man devote himself wholly to the divine
service by entering religion, for this surpasses all manner of
satisfaction, even that of public penance, according to the Decretals
(XXXIII, qu. i, cap. Admonere) just as a holocaust exceeds a sacrifice,
as Gregory declares (Hom. xx in Ezech.). Hence we read in the Lives
of the Fathers (vi, 1) that by entering religion one receives the same
grace as by being baptized. And yet even if one were not thereby
absolved from all debt of punishment, nevertheless the entrance into
religion is more profitable than a pilgrimage to the Holy Land, as
regards the advancement in good, which is preferable to absolution
from punishment.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.188, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether he who has vowed to enter religion is

bound to remain in religion in perpetuity?
Objection 1: It would seem that he who has vowed to enter religion,
is bound in perpetuity to remain in religion. For it is better not to
enter religion than to leave after entering, according to 2 Pt. 2:21, "It
had been better for them not to have known the way of justice, than
after they have known it to turn back," and Lk. 9:62, "No man putting
his hand to the plough, and looking back, is fit for the kingdom of
God." But he who bound himself by the vow to enter religion, is
under the obligation to enter, as stated above (Article 3). Therefore
he is also bound to remain for always.
Objection 2: Further, everyone is bound to avoid that which gives
rise to scandal, and is a bad example to others. Now by leaving after
entering religion a man gives a bad example and is an occasion of
scandal to others, who are thereby withdrawn from entering or
incited to leave. Therefore it seems that he who enters religion in
order to fulfil a vow which he had previously taken, is bound to
remain evermore.
Objection 3: Further, the vow to enter religion is accounted a
perpetual vow: wherefore it is preferred to temporal vows, as stated
above (Article 3, ad 3; Question 88, Article 12, ad 1). But this would
not be so if a person after vowing to enter religion were to enter with
the intention of leaving. It seems, therefore, that he who vows to
enter religion is bound also to remain in perpetuity.
On the contrary, The vow of religious profession, for the reason that
it binds a man to remain in religion for evermore, has to be preceded
by a year of probation; whereas this is not required before the simple
vow whereby a man binds himself to enter religion. Therefore it
seems that he who vows to enter religion is not for that reason
bound to remain there in perpetuity.
I answer that, The obligation of a vow proceeds from the will:
because "to vow is an act of the will" according to Augustine [Gloss
of Peter Lombard on Ps. 75:12]. Consequently the obligation of a
vow extends as far as the will and intention of the person who takes
the vow. Accordingly if in vowing he intend to bind himself not only
to enter religion, but also to remain there evermore, he is bound to