FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.3, C.4.

because at the resurrection, "from the very happiness of the soul,"
as Augustine says (Ep. ad Dioscor.) "the body and the bodily senses
will receive a certain overflow, so as to be perfected in their
operations"; a point which will be explained further on when we treat
of the resurrection (SS, Questions 82-85). But then the operation
whereby man's mind is united to God will not depend on the senses.
Reply to Objection 1: This objection proves that the operation of the
senses is required antecedently for imperfect happiness, such as
can be had in this life.
Reply to Objection 2: Perfect happiness, such as the angels have,
includes the aggregate of all good things, by being united to the
universal source of all good; not that it requires each individual
good. But in this imperfect happiness, we need the aggregate of
those goods that suffice for the most perfect operation of this life.
Reply to Objection 3: In perfect happiness the entire man is
perfected, in the lower part of his nature, by an overflow from the
higher. But in the imperfect happiness of this life, it is otherwise; we
advance from the perfection of the lower part to the perfection of the
higher part.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.3, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether, if happiness is in the intellective part, it

is an operation of the intellect or of the will?
Objection 1: It would seem that happiness consists in an act of the
will. For Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xix, 10,11), that man's
happiness consists in peace; wherefore it is written (Ps. 147:3):
"Who hath placed peace in thy end". But peace pertains to the will.
Therefore man's happiness is in the will.
Objection 2: Further, happiness is the supreme good. But good is
the object of the will. Therefore happiness consists in an operation
of the will.
Objection 3: Further, the last end corresponds to the first mover:
thus the last end of the whole army is victory, which is the end of the
general, who moves all the men. But the first mover in regard to
operations is the will: because it moves the other powers, as we
shall state further on (Question 9, Articles 1,3). Therefore happiness
regards the will.
Objection 4: Further, if happiness be an operation, it must needs be
man's most excellent operation. But the love of God, which is an act
of the will, is a more excellent operation than knowledge, which is an
operation of the intellect, as the Apostle declares (1 Cor. 13).
Therefore it seems that happiness consists in an act of the will.
Objection 5: Further, Augustine says (De Trin. xiii, 5) that "happy is
he who has whatever he desires, and desires nothing amiss." And a
little further on (6) he adds: "He is most happy who desires well,
whatever he desires: for good things make a man happy, and such a
man already possesses some good---i.e. a good will." Therefore
happiness consists in an act of the will.
On the contrary, Our Lord said (Jn. 17:3): "This is eternal life: that
they may know Thee, the only true God." Now eternal life is the last
end, as stated above (Article 2, ad 1). Therefore man's happiness
consists in the knowledge of God, which is an act of the intellect.
I answer that, As stated above (Question 2, Article 6) two things are
needed for happiness: one, which is the essence of happiness: the
other, that is, as it were, its proper accident, i.e. the delight