be from fear of present punishment, but out of desire towards Himself, that both
our being habitually virtuous, and all our single good deeds are to come. Neither
does he promise a land flowing with milk and honey, but makes us joint-heir
with the Only-Begotten, so making us by every means stand aloof from things
present, and promising to give such things especially as are worth the acceptance
of men made sons of God, nothing, that is, of a sensible kind or corporeal, but
spiritual all of them. And so they, even if they had the name of sons, were but as
slaves; but we as having been made free, have received the adoption, and are
waiting for Heaven. And with them He discoursed through the intervention of
others, with us by Himself. And all that they did was through the impulse of fear,
but the spiritual act through a coveting and a vehement desire. And this they
show by the fact of their overstepping the commandments. They, as hirelings and
obstinate persons, so never left murmuring: but these do all for the pleasing of
the Father. So too they blasphemed when they had benefits done them: but we
are thankful at being jeoparded. And if there be need of punishing both of us
upon our sinning, even in this case the difference is great. For it is not on being
stoned and branded and maimed by the priests, as they were, that we are brought
round. But it is enough for us to be cast out from our Father's table, and to be out
of sight for certain days. And with the Jews the honor of adoption was one of
name only, but here the reality followed also, the cleansing of Baptism, the
giving of the Spirit, the furnishing of the other blessings. And there are several
other points besides, which go to show our high birth and their low condition.
After intimating all these then by speaking of the Spirit, and fear, and the
adoption, he gives a fresh proof again of having the Spirit of adoption. Now
what is this? That "we cry, Abba, Father." And how great this is, the initiated
know (St. Cyr. Jer. Cat. 23, §11, p. 276, O.T.), being with good reason bidden to
use this word first in the Prayer of the initiated. What then, it may be said, did
not they also call God Father? Do you not hear Moses, when he says, "You
deserted the God that begot you?" [Deuteronomy 32:15, Septuagint] Do you not
hear Malachi reproaching them, and saying, that "one God formed you," and

there is "one Father of you all?" [Malachi 2:10, Septuagint] Still, if these words
and others besides are used, we do not find them anywhere calling God by the
name, or praying in this language. But we all, priests and laymen, rulers and
ruled, are ordered to pray herein. And this is the first language we give utterance
to, after those marvellous throes, and that strange and unusual mode of labor. If
in any other instances they so called Him, that was only of their own mind. But
those in the state of grace do it through being moved by the in-working of the
Spirit. For as there is a Spirit of Wisdom, after which they that were unwise
became wise, and this discloses itself in their teaching: and a Spirit of Power
there is, whereby the feeble raised up the dead, and drove out devils; a Spirit also
of the gift of healing, and a Spirit of prophecy, and a Spirit of tongues, so also a
Spirit of adoption. And as we know the Spirit of prophecy, in that he who has it
foretells things to come, not speaking of his own mind, but moved by the Grace;
so too is the Spirit of adoption, whereby he that is gifted with it calls God,
Father, as moved by the Spirit. Wishing to express this as a most true descent, he
used also the Hebrew tongue, for he does not say only, "Father," but "Abba,
Father," which name is a special sign of true-born children to their fathers. After
mentioning then the diversity resulting from their conversation, that resulting
from the grace which had been given, and that from their freedom, he brings
forward another demonstration of the superiority which goes with this adoption.
Now of what kind is this?
Ver. 16. "The Spirit Itself bears witness with our spirit, that we are the
children of God."
For it is not from the language merely, he says, that I make my assertion,
but from the cause out of which the language has its birth; since it is from the
Spirit suggesting it that we so speak. And this in another passage he has put into
plainer words, thus: "God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into our hearts,
crying, Abba Father." [Galatians 4:6] And what is that, "Spirit bears witness
with spirit?" The Comforter, he means, with that Gift, which is given unto us.
For it is not of the Gift alone that it is the voice, but of the Comforter also who