rather then, because of stillness. Mark how he both made a long discourse, and
beyond the time of supper itself. But the Devil disturbed the feast— not that he
prevailed, however— by plunging the hearer in sleep, and causing him to fall
down. "And," it says, "there were many lights in the upper chamber, where they
were gathered together. And there sat in a window a certain young man named
Eutychus, being fallen into a deep sleep: and as Paul was long preaching, he
sunk down with sleep, and fell down from the third loft, and was taken up dead.
And Paul went down, and fell on him, and embracing him, said, Trouble not
yourselves; for his life is in him. When he therefore had come up again, and had
broken bread, and eaten, and talked a long while, even till break of day, so he
departed. And they brought the young man alive, and were not a little
comforted." [Acts 20:8-12] But observe, I pray you, the theatre, how crowded it
was: and the miracle, what it was. "He was sitting in a window," at dead of night.
Such was their eagerness to hear him! Let us take shame to ourselves! "Aye, but
a Paul" say you, "was discoursing then." Yes, and Paul discourses now, or rather
not Paul, either then or now, but Christ, and yet none cares to hear. No window
in the case now, no importunity of hunger, or sleep, and yet we do not care to
hear: no crowding in a narrow space here, nor any other such comfort. And the
wonderful circumstance is, that though he was a youth, he was not listless and
indifferent; and though (he felt himself) weighed down by sleep, he did not go
away, nor yet fear the danger of falling down. It was not from listlessness that he
slumbered, but from necessity of nature. But observe, I beseech you, so fervent
was their zeal, that they even assembled in a third loft: for they had not a Church
yet. "Trouble not yourselves," he says. He said not, "He shall come to life again,
for I will raise him up:" but mark the unassuming way in which he comforts
them: "for his life," says he, "is in him. When he had come up again, and had
broken bread, and eaten." This thing cut short the discourse; it did no harm,
however. "When he had eaten," it says, "and discoursed a long while, even till
break of day, so he departed." Do you mark the frugality of the supper? Do you
observe how they passed the whole night? Such were their meals, that the

hearers came away sober, and fit for hearing. But we, in what do we differ from
dogs? Do you mark what a difference (between us and those men)? "And they
brought the young man alive, and," it says, "were not a little comforted," both
because they received him back alive, and because a miracle had been wrought.
"And we went before to ship, and sailed unto Thasos, there intending to take in
Paul: for so had he appointed, minding himself to go afoot." [Acts 20:13] We
often find Paul parting from the disciples. For behold again, he himself goes
afoot: giving them the easier way, and himself choosing the more painful. He
went afoot, both that he might arrange many matters, and by way of training
them to bear a parting from him. "And when he had joined us at Thasos, having
taken him on board, we came to Mytilene; and having sailed thence on the
morrow, we come over against Chios"— then they pass the island— "and on the
next day we touched at Samos, and having stopped at Trogylium, on the
following day we came to Miletus. For Paul had determined to sail by Ephesus,
because he would not spend the time in Asia: for he hasted, if it were possible for
him, to be in Jerusalem the day of Pentecost." [Acts 20:14-16] Why this haste?
Not for the sake of the feast, but of the multitude. At the same time, by this he
conciliated the Jews, as being one that did honor the feasts, wishing to gain even
his adversaries: at the same time also he delivers the word. Accordingly, see
what great gain accrued, from all being present. But that the interests of the
people of Ephesus might not be neglected on that account, he managed for this
in a different way. But let us look over again what has been said.
(Recapitulation.) "And having embraced them," it says, "he departed for to
go into Macedonia." [Acts 20:1] By this again he refreshed them ([ἀ]
[νεκτήσατο]), giving them much consolation. "And having exhorted" the
Macedonians, "with much discourse, he came into Greece." [Acts 20:2] Observe
how we everywhere find him accomplishing all by means of preaching, not by
miracles. "And we, sailed," etc. The writer constantly shows him to us as hasting
to get to Syria; and the reason of it was the Church, and Jerusalem, but still he
restrained his desire, so as to set all right in those parts also. And yet Troas is not