That is, that man's human nature should not prevent him from becoming a partaker of the divine.

become indolent or neglectful of God's command; and learning by experience that it is an evil thing
which deprives him of life, that is, disobedience to God, may never attempt it at all, but that, knowing
that what preserves his life, namely, obedience to God, is good, he may diligently keep it with all
earnestness. Wherefore he has also had a twofold experience, possessing knowledge of both kinds,
that with discipline he may make choice of the better things. But how, if he had no knowledge of
the contrary, could he have had instruction in that which is good? For there is thus a surer and an
undoubted comprehension of matters submitted to us than the mere surmise arising from an opinion
regarding them. For just as the tongue receives experience of sweet and bitter by means of tasting,
and the eye discriminates between black and white by means of vision, and the ear recognises the
distinctions of sounds by hearing; so also does the mind, receiving through the experience of both
the knowledge of what is good, become more tenacious of its preservation, by acting in obedience
to God: in the first place, casting away, by means of repentance, disobedience, as being something
disagreeable and nauseous; and afterwards coming to understand what it really is, that it is contrary
to goodness and sweetness, so that the mind may never even attempt to taste disobedience to God.
But if any one do shun the knowledge of both these kinds of things, and the twofold perception of
knowledge, he unawares divests himself of the character of a human being.
2. How, then, shall he be a God, who has not as yet been made a man? Or how can he be perfect
who was but lately created? How, again, can he be immortal, who in his mortal nature did not obey
his Maker? For it must be that thou, at the outset, shouldest hold the rank of a man, and then
afterwards partake of the glory of God. For thou dost not make God, but God thee. If, then, thou
art God's workmanship, await the hand of thy Maker which creates everything in due time; in due
time as far as thou art concerned, whose creation is being carried out. Offer to Him thy heart in
a soft and tractable state, and preserve the form in which the Creator has fashioned thee, having
moisture in thyself, lest, by becoming hardened, thou lose the impressions of His fingers. But by
preserving the framework thou shalt ascend to that which is perfect, for the moist clay which is in
thee is hidden [there] by the workmanship of God. His hand fashioned thy substance; He will cover
thee over [too] within and without with pure gold and silver, and He will adorn thee to such a
degree, that even "the King Himself shall have pleasure in thy beauty." But if thou, being
obstinately hardened, dost reject the operation of His skill, and show thyself ungrateful towards
Him, because thou wert created a [mere] man, by becoming thus ungrateful to God, thou hast at
once lost both His workmanship and life. For creation is an attribute of the goodness of God but
to be created is that of human nature. If then, thou shalt deliver up to Him what is thine, that is,
faith towards Him and subjection, thou shalt receive His handiwork, and shall be a perfect work
of God.
3. If, however, thou wilt not believe in Him, and wilt flee from His hands, the cause of
imperfection shall be in thee who didst not obey, but not in Him who called [thee]. For He