SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.3, C.6.

On the other hand, lifeless faith is not a virtue, because, though the
act of lifeless faith is duly perfect on the part of the intellect, it has
not its due perfection as regards the will: just as if temperance be in
the concupiscible, without prudence being in the rational part,
temperance is not a virtue, as stated above (FS, Question 65, Article
1), because the act of temperance requires both an act of reason,
and an act of the concupiscible faculty, even as the act of faith
requires an act of the will, and an act of the intellect.
Reply to Objection 1: The truth is itself the good of the intellect,
since it is its perfection: and consequently faith has a relation to
some good in so far as it directs the intellect to the true.
Furthermore, it has a relation to the good considered as the object of
the will, inasmuch as it is formed by charity.
Reply to Objection 2: The faith of which the Philosopher speaks is
based on human reasoning in a conclusion which does not follow, of
necessity, from its premisses; and which is subject to be false:
hence such like faith is not a virtue. On the other hand, the faith of
which we are speaking is based on the Divine Truth, which is
infallible, and consequently its object cannot be anything false; so
that faith of this kind can be a virtue.
Reply to Objection 3: Living and lifeless faith do not differ
specifically, as though they belonged to different species. But they
differ as perfect and imperfect within the same species. Hence
lifeless faith, being imperfect, does not satisfy the conditions of a
perfect virtue, for "virtue is a kind of perfection" (Phys. vii, text. 18).
Reply to Objection 4: Some say that faith which is numbered among
the gratuitous graces is lifeless faith. But this is said without reason,
since the gratuitous graces, which are mentioned in that passage,
are not common to all the members of the Church: wherefore the
Apostle says: "There are diversities of graces," and again, "To one is
given" this grace and "to another" that. Now lifeless faith is common
to all members of the Church, because its lifelessness is not part of
its substance, if we consider it as a gratuitous gift. We must,
therefore, say that in that passage, faith denotes a certain excellency
of faith, for instance, "constancy in faith," according to a gloss, or
the "word of faith."
Faith is numbered among the fruits, in so far as it gives a certain

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.3, C.6.

pleasure in its act by reason of its certainty, wherefore the gloss on
the fifth chapter to the Galatians, where the fruits are enumerated,
explains faith as being "certainty about the unseen."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.3, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether faith is one virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that faith is not one. For just as faith is a
gift of God according to Eph. 2:8, so also wisdom and knowledge are
numbered among God's gifts according to Is. 11:2. Now wisdom and
knowledge differ in this, that wisdom is about eternal things, and
knowledge about temporal things, as Augustine states (De Trin. xii,
14,15). Since, then, faith is about eternal things, and also about some
temporal things, it seems that faith is not one virtue, but divided into
several parts.
Objection 2: Further, confession is an act of faith, as stated above
(Question 3, Article 1). Now confession of faith is not one and the
same for all: since what we confess as past, the fathers of old
confessed as yet to come, as appears from Is. 7:14: "Behold a virgin
shall conceive." Therefore faith is not one.
Objection 3: Further, faith is common to all believers in Christ. But
one accident cannot be in many subjects. Therefore all cannot have
one faith.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (Eph. 4:5): "One Lord, one faith."
I answer that, If we take faith as a habit, we can consider it in two
ways. First on the part of the object, and thus there is one faith.
Because the formal object of faith is the First Truth, by adhering to
which we believe whatever is contained in the faith. Secondly, on the
part of the subject, and thus faith is differentiated according as it is
in various subjects. Now it is evident that faith, just as any other
habit, takes its species from the formal aspect of its object, but is
individualized by its subject. Hence if we take faith for the habit
whereby we believe, it is one specifically, but differs numerically
according to its various subjects.
If, on the other hand, we take faith for that which is believed, then,
again, there is one faith, since what is believed by all is one same
thing: for though the things believed, which all agree in believing, be
diverse from one another, yet they are all reduced to one.
Reply to Objection 1: Temporal matters which are proposed to be
believed, do not belong to the object of faith, except in relation to