not as the chief part of the proposition. Hence its contingency or
necessity has no reference to the necessity or contingency of the
proposition, or to its being true or false. For it may be just as true
that I said a man is an ass, as that I said Socrates runs, or God is:
and the same applies to necessary and contingent. Hence it must be
said that this antecedent is absolutely necessary. Nor does it follow,
as some say, that the consequent is absolutely necessary, because
the antecedent is the remote cause of the consequent, which is
contingent by reason of the proximate cause. But this is to no
purpose. For the conditional would be false were its antecedent the
remote necessary cause, and the consequent a contingent effect; as,
for example, if I said, "if the sun moves, the grass will grow."
Therefore we must reply otherwise; that when the antecedent
contains anything belonging to an act of the soul, the consequent
must be taken not as it is in itself, but as it is in the soul: for the
existence of a thing in itself is different from the existence of a thing
in the soul. For example, when I say, "What the soul understands is
immaterial," this is to be understood that it is immaterial as it is in
the intellect, not as it is in itself. Likewise if I say, "If God knew
anything, it will be," the consequent must be understood as it is
subject to the divine knowledge, i.e. as it is in its presentiality. And
thus it is necessary, as also is the antecedent: "For everything that
is, while it is, must be necessarily be," as the Philosopher says in
Peri Herm. i.
Reply to Objection 3: Things reduced to act in time, as known by us
successively in time, but by God (are known) in eternity, which is
above time. Whence to us they cannot be certain, forasmuch as we
know future contingent things as such; but (they are certain) to God
alone, whose understanding is in eternity above time. Just as he who
goes along the road, does not see those who come after him;
whereas he who sees the whole road from a height, sees at once all
travelling by the way. Hence what is known by us must be
necessary, even as it is in itself; for what is future contingent in
itself, cannot be known by us. Whereas what is known by God must
be necessary according to the mode in which they are subject to the
divine knowledge, as already stated, but not absolutely as
considered in their own causes. Hence also this proposition,
"Everything known by God must necessarily be," is usually
distinguished; for this may refer to the thing, or to the saying. If it
refers to the thing, it is divided and false; for the sense is,
"Everything which God knows is necessary." If understood of the

saying, it is composite and true; for the sense is, "This proposition,
'that which is known by God is' is necessary."
Now some urge an objection and say that this distinction holds good
with regard to forms that are separable from the subject; thus if I
said, "It is possible for a white thing to be black," it is false as
applied to the saying, and true as applied to the thing: for a thing
which is white, can become black; whereas this saying, " a white
thing is black" can never be true. But in forms that are inseparable
from the subject, this distinction does not hold, for instance, if I said,
"A black crow can be white"; for in both senses it is false. Now to be
known by God is inseparable from the thing; for what is known by
God cannot be known. This objection, however, would hold if these
words "that which is known" implied any disposition inherent to the
subject; but since they import an act of the knower, something can
be attributed to the thing known, in itself (even if it always be
known), which is not attributed to it in so far as it stands under
actual knowledge; thus material existence is attributed to a stone in
itself, which is not attributed to it inasmuch as it is known.