And since we have observed in persons of quality and understanding that this exerts a very good influence on them, it will be good if, in the letters which can be shown to those outside the Society, less time is spent on those things which concern members of the Society and more given to matters of general interest. Otherwise the letters cannot be printed here without considerable editing. It is true that what concerns members of the Society will have more edification for our own members here; but this can be taken care of separately, if in the latter case they miss the mark, some remedy can be applied here, though it will cause some inconvenience. But the former cannot be supplied by us here. Your reverence can see to it that the members of the province write as directed. For other matters I refer you to the other letters, and I will say no more here than that in this house, the Roman College, and the German College, we are all well by God's grace. May Jesus Christ our God and Lord, who is the health and true life of the world, give us the health and life that is interior. Amen.

From Rome, February 24, 1554.

1 Berze was a Lowlander, having been born in Goes, in Zeeland, in 1515. He studied at Louvain, served in the army of Charles V, then exchanged his soldier's uniform for the garb of a hermit at Montserrat. He then left to go to Portugal and entered the service of the royal treasurer. While at court he met Simío Rodrigues, who eventually led him through the Exercises and accepted him into the Society on April 30, 1546. Berze was ordained before the end of that year, and shortly afterwards was assigned to India, where he imitated Francis Xavier, not only in apostolic zeal but also in holiness. 2 Polanco had written three letters to Berze under the date of December 24, 1553, and since there were no ships going to the East at the time, the letters had not yet left Italy.

# 33. TO FRANCESCO DE ATTINO

On Preserving One's Health for God's Service

Rome

Francesco de Attino was a scholastic teaching in Sicily and because of a touch of pulmonary tuberculosis was told by his physician to return to his native air to recuperate. Being still young he wanted to stay with his Jesuit brethren in Naples and enjoy the consolation of their company, rather than living at home with his family. Thus he wrote to Ignatius asking to remain in Naples. But Alfonso Salmerón, who was then superior in Naples, not waiting for Ignatius' letter to arrive, ordered the youth to return to Atina to recover his health. Ignatius' letter is full of affection and concern for the young scholastic, and tells him that for the present it is better for him to forgo the consolation of living with his Jesuit brethren so that he could regain his health. Ignatius assures him that though he may be temporarily living outside the Society, nevertheless, he still remains a member because all Jesuits are bound in spirit. This letter was written in Italian [Ep . 6:585-587].