silence, and we shall not be worse than sailors on the sea, who, when they
behold men of their own craft drifting on a plank, because their ship has been
broken to pieces by the winds and waves, take down their sails, and cast anchor,
and get into a boat and try to rescue the men, although strangers, known to them
only in consequence of their calamity. But if the others were unwilling to be
rescued no one would accuse those of their destruction who attempted to save
them. This is what we offer; but we trust that by the grace of God you also will
do your part, and we shall again see you occupying an eminent place in the flock
of Christ. In answer to the prayers of the saints may we speedily receive you
back, dear friend, sound in the true health. If you have any regard for us, and
hast not utterly cast us out of your memory, please vouchsafe a reply to our
letter; for in so doing you will give us much pleasure.

## Letter to a Young Widow

The date of the following letter can be determined within very narrow
limits. It contains a reference (c. 5) to the defeat and death of the Emperor
Valens in the battle with the Goths at Hadrianople, in A.D. 378, as a recent
event. The Emperor who is described as having incessantly engaged in war ever
since his accession (c. 4) must be Theodosius, who succeeded Valens, and as the
Goths are said to be still overrunning large regions with impunity, and insolently
mocking the timidity of the imperial troops (ib.) the letter must have been
written prior to the crushing defeat which Theodosius inflicted on them in 382.
The whole epistle is deeply tinged with that profound sense of the unhappiness
and instability of human life which the moral corruption of society and recent
calamities of the empire impressed with peculiar force on the minds of men;
producing too often among Pagans either a cynical gloom or reckless
indifference, but leading Christians to cling more closely and earnestly to the
hopes and consolations of the Gospel.
1. That you have sustained a severe blow, and that the weapon directed
from above has been planted in a vital part all will readily admit, and none even
of the most rigid moralists will deny it; but since they who are stricken with
sorrow ought not to spend their whole time in mourning and tears, but to make
good provision also for the healing of their wounds, lest, if they be neglected
their tears should aggravate the wound, and the fire of their sorrow become
inflamed, it is a good thing to listen to words of consolation, and restraining for a
brief season at least the fountain of your tears to surrender yourself to those who
endeavour to console you. On this account I abstained from troubling you when
your sorrow was at its height, and the thunderbolt had only just fallen upon you;
but having waited an interval and permitted you to take your fill of mourning,
now that you are able to look out a little through the mist, and to open your ears