FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.18, C.6.

difference of object may be essential in reference to one active
principle, and accidental in reference to another. Thus to know color
and to know sound, differ essentially in reference to sense, but not
in reference to the intellect.
Now in human actions, good and evil are predicated in reference to
the reason; because as Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iv), "the good of
man is to be in accordance with reason," and evil is "to be against
reason." For that is good for a thing which suits it in regard to its
form; and evil, that which is against the order of its form. It is
therefore evident that the difference of good and evil considered in
reference to the object is an essential difference in relation to
reason; that is to say, according as the object is suitable or
unsuitable to reason. Now certain actions are called human or moral,
inasmuch as they proceed from the reason. Consequently it is
evident that good and evil diversify the species in human actions;
since essential differences cause a difference of species.
Reply to Objection 1: Even in natural things, good and evil,
inasmuch as something is according to nature, and something
against nature, diversify the natural species; for a dead body and a
living body are not of the same species. In like manner, good,
inasmuch as it is in accord with reason, and evil, inasmuch as it is
against reason, diversify the moral species.
Reply to Objection 2: Evil implies privation, not absolute, but
affecting some potentiality. For an action is said to be evil in its
species, not because it has no object at all; but because it has an
object in disaccord with reason, for instance, to appropriate
another's property. Wherefore in so far as the object is something
positive, it can constitute the species of an evil act.
Reply to Objection 3: The conjugal act and adultery, as compared to
reason, differ specifically and have effects specifically different;
because the other deserves praise and reward, the other, blame and
punishment. But as compared to the generative power, they do not
differ in species; and thus they have one specific effect.
Reply to Objection 4: A circumstance is sometimes taken as the
essential difference of the object, as compared to reason; and then it
can specify a moral act. And it must needs be so whenever a
circumstance transforms an action from good to evil; for a

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.18, C.6.

circumstance would not make an action evil, except through being
repugnant to reason.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.18, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether an action has the species of good or evil

from its end?
Objection 1: It would seem that the good and evil which are from the
end do not diversify the species of actions. For actions derive their
species from the object. But the end is altogether apart from the
object. Therefore the good and evil which are from the end do not
diversify the species of an action.
Objection 2: Further, that which is accidental does not constitute the
species, as stated above (Article 5). But it is accidental to an action
to be ordained to some particular end; for instance, to give alms
from vainglory. Therefore actions are not diversified as to species,
according to the good and evil which are from the end.
Objection 3: Further, acts that differ in species, can be ordained to
the same end: thus to the end of vainglory, actions of various virtues
and vices can be ordained. Therefore the good and evil which are
taken from the end, do not diversify the species of action.
On the contrary, It has been shown above (Question 1, Article 3) that
human actions derive their species from the end. Therefore good
and evil in respect of the end diversify the species of actions.
I answer that, Certain actions are called human, inasmuch as they
are voluntary, as stated above (Question 1, Article 1). Now, in a
voluntary action, there is a twofold action, viz. the interior action of
the will, and the external action: and each of these actions has its
object. The end is properly the object of the interior act of the will:
while the object of the external action, is that on which the action is
brought to bear. Therefore just as the external action takes its
species from the object on which it bears; so the interior act of the
will takes its species from the end, as from its own proper object.
Now that which is on the part of the will is formal in regard to that
which is on the part of the external action: because the will uses the
limbs to act as instruments; nor have external actions any measure
of morality, save in so far as they are voluntary. Consequently the
species of a human act is considered formally with regard to the end,
but materially with regard to the object of the external action. Hence
the Philosopher says (Ethic. v, 2) that "he who steals that he may