did not act in a spirit of boasting. "And Paul being grieved," etc. By their clamor
and shouting they thought to alarm them (the magistrates): saying, "These men
do exceedingly trouble our city." [Acts 16:18-20] What do you say? Do you
believe the demon? Why not here also? He says, They are "servants of the most
high God;" you say, "They exceedingly trouble our city:" he says, "They show us
the way of salvation;" you say, "They teach customs which are not lawful for us
to receive." [Acts 16:21] Observe, how they do not attend even to the demon, but
look only to one thing, their covetousness. But observe them (Paul and Silas),
how they do not answer, nor plead for themselves; (b) "For when," says he, "I
am weak, then am I strong. My grace is sufficient for you, for My strength is
made perfect in weakness" [2 Corinthians 12:9]: so that by reason of their
gentleness also they should be admired. (a) "And the magistrates," etc.,
"charging the jailer to keep them safely" [Acts 16:22]: that they may be the
means of a greater miracle. (c) The stricter the custody, the greater the miracle. It
was probably from the wish to cut short the disturbance, that the magistrates did
these things; because they saw the crowd urgent, and wished to stay their passion
at the instant, therefore they inflicted the stripes: at the same time it was their
wish to hear the matter, and that was why they cast them into prison and gave
charge "to keep them safely." And, it says, "he made them fast in the stocks"
[Acts 16:24], ([το ξύλον]) as we should say, the nervum ([νέρβον]).
What tears do not these things call for! (Think) what they suffer, while we
(live) in luxury, we in theatres, we perishing and drowning (in dissolute living),
seeking always idle amusement, not enduring to suffer pain for Christ, not even
as far as words, not even as far as talk. These things I beseech you let us ever
call to mind, what things they suffered, what things they endured, how
undismayed they were, how unoffended. They were doing God's work, and
suffered these things! They did not say, Why do we preach this, and God does
not take our part? But even this was a benefit to them, even apart from the truth,
in the thing itself; it made them more vigorous, stronger, intrepid. "Tribulation
works endurance." [Romans 5:4] Then let us not seek loose and dissolute living.

For as in the one case the good is twofold, that the sufferers are made strong, and
that the rewards are great; so in the other the evil is twofold, that such are
rendered more enervated, and that it is to no good, but only evil. For nothing can
be more worthless than a man who passes all his time in idleness and luxury. For
the man untried, as the saying is, is also unapproved; unapproved not only in the
contests, but also in everything else. Idleness is a useless thing, and in luxury
itself nothing is so unsuited to the end proposed as the leading a luxurious life:
for it palls with satiety, so that neither the enjoyment of the viands is so great,
nor the enjoyment of relaxation, but all becomes vapid, and runs to waste.
Then let us not seek after this. For if we will consider which has the
pleasanter life, he that is toiled and hardworked, or he that lives in luxury, we
shall find it to be the former. For in the first place, the bodily senses are neither
clear nor sound, but dull ([χαὕναι]) and languid; and when those are not right,
even of health there is plainly no enjoyment. Which is the useful horse, the
pampered or the exercised? Which the serviceable ship, that which sails, or that
which lies idle? Which the best water, the running or the stagnant? Which the
best iron, that which is much used, or that which does no work? Does not the one
shine bright as silver, while the other becomes all over rusty, useless, and even
losing some of its own substance? The like happens also to the soul as the
consequence of idleness: a kind of rust spreads over it, and corrodes both its
brightness and everything else. How then shall one rub off this rust? With the
whetstone of tribulations: so shall one make the soul useful and fit for all things.
Else, how, I ask, will she be able to cut off the passions, with her edge turned
([ἀ] [νακλώσης]) and bending like lead? How shall she wound the devil?— And
then to whom can such an one be other than a disgusting spectacle— a man
cultivating obesity, dragging himself along like a seal? I speak not this of those
who are naturally of this habit, but of those who by luxurious living have
brought their bodies into such a condition, of those who are naturally of a spare
habit. The sun has risen, has shot forth his bright beams on all sides, and roused
up each person to his work: the husbandman goes forth with his spade, the smith