Isa. xxx. 25, 26.

faciet Deus homines), and those who shall remain shall multiply upon the earth." Then Daniel
also says this very thing: "And the kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of those under the
heaven, is given to the saints of the Most High God, whose kingdom is everlasting, and all dominions
shall serve and obey Him." And lest the promise named should be understood as referring to
this time, it was declared to the prophet: "And come thou, and stand in thy lot at the consummation
of the days."
3. Now, that the promises were not announced to the prophets and the fathers alone, but to the
Churches united to these from the nations, whom also the Spirit terms "the islands" (both because
they are established in the midst of turbulence, suffer the storm of blasphemies, exist as a harbour
of safety to those in peril, and are the refuge of those who love the height [of heaven], and strive
to avoid Bythus, that is, the depth of error), Jeremiah thus declares: "Hear the word of the Lord,
ye nations, and declare it to the isles afar off; say ye, that the Lord will scatter Israel, He will gather
him, and keep him, as one feeding his flock of sheep. For the Lord hath redeemed Jacob, and rescued
him from the hand of one stronger than he. And they shall come and rejoice in Mount Zion, and
shall come to what is good, and into a land of wheat, and wine, and fruits, of animals and of sheep;
and their soul shall be as a tree bearing fruit, and they shall hunger no more. At that time also shall
the virgins rejoice in the company of the young men: the old men, too, shall be glad, and I will turn
their sorrow into joy; and I will make them exult, and will magnify them, and satiate the souls of
the priests the sons of Levi; and my people shall be satiated with my goodness." Now, in the
preceding book I have shown that all the disciples of the Lord are Levites and priests, they who
used in the temple to profane the Sabbath, but are blameless. Promises of such a nature, therefore,
do indicate in the clearest manner the feasting of that creation in the kingdom of the righteous,
which God promises that He will Himself serve.
4. Then again, speaking of Jerusalem, and of Him reigning there, Isaiah declares, "Thus saith
the Lord, Happy is he who hath seed in Zion, and servants in Jerusalem. Behold, a righteous king
shall reign, and princes shall rule with judgment." And with regard to the foundation on which
it shall be rebuilt, he says: "Behold, I will lay in order for thee a carbuncle stone, and sapphire for
thy foundations; and I will lay thy ramparts with jasper, and thy gates with crystal, and thy wall
with choice stones: and all thy children shall be taught of God, and great shall be the peace of thy

Jer. xxxi. 10, etc.

children; and in righteousness shalt thou be built up." And yet again does he say the same thing:
"Behold, I make Jerusalem a rejoicing, and my people [a joy]; for the voice of weeping shall be no
more heard in her, nor the voice of crying. Also there shall not be there any immature [one], nor
an old man who does not fulfil his time: for the youth shall be of a hundred years; and the sinner
shall die a hundred years old, yet shall be accursed. And they shall build houses, and inhabit them
themselves; and shall plant vineyards, and eat the fruit of them themselves, and shall drink wine.
And they shall not build, and others inhabit; neither shall they prepare the vineyard, and others eat.
For as the days of the tree of life shall be the days of the people in thee; for the works of their hands
shall endure."