"Why eats your Master with publicans and sinners?" [Matthew 9:11]
And when the disciples seem to be doing wrong, they intercede with Him,
saying, "Behold your disciples do that which is not lawful to do on the sabbathday;" [Matthew 12:2] but here to them they discredit Him. All which was the
part of men dealing craftily, and wishing to separate from the Master the choir of
the disciples. What then says Infinite Wisdom?
"They that be whole need not a physician," says He, "but they that are sick."
See how He turned their reasoning to the opposite conclusion. That is,
while they made it a charge against Him that He was in company with these
men: He on the contrary says, that His not being with them would be unworthy
of Him, and of His love of man; and that to amend such persons is not only
blameless, but excellent, and necessary, and deserving of all sorts of praise.
After this, that He might not seem to put them that were bidden to shame,
by saying, "they that are sick;" see how He makes up for it again, by reproving
the others, and saying,
"Go ye and learn what that means, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice."
[Matthew 9:13]
Now this He said, to upbraid them with their ignorance of the Scriptures.
Wherefore also He orders His discourse more sharply, not Himself in anger, far
from it; but so as that the publicans might not be in utter perplexity.
And yet of course He might say, "Did ye not mark, how I remitted the sins
of the sick of the palsy, how I braced up his body?" But He says no such thing,
but argues with them first from men's common reasonings, and then from the
Scriptures. For having said, "They that be whole need not a physician, but they
that are sick;" and having covertly indicated that He Himself was the Physician;
after that He said, "Go ye and learn what that means, I will have mercy, and not
sacrifice." Thus does Paul also: when he had first established his reasoning by
illustrations from common things, and had said, "Who feeds a flock, and eats not
of the milk thereof?" [1 Corinthians 9:7] then he brings in the Scriptures also,
saying, "It is written in the law of Moses, You shall not muzzle the ox that treads

out the grain;" and again, "Even so has the Lord ordained, that they which
preach the gospel should live of the gospel."
But to His disciples not so, but He puts them in mind of His signs, saying
on this wise, "Do ye not yet remember the five loaves of the five thousand, and
how many baskets ye took up?" [Matthew 16:9] Not so however with these, but
He reminds them of our common infirmity, and signifies them at any rate to be
of the number of the infirm; who did not so much as know the Scriptures, but
making light of the rest of virtue, laid all the stress on their sacrifices; which
thing He is also earnestly intimating unto them, when He sets down in brief what
had been affirmed by all the prophets, saying, "Learn ye what that means, I will
have mercy, and not sacrifice."
The fact is, He is signifying hereby that not He was transgressing the law,
but they; as if He had said, "Wherefore accuse me? Because I bring sinners to
amendment? Why then ye must accuse the Father also for this." Much as He said
also elsewhere, establishing this point: "My Father works hitherto, and I work:"
[John 5:17] so here again, "Go ye and learn what that means, I will have mercy,
and not sacrifice." "For as this is His will, says Christ, so also mine." Do you
see how the one is superfluous, the other necessary? For neither did He say, "I
will have mercy, and sacrifice," but, "I will have mercy, and not sacrifice." That
is, the one thing He allowed, the other He cast out; and proved that what they
blamed, so far from being forbidden, was even ordained by the law, and more so
than sacrifice; and He brings in the Old Testament, speaking words and
ordaining laws in harmony with Himself.
Having then reproved them, both by common illustrations and by the
Scriptures, He adds again,
"I am not come to call righteous men, but sinners to repentance."
And this He says unto them in irony; as when He said, "Behold, Adam has
become as one of us;" and again, "If I were hungry, I would not tell you." For
that no man on earth was righteous, Paul declared, saying, "For all have sinned,
and come short of the glory of God." [Romans 3:23] And by this too the others