if (continues he) the patriarch Jacob, when in charge of flocks, and feeding brute
sheep, and having to give account to man, passed sleepless nights, and bore heat
and cold, and all the inclemency of the elements, to the end that not one of those
animals might perish, much less does it become us, who preside over those, who
are not irrational, but spiritual sheep; who are about to give an account of this
charge, not to man, but to God, to be slack in any respect, or shrink from
anything which might benefit the flock. Besides, in proportion as the latter flock
is superior to the former; men to brutes, and God to men; so it behooves us to
manifest a greater and more intense anxiety and diligence. He knows well that
his concern is now, not for one city only, but for the whole of the East. For our
city is the head and mother of all that lie towards the East. For this reason he
would encounter every danger, and nothing would avail to detain him here.
2. On this account I trust that there may be a good hope; for God will not
disdain to look upon such earnestness and zeal, nor will He suffer his servant to
return without success. I know that when he has barely seen our pious Emperor,
and been seen by him, he will be able at once by his very countenance to allay
his wrath. For not only the words of the saints, but their very countenances are
full of grace. And he is a person too endowed with abundant wisdom; and being
well skilled in the divine laws, he will say to him as Moses said to God, "Yet
now, if you will forgive their sin—and if not, slay me together with them."
[Exodus 32:31-32] For such are the bowels of the saints, that they think death
with their children sweeter than life without them. He will also make the special
season his advocate and shelter himself behind the sacred festival of the
Passover; and will remind the Emperor of the season when Christ remitted the
sins of the whole world. He will exhort him to imitate his Lord. He will also
remind him of that parable of the ten thousand talents, and the hundred pence. I
know the boldness of our father, that he will not hesitate to alarm him from the
parable, and to say, "Take heed lest you also hear it said in that day, 'O thou
wicked servant, I forgave you all that debt, because you desire me; you ought
also to forgive your fellow-servants!' [Matthew 18:32-33] Thou dost to yourself

a greater benefit than them, since by pardoning these few offenses you gain an
amnesty for greater." To this address he will add that prayer, which those who
initiated him into the sacred mystery taught him to offer up, and say, "Forgive us
our debts, as we forgive our debtors."
3. He will moreover inform him, that the offense was not common to the
whole city, but the deed of certain strangers and adventurers, men that act upon
no deliberate plan, but with every sort of audacity and lawlessness; and that it
would not be just for the disorderly conduct of a few to extirpate so great a city,
and to punish those who had done no wrong; and that even though all had been
transgressors, they had paid a sufficient punishment, being consumed by fear so
many days, and expecting every day to be put to death, and being exiles and
fugitives; thus living more wretchedly than condemned criminals, carrying their
life in their hands, and having no confidence of escape! "Let this punishment (he
will say) suffice. Carry not your resentment further! Make the Judge above
merciful to yourself, by humanity towards your fellow-servants! Think of the
greatness of the city, and that the question now is not concerning one, or two, or
three, or ten souls, but of a vast multitude too numerous to be reckoned up! It is
a question which affects the capital of the whole world. This is the city in which
Christians were first called by that name. Honor Christ. Reverence the city
which first proclaimed that name, so lovely and sweet to all! This city has been
the tabernacle of Apostles; the dwelling place of the just! And now this is the
first and only instance of insurrection against its rulers; and all past time will
bear favourable witness to the manners of the city. For had the people been
continually given to sedition, it might have been necessary to make an example
of such iniquity; but if this has happened only once in all time, it is plain that the
offense has not arisen from the habit of the city, but that it was the transgression
of those who had in an evil hour by mere random chance arrived there."
4. These things and more than these the priest will say with still greater
boldness; and the Emperor will listen to them; and one is humane, and the other
is faithful; so that on both sides we entertain favourable hopes. But much more