the judgment, both from the added glory of the body and from the
completion of the number of the saints. The wicked also will receive
an increase of torment from the added punishment of the body and
from the completion of the number of damned to be punished,
because the more numerous those with whom they will burn, the
more will they themselves burn.
Reply to Objection 3: The general judgment will regard more directly
the generality of men than each individual to be judged, as stated
above. Wherefore although before that judgment each one will be
certain of his condemnation or reward, he will not be cognizant of
the condemnation or reward of everyone else. Hence the necessity
of the general judgment.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the judgment will take place by word of

mouth?
Objection 1: It would seem that this judgment, as regards the inquiry
and sentence, will take place by word of mouth. For according to
Augustine (De Civ. Dei xx) "it is uncertain how many days this
judgment will last." But it would not be uncertain if the things we are
told will take place at the judgment were to be accomplished only in
the mind. Therefore this judgment will take place by word of mouth
and not only in the mind.
Objection 2: Further, Gregory says (Moral. xxvi): "Those at least will
hear the words of the Judge, who have confessed their faith in Him
by words." Now this cannot be understood as referring to the inner
word, because thus all will hear the Judge's words, since all the
deeds of other men will be known to all both good and wicked.
Therefore it seems that this judgment will take place by word of
mouth.
Objection 3: Further, Christ will judge according to His human form,
so as to be visible in the body to all. Therefore in like manner it
seems that He will speak with the voice of the body, so as to be
heard by all.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xx) that the book of life
which is mentioned Apoc. 20:12,15 "is a kind of Divine energy
enabling each one to remember all his good or evil works, and to
discern them with the gaze of the mind, with wondrous rapidity, his
knowledge accusing or defending his conscience, so that all and
each will be judged at the same moment." But if each one's merits
were discussed by word of mouth, all and each could not be judged
at the same moment. Therefore it would seem that this judgment will
not take place by word of mouth.
Further, the sentence should correspond proportionately to the
evidence. Now the evidence both of accusation and of defense will
be mental, according to Rm. 2:15,16, "Their conscience bearing
witness to them, and their thoughts between themselves accusing or
also defending one another in the day when God shall judge the
secrets of men." Therefore seemingly, this sentence and the entire
judgment will take place mentally.