no evil, but had enjoyed infinite good, so you received us after these things. For
this was the second entering. They went to Berœa, they were persecuted, and
when they came after this they so received them, as though they had been
honored by these also, so that they even laid down their lives for them. The
expression, "What manner of entering in we had," is complicated, and contains
an encomium both of them and of themselves. But he himself has turned this to
their advantage. "And how," he says, "ye turned to God from idols, to serve a
living and true God"; that is, that you did it readily, that you did it with much
eagerness, that it did not require much labor to make you. "In order to serve,"
says he, "a living and true God."
Here also he introduced an exhortation, which is the part of one who would
make his discourse less offensive. "And to wait," he says, "for His Son from
heaven, whom He raised from the dead, even Jesus, which delivers us from the
wrath to come." "And to wait," he says, "for His Son from heaven"; Him that was
crucified, Him that was buried; to wait for Him from heaven. And how "from
heaven"? "Whom He raised from the dead." You see all things at the same time;
both the Resurrection, and the Ascension, and the second Coming, the Judgment,
the retribution of the just, the punishment of the wicked. "Jesus," he says, "which
delivers us from the wrath to come." This is at once comfort, and exhortation,
and encouragement. For if He raised Him from the dead, and He is in heaven,
and thence will come, (and you believed in Him; for if you had not believed in
Him, you would not have suffered so much), this of itself is sufficient comfort.
These shall suffer punishment, which he says in his second epistle, and you will
have no small consolation.
And to "wait," he says, "for His Son from heaven." The terrible things are in
hand, but the good things are in the future, when Christ shall come from heaven.
See how much hope is required, in that He who was crucified has been raised,
that He has been taken up into heaven, that He will come to judge the quick and
the dead.
Chap. 2:1, 2. "For yourselves, brethren, know our entering in unto you, that

it has not been found vain: but having suffered before, and been shamefully
entreated, as you know, at Philippi, we waxed bold in our God to speak unto you
the Gospel of God in much conflict."
Great indeed were your actions also, but yet neither did we have recourse to
human speech. But what he says above, that also he repeats here, that from both
sides is shown what was the nature of the Preaching, from the miracles, and from
the resolution of the preachers, and from the zeal and fervor of those who
received it. "For yourselves," he says, "know our entering in unto you, that it has
not been found vain," that is, that it was not according to man, nor of any
common kind. For being fresh from great dangers, and deaths, and stripes, we
immediately fell into dangers. "But," he says, "having suffered before, and been
shamefully entreated; as you know, at Philippi, we waxed bold in our God." Do
you see how again he refers the whole to God? "To speak unto you," says he,
"the Gospel of God in much conflict." It is not possible to say, that there indeed
we were in danger, but here we are not; yourselves also know, how great was the
danger, with how much contention we were among you. Which also he says in
his Epistle to the Corinthians; "And I was with you in weakness," and in labor,
"and in fear, and in much trembling." [1 Corinthians 2:3]
Ver. 3, 4. "For our exhortation is not of error nor of uncleanness, nor in
guile: but even as we have been approved of God to be entrusted with the
Gospel, so we speak; not as pleasing men, but God which proves our hearts."
Do you see that, as I said, from their perseverance he makes a proof that the
Preaching is divine? For, if it were not so, if it were a deceit, we should not have
endured so many dangers, which allowed us not even to take breath. You were in
tribulation, we were in tribulation. What then was it? Unless somewhat of things
future had excited us, unless we had been persuaded that there is a good hope,
we should not have been filled with the more alacrity by suffering. For who
would have chosen for the sake of what we have here to endure so many
sufferings, and to live a life of anxiety, and full of dangers? For whom would
they persuade? For are not these things of themselves enough to trouble the