FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.48, C.3.

cause continually multiplied.
Nevertheless the very fact that anger soon spends itself proves the
strength of its fervor: for as a great fire is soon spent having burnt
up all the fuel; so too anger, by reason of its vehemence, soon dies
away.
Reply to Objection 3: Every power that is divided in itself is
weakened. Consequently if a man being already angry with one,
becomes angry with another, by this very fact his anger with the
former is weakened. Especially is this so if his anger in the second
case be greater: because the wrong done which aroused his former
anger, will, in comparison with the second wrong, which is reckoned
greater, seem to be of little or no account.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.48, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether anger above all hinders the use of

reason?
Objection 1: It would seem that anger does not hinder the use of
reason. Because that which presupposes an act of reason, does not
seem to hinder the use of reason. But "anger listens to reason," as
stated in Ethic. vii, 6. Therefore anger does not hinder reason.
Objection 2: Further, the more the reason is hindered, the less does
a man show his thoughts. But the Philosopher says (Ethic. vii, 6) that
"an angry man is not cunning but is open." Therefore anger does not
seem to hinder the use of reason, as desire does; for desire is
cunning, as he also states (Ethic. vii, 6.).
Objection 3: Further, the judgment of reason becomes more evident
by juxtaposition of the contrary: because contraries stand out more
clearly when placed beside one another. But this also increases
anger: for the Philosopher says (Rhet. ii, 2) that "men are more angry
if they receive unwonted treatment; for instance, honorable men, if
they be dishonored": and so forth. Therefore the same cause
increases anger, and facilitates the judgment of reason. Therefore
anger does not hinder the judgment of reason.
On the contrary, Gregory says (Moral. v, 30) that anger "withdraws
the light of understanding, while by agitating it troubles the mind."
I answer that, Although the mind or reason makes no use of a bodily
organ in its proper act, yet, since it needs certain sensitive powers
for the execution of its act, the acts of which powers are hindered
when the body is disturbed, it follows of necessity that any
disturbance in the body hinders even the judgment of reason; as is
clear in the case of drunkenness or sleep. Now it has been stated
(Article 2) that anger, above all, causes a bodily disturbance in the
region of the heart, so much as to effect even the outward members.
Consequently, of all the passions, anger is the most manifest
obstacle to the judgment of reason, according to Ps. 30:10: "My eye
is troubled with wrath."
Reply to Objection 1: The beginning of anger is in the reason, as
regards the appetitive movement, which is the formal element of
anger. But the passion of anger forestalls the perfect judgment of