but have done unto him whatsoever they listed. Likewise shall also the Son of
Man suffer of them. Then they understood that He spoke to them of John."
[Matthew 17:12-13]
And yet neither the Scribes said this, nor the Scriptures; but because now
they were sharper and more attentive to His sayings, they quickly caught His
meaning.
And whence did the disciples know this? He had already told them, "He is
Elias, which was for to come;" [Matthew 11:14] but here, that he has come; and
again, that "Elias comes and will restore all things." But be not thou troubled,
nor imagine that His statement wavers, though at one time He said, "he will
come," at another, "he has come." For all these things are true. Since when He
says, "Elias indeed comes, and will restore all things," He means Elias himself,
and the conversion of the Jews which is then to take place; but when He says,
"Which was for to come," He calls John, Elias, with regard to the manner of his
administration. Yea, and so the prophets used to call every one of their approved
kings, David; and the Jews, "rulers of Sodom," [Isaiah 1:10] and "sons of
Ethiopians;" [Amos 9:7] because of their ways. For as the other shall be
forerunner of the second advent, so was this of the first.
2. And not for this only does He call him Elias everywhere, but to signify
His perfect agreement with the Old Testament, and that this advent too is
according to prophecy.
Wherefore also He adds again, "He came, and they knew him not, but have
done unto him all things whatsoever they listed." [Matthew 17:12] What means,
"call things whatsoever they listed?" They cast him into prison, they used him
despitefully, they slew him, they brought his head in a charger.
"Likewise shall also the Son of Man suffer of them." Do you see how again
He in due season reminds them of His passion, laying up for them great store of
comfort from the passion of John. And not in this way only, but also by presently
working great miracles. Yea, and whenever He speaks of His passion, presently
He works miracles, both after those sayings and before them; and in many places

one may find Him to have kept this rule.
"Then," for instance, it says, "He began to signify how that He must go unto
Jerusalem, and be killed, and suffer many things." [Matthew 16:21] "Then:"
when? When He was confessed to be Christ, and the Son of God.
Again on the mountain, when He had shown them the marvellous vision,
and the prophets had been discoursing of His glory, He reminded them of His
passion. For having spoken of the history concerning John, He added, "Likewise
shall also the Son of Man suffer of them."
And after a little while again, when He had cast out the devil, which His
disciples were not able to cast out; for then too, "As they abode in Galilee," so it
says, "Jesus said unto them, The Son of Man shall be betrayed into the hands of
sinful men, and they shall kill Him, and the third day He shall rise again."
[Matthew 17:23]
Now in doing this, He by the greatness of the miracles was abating the
excess of their sorrow, and in every way consoling them; even as here also, by
the mention of John's death, He afforded them much consolation.
But should any one say, "Wherefore did He not even now raise up Elias and
send him, witnessing as He does so great good of his coming?" we should reply,
that even as it was, while thinking Christ to be Elias, they did not believe Him.
For "some say," such are the words, "that You are Elias, and others, Jeremias."
[Matthew 16:14] And indeed between John and Elias, there was no difference
but the time only. "Then how will they believe at that time?" it may be said. Why,
"he will restore all things," not simply by being recognized, but also because the
glory of Christ will have been growing more intense up to that day, and will be
among all clearer than the sun. When therefore, preceded by such an opinion and
expectation, he comes making the same proclamation as John, and himself also
announcing Jesus, they will more easily receive his sayings. But in saying, "They
knew him not," He is excusing also what was done in His own case.
[Luke 23:24]
And not in this way only does He console them, but also by pointing out