FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.94, C.4.

conducive to well-living.
Reply to Objection 1: Temperance is about the natural
concupiscences of food, drink and sexual matters, which are indeed
ordained to the natural common good, just as other matters of law
are ordained to the moral common good.
Reply to Objection 2: By human nature we may mean either that
which is proper to man---and in this sense all sins, as being against
reason, are also against nature, as Damascene states (De Fide Orth.
ii, 30): or we may mean that nature which is common to man and
other animals; and in this sense, certain special sins are said to be
against nature; thus contrary to sexual intercourse, which is natural
to all animals, is unisexual lust, which has received the special name
of the unnatural crime.
Reply to Objection 3: This argument considers acts in themselves.
For it is owing to the various conditions of men, that certain acts are
virtuous for some, as being proportionate and becoming to them,
while they are vicious for others, as being out of proportion to them.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.94, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the natural law is the same in all men?

Objection 1: It would seem that the natural law is not the same in all.
For it is stated in the Decretals (Dist. i) that "the natural law is that
which is contained in the Law and the Gospel." But this is not
common to all men; because, as it is written (Rm. 10:16), "all do not
obey the gospel." Therefore the natural law is not the same in all
men.
Objection 2: Further, "Things which are according to the law are said
to be just," as stated in Ethic. v. But it is stated in the same book that
nothing is so universally just as not to be subject to change in
regard to some men. Therefore even the natural law is not the same
in all men.
Objection 3: Further, as stated above (Articles 2,3), to the natural law
belongs everything to which a man is inclined according to his
nature. Now different men are naturally inclined to different things;
some to the desire of pleasures, others to the desire of honors, and
other men to other things. Therefore there is not one natural law for
all.
On the contrary, Isidore says (Etym. v, 4): "The natural law is
common to all nations."
I answer that, As stated above (Articles 2,3), to the natural law
belongs those things to which a man is inclined naturally: and
among these it is proper to man to be inclined to act according to
reason. Now the process of reason is from the common to the
proper, as stated in Phys. i. The speculative reason, however, is
differently situated in this matter, from the practical reason. For,
since the speculative reason is busied chiefly with the necessary
things, which cannot be otherwise than they are, its proper
conclusions, like the universal principles, contain the truth without
fail. The practical reason, on the other hand, is busied with
contingent matters, about which human actions are concerned: and
consequently, although there is necessity in the general principles,
the more we descend to matters of detail, the more frequently we
encounter defects. Accordingly then in speculative matters truth is
the same in all men, both as to principles and as to conclusions:
although the truth is not known to all as regards the conclusions, but