SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.153, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether simple fornication is a mortal sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that simple fornication is not a mortal sin.
For things that come under the same head would seem to be on a
par with one another. Now fornication comes under the same head
as things that are not mortal sins: for it is written (Acts 15:29): "That
you abstain from things sacrificed to idols, and from blood, and from
things strangled, and from fornication." But there is not mortal sin in
these observances, according to 1 Tim. 4:4, "Nothing is rejected that
is received with thanksgiving." Therefore fornication is not a mortal
sin.
Objection 2: Further, no mortal sin is the matter of a Divine precept.
But the Lord commanded (Osee 1:2): "Go take thee a wife of
fornications, and have of her children of fornications." Therefore
fornication is not a mortal sin.
Objection 3: Further, no mortal sin is mentioned in Holy Writ without
disapprobation. Yet simple fornication is mentioned without
disapprobation by Holy Writ in connection with the patriarchs. Thus
we read (Gn. 16:4) that Abraham went in to his handmaid Agar; and
further on (Gn. 30:5,9) that Jacob went in to Bala and Zelpha the
handmaids of his wives; and again (Gn. 38:18) that Juda was with
Thamar whom he thought to be a harlot. Therefore simple fornication
is not a mortal sin.
Objection 4: Further, every mortal sin is contrary to charity. But
simple fornication is not contrary to charity, neither as regards the
love of God, since it is not a sin directly against. God, nor as regards
the love of our neighbor, since thereby no one is injured. Therefore
simple fornication is not a mortal sin.
Objection 5: Further, every mortal sin leads to eternal perdition. But
simple fornication has not this result: because a gloss of Ambrose
[Gloss of Peter Lombard] on 1 Tim. 4:8, "Godliness is profitable to all
things," says: "The whole of Christian teaching is summed up in
mercy and godliness: if a man conforms to this, even though he
gives way to the inconstancy of the flesh, doubtless he will be
punished, but he will not perish." Therefore simple fornication is not
a mortal sin.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.153, C.3.

Objection 6: Further, Augustine says (De Bono Conjug. xvi) that
"what food is to the well-being of the body, such is sexual
intercourse to the welfare of the human race." But inordinate use of
food is not always a mortal sin. Therefore neither is all inordinate
sexual intercourse; and this would seem to apply especially to
simple fornication, which is the least grievous of the aforesaid
species.
On the contrary, It is written (Tob. 4:13): "Take heed to keep
thyself . . . from all fornication, and beside thy wife never endure to
know a crime." Now crime denotes a mortal sin. Therefore
fornication and all intercourse with other than one's wife is a mortal
sin.
Further, nothing but mortal sin debars a man from God's kingdom.
But fornication debars him, as shown by the words of the Apostle
(Gal. 5:21), who after mentioning fornication and certain other vices,
adds: "They who do such things shall not obtain the kingdom of
God." Therefore simple fornication is a mortal sin.
Further, it is written in the Decretals (XXII, qu. i, can. Praedicandum):
"They should know that the same penance is to be enjoined for
perjury as for adultery, fornication, and wilful murder and other
criminal offenses." Therefore simple fornication is a criminal or
mortal sin.
I answer that, Without any doubt we must hold simple fornication to
be a mortal sin, notwithstanding that a gloss [St. Augustine,
Questions. in Deut., qu. 37] on Dt. 23:17, says: "This is a prohibition
against going with whores, whose vileness is venial." For instead of
"venial" it should be "venal," since such is the wanton's trade. In
order to make this evident, we must take note that every sin
committed directly against human life is a mortal sin. Now simple
fornication implies an inordinateness that tends to injure the life of
the offspring to be born of this union. For we find in all animals
where the upbringing of the offspring needs care of both male and
female, that these come together not indeterminately, but the male
with a certain female, whether one or several; such is the case with
all birds: while, on the other hand, among those animals, where the
female alone suffices for the offspring's upbringing, the union is
indeterminate, as in the case of dogs and like animals. Now it is
evident that the upbringing of a human child requires not only the
mother's care for his nourishment, but much more the care of his