thunderbolts were about to be launched. And besides, this was not spoken of
vice and virtue but of the chastisement inflicted by God. For what was he to do,
tell me? Sit still and await the punishment, and without at all profiting them, be
burned up? Nay, this were the extremest folly.
For I do not affirm this, that one ought to bring chastisement on one's self
without discrimination and at random, apart from the will of God. But when a
man tarries long in sin, then I bid you push yourself forward and correct him: if
you will, for your neighbor's sake: but if not, at least for your own profit. It is
true, the first is the better course: but if you reach not yet unto that height, do it
even for this. And let no man seek his own that he may find his own; and bearing
in mind that neither voluntary poverty nor martyrdom, nor any other thing, can
testify in our favor, unless we have the crowning virtue of love; let us preserve
this beyond the rest, that through it we may also obtain all other, both present
and promised blessings; at which may we all arrive through the grace and mercy
of our Lord Jesus Christ; Whom be the glory world without end. Amen.

## Homily 26 on First Corinthians

1 Corinthians 11:2
Now I praise you that you remember me in all things, and hold fast the
traditions, even as I delivered them to you.
Having completed the discourse concerning the idol-sacrifices as became
him, and having rendered it most perfect in all respects, he proceeds to another
thing, which also itself was a complaint, but not so great a one. For that which I
said before, this do I also now say, that he does not set down all the heavy
accusations continuously, but after disposing them in due order, he inserts among
them the lighter matters, mitigating what the readers would else feel offensive in
his discourse on account of his continually reproving.
Wherefore also he set the most serious of all last, that relating to the
resurrection. But for the present he goes to another, a lighter thing, saying, "Now
I praise you that you remember me in all things." Thus when the offense is
admitted, he both accuses vehemently and threatens: but when it is questioned,
he first proves it and then rebukes. And what was admitted, he aggravates: but
what was likely to be disputed, he shows to be admitted. Their fornication, for
instance, was a thing admitted. Wherefore there was no need to show that there
was an offense; but in that case he proved the magnitude of the transgression,
and conducted his discourse by way of comparison. Again, their going to law
before aliens was an offense, but not so great a one. Wherefore he considered by
the way, and proved it. The matter of the idol-sacrifices again was questioned. It
was however, a most serious evil. Wherefore he both shows it to be an offense,
and amplifies it by his discourse. But when he does this, he not only withdraws
them from the several crimes, but invites them also to their contraries. Thus he
said not only that one must not commit fornication, but likewise that one ought