one street; and immediately the angel departed from him. And when Peter had
come to himself, he said, Now I know of a surety, that the Lord has sent His
Angel, and has delivered me out of the hand of Herod, and from all the
expectation of the people of the Jews." (v. 10, 11.) When the angel departed, then
Peter understood: "Now I perceive," says he, not then. But why is this so, and
why is Peter not sensible of the things taking place, although he had already
experienced a like deliverance when all were released? [Acts 5:18] (The Lord)
would have the pleasure come to him all at once, and that he should first be at
liberty, and then be sensible of what had happened. The circumstance also of the
chains having fallen off from his hands, is a strong argument of his not having
fled. "And when he had considered the thing, he came to the house of Mary the
mother of John, whose surname was Mark; where many were gathered together
praying." [Acts 12:12] Observe how Peter does not immediately withdraw, but
first brings the good tidings to his friends. "And as Peter knocked at the door of
the gate, a damsel came to hearken, named Rhoda. And when she knew Peter's
voice, she opened not the gate for gladness,"— Mark even the servant-girls, how
full of piety they are—"but ran in, and told how Peter stood before the gate."
[Acts 12:13-15] But they, though it was so, shook their heads (incredulously):
And they said unto her, You are mad. But she constantly affirmed that it was
even so. And they said, It is his angel. "But Peter continued knocking: and when
they had opened the door, and saw him, they were astonished. But he, beckoning
unto them with the hand to hold their peace, declared unto them how the Lord
had brought him out of the prison. And he said, Go show these things unto
James, and to the brethren. And he departed, and went into another place." (v.
16, 17.) But let us review the order of the narrative.
(Recapitulation.) "At that time," it says, "Herod the king stretched forth his
hands to afflict certain of the Church." [Acts 12:1] Like a wild beast, he attacked
all indiscriminately and without consideration. This is what Christ said: "My cup
indeed you shall drink, and with the baptism wherewith I am baptized, shall you
be baptized." [Mark 10:39] (b) "And he killed James the brother of John." [Acts

12:2] For there was also another James, the brother of the Lord: therefore to
distinguish him, he says, "The brother of John." Do you mark that the sum of
affairs rested in these three, especially Peter and James? (a) And how was it he
did not kill Peter immediately? It mentions the reason: "it was the day of
unleavened bread:" and he wished rather to make a display ([ἐ] [κπομπεὕσαι])
with the killing of him. "And when he saw it pleased the Jews." [Acts 12:3] For
their own part, they now in consequence of Gamaliel's advice, abstained from
bloodshedding: and besides, did not even invent accusations; but by means of
others they compassed the same results. (c) This (counsel of Gamaliel's) above
all was their condemnation: for the preaching was shown to be no longer a thing
of men. "He proceeded further to kill Peter also." [ch. 5:8] In very deed was that
fulfilled, "We are accounted as sheep for the slaughter." [Psalm 44:13] "Seeing,"
it says, "it was a pleasing thing to the Jews." [Romans 8:36] A pleasing thing,
bloodshed, and unrighteous bloodshed, wickedness, impiety! He ministered to
their senseless ([ἀ] [τόποις]) lusts: for, whereas he ought to have done the
contrary, to check their rage, he made them more eager, as if he were an
executioner, and not a physician to their diseased minds. (And this) though he
had numberless warnings in the case of both his grandfather and his father
Herod, how the former in consequence of his putting the children to death
suffered the greatest calamities, and the latter by slaying John raised up against
himself a grievous war. But as they thought * * He feared lest Peter, in
consequence of the slaying of James, should withdraw; and wishing to have him
in safe keeping, he put him in prison: "and delivered him to four quaternions of
soldiers" [Acts 12:4]: the stricter the custody, the more wondrous the display.
"Peter therefore was kept in prison." [Acts 12:5] But this was all the better for
Peter, who was thereby made more approved, and evinced his own manly
courage. And it says, "there was earnest prayer making." It was the prayer of
(filial) affection: it was for a father they asked, a father mild. "There was," it
says, "earnest prayer." Hear how they were affected to their teachers. No
factions, no perturbation: but they betook them to prayer, to that alliance which