obedience, and shaming them, and casting them down. For this, says he, is wellpleasing to the Lord. See how he would have us do all not from nature only, but,
prior to this, from what is pleasing to God, that we may also have reward.
Ver. 21. "Fathers, provoke not your children, that they be not discouraged."
Lo! Again here also is subjection and love. And he said not, "Love your
children," for it had been superfluous, seeing that nature itself constrains to this;
but what needed correction he corrected; that the love should in this case also be
the more vehement, because that the obedience is greater. For it nowhere lays
down as an exemplification the relation of husband and wife; but what? Hear the
prophet saying, "Like as a father pities his children, so the Lord pitied them that
fear Him" [Psalm 103:13, Septuagint] And again Christ says, "What man is there
of you, whom if his son ask bread, will he give him a stone? Or if he ask a fish,
will he give him a serpent?" [Matthew 7:9]
"Fathers, provoke not your children, that they be not discouraged."
He has set down what he knew had the greatest power to seize upon them;
and while commanding them he has spoken more like a friend; and nowhere
does he mention God, for he would overcome parents, and bow their tender
affections. That is, "Make them not more contentious, there are occasions when
you ought even to give way."
Next he comes to the third kind of authority.
There is here also a certain love, but that no more proceeding from nature,
as above, but from habit, and from the authority itself, and the works done.
Seeing then that in this case the sphere of love is narrowed, while that of
obedience is amplified, he dwells upon this, wishing to give to these from their
obedience, what the first have from nature. So that what he discourses with the
servants alone is not for their masters' sakes, but for their own also, that they
may make themselves the objects of tender affection to their masters. But he sets
not this forth openly; for so he would doubtless have made them supine.
Ver. 22. "Servants," he says, "obey in all things your masters according to
the flesh."

And see how always he sets down the names, "wives, children, servants,"
being at once a just claim upon their obedience. But that none might be pained,
he added, "to your masters according to the flesh." Your better part, the soul, is
free, he says; your service is for a season. It therefore do thou subject, that your
service be no more of constraint. "Not with eye-service, as men-pleasers." Make,
he says, your service which is by the law, to be from the fear of Christ. For if
when your master sees you not, you do your duty and what is for his honor, it is
manifest that you do it because of the sleepless Eye. "Not with eye-service," he
says, "as men-pleasers"; thus implying, "it is you who will have to sustain the
damage." For hear the prophet saying, "God has scattered the bones of the menpleasers." [Psalm 53:6, Septuagint] See then how he spares them, and brings
them to order. "But in singleness of heart," he says, "fearing God." For that is
not singleness, but hypocrisy, to hold one thing, and act another; to appear one
when the master is present, another when he is absent. Therefore he said not
simply, "in singleness of heart," but, "fearing God." For this is to fear God,
when, though none be seeing, we do not anything that is evil; but if we do, we
fear not God, but men. Do you see how he brings them to order?
Ver. 23. "Whatsoever you do, work heartily, as unto the Lord, and not unto
men."
He desires to have them freed not only from hypocrisy, but also from
slothfulness. He has made them instead of slaves free, when they need not the
superintendence of their master; for the expression "heartily" means this, "with
good will," not with a slavish necessity, but with freedom, and of choice. And
what is the reward?
Ver. 24. "Knowing," he says, "that from the Lord you shall receive the
recompense of your inheritance: for you serve the Lord Christ."
For from Him also it is evident that you shall receive the reward. And that
you serve the Lord is plain from this.
Ver. 25. "For he that does wrong," he says, "shall receive again for the
wrong that he has done."