ourselves, how much more must it be so with Him, who brought us out of
nothing into being, who after this bought us with His precious Blood, who paid
down such a price for us as no one would endure to pay for his own son, who
shed His own Blood for us? If therefore we had ten thousand souls, and should
lay them all down for Him, should we make Him an equal return? By no means.
And why? Because He did this, owing us nothing, but the whole was a matter of
grace. But we henceforth are debtors: and being God Himself, He became a
servant, and not being subject to death, subjected Himself to death in the flesh.
We, if we do not lay down our lives for Him, by the law of nature must certainly
lay them down, and a little later shall be separated from it, however unwillingly.
So also in the case of riches, if we do not bestow them for His sake, we shall
render them up from necessity at our end. So it is also with humility. Although
we are not humble for His sake, we shall be made humble by tribulations, by
calamities, by over-ruling powers. Do you see therefore how great is the grace!
He has not said, "What great things do the Martyrs do? Although they die not for
Me, they certainly will die." But He owns Himself much indebted to them,
because they voluntarily resign that which in the course of nature they were
about to resign shortly against their will. He has not said, "What great thing do
they, who give away their riches? Even against their will they will have to
surrender them." But He owns Himself much indebted to them too, and is not
ashamed to confess before all that He, the Master, is nourished by His slaves.
For this also is the glory of a Master, to have grateful slaves. And this is the
glory of a Master, that He should thus love His slaves. And this is the glory of a
Master, to claim for His own what is theirs. And this is the glory of a Master, not
to be ashamed to confess them before all. Let us therefore be stricken with awe
at this so great love of Christ. Let us be inflamed with this love-potion. Though a
man be low and mean, yet if we hear that he loves us, we are above all things
warmed with love towards him, and honor him exceedingly. And do we then
love? And when our Master loves us so much, we are not excited? Let us not, I
beseech you, let us not be so indifferent with regard to the salvation of our souls,

but let us love Him according to our power, and let us spend all upon His love,
our life, our riches, our glory, everything, with delight, with joy, with alacrity,
not as rendering anything to Him, but to ourselves. For such is the law of those
who love. They think that they are receiving favors, when they are suffering
wrong for the sake of their beloved. Therefore let us be so affected towards our
Lord, that we also may partake of the good things to come in Christ Jesus our
Lord.