to its end, it follows that for this very reason he directs the whole of
his life to that sin, and is willing to remain in sin forever, if he could
do so with impunity. This is what Gregory says on Job 41:23, "He
shall esteem the deep as growing old" (Moral. xxxiv): "The wicked
only put an end to sinning because their life came to an end: they
would indeed have wished to live for ever, that they might continue
in sin for ever for they desire rather to sin than to live." Still another
reason may be given why the punishment of mortal sin is eternal:
because thereby one offends God Who is infinite. Wherefore since
punishment cannot be infinite in intensity, because the creature is
incapable of an infinite quality, it must needs be infinite at least in
duration. And again there is a fourth reason for the same: because
guilt remains for ever, since it cannot be remitted without grace, and
men cannot receive grace after death; nor should punishment cease
so long as guilt remains.
Reply to Objection 1: Punishment has not to be equal to fault as to
the amount of duration as is seen to be the case also with human
laws. We may also reply with Gregory (Dial. xliv) that although sin is
temporal in act, it is eternal in will.
Reply to Objection 2: The degree of intensity in the punishment
corresponds to the degree of gravity in the sin; wherefore mortal
sins unequal in gravity will receive a punishment unequal in intensity
but equal in duration.
Reply to Objection 3: The punishments inflicted on those who are
not altogether expelled from the society of their fellow-citizens are
intended for their correction: whereas those punishments, whereby
certain persons are wholly banished from the society of their fellowcitizens, are not intended for their correction; although they may be
intended for the correction and tranquillity of the others who remain
in the state. Accordingly the damnation of the wicked is for the
correction of those who are now in the Church; for punishments are
intended for correction, not only when they are being inflicted, but
also when they are decreed.
Reply to Objection 4: The everlasting punishment of the wicked will
not be altogether useless. For they are useful for two purposes.
First, because thereby the Divine justice is safeguarded which is
acceptable to God for its own sake. Hence Gregory says (Dial. iv):
"Almighty God on account of His loving kindness delights not in the
torments of the unhappy, but on account of His justice. He is for ever

unappeased by the punishment of the wicked." Secondly, they are
useful, because the elect rejoice therein, when they see God's justice
in them, and realize that they have escaped them. Hence it is written
(Ps. 57:12): "The just shall rejoice when he shall see the revenge,"
etc., and (Is. 66:24): "They," namely the wicked, "shall be a
loathsome sight to all flesh," namely to the saints, as a gloss says.
Gregory expresses himself in the same sense (Dial. iv): "The wicked
are all condemned to eternal punishment, and are punished for their
own wickedness. Yet they will burn to some purpose, namely that
the just may all both see in God the joys they receive, and perceive
in them the torments they have escaped: for which reason they will
acknowledge themselves for ever the debtors of Divine grace the
more that they will see how the evils which they overcame by its
assistance are punished eternally."
Reply to Objection 5: Although the punishment relates to the soul
accidentally, it relates essentially to the soul infected with guilt. And
since guilt will remain in the soul for ever, its punishment also will be
everlasting.
Reply to Objection 6: Punishment corresponds to fault, properly
speaking, in respect of the inordinateness in the fault, and not of the
dignity in the person offended: for if the latter were the case, a
punishment of infinite intensity would correspond to every sin.
Accordingly, although a man deserves to lose his being from the fact
that he has sinned against God the author of his being, yet, in view
of the inordinateness of the act itself, loss of being is not due to him,
since being is presupposed to merit and demerit, nor is being lost or
corrupted by the inordinateness of sin [FS, Question 85, Article 1]:
and consequently privation of being cannot be the punishment due
to any sin.