succeeds in exasperating (for what can one say to him who is overcome?), he
addresses the man who is able to bear the other's infirmity, exhorting him before
he bestows his gift to correct the suppliant by the gentleness of his countenance
and the mildness of his words. But if any one, although he does not take the
property (of these widows), nevertheless loads them with innumerable
reproaches, and insults them, and is exasperated against them, he not only fails
through his gift to alleviate the despondency produced by poverty, but
aggravates the distress by his abuse. For although they may be compelled to act
very shamelessly through the necessity of hunger, they are nevertheless
distressed at this compulsion. When, then, owing to the dread of famine, they are
constrained to beg, and owing to their begging are constrained to put off shame,
and then again on account of their shamelessness are insulted, the power of
despondency becoming of a complex kind, and accompanied by much gloom,
settles down upon the soul. And one who has the charge of these persons ought
to be so long-suffering, as not only not to increase their despondency by his fits
of anger, but also to remove the greater part of it by his exhortation. For as the
man who has been insulted, although he is in the enjoyment of great abundance,
does not feel the advantage of his wealth, on account of the blow which he has
received from the insult; so on the other hand, the man who has been addressed
with kindly words, and for whom the gift has been accompanied with
encouragement, exults and rejoices all the more, and the thing given becomes
doubled in value through the manner in which it is offered. And this I say not of
myself, but borrow from him whose precept I quoted just now: "My son, blemish
not your good deeds, neither use uncomfortable words when you give anything.
Shall not the dew assuage the heat? So is a word better than a gift. Lo! Is not a
word better than a gift? But both are with a gracious man." [Sirach 18:15-17]
But the superintendent of these persons ought not only to be gentle and
forbearing, but also skillful in the management of property; for if this
qualification is wanting, the affairs of the poor are again involved in the same
distress. One who was entrusted not long ago with this ministry, and got together

a large hoard of money, neither consumed it himself, nor expended it with a few
exceptions upon those who needed it, but kept the greater part of it buried in the
earth until a season of distress occurred, when it was all surrendered into the
hands of the enemy. Much forethought, therefore, is needed, that the resources of
the Church should be neither over abundant, nor deficient, but that all the
supplies which are provided should be quickly distributed among those who
require them, and the treasures of the Church stored up in the hearts of those
who are under her rule.
Moreover, in the reception of strangers, and the care of the sick, consider
how great an expenditure of money is needed, and how much exactness and
discernment on the part of those who preside over these matters. For it is often
necessary that this expenditure should be even larger than that of which I spoke
just now, and that he who presides over it should combine prudence and wisdom
with skill in the art of supply, so as to dispose the affluent to be emulous and
ungrudging in their gifts, lest while providing for the relief of the sick, he should
vex the souls of those who supply their wants. But earnestness and zeal need to
be displayed here in a far higher degree; for the sick are difficult creatures to
please, and prone to languor; and unless great accuracy and care are used, even a
slight oversight is enough to do the patient great mischief.
17. But in the care of virgins, the fear is greater in proportion as the
possession is more precious, and this flock is of a nobler character than the
others. Already, indeed, even into the band of these holy ones, an infinite number
of women have rushed full of innumerable bad qualities; and in this case our
grief is greater than in the other; for there is just the same difference between a
virgin and a widow going astray, as between a free-born damsel and her
handmaid. With widows, indeed, it has become a common practice to trifle, and
to rail at one another, to flatter or to be impudent, to appear everywhere in
public, and to perambulate the market-place. But the virgin has striven for nobler
aims, and eagerly sought the highest kind of philosophy, and professes to exhibit
upon earth the life which angels lead, and while yet in the flesh proposes to do