cause of a greater remission of sins.
For if we be willing, no one shall be able to injure us, but even our enemies
shall advantage us in the greatest degree. And why do I speak of men? For what
can be more wicked than the devil; yet nevertheless, even hence have we a great
opportunity of approving ourselves; and Job shows it. But if the devil has
become a cause of crowns, why are you afraid of a man as an enemy?
See then how much you gain, bearing meekly the spiteful acts of your
enemies. First and greatest, deliverance from sins; secondly, fortitude and
patience; thirdly, mildness and benevolence; for he that knows not how to be
angry with them that grieve him, much more will he be ready to serve them that
love him. Fourthly, to be free from anger continually, to which nothing can be
equal. For of him that is free from anger, it is quite clear that he is delivered also
from the despondency hence arising, and will not spend his life on vain labors
and sorrows. For he that knows not how to hate, neither does he know how to
grieve, but will enjoy pleasure, and ten thousand blessings. So that we punish
ourselves by hating others, even as on the other hand we benefit ourselves by
loving them.
Besides all these things, you will be an object of veneration even to your
very enemies, though they be devils; or rather, you will not so much as have an
enemy while you are of such a disposition.
But what is greater than all, and first, you gain the favor of God. Should
thou have sinned, you will obtain pardon; should you have done what is right,
you will obtain a greater confidence. Let us accomplish therefore the hating no
one, that God also may love us, that, though we be in debt for ten thousand
talents, He may have compassion and pity us.
But have you been injured by him? Pity him then, do not hate him; weep
and mourn, do not turn away from him. For you are not the one that has offended
against God, but he; but you have even approved yourself, if you endure it.
Consider that Christ, when about to be crucified, rejoiced for Himself, but wept
for them that were crucifying Him. This ought to be our disposition also; and the

more we are injured, so much the more should we lament for them that are
injuring us. For to us many are the benefits hence arising, but to them the
opposites.
But did he insult you, and strike you before all? Then has he disgraced and
dishonored himself before all, and has opened the mouths of a thousand
accusers, and for you has he woven more crowns, and gathered for you many to
publish your forbearance.
But did he slander you to others? And what is this? God is the one that is to
demand the account, not they that have heard this. For to himself has he added
occasion of punishment, so that not only for his own sins he should give account,
but also of what he said of you. And upon you has he brought evil report with
men, but he himself has incurred evil report with God.
And if these things are not sufficient for you, consider that even your Lord
was evil reported of both by Satan and by men, and that to those most loved by
Him; and His Only-Begotten the same again. Wherefore He said, "If they have
called the Master of the house Beelzebub, much more shall they call them of His
household." [Matthew 10:25]
And that wicked demon did not only slander Him, but was also believed,
and slandered Him not in ordinary matters, but with the greatest reproaches and
accusations. For he affirmed Him to be possessed, and to be a deceiver, and an
adversary of God.
But have you also done good, and received evil? Nay, in respect of this
most of all lament and grieve for him that has done the wrong, but for yourself
rather rejoice, because you have become like God, "Who makes the sun to rise
upon evil and good." [Matthew 5:45]
But if to follow God is beyond you, although to him that watches not even
this is hard; yet nevertheless if this seem to you to be too great for you, come let
us bring you to your fellow-servants, to Joseph, who suffered countless things,
and did good unto his brethren; to Moses, who after their countless plots against
him, prayed for them; to the blessed Paul, who cannot so much as number what