conduct under all circumstances on the stretch, and braced up. For instance when
we pray, we ought to do it with much intentness, stretching forth the soul toward
Heaven, not with cords, but with great earnestness. Again when we do works of
mercy, we have need of intentness, lest by any means, thought for our
household, and care for children, and anxiety about wife, and fear of poverty
entering in, should slacken our sail. For if we put it on the stretch on all sides by
the hope of the things to come, it receives well the energy of the Spirit; and none
of those perishable and wretched things will fall upon it, yea, and if any of them
should fall, it does it no harm, but is quickly thrown back by the tightness, and is
shaken off and fails down.
Therefore we have need of much intentness. For we too are sailing over a
great and wide sea, full of many monsters, and of many rocks, and bringing forth
for us many storms, and from the midst of serene weather raising up a most
violent tempest. It is necessary then if we would sail with ease, and without
danger, to stretch the sails, that is, our determination: for this is sufficient for us.
For Abraham also, when he had stretched forth his affections towards God and
set before Him his fixed resolution, what else had he need of? Nothing: but "he
believed God, and it was counted unto him for righteousness." [Genesis 15:6]
But Faith [comes] of a sincere will. He offered up his son, and though he did not
slay him, he received a recompense as if he had slain him, and though the work
was not done the reward was given.
Let our sails then be in good order, not grown old (for everything "that is
decayed and waxen old is near to vanishing away" ) [Hebrews 8:13], not worn
into holes, that so they may bear the energy of the Spirit . "For the natural man,"
it is said, "receives not the things of the Spirit." [1 Corinthians 2:14] For as the
webs of spiders could not receive a blast of wind, so neither will the soul
devoted to this life, nor the natural man ever be able to receive the grace of the
Spirit: for our reasonings differ nothing from them, preserving a connection in
appearance only but destitute of all power.
8. Our condition, however, is not such, if we are watchful: but whatever

may fall upon [the Christian], he bears all, and is above all, stronger than any
whirlpool. For suppose there be a spiritual man, and that innumerable calamities
befall him, yet is he overcome by none of them. And what do I say? Let poverty
come upon him, disease, insults, revilings, mockings, stripes, every sort of
infliction, every sort of mocking, and slanders, and insults: yet, as though he
were outside the world, and set free from the feelings of the body, so will he
laugh all to scorn.
And that my words are not mere boasting, I think many [such] exist even
now; for instance, of those who have embraced the life of the desert. This
however, you say, is nothing wonderful. But I say that of those also who live in
cities, there are such men unsuspected. If you wish however, I shall be able to
exhibit some among those of old. And that you may learn, consider Paul, I pray
you. What is there fearful that he did not suffer, and that he did not submit to?
But he bore all nobly. Let us imitate him, for so shall we be able to land in the
tranquil havens with much merchandise.
Let us then stretch our mind towards Heaven, let us be held fast by that
desire, let us clothe ourselves with spiritual fire, let us gird ourselves with its
flame. No man who bears flame fears those who meet him; be it wild beast, be it
man, be it snares innumerable, so long as he is armed with fire, all things stand
out of his way, all things retire. The flame is intolerable, the fire cannot be
endured, it consumes all.
With this fire let us clothe ourselves, offering up glory to our Lord Jesus
Christ, with whom to the Father, together with the Holy Ghost, be glory, might,
honor, now and ever and world without end. Amen.
Thanks be to God.