taking the form of a servant, being made in the likeness of men: and being found
in fashion as a man, He humbled Himself, becoming obedient even unto death,
yea, the death of the cross. Wherefore has God highly exalted Him." [Philippians
2:6-9]
Do you see how when he was discoursing of the Godhead alone, he uttered
those great things, that He "was in the form of God" and that He "was equal
with" Him that begot Him, and to Him refers the whole? But when He showed
Him to you made flesh, he lowered again the discourse. For except thou
distinguish these things, there is great variance between the things spoken. Since,
if He were "equal with God," how did He highly exalt one equal with Himself?
If He were "in the form of God," how "gave" He Him "a name?" for he that
gives, gives to one that has not, and he that exalts, exalts one that is before
abased. He will be found then to be imperfect and in need, before He has
received the "exaltation" and "the Name;" and many other absurd corollaries
will hence follow. But if you should add the incarnation, you will not err in
saying these things. These things then here also consider, and with this mind
receive thou the expressions.
8. Now together with these we will state also other reasons why this
pericope of Scripture was thus composed. But at present it is necessary to
mention this: first, that Paul's discourse was of the resurrection, a thing counted
to be impossible and greatly disbelieved: next, he was writing to Corinthians
among whom there were many philosophers who mocked at such things always.
For although in other things wrangling one with another, in this they all, as with
one mouth, conspired, dogmatically declaring that there is no resurrection.
Contending therefore for such a subject so disbelieved and ridiculed, both on
account of the prejudice which had been formed, and on account of the difficulty
of the thing; and wishing to demonstrate its possibility, he first effects this from
the resurrection of Christ. And having proved it both from the prophets, and
from those who had seen, and from those who believed: when he had obtained
an admitted reductio ad absurdum, he proves in what follows the resurrection of

mankind also. "For if the dead rise not," says he, "neither has Christ been
raised."
Further; having closely urged these converse arguments in the former
verses, he tries it again in another way, calling Him the "first-fruits," and
pointing to His "abolishing all rule and authority and power, and death last."
"How then should death be put down," says he, "unless he first loose the bodies
which he held?" Since then he had spoken great things of the Only-Begotten,
that He "gives up the kingdom," i.e., that He Himself brings these things to pass,
and Himself is victor in the war, and "puts all things under His feet," he adds, to
correct the unbelief of the multitude, "for He must reign till He has put all His
enemies under His feet." Not as putting an end to the kingdom, did he use the
expression "until," but to render what was said worthy of credit, and induce them
to be confident. For "do not," says he, "because you have heard that He will
abolish all rule, and authority and power," to wit, the devil, and the bands of
demons, (many as there are,) and the multitudes of unbelievers, and the tyranny
of death, and all evils: do not thou fear as though His strength was exhausted.
For until He shall have done all these things, "He must reign;" not saying this,
that after He has brought it to pass He does not reign; but establishing this other,
that even if it be not now, undoubtedly it will be. For His kingdom is not cut off:
yea, He rules and prevails and abides until He shall have set to right all things.
And this manner of speech one might find also in the Old Testament; as
when it is said, "But the word of the Lord abides for ever;" [Psalm 119:89] and,
"You are the same, and Your years shall not fail." [Psalm 102:27] Now these and
such-like things the Prophet says, when he is telling of things which a long space
of time must achieve and which must by all means come to pass; casting out the
fearfulness of the duller sort of hearers.
But that the expression, "until," spoken of God, and "unto," do not signify
an end, hear what one says: "From everlasting unto everlasting You are God:"
[Psalm 90:2] and again, "I am, I am," and "Even to your old age I am He."
[Isaiah 46:4]