itself a proof how great a thing he considered those bonds; for as in writing to
the Corinthians he said, "I fed you with milk, not with meat, for you were not yet
able to bear it;" [1 Corinthians 3:2] so also here. They before whom he spoke
were not able to hear of the beauty, nor the comeliness, nor the blessing of those
bonds. Hence it was he added, "except these bonds." To the Hebrews however he
spoke not thus, but exhorted them to "be bound with" [Hebrews 13:3] them that
were in bonds. And hence too did he himself rejoice in his bonds, and was
bound, and was led with the prisoners into the inner prison. Mighty is the power
of Paul's chain! A spectacle this, which may suffice for every other, to behold
Paul bound, and led forth from his prison; to behold him bound, and sitting
within it, what pleasure can come up to this? What would I not give for such a
sight? Do ye see the emperors, the consuls, borne along in their chariots and
arrayed in gold, and their bodyguard with every thing about them of gold? Their
halberds of gold, their shields of gold, their raiment of gold, their horses with
trappings of gold? How much more delightful than such a spectacle is his! I
would rather see Paul once, going forth with the prisoners from his prison, than
behold these ten thousand times over, parading along with all that retinue. When
he was thus led forth, how many Angels, suppose ye, led the way before him?
And to show that I speak no fiction, I will make the fact manifest to you from a
certain ancient narrative.
Elisha the prophet, (perhaps ye know the man,) at the time [2 Kings 6:8-12]
when the king of Syria was at war with the king of Israel, sitting at his own
home, brought to light all the counsels which the king of Syria was taking in his
chamber with them that were privy to his designs, and rendered the king's
counsels of none effect, by telling beforehand his secrets, and not suffering the
king of Israel to fall into the snares which he was laying. This sorely troubled the
king; he was disheartened, and was reduced to greater perplexity, not knowing
how to discover him who was disclosing all that passed, and plotting against
him, and disappointing his schemes. Whilst therefore he was in this perplexity,
and enquiring into the cause, one of his armor-bearers told him, that there was a

certain prophet, one Elisha, dwelling in Samaria, who suffered not the king's
designs to stand, but disclosed all that passed. The king imagined that he had
discovered the whole matter. Sure, never was any one more miserably misled
than he. When he ought to have honored the man, to have reverenced him, to
have been awed that he really possessed so great power, as that, seated, as he
was, so many furlongs off, he should know all that passed in the king's chamber,
without any one at all to tell him; this indeed he did not, but being exasperated,
and wholly carried away by his passion, he equips horsemen, and soldiers, and
dispatches them to bring the prophet before him.
Now Elisha had a disciple as yet only on the threshold of prophecy, [2
Kings 6:13 ff.] as yet far from being judged worthy of revelations of this kind.
The king's soldiers arrived at the spot, as intending to bind the man, or rather the
prophet.— Again I am falling upon bonds, so entirely is this discourse
interwoven with them.— And when the disciple saw the host of soldiers, he was
affrighted, and ran full of trembling to his master, and told him the calamity, as
he thought, and informed him of the inevitable peril. The prophet smiled at him
for fearing things not worthy to be feared, and bade him be of good cheer. The
disciple, however, being as yet imperfect, did not listen to him, but being still
amazed at the sight, remained in fear. Upon this, what did the prophet do?
"Lord," said he, "open the eyes of this young man, and let him see that they
which are with us, are more than they which are with them;" [2 Kings 6:16-17]
and immediately he beheld the whole mountain, where the prophet then dwelt,
filled with so great a multitude of horses and chariots of fire. Now these were
nothing else than ranks of Angels. But if only for an occasion like this so great a
band of Angels attended Elisha what must Paul have had? This is what the
prophet David tells us. "The Angel of the Lord encamps round about them that
fear Him." [Psalm 34:7] And again; "They shall bear you up in their hands, lest
you dash your foot against a stone." [Psalm 91:2] And why do I speak of
Angels? The Lord Himself was with him then as he went forth; for surely it
cannot be that He was seen by Abraham, and yet was not with Paul. No, it was