death all things are dissolved; for hear the Prophet, how he says, "In that very
day his thoughts perish." [Psalm 146:4] And not by death only, but by many
things besides; for instance, beauty, at the advance of either disease or old age,
withdraws and dies away, and suffers corruption. Bodily vigor again is destroyed
by the same means; nor does luxury itself afford the same pleasure in old age, as
is evident from the case of Barzillai: the history, no doubt, you know. Or again,
in another sense, lust corrupts and destroys the old man; for as wool is destroyed
by the very same means by which it is produced, so likewise is the old man. For
love of glory destroys him, and pleasures will often destroy him, and "lust" will
utterly "deceive" him. For this is not really pleasure but bitterness and deceit, all
pretense and outward show. The surface, indeed, of the things is bright, but the
things themselves are only full of misery and extreme wretchedness, and
loathsomeness, and utter poverty. Take off the mask, and lay bare the true face,
and you shall see the cheat, for cheat it is, when that which is, appears not, and
that which is not, is displayed. And it is thus that impositions are effected.
The Apostle delineates for us four men. Of these I shall give an
explanation. In this place he mentions two, speaking thus, "Putting away the old
man, be ye renewed in the spirit of your mind, and put on the new man." And in
the Epistle to the Romans, two more, as where he says, "But I see a different law
in my members warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into
captivity under the law of sin which is in my members." [Romans 7:23] And
these latter bear affinity to those former two, the "new man" to the "inner man,"
and the "old man" to the "outer man." However, three of these four were subject
to corruption. Or rather there are three, the new man, the old, and this, man in his
substance and nature.
Ver. 23. "And that you be renewed," says he, "in the spirit of your mind."
In order that no one may suppose that, whereas he speaks of old and new,
he is introducing a different person, observe his expression, "That ye be
renewed." To be renewed is, when the selfsame thing which has grown old is
renewed, changed from one thing into the other. So that the subject indeed is the

same, but the change is in that which is accidental. Just as the body indeed is the
same, and the change in that which is accidental, so is it here. How then is the
renewal to take place? "In the spirit of your mind," says he. Whosoever therefore
has the Spirit, will perform no old deed, for the Spirit will not endure old deeds.
"In the spirit," says he, "of your mind," that is, in the spirit which is in your
mind.
Ver. 24. "And put on the new man."
Do you see that the subject is one, but the clothing is twofold, that which is
put off, and that which is put on? "The new man," he continues, "which after
God has been created in righteousness and holiness of truth." Now wherefore
does he call virtue a man? And wherefore vice, a man? Because a man cannot be
shown without acting; so that these things, no less than nature, show a man,
whether he be good or evil. Now as to undress one's self and to dress one's self is
easy, so may we see it is with virtue and vice. The young man is strong;
wherefore let us also become strong for the performance of good actions. The
young man has no wrinkle, therefore neither should we have. The young man
wavers not, nor is he easily taken with diseases, therefore neither should we be.
Observe here how he calls this realizing of virtue, this bringing of it into
being from nothing, a "creation." But what? Was not that other former creation
after God? No, in no-wise, but after the devil. He is the sole creator of sin.
How is this? For man is created henceforth, not of water, nor of earth, but
"in righteousness and holiness of truth." What is this? He straightway created
him, he means, to be a son: for this takes place from Baptism. This it is which is
the reality, "in righteousness and holiness of truth." There was of old a
righteousness, there was likewise a holiness with the Jews. Yet was that
righteousness not in truth, but in figure. For the being clean in body was a type
of purity, not the truth of purity; was a type of righteousness, not the truth of
righteousness. "In righteousness," says he, "and holiness," which are "of truth."
And this expression is used with reference to falsehood; for many there are,
who to them that are without, seem to be righteous, yet are false. Now by