tree, so that the birds of the air come and lodge in the branches thereof."
Thus He meant to set forth the most decisive sign of its greatness. "Even so
then shall it be with respect to the gospel too," says He. Yea, for His disciples
were weakest of all, and least of all; but nevertheless, because of the great power
that was in them, It has been unfolded in every part of the world.
After this He adds the leaven to this similitude, saying,
"The Kingdom of Heaven is like leaven, which a woman took, and hid in
three measures of meal, until the whole was leavened."
For as this converts the large quantity of meal into its own quality, even so
shall you convert the whole world.
And see His wisdom, in that He brings in things natural, implying that as
the one cannot fail to take place, so neither the other. For say not this to me:
"What shall we be able to do, twelve men, throwing ourselves upon so vast a
multitude?" Nay, for this very thing most of all makes your might conspicuous,
that you mix with the multitude and are not put to flight. As therefore the leaven
then leavens the lump when it comes close to the meal, and not simply close, but
so as to be actually mixed with it (for He said not, "put," simply, but "hid"); so
also ye, when you cleave to your enemies, and are made one with them, then
shall you get the better of them. And as the leaven, though it be buried, yet is not
destroyed, but little by little transmutes all into its own condition; of like sort
will the event be here also, with respect to the gospel. Fear ye not then, because I
said there would be much injurious dealing: for even so shall you shine forth,
and get the better of all.
But by "three measures," here, He meant many, for He is wont to take this
number for a multitude.
And marvel not, if discoursing about the kingdom, He made mention of a
little seed and of leaven; for He was discoursing with men inexperienced and
ignorant, and such as needed to be led on by those means. For so simple were
they, that even after all this, they required a good deal of explanation.
Where now are the children of the Greeks? Let them learn Christ's power,

seeing the verity of His deeds, and on either ground let them adore Him, that He
both foretold so great a thing, and fulfilled it. Yea, for it is He that put the power
into the leaven. With this intent He mingled also with the multitude those who
believe in Him, that we might impart unto the rest of our wisdom. Let no one
therefore reprove us for being few. For great is the power of the gospel, and that
which has been once leavened, becomes leaven again for what remains. And as a
spark, when it has caught in timber, makes what has been burnt up already
increase the flame, and so proceeds to the rest; even so the gospel likewise. But
He said not fire, but "leaven." Why might this be? Because in that case the
whole effect is not of the fire, but partly of the timber too that is kindled, but in
this the leaven does the whole work by itself.
3. Now if twelve men leavened the whole world, imagine how great our
baseness, in that when we being so many are not able to amend them that
remain; we, who ought to be enough for ten thousand worlds, and to become
leaven to them. "But they," one may say, "were apostles." And what then? Were
they not partakers with you? Were they not brought up in cities? Did they not
enjoy the same benefits? Did they not practise trades? What, were they angels?
What, came they down from Heaven?
"But they had signs," it will be said. It was not the signs that made them
admirable. How long shall we use those miracles as cloaks for our own
remissness? Behold the choir of the Saints, that they shone not by those miracles.
Why, many who had actually cast out devils, because they wrought iniquity,
instead of being admired, did even incur punishment.
And what can it be then, he will say, that showed them great? Their
contempt of wealth, their despising glory, their freedom from worldly things.
Since surely, had they wanted these qualities, and been slaves of their passions,
though they had raised ten thousand dead, so far from doing any good, they
would even have been accounted deceivers. Thus it is their life, so bright on all
sides, which also draws down the grace of the Spirit.
What manner of miracle did John work, that he fixed on himself the