THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.41, C.4.

assaults which perhaps Christ suffered from the devil during that
time of His fast.
Reply to Objection 3: As Ambrose says on Lk. 4:13, the devil
departed from Christ "for a time, because, later on, he returned, not
to tempt Him, but to assail Him openly"---namely, at the time of His
Passion. Nevertheless, He seemed in this later assault to tempt
Christ to dejection and hatred of His neighbor; just as in the desert
he had tempted Him to gluttonous pleasure and idolatrous contempt
of God.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.41, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the mode and order of the temptation

were becoming?
Objection 1: It would seem that the mode and order of the temptation
were unbecoming. For the devil tempts in order to induce us to sin.
But if Christ had assuaged His bodily hunger by changing the stones
into bread, He would not have sinned; just as neither did He sin
when He multiplied the loaves, which was no less a miracle, in order
to succor the hungry crowd. Therefore it seems that this was nowise
a temptation.
Objection 2: Further, a counselor is inconsistent if he persuades the
contrary to what he intends. But when the devil set Christ on a
pinnacle of the Temple, he purposed to tempt Him to pride or
vainglory. Therefore it was inconsistent to urge Him to cast Himself
thence: for this would be contrary to pride or vainglory, which
always seeks to rise.
Objection 3: Further, one temptation should lead to one sin. But in
the temptation on the mountain he counseled two sins---namely,
covetousness and idolatry. Therefore the mode of the temptation
was unfitting.
Objection 4: Further, temptations are ordained to sin. But there are
seven deadly sins, as we have stated in the FS, Question 84, Article
4. But the tempter only deals with three, viz. gluttony, vainglory, and
covetousness. Therefore the temptation seems to have been
incomplete.
Objection 5: Further, after overcoming all the vices, man is still
tempted to pride or vainglory: since pride "worms itself in stealthily,
and destroys even good works," as Augustine says (Ep. ccxi).
Therefore Matthew unfittingly gives the last place to the temptation
to covetousness on the mountain, and the second place to the
temptation to vainglory in the Temple, especially since Luke puts
them in the reverse order.
Objection 6: Further, Jerome says on Mt. 4:4 that "Christ purposed to
overcome the devil by humility, not by might." Therefore He should
not have repulsed him with a haughty rebuke, saying: "Begone,
Satan."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.41, C.5.

Objection 7: Further, the gospel narrative seems to be false. For it
seems impossible that Christ could have been set on a pinnacle of
the Temple without being seen by others. Nor is there to be found a
mountain so high that all the world can be seen from it, so that all
the kingdoms of the earth could be shown to Christ from its summit.
It seems, therefore, that Christ's temptation is unfittingly described.
On the contrary is the authority of Scripture.
I answer that, The temptation which comes from the enemy takes the
form of a suggestion, as Gregory says (Hom. xvi in Evang.). Now a
suggestion cannot be made to everybody in the same way; it must
arise from those things towards which each one has an inclination.
Consequently the devil does not straight away tempt the spiritual
man to grave sins, but he begins with lighter sins, so as gradually to
lead him to those of greater magnitude. Wherefore Gregory (Moral.
xxxi), expounding Job 39:25, "He smelleth the battle afar off, the
encouraging of the captains and the shouting of the army," says:
"The captains are fittingly described as encouraging, and the army
as shouting. Because vices begin by insinuating themselves into the
mind under some specious pretext: then they come on the mind in
such numbers as to drag it into all sorts of folly, deafening it with
their bestial clamor."
Thus, too, did the devil set about the temptation of the first man. For
at first he enticed his mind to consent to the eating of the forbidden
fruit, saying (Gn. 3:1): "Why hath God commanded you that you
should not eat of every tree of paradise?" Secondly [he tempted him]
to vainglory by saying: "Your eyes shall be opened." Thirdly, he led
the temptation to the extreme height of pride, saying: "You shall be
as gods, knowing good and evil." This same order did he observe in
tempting Christ. For at first he tempted Him to that which men desire,
however spiritual they may be---namely, the support of the corporeal
nature by food. Secondly, he advanced to that matter in which
spiritual men are sometimes found wanting, inasmuch as they do
certain things for show, which pertains to vainglory. Thirdly, he led
the temptation on to that in which no spiritual men, but only carnal
men, have a part---namely, to desire worldly riches and fame, to the
extent of holding God in contempt. And so in the first two
temptations he said: "If Thou be the Son of God"; but not in the third,
which is inapplicable to spiritual men, who are sons of God by
adoption, whereas it does apply to the two preceding temptations.