saying, "You shall be brought before kings and governors;" signifying that to the
Gentiles also He was afterwards to send them as heralds.) "You have made the
world our enemy, You have armed against us all them that dwell on the earth,
peoples, tyrants, kings."
And what follows again is much more fearful, since men are to become on
our account murderers of brothers, of children, of fathers.
"For the brother," says He, "shall deliver up the brother to death, and the
father the child; and children shall rise up against their parents, and cause them
to be put to death." [Matthew 10:21]
"How, then," one might say, "will the rest of men believe, when they see on
our account, children slain by their fathers, and brethren by brethren, and all
things filled with abominations?" What? Will not men, as though we were
destructive demons, will they not, as though we were devoted, and pests of the
world, drive us out from every quarter, seeing the earth filled with blood of
kinsmen, and with so many murderers? Surely fair is the peace (is it not?) which
we are to bring into men's houses and give them, while we are filling those
houses with so many slaughters. Why, had we been some great number of us,
instead of twelve; had we been, instead of "unlearned and ignorant," wise, and
skilled in rhetoric, and mighty in speech; nay more, had we been even kings, and
in possession of armies and abundance of wealth; how could we have persuaded
any, while kindling up civil wars, yea, and other wars far worse than they? Why,
though we were to despise our own safety, which of all other men will give heed
to us?
But none of these things did they either think or say, neither did they
require any account of His injunctions, but simply yielded and obeyed. And this
came not from their own virtue only, but also of the wisdom of their Teacher. For
see how to each of the fearful things He annexed an encouragement; as in the
case of such as received them not, He said, "It shall be more tolerable for the
land of Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of judgment, than for that city;" so here
again, when He had said, "You shall be brought before governors and kings," He

added, "for my sake, for a testimony to them, and the Gentiles." And this is no
small consolation, that they are suffering these things both for Christ, and for the
Gentiles' conviction. Thus God, though no one regard, is found to be everywhere
doing His own works. Now these things were a comfort to them, not that they
desired the punishment of other men, but that they might have ground of
confidence, as sure to have Him everywhere present with them, who had both
foretold and foreknown these things; and because not as wicked men, and as
pests, were they to suffer all this.
And together with these, He adds another, and that no small consolation for
them, saying,
"But when they deliver you up, take no thought how or what you shall
speak, for it shall be given you in that hour what you shall speak. For it is not ye
that speak, but the Spirit of your Father that speaks in you." [Matthew 10:19-20]
For lest they should say, "How shall we be able to persuade men, when
such things are taking place?" He bids them be confident as to their defense
also. And elsewhere indeed He says, "I will give you a mouth and wisdom;"
[Luke 21:15] but here, "It is the Spirit of your Father that speaks in you,"
advancing them unto the dignity of the prophets. Therefore, when He had spoken
of the power that was given, then He added also the terrors, the murders, and the
slaughters.
"For the brother shall deliver up the brother," says He, "to death, and the
father the child, and the children shall rise up against their parents, and cause
them to be put to death." [Matthew 10:21]
And not even at this did He stop, but added also what was greatly more
fearful, and enough to shiver a rock to pieces: "And you shall be hated of all
men." And here again the consolation is at the doors, for, "For my name's sake,"
says He, "you shall suffer these things." And with this again another, "But he
that endures to the end, the same shall be saved." [Matthew 10:22...]
And these things in another point of view likewise were sufficient to rouse
up their spirits; since at any rate the power of their gospel was to blaze up so