the keys, unless he be appointed to that purpose by receiving
orders.
Reply to Objection 1: Just as between instrument and effect there is
need or likeness, not of a similar form, but of aptitude in the
instrument for the effect, so is it as regards the instrument and the
principal agent. The former is the likeness between holy men and the
suffering Christ, nor does it bestow on them the use of the keys.
Reply to Objection 2: Although a mere man cannot merit grace for
another man condignly, yet the merit of one man can co-operate in
the salvation of another. Hence there is a twofold blessing. One
proceeds from a mere man, as meriting by his own act: this blessing
can be conferred by any holy person in whom Christ dwells by His
grace, in so far as he excels in goodness the person whom he
blesses. The other blessing is when a man blesses, as applying a
blessing instrumentally through the merit of Christ, and this requires
excellence of order and not of virtue.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether wicked priests have the use of the keys?

Objection 1: It would seem that wicked priests have not the use of
the keys. For in the passage where the use of the keys is bestowed
on the apostles (Jn. 20:22,23), the gift of the Holy Ghost is promised.
But wicked men have not the Holy Ghost. Therefore they have not
the use of the keys.
Objection 2: Further, no wise king entrusts his enemy with the
dispensation of his treasure. Now the use of the keys consists in
dispensing the treasure of the King of heaven, Who is Wisdom itself.
Therefore the wicked, who are His enemies on account of sin, have
not the use of the keys.
Objection 3: Further, Augustine says (De Bapt. v, 21) that God "gives
the sacrament of grace even through wicked men, but grace itself
only by Himself or through His saints." Hence He forgives sin by
Himself, or by those who are members of the Dove. But the
remission of sins is the use of the keys. Therefore sinners, who are
not "members of the Dove," have not the use of the keys.
Objection 4: Further, the prayer of a wicked priest cannot effect
reconciliation, for, as Gregory says (Pastor. i, 11), "if an
unacceptable person is sent to intercede, anger is provoked to yet
greater severity." But the use of the keys implies a kind of
intercession, as appears in the form of absolution. Therefore wicked
priests cannot use the keys effectively.
On the contrary, No man can know whether another man is in the
state of grace. If, therefore, no one could use the keys in giving
absolution unless he were in a state of grace, no one would know
that he had been absolved, which would be very unfitting.
Further, the wickedness of the minister cannot void the liberality of
his lord. But the priest is no more than a minister. Therefore he
cannot by his wickedness take away from us the gift which God has
given through him.
I answer that, Just as participation of a form to be induced into an
effect does not make a thing to be an instrument, so neither does the
loss of that form prevent that thing being used as an instrument.