is an individual in a nature of one essence composed of matter and
form, if the intellect be not the form, it follows that it must be outside
the essence, and then the intellect is the whole Socrates as a motor
to the thing moved. Whereas the act of intellect remains in the agent,
and does not pass into something else, as does the action of
heating. Therefore the action of understanding cannot be attributed
to Socrates for the reason that he is moved by his intellect. Thirdly,
because the action of a motor is never attributed to the thing moved,
except as to an instrument; as the action of a carpenter to a saw.
Therefore if understanding is attributed to Socrates, as the action of
what moves him, it follows that it is attributed to him as to an
instrument. This is contrary to the teaching of the Philosopher, who
holds that understanding is not possible through a corporeal
instrument (De Anima iii, 4). Fourthly, because, although the action
of a part be attributed to the whole, as the action of the eye is
attributed to a man; yet it is never attributed to another part, except
perhaps indirectly; for we do not say that the hand sees because the
eye sees. Therefore if the intellect and Socrates are united in the
above manner, the action of the intellect cannot be attributed to
Socrates. If, however, Socrates be a whole composed of a union of
the intellect with whatever else belongs to Socrates, and still the
intellect be united to those other things only as a motor, it follows
that Socrates is not one absolutely, and consequently neither a
being absolutely, for a thing is a being according as it is one.
There remains, therefore, no other explanation than that given by
Aristotle---namely, that this particular man understands, because the
intellectual principle is his form. Thus from the very operation of the
intellect it is made clear that the intellectual principle is united to the
body as its form.
The same can be clearly shown from the nature of the human
species. For the nature of each thing is shown by its operation. Now
the proper operation of man as man is to understand; because he
thereby surpasses all other animals. Whence Aristotle concludes
(Ethic. x, 7) that the ultimate happiness of man must consist in this
operation as properly belonging to him. Man must therefore derive
his species from that which is the principle of this operation. But the
species of anything is derived from its form. It follows therefore that
the intellectual principle is the proper form of man.
But we must observe that the nobler a form is, the more it rises
above corporeal matter, the less it is merged in matter, and the more

it excels matter by its power and its operation; hence we find that the
form of a mixed body has another operation not caused by its
elemental qualities. And the higher we advance in the nobility of
forms, the more we find that the power of the form excels the
elementary matter; as the vegetative soul excels the form of the
metal, and the sensitive soul excels the vegetative soul. Now the
human soul is the highest and noblest of forms. Wherefore it excels
corporeal matter in its power by the fact that it has an operation and
a power in which corporeal matter has no share whatever. This
power is called the intellect.
It is well to remark that if anyone holds that the soul is composed of
matter and form, it would follow that in no way could the soul be the
form of the body. For since the form is an act, and matter is only in
potentiality, that which is composed of matter and form cannot be
the form of another by virtue of itself as a whole. But if it is a form by
virtue of some part of itself, then that part which is the form we call
the soul, and that of which it is the form we call the "primary
animate," as was said above (Question 75, Article 5).
Reply to Objection 1: As the Philosopher says (Phys. ii, 2), the
ultimate natural form to which the consideration of the natural
philosopher is directed is indeed separate; yet it exists in matter. He
proves this from the fact that "man and the sun generate man from
matter." It is separate indeed according to its intellectual power,
because the intellectual power does not belong to a corporeal organ,
as the power of seeing is the act of the eye; for understanding is an
act which cannot be performed by a corporeal organ, like the act of
seeing. But it exists in matter so far as the soul itself, to which this
power belongs, is the form of the body, and the term of human
generation. And so the Philosopher says (De Anima iii) that the
intellect is separate, because it is not the faculty of a corporeal
organ.
From this it is clear how to answer the Second and Third objections:
since, in order that man may be able to understand all things by
means of his intellect, and that his intellect may understand
immaterial things and universals, it is sufficient that the intellectual
power be not the act of the body.
Reply to Objection 4: The human soul, by reason of its perfection, is
not a form merged in matter, or entirely embraced by matter.
Therefore there is nothing to prevent some power thereof not being