FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.71, C.3.

accord with the nature of man, as man. Now "man's good is to be in
accord with reason, and his evil is to be against reason," as
Dionysius states (Div. Nom. iv). Therefore human virtue, which
makes a man good, and his work good, is in accord with man's
nature, for as much as it accords with his reason: while vice is
contrary to man's nature, in so far as it is contrary to the order of
reason.
Reply to Objection 1: Although the virtues are not caused by nature
as regards their perfection of being, yet they incline us to that which
accords with reason, i.e. with the order of reason. For Cicero says
(De Inv. Rhet. ii) that "virtue is a habit in accord with reason, like a
second nature": and it is in this sense that virtue is said to be in
accord with nature, and on the other hand that vice is contrary to
nature.
Reply to Objection 2: The Philosopher is speaking there of a thing
being against nature, in so far as "being against nature" is contrary
to "being from nature": and not in so far as "being against nature" is
contrary to "being in accord with nature," in which latter sense
virtues are said to be in accord with nature, in as much as they
incline us to that which is suitable to nature.
Reply to Objection 3: There is a twofold nature in man, rational
nature, and the sensitive nature. And since it is through the
operation of his senses that man accomplishes acts of reason,
hence there are more who follow the inclinations of the sensitive
nature, than who follow the order of reason: because more reach the
beginning of a business than achieve its completion. Now the
presence of vices and sins in man is owing to the fact that he follows
the inclination of his sensitive nature against the order of his reason.
Reply to Objection 4: Whatever is irregular in a work of art, is
unnatural to the art which produced that work. Now the eternal law is
compared to the order of human reason, as art to a work of art.
Therefore it amounts to the same that vice and sin are against the
order of human reason, and that they are contrary to the eternal law.
Hence Augustine says (De Lib. Arb. iii, 6) that "every nature, as such,
is from God; and is a vicious nature, in so far as it fails from the
Divine art whereby it was made."

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.71, C.3.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.71, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether vice is worse than a vicious act?

Objection 1: It would seem that vice, i.e. a bad habit, is worse than a
sin, i.e. a bad act. For, as the more lasting a good is, the better it is,
so the longer an evil lasts, the worse it is. Now a vicious habit is
more lasting than vicious acts, that pass forthwith. Therefore a
vicious habit is worse than a vicious act.
Objection 2: Further, several evils are more to be shunned than one.
But a bad habit is virtually the cause of many bad acts. Therefore a
vicious habit is worse than a vicious act.
Objection 3: Further, a cause is more potent than its effect. But a
habit produces its actions both as to their goodness and as to their
badness. Therefore a habit is more potent than its act, both in
goodness and in badness.
On the contrary, A man is justly punished for a vicious act; but not
for a vicious habit, so long as no act ensues. Therefore a vicious
action is worse than a vicious habit.
I answer that, A habit stands midway between power and act. Now it
is evident that both in good and in evil, act precedes power, as
stated in Metaph. ix, 19. For it is better to do well than to be able to
do well, and in like manner, it is more blameworthy to do evil, than to
be able to do evil: whence it also follows that both in goodness and
in badness, habit stands midway between power and act, so that, to
wit, even as a good or evil habit stands above the corresponding
power in goodness or in badness, so does it stand below the
corresponding act. This is also made clear from the fact that a habit
is not called good or bad, save in so far as it induces to a good or
bad act: wherefore a habit is called good or bad by reason of the
goodness or badness of its act: so that an act surpasses its habit in
goodness or badness, since "the cause of a thing being such, is yet
more so."
Reply to Objection 1: Nothing hinders one thing from standing above
another simply, and below it in some respect. Now a thing is deemed
above another simply if it surpasses it in a point which is proper to
both; while it is deemed above it in a certain respect, if it surpasses
it in something which is accidental to both. Now it has been shown