God."] [Acts 2:47] Two things there were which might deject them; their
abstemious living, and the loss of their property. Yet on both these accounts did
they rejoice. ["And having favor with all the people."] For who but must love
men of this character, as common fathers? They conceived no malice toward
each other; they committed all to the grace of God. ["With all the people."] Fear
there was none; yea, though they had taken their position in the midst of dangers.
By singleness, however, he denotes their entire virtue, far surpassing their
contempt of riches, their abstinence, and their preseverance in prayer. For thus
also they offered pure praise to God: this is to praise God. But observe also here
how they immediately obtain their reward. "Having favor with all the people."
They were engaging, and highly beloved. For who would not prize and admire
their simplicity of character; who would not be linked to one in whom was
nothing underhand? To whom too does salvation belong, but to these? To whom
those great marvels? Was it not to shepherds that the Gospel was first preached?
And to Joseph, being a man of simple mind, insomuch that he did not let a
suspicion of adultery frighten him into doing wrong? Did not God elect rustics,
those artless men? For it is written, "Blessed is every simple soul." [Proverbs
11:25] And again, "He that walks simply, walks surely." [Proverbs 10:9] "True,"
you will say, "but prudence also is needed." Why, what is simplicity, I pray you,
but prudence? For when you suspect no evil, neither can you fabricate any: when
you have no annoyances, neither can you remember injuries. Has any one
insulted you? You were not pained. Has any one reviled you? You were nothing
hurt. Has he envied you? Still you had no hurt. Simplicity is a high road to true
philosophy. None so beautiful in soul as the simple. For as in regard of personal
appearance, he that is sullen, and downcast, and reserved ([σύννους]), even if he
be good-looking, loses much of his beauty; while he that relaxes his
countenance, and gently smiles, enhances his good looks; so in respect of the
soul, he that is reserved, if he have ten thousand good points, disfigures them;
but the frank and simple, just the reverse. A man of this last description may be
safely made a friend, and when at variance easily reconciled. No need of guards

and outposts, no need of chains and fetters with such an one; but great is his own
freedom, and that of those who associate with him. But what, you will say, will
such a man do if he fall among wicked people? God, Who has commanded us to
be simple-minded, will stretch out His hand. What was more guileless than
David? What more wicked than Saul? Yet who triumphed? Again, in Joseph's
case; did not he in simplicity approach his master's wife, she him with wicked
art? Yet what, I pray, was he the worse? Furthermore, what more simple than
was Abel? What more malicious than Cain? And Joseph again, had he not dealt
artlessly with his brethren? Was not this the cause of his eminence, that he spoke
out unsuspiciously, while they received his words in malice? He declared once
and again his dreams unreservedly; and then again he set off to them carrying
provisions; he used no caution; he committed all to God: nay, the more they held
him in the light of an enemy, the more did he treat them as brothers. God had
power not to have suffered him to fall into their hands; but that the wonder might
be made manifest, how, though they do their worst, he shall be higher than they:
though the blow do come upon him, it comes from another, not from himself. On
the contrary, the wicked man strikes himself first, and none other than himself.
"For alone," it is said, "shall he bear his troubles." [Proverbs 9:12] Ever in him
the soul is full of dejection, his thoughts being ever entangled: whether he must
hear anything or say anything, he does all with complaints, with accusation. Far,
very far from such do friendship and harmony make their abode: but fightings
are there, and enmities, and all unpleasantness. They that are such suspect even
themselves. To these not even sleep is sweet, nor anything else. And have they a
wife also, lo, they are enemies and at war with all: what endless jealousies, what
unceasing fear! Aye, the wicked, [πονηρὸς] has his name from [πονεἵν], "to have
trouble." And, indeed, thus the Scripture is ever calling "wickedness" by the
name of labor; as, for instance, "Under his tongue is toil and labor;" and again,
"In the midst of them is toil and labor." [Psalm 10:7; 90:10; and 55:11]
Now if any one should wonder, whence those who had at first been of this
last class, now are so different, let him learn that affliction was the cause,