themselves are not virtue. For what advantages it, if a man has these things, and
yet is the slave of vainglory, and remains in his error, from fear of the company
of his friends? This is not right living. The slave of a reputation is no less a
sinner than the fornicator; nay, he works more and more grievous deeds than he.
But tell me of any one that is free from all passions and from all iniquity, and
who remains among the heathen. You can not do so; for even those among them
who have boasted great things, and who have, as they say, mastered avarice or
gluttony, have been, most of all men, the slaves of reputation, and this is the
cause of all evils. Thus it is that the Jews also have continued Jews; for which
cause Christ rebuked them and said, "How can you believe, which receive honor
from men?" [John 5:44]
"And why, pray, did He not speak on these matters with Nathanael, to whom
He testified of the truth, nor extend His discourse to any length?" Because even
he came not with such zeal as did Nicodemus. For Nicodemus made this his
work, and the season which others used for rest he made a season for hearing;
but Nathanael came at the instance of another. Yet not even him did Jesus
entirely pass by, for to him He says, "Hereafter you shall see heaven open, and
the angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of Man." [John 1:51]
But to Nicodemus He spoke not so, but conversed with him on the Dispensation
and on eternal life, addressing each differently and suitably to the condition of
his will. It was sufficient for Nathanael, because he knew the writings of the
prophets, and was not so timid either, to hear only thus far; but because
Nicodemus was as yet possessed by fear, Christ did not indeed clearly reveal to
him the whole, but shook his mind so as to cast out fear by fear, declaring that he
who did not believe was being judged, and that unbelief proceeded from an evil
conscience. For since he made great account of honor from men, more than he
did of the punishment; ("Many," says the Evangelist, "of the rulers believed on
Him, but because of the Jews they did not confess" [John 12:42]) on this point
Christ touches him, saying, "It cannot be that he who believes not on Me
disbelieves for any other cause save that he lives an unclean life." Farther on He

says, "I am the Light" [John 8:12], but here, "the Light came into the world"; for
at the beginning He spoke somewhat darkly, but afterwards more clearly. Yet
even so the man was kept back by regard for the opinion of the many, and
therefore could not endure to speak boldly as he ought.
Fly we then vainglory, for this is a passion more tyrannical than any. Hence
spring covetousness and love of wealth, hence hatred and wars and strifes; for he
that desires more than he has, will never be able to stop, and he desires from no
other cause, but only from his love of vainglory. For tell me, why do so many
encircle themselves with multitudes of eunuchs, and herds of slaves, and much
show? Not because they need it, but that they may make those who meet them
witnesses of this unseasonable display. If then we cut this off, we shall slay
together with the head the other members also of wickedness, and there will be
nothing to hinder us from dwelling on earth as though it were heaven. Nor does
this vice merely thrust its captives into wickedness, but is even co-existent with
their virtues, and when it is unable entirely to cast us out of these, it still causes
us much damage in the very exercise of them, forcing us to undergo the toil, and
depriving us of the fruit. For he that with an eye to this, fasts, and prays, and
shows mercy, has his reward. What can be more pitiable than a loss like this, that
it should befall man to bewail himself uselessly and in vain, and to become an
object of ridicule, and to lose the glory from above? Since he that aims at both
cannot obtain both. It is indeed possible to obtain both, when we desire not both,
but one only, that from heaven; but he cannot obtain both, who longs for both.
Wherefore if we wish to attain to glory, let us flee from human glory, and desire
that only which comes from God; so shall we obtain both the one and the other;
which may we all enjoy, through the grace and loving kindness of our Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom and with whom, to the Father and the Holy Ghost, be glory for
ever and ever. Amen.