FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.91, C.6.

the very outset of the law, the people were invited to the earthly
kingdom of the Chananaeans (Ex. 3:8,17). Again it may be an
intelligible and heavenly good: and to this, man is ordained by the
New Law. Wherefore, at the very beginning of His preaching, Christ
invited men to the kingdom of heaven, saying (Mt. 4:17): "Do
penance, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand." Hence Augustine
says (Contra Faust. iv) that "promises of temporal goods are
contained in the Old Testament, for which reason it is called old; but
the promise of eternal life belongs to the New Testament."
Secondly, it belongs to the law to direct human acts according to the
order of righteousness (Article 4): wherein also the New Law
surpasses the Old Law, since it directs our internal acts, according
to Mt. 5:20: "Unless your justice abound more than that of the
Scribes and Pharisees, you shall not enter into the kingdom of
heaven." Hence the saying that "the Old Law restrains the hand, but
the New Law controls the mind" ( Sentent. iii, D, xl).
Thirdly, it belongs to the law to induce men to observe its
commandments. This the Old Law did by the fear of punishment: but
the New Law, by love, which is poured into our hearts by the grace of
Christ, bestowed in the New Law, but foreshadowed in the Old.
Hence Augustine says (Contra Adimant. Manich. discip. xvii) that
"there is little difference between the Law and the Gospel---fear and
love."
Reply to Objection 1: As the father of a family issues different
commands to the children and to the adults, so also the one King,
God, in His one kingdom, gave one law to men, while they were yet
imperfect, and another more perfect law, when, by the preceding law,
they had been led to a greater capacity for Divine things.
Reply to Objection 2: The salvation of man could not be achieved
otherwise than through Christ, according to Acts 4:12: "There is no
other name . . . given to men, whereby we must be saved."
Consequently the law that brings all to salvation could not be given
until after the coming of Christ. But before His coming it was
necessary to give to the people, of whom Christ was to be born, a
law containing certain rudiments of righteousness unto salvation, in
order to prepare them to receive Him.
Reply to Objection 3: The natural law directs man by way of certain

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.91, C.6.

general precepts, common to both the perfect and the imperfect:
wherefore it is one and the same for all. But the Divine law directs
man also in certain particular matters, to which the perfect and
imperfect do not stand in the same relation. Hence the necessity for
the Divine law to be twofold, as already explained.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.91, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether there is a law in the fomes of sin?