him, he said, "Take and eat, children, lest your belly be angry!" And again,
others say, "Woe unto you, Mammon, and to him that has you not;" and many
like enormities has jesting introduced; as when they say, "Now is there no
nativity." And this I say to show the enormity of this base temper; for these are
the expressions of a soul destitute of all reverence. And are not these things
enough to call down thunderbolts? And one might find many other such things
which have been said by these men.
Wherefore, I entreat you, let us banish the custom universally, and speak
those things which become us. Let not holy mouths utter the words of
dishonorable and base men. "For what fellowship have righteousness and
iniquity, or what communion has light with darkness?" [2 Corinthians 6:14]
Happy will it be for us, if, having kept ourselves aloof from all such foul things,
we be thus able to attain to the promised blessings; far indeed from dragging
such a train after us, and sullying the purity of our minds by so many. For the
man who will play the jester will soon go on to be a railer, and the railer will go
on to heap ten thousand other mischiefs on himself. When then we shall have
disciplined these two faculties of the soul, anger and desire (vid. Plat. Phædr. cc.
25, 34), and have put them like well-broken horses under the yoke of reason,
then let us set over them the mind as charioteer, that we may "gain the prize of
our high calling" [Philippians 3:14]; which God grant that we may all attain,
through Jesus Christ our Lord, with Whom, together with the Holy Ghost, be
unto the Father, glory, might, and honor, now, and ever, and throughout all ages.
Amen.

## Homily 18 on Ephesians

Ephesians 5:5, 6
"For this ye know of a surety, that no fornicator, nor unclean person, nor
covetous man, which is an idolater, has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ
and God. Let no man deceive you with empty words: for because of these things
comes the wrath of God upon the sons of disobedience."
There were, it is likely, in the time of our forefathers also, some who
"weakened the hands of the people" [Jeremiah 38:4], and brought into practice
that which is mentioned by Ezekiel,— or rather who did the works of the false
prophets, who "profaned God among His people for handfuls of barley" [Ezekiel
13:19]; a thing, by the way, done methinks by some even at this day. When, for
example, we say that he who calls his brother a fool shall depart into hell-fire,
others say, "What? Is he that calls his brother a fool to depart into hell-fire?
Impossible," say they. And again, when we say that "the covetous man is an
idolater," in this too again they make abatements, and say the expression is
hyperbolical. And in this manner they underrate and explain away all the
commandments. It was in allusion then to these that the blessed Paul, at this time
when he wrote to the Ephesians, spoke thus, "For this ye know, that no
fornicator, nor unclean person, nor covetous man, which is an idolater, has any
inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and God"; adding, "let no man deceive you
with empty words." Now "empty words" are those which for a while are
gratifying, but are in nowise borne out in facts; because the whole case is a
deception.
"Because of these things comes the wrath of God upon the sons of
disobedience."
Because of "fornication," he means, because of "covetousness," because of
"uncleanness," or both because of these things, and because of the "deceit,"