man who has no equal upon earth; a sovereign, powerful enough to destroy and
devastate all things; and teaches him to practice such philosophy as one in a
private station had not been likely to display! Great indeed must be the God of
the Christians, who makes angels out of men, and renders them superior to all
the constraining force of our nature!"
14. Nor ought you, assuredly, to entertain that idle fear; nor to bear with
those who say that other cites will become worse, and grow more contemptuous
of authority, if this city goes unpunished. For if you were unable to take
vengeance; and they, after doing these things, had forcibly defied you; and the
power on each side was equally matched; then reasonably enough might such
suspicions be entertained. But if, terrified and half dead with fear, they run to
cast themselves at your feet, through me; and expect daily nothing else but the
pit of slaughter, and are engaged in common supplications; looking up to heaven
and calling upon God to come to their aid, and to favour this our embassy; and
have each given charge about his private affairs, as if they were at their last gasp;
how can such a fear be otherwise than superfluous? If they had been ordered to
be put to death, they would not have suffered as much as they do now, living as
they have done so many days in fear and trembling; and when the evening
approaches, not expecting to behold the morning; nor when the day arrives,
hoping to reach the evening! Many too have fallen in with wild beasts, while
pursuing their way through desert places, and removing to untrodden spots; and
not men only, but also little children and women; free born, and of good
condition; hiding themselves many days and nights in caves, and ravines, and
holes of the desert! A new mode of captivity has indeed befallen the city. Whilst
the buildings and walls are standing, they suffer heavier calamities than when
cities have been set on fire! Whilst no barbarian foe is present, while no enemy
appears, they are more wretchedly situated than if actually taken; and the
rustling only of a leaf scares them all every day! And these are matters which are
universally known; so that if all men had seen the city razed to the ground, they
would not have been taught such a lesson of sobriety, as by hearing of the

calamities which have now befallen it. Suppose not, therefore, that other cities
will be made worse in future! Not even if you had overturned other cities, would
you have so effectually corrected them, as now, by this suspense concerning
their fate, having chastised them more severely than by any punishment!
15. Do not, then, carry this calamity any farther; but allow them henceforth
to take breath again. For to punish the guilty, and to exact the penalty for these
deeds, were easy and open to any one; but to spare those who have insulted you,
and to pardon those who have committed offenses undeserving of pardon, is an
act of which only some one or two are capable; and especially so, where the
person treated with indignity is the Emperor. It is an easy matter to place the city
under the subjection of fear; but to dispose all to be loving subjects; and to
persuade them to hold themselves well affected towards your government; and to
offer not only their common, but individual prayers for your empire; is a work of
difficulty. A monarch might expend his treasures, or put innumerable troops in
motion, or do what else he pleased, but still he would not be able to draw the
affections of so many men towards himself as may now very easily be done. For
they who have been kindly dealt with, and those who hear of it too, will be well
affected towards you, even as the recipients of the benefit. How much money,
how many labours would you not have expended to win over to yourself the
whole world in a short space of time; and to be able to persuade all those men
who are now in existence, as well as all future generations, to invoke upon your
head the same blessings which they pray for on behalf of their own children!
And if you will receive such a reward from men, how much greater will you
have from God! And this, not merely from the events which are now taking
place, but from those good deeds which shall be performed by others in time to
come. For if ever it should be that an event similar to what has now occurred
should take place, (which God forbid!) and any of those who have been treated
with indignity, should then be consulting about prosecuting measures against the
rioters; your gentleness and moral wisdom will serve them instead of all other
teaching and admonition; and they will blush and be ashamed, having such an