Essence, but sending up, "Glory to God in the Highest, on earth peace, good will
towards men." [Luke 2:14] If you desire to learn something from Cherubim or
Seraphim, you shall hear the mystic song of His Holiness, and that "heaven and
earth are full of His glory." [Isaiah 6:3] If you enquire of the higher powers, you
shall but find that their one work is the praise of God. "Praise Him," says David,
"all His hosts." [Psalm 148:2] But the Son only Beholds Him, and the Holy
Ghost. How can any created nature even see the Uncreated? If we are absolutely
unable clearly to discern any incorporeal power whatsoever, even though
created, as has been often proved in the case of angels, much less can we discern
the Essence which is incorporeal and uncreated. Wherefore Paul says, "Whom no
man has seen, nor can see." [1 Timothy 6:16] Does then this special attribute
belong to the Father only, not to the Son? Away with the thought. It belongs also
to the Son; and to show that it does so, hear Paul declaring this point, and saying,
that He "is the Image of the invisible God." [Colossians 1:15] Now if He be the
Image of the Invisible, He must be invisible Himself, for otherwise He would
not be an "image." And wonder not that Paul says in another place, "God was
manifested in the Flesh" [1 Timothy 3:16]; because the manifestation took place
by means of the flesh, not according to (His) Essence. Besides, Paul shows that
He is invisible, not only to men, but also to the powers above, for after saying,
"was manifested in the Flesh," he adds, "was seen of angels."
2. So that even to angels He then became visible, when He put on the Flesh;
but before that time they did not so behold Him, because even to them His
Essence was invisible.
"How then," asks some one, "did Christ say, 'Despise not one of these little
ones, for I tell you, that their angels do always behold the face of My Father
which is in heaven'? [Matthew 18:10] Hath then God a face, and is He bounded
by the heavens?" Who so mad as to assert this? What then is the meaning of the
words? As when He says, "Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God"
[Matthew 5:8], He means that intellectual vision which is possible to us, and the
having God in the thoughts; so in the case of angels, we must understand that by

reason of their pure and sleepless nature they do nothing else, but always image
to themselves God. And therefore Christ says, that "No man knows the Father,
save the Son." [Matthew 10:27] What then, are we all in ignorance? God forbid;
but none knows Him as the Son knows Him. As then many have seen Him in the
mode of vision permitted to them, but no one has beheld His Essence, so many
of us know God, but what His substance can be none knows, save only He that
was begotten of Him. For by "knowledge" He here means an exact idea and
comprehension, such as the Father has of the Son. "As the Father knows Me,
even so know I the Father." [John 10:15]
Observe, therefore, with what fullness the Evangelist speaks; for having
said that "no man has seen God at any time," he does not go on to say, "that the
Son who has seen, has declared Him," but adds something beyond "seeing" by
the words, "Who is in the bosom of the Father"; because, "to dwell in the bosom"
is far more than "to see." For he that merely "sees" has not an in every way exact
knowledge of the object, but he that "dwells in the bosom" can be ignorant of
nothing. Now lest when you hear that "none knows the Father, save the Son,"
you should assert that although He knows the Father more than all, yet He
knows not how great He is, the Evangelist says that He dwells in the bosom of
the Father; and Christ Himself declares, that He knows Him as much as the
Father knows the Son. Ask therefore the gainsayer, "Tell me, does the Father
know the Son?" And if he be not mad, he will certainly answer "Yes." Then ask
again; "Does He see and know Him with exact vision and knowledge? Does He
know clearly what He Is?" He will certainly confess this also. From this next
collect the exact comprehension the Son has of the Father. For He says, "As the
Father knows me, even so know I the Father" [John 10:15]; and in another place,
"Not that any man has seen the Father, save He which is of God." [John 6:46]
Wherefore, as I said, the Evangelist mentions "the bosom," to show all this to us
by that one word; that great is the affinity and nearness of the Essence, that the
knowledge is nowise different, that the power is equal. For the Father would not
have in His bosom one of another essence, nor would He have dared, had He