SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.69, C.2.

profit thereby. For it is written (Ps. 81:4): "Rescue the poor, and
deliver the needy from the hand of the sinner"; and (Prov. 24:11):
"Deliver them that are led to death"; and (Rm. 1:32): "They are
worthy of death, not only they that do them, but they also that
consent to them that do them," on which words a gloss says: "To be
silent when one can disprove is to consent." In matters pertaining to
a man's condemnation, one is not bound to give evidence, except
when one is constrained by a superior in accordance with the order
of justice; since if the truth of such a matter be concealed, no
particular injury is inflicted on anyone. Or, if some danger threatens
the accuser, it matters not since he risked the danger of his own
accord: whereas it is different with the accused, who incurs the
danger against his will.
Reply to Objection 1: Augustine is speaking of concealment of the
truth in a case when a man is not compelled by his superior's
authority to declare the truth, and when such concealment is not
specially injurious to any person.
Reply to Objection 2: A man should by no means give evidence on
matters secretly committed to him in confession, because he knows
such things, not as man but as God's minister: and the sacrament is
more binding than any human precept. But as regards matters
committed to man in some other way under secrecy, we must make a
distinction. Sometimes they are of such a nature that one is bound to
make them known as soon as they come to our knowledge, for
instance if they conduce to the spiritual or corporal corruption of the
community, or to some grave personal injury, in short any like matter
that a man is bound to make known either by giving evidence or by
denouncing it. Against such a duty a man cannot be obliged to act
on the plea that the matter is committed to him under secrecy, for he
would break the faith he owes to another. On the other hand
sometimes they are such as one is not bound to make known, so
that one may be under obligation not to do so on account of their
being committed to one under secrecy. In such a case one is by no
means bound to make them known, even if the superior should
command; because to keep faith is of natural right, and a man
cannot be commanded to do what is contrary to natural right.
Reply to Objection 3: It is unbecoming for ministers of the altar to
slay a man or to cooperate in his slaying, as stated above (Question
64, Article 4); hence according to the order of justice they cannot be
compelled to give evidence when a man is on trial for his life.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.69, C.2.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.69, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the evidence of two or three persons

suffices?
Objection 1: It would seem that the evidence of two or three persons
is not sufficient. For judgment requires certitude. Now certitude of
the truth is not obtained by the assertions of two or three witnesses,
for we read that Naboth was unjustly condemned on the evidence of
two witnesses (3 Kgs. 21). Therefore the evidence of two or three
witnesses does not suffice.
Objection 2: Further, in order for evidence to be credible it must
agree. But frequently the evidence of two or three disagrees in some
point. Therefore it is of no use for proving the truth in court.
Objection 3: Further, it is laid down (Decret. II, qu. iv, can. Praesul.):
"A bishop shall not be condemned save on the evidence of seventytwo witnesses; nor a cardinal priest of the Roman Church, unless
there be sixty-four witnesses. Nor a cardinal deacon of the Roman
Church, unless there be twenty-seven witnesses; nor a subdeacon,
an acolyte, an exorcist, a reader or a doorkeeper without seven
witnesses." Now the sin of one who is of higher dignity is more
grievous, and consequently should be treated more severely.
Therefore neither is the evidence of two or three witnesses sufficient
for the condemnation of other persons.
On the contrary, It is written (Dt. 17:6): "By the mouth of two or three
witnesses shall he die that is to be slain," and further on (Dt. 19:15):
"In the mouth of two or three witnesses every word shall stand."
I answer that, According to the Philosopher (Ethic. i, 3), "we must not
expect to find certitude equally in every matter." For in human acts,
on which judgments are passed and evidence required, it is
impossible to have demonstrative certitude, because they a about
things contingent and variable. Hence the certitude of probability
suffices, such as may reach the truth in the greater number, cases,
although it fail in the minority. No it is probable that the assertion of
sever witnesses contains the truth rather than the assertion of one:
and since the accused is the only one who denies, while several
witness affirm the same as the prosecutor, it is reasonably
established both by Divine and by human law, that the assertion of
several witnesses should be upheld. Now all multitude is comprised