Reply to Objection 2: A twofold reason may be given in assigning the
number of the assisting and ministering angels. For Gregory says
that those who minister are more numerous than those who assist;
because he takes the words (Dan. 7:10) "thousands of thousands
ministered to Him," not in a multiple but in a partitive sense, to mean
"thousands out of thousands"; thus the number of those who
minister is indefinite, and signifies excess; while the number of
assistants is finite as in the words added, "and ten thousand times a
hundred thousand assisted Him." This explanation rests on the
opinion of the Platonists, who said that the nearer things are to the
one first principle, the smaller they are in number; as the nearer a
number is to unity, the lesser it is than multitude. This opinion is
verified as regards the number of orders, as six administer and three
assist.
Dionysius, however, (Coel. Hier. xiv) declares that the multitude of
angels surpasses all the multitude of material things; so that, as the
superior bodies exceed the inferior in magnitude to an immeasurable
degree, so the superior incorporeal natures surpass all corporeal
natures in multitude; because whatever is better is more intended
and more multiplied by God. Hence, as the assistants are superior to
the ministers there will be more assistants than ministers. In this
way, the words "thousands of thousands" are taken by way of
multiplication, to signify "a thousand times a thousand." And
because ten times a hundred is a thousand, if it were said "ten times
a hundred thousand" it would mean that there are as many
assistants as ministers: but since it is written "ten thousand times a
hundred thousand," we are given to understand that the assistants
are much more numerous than the ministers. Nor is this said to
signify that this is the precise number of angels, but rather that it is
much greater, in that it exceeds all material multitude. This is
signified by the multiplication together of all the greatest numbers,
namely ten, a hundred, and a thousand, as Dionysius remarks in the
same passage.

## QUESTION 113 — OF THE GUARDIANSHIP OF THE GOOD ANGELS

Prologue
We next consider the guardianship exercised by the good angels;
and their warfare against the bad angels. Under the first head eight
points of inquiry arise:
(1) Whether men are guarded by the angels?
(2) Whether to each man is assigned a single guardian angel?
(3) Whether the guardianship belongs only to the lowest order of
angels?
(4) Whether it is fitting for each man to have an angel guardian?
(5) When does an angel's guardianship of a man begin?
(6) Whether the angel guardians always watch over men?
(7) Whether the angel grieves over the loss of the one guarded?
(8) Whether rivalry exists among the angels as regards their
guardianship?