they do not put their hands upon them and stand upright, but flag. He, however,
who "is girt about with the truth," first, never is weary; and secondly, if he
should be weary, he will rest himself upon the truth itself. What? Will poverty,
tell me, render him weary? No, in nowise; for he will repose on the true riches,
and by this poverty will understand what is true poverty. Or again, will slavery
make him weary? No, in nowise, for he will know what is the true slavery. Or
shall disease? No, nor even that. "Let your loins," says Christ, "be girded about,
and your lamps burning" [Luke 12:35], with that light which shall never be put
out. This is what the Israelites also, when they were departing out of Egypt
[Exodus 12:11], were charged to do. For why did they eat the passover with their
loins girded? Are you desirous to hear the ground of it? According to the
historical fact, or according to its mystical sense, shall I state it? But I will state
them both, and do ye retain it in mind, for I am not doing it without an object,
merely that I may tell you the solution, but also that my words may become in
you reality. They had, we read, their loins girded, and their staff in their hands,
and their shoes on their feet, and thus they ate the Passover. Awful and terrible
mysteries, and of vast depth; and if so terrible in the type, how much more in the
reality? They come forth out of Egypt, they eat the Passover. Attend. "Our
Passover has been sacrificed, even Christ," it is said. Wherefore did they have
their loins girded? Their guise is that of wayfarers; for their having shoes, and
staves in their hands, and their eating standing, declares nothing else than this.
Will ye hear the history first, or the mystery? Better the history first. What then
is the design of the history? The Jews were continually forgetting God's benefits
to them. Accordingly then, God tied the sense of these, His benefits, not only to
the time, but also to the very habit of them that were to eat. For this is why they
were to eat girded and sandalled, that when they were asked the reason, they
might say, "we were ready for our journey, we were just about to go forth out of
Egypt to the land of promise and we were ready for our exodus." This then is the
historical type. But the reality is this; we too eat a Passover, even Christ; "for,"
says he, "our Passover has been sacrificed, even Christ." [1 Corinthians 5:7]

What then? We too ought to eat it, both sandalled and girded. And why? That we
too may be ready for our Exodus, for our departure hence.
Moral. Let not any one of them that eat this Passover look towards Egypt,
but towards Heaven, towards "Jerusalem that is above." [Galatians 4:26] On this
account you eat with your loins girded, on this account you eat with shoes on
your feet, that you may know, that from the moment you first begin to eat the
Passover, you ought to set out, and to be upon your journey. And this implies
two things, both that we must depart out of Egypt, and that, while we stay, we
must stay henceforth as in a strange country; "for our citizenship," says he, "is in
Heaven" [Philippians 3:20]; and that all our life long we should ever be
prepared, so that when we are called we may not put it off, but say, "My heart is
fixed." [Psalm 108:1] "Yes, but this Paul indeed could say, who knew nothing
against himself; but I, who require a long time for repentance, I cannot say it."
Yet that to be girded is the part of a waking soul, hearken to what God says to
that righteous man, "Gird up now your loins like a man, for I will demand of you,
and declare thou unto Me." [Job 38:3] This He says also to all the prophets, and
this He says again to Moses, to be girded. And He Himself also appears to
Ezekiel [Ezekiel 9:11, Septuagint] girded. Nay more, and the Angels, too, appear
to us girded [Revelation 15:6], as being soldiers. From our being girded about, it
comes that we also stand bravely as from our standing our being girded comes.
For we also are going to depart, and many are the difficulties that intervene.
When we have crossed this plain, straightway the devil is upon us, doing
everything, contriving every artifice, to the end that those who have been saved
out of Egypt, those who have passed the Red Sea, those who are delivered at
once from the evil demons, and from unnumbered plagues, may be taken and
destroyed by him. But, if we be vigilant, we too have a pillar of fire, the grace of
the Spirit. The same both enlightens and overshadows us. We have manna; yea
rather not manna, but far more than manna. Spiritual drink we have, not water,
that springs forth from the Rock. So have we too our encampment [Revelation
20:9], and we dwell in the desert even now; for a desert indeed without virtue, is