THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.29, C.2.

Secondly, because thereby the very words of the Virgin are rendered
more credible by which she asserted her virginity. Thus Ambrose
says: "Belief in Mary's words is strengthened, the motive for a lie is
removed. If she had not been espoused when pregnant, she would
seem to have wished to hide her sin by a lie: being espoused, she
had no motive for lying, since a woman's pregnancy is the reward of
marriage and gives grace to the nuptial bond." These two reasons
add strength to our faith.
Thirdly, that all excuse be removed from those virgins who, through
want of caution, fall into dishonor. Hence Ambrose says: "It was not
becoming that virgins should expose themselves to evil report, and
cover themselves with the excuse that the Mother of the Lord had
also been oppressed by ill-fame."
Fourthly, because by this the universal Church is typified, which is a
virgin and yet is espoused to one Man, Christ, as Augustine says (De
Sanct. Virg. xii).
A fifth reason may be added: since the Mother of the Lord being both
espoused and a virgin, both virginity and wedlock are honored in her
person, in contradiction to those heretics who disparaged one or the
other.
Reply to Objection 1: We must believe that the Blessed Virgin,
Mother of God, desired, from an intimate inspiration of the Holy
Ghost, to be espoused, being confident that by the help of God she
would never come to have carnal intercourse: yet she left this to
God's discretion. Wherefore she suffered nothing in detriment to her
virginity.
Reply to Objection 2: As Ambrose says on Lk. 1:26: "Our Lord
preferred that men should doubt of His origin rather than of His
Mother's purity. For he knew the delicacy of virgin modesty, and how
easily the fair name of chastity is disparaged: nor did He choose that
our faith in His Birth should be strengthened in detriment to His
Mother." We must observe, however, that some miracles wrought by
God are the direct object of faith; such are the miracles of the
virginal Birth, the Resurrection of our Lord, and the Sacrament of the
Altar. Wherefore our Lord wished these to be more hidden, that
belief in them might have greater merit. Whereas other miracles are
for the strengthening of faith: and these it behooves to be manifest.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.29, C.2.

Reply to Objection 3: As Augustine says (De Trin. iii), the devil can
do many things by his natural power which he is hindered by the
Divine power from doing. Thus it may be that by his natural power
the devil could know that the Mother of God knew not man, but was a
virgin; yet was prevented by God from knowing the manner of the
Divine Birth. That afterwards the devil after a fashion knew that He
was the Son of God, makes no difficulty: because then the time had
already come for Christ to make known His power against the devil,
and to suffer persecution aroused by him. But during His infancy it
behooved the malice of the devil to be withheld, lest he should
persecute Him too severely: for Christ did not wish to suffer such
things then, nor to make His power known, but to show Himself to be
in all things like other infants. Hence Pope Leo (Serm. in Epiph. iv)
says that "the Magi found the Child Jesus small in body, dependent
on others, unable to speak, and in no way differing from the
generality of human infants." Ambrose, however, expounding Lk.
1:26, seems to understand this of the devil's members. For, after
giving the above reason---namely, that the prince of the world might
be deceived---he continues thus: "Yet still more did He deceive the
princes of the world, since the evil disposition of the demons easily
discovers even hidden things: but those who spend their lives in
worldly vanities can have no acquaintance of Divine things."
Reply to Objection 4: The sentence of adulteresses according to the
Law was that they should be stoned, not only if they were already
espoused or married, but also if their maidenhood were still under
the protection of the paternal roof, until the day when they enter the
married state. Thus it is written (Dt. 22:20,21): "If . . . virginity be not
found in the damsel . . . the men of the city shall stone her to death,
and she shall die; because she hath done a wicked thing in Israel, to
play the whore in her father's house."
It may also be said, according to some writers, that the Blessed
Virgin was of the family or kindred of Aaron, so that she was related
to Elizabeth, as we are told (Lk. 1:36). Now a virgin of the priestly
tribe was condemned to death for whoredom; for we read (Lev. 21:9):
"If the daughter of a priest be taken in whoredom, and dishonor the
name of her father, she shall be burnt with fire."
Lastly, some understand the passage of Jerome to refer to the
throwing of stones by ill-fame.