Hebrews 3:1-2
"Wherefore, holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling, consider the
Apostle and High Priest of our profession, Christ Jesus, who was faithful to Him
that appointed [or made] Him, as also Moses [was faithful] in all His house."
Being about to place Him before Moses in comparison, he led his discourse
to the law of the high-priesthood; for they all had a high esteem for Moses:
moreover, he is already beforehand casting down the seeds of the superiority.
Therefore he begins from the flesh, and goes up to the Godhead, where there was
no longer any comparison. He began from the flesh [from His Human nature],
by assuming for a time the equality, and says, "as also Moses in all His house":
nor does he at first show His superiority lest the hearer should start away, and
straightway stop his ears. For although they were believers, yet nevertheless they
still had strong feeling of conscience as to Moses. "Who was faithful," he says,
"to Him that made Him"— made [Him] what? "Apostle and High Priest." He is
not speaking at all in this place of His Essence, nor of His Godhead; but so far
concerning human dignities.
"As also Moses in all His house," that is, either among the people, or in the
temple. But here he uses the expression "in His house," just as one might say,
concerning those in the household; even as some guardian and steward of a
household, so was Moses to the people. For that by "house" he means the
people, he added, "whose house we are" [Hebrews 3:6]; that is, we are in His
creation. Then [comes] the superiority.

Hebrews 3:3-4
"For this man was counted worthy of more glory than Moses," (Again [he is
speaking] of the Flesh), "inasmuch as he who has built [the house] has more
honor than the house"; [Moses] himself also (he means) was of the house.
(Moreover he did not say, For this one was a servant, but the Other a master, but
he covertly intimated it.) If the people were the house and he was of the people,
then he certainly was of the household. For so also we are accustomed to say,
such an one is of such an one's house. For here he is speaking of a house, not of
the temple, for the temple was not constructed by God, but by men. But He that
made him [is] God. Moses he means. And see how he covertly shows the
superiority. "Faithful," he says, "in all His house," being himself also of the
house, that is, of the people. The builder has more honor than the house, yet he
did not say "the artificer has more honor than his works," but "he that has built
the house, than the house." [Hebrews 3:4] "But He that built all things is God."
You see that he is speaking not about the temple but about the whole people.

Hebrews 3:5
"And Moses verily [was] faithful in all His house, as a servant, for a
testimony of those things which were to be spoken." See also another point of
superiority, that [which is derived] from the Son and the servants. You see again
that by the appellation of The Son, he intimates true relationship. [Hebrews 3:6]
"But Christ as a Son over His own house." Perceivest thou how he separates the
thing made and the maker, the servant and the son? Moreover He indeed enters
into His Father's property as a master, but the other as a servant.
"Whose" [i.e.] God's "house are we, if we hold fast the confidence and the
rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end." Here again he encourages them to press
forward nobly, and not to fall: for we shall be the "house" of God (he says), as
Moses was, "if we hold fist our confidence and our rejoicing firm unto the end."
He however (he would say) that is distressed in his trials, and who falls, does not
glory: he that is ashamed, he that hides himself, has no confidence, he that is
perplexed does not glory.
And then he also commends them, saying, "if we hold fast the confidence
and the rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end," implying that they had even
made a beginning; but that there is need of the end, and not simply to stand, but
to have their hope firm "in full assurance of faith," without being shaken by their
trials.
5. And be not astonished, that the [words] "Himself being tempted"
[Hebrews 2:18] are spoken more after the manner of men. For if the Scripture
says of the Father, who was not made flesh, "The Lord looked down from
heaven, and beheld all the sons of men" [Psalm 14:2], that is, accurately
acquainted Himself with all things; and again, "I will go down, and see whether
they do altogether according to the cry of them" [Genesis 18:21]; and again,
"God cannot endure the evil ways of men" [Genesis 6:5?], the divine Scripture