Yes to the new relationships brought by Christ

87. Today, when the networks and means of human communication have made unprecedented
advances, we sense the challenge of finding and sharing a “mystique” of living together, of
mingling and encounter, of embracing and supporting one another, of stepping into this flood tide
which, while chaotic, can become a genuine experience of fraternity, a caravan of solidarity, a
sacred pilgrimage. Greater possibilities for communication thus turn into greater possibilities for
encounter and solidarity for everyone. If we were able to take this route, it would be so good, so
soothing, so liberating and hope-filled! To go out of ourselves and to join others is healthy for us.
To be self-enclosed is to taste the bitter poison of immanence, and humanity will be worse for
every selfish choice we make.

88. The Christian ideal will always be a summons to overcome suspicion, habitual mistrust, fear of
losing our privacy, all the defensive attitudes which today’s world imposes on us. Many try to
escape from others and take refuge in the comfort of their privacy or in a small circle of close
friends, renouncing the realism of the social aspect of the Gospel. For just as some people want a
purely spiritual Christ, without flesh and without the cross, they also want their interpersonal
relationships provided by sophisticated equipment, by screens and systems which can be turned
on and off on command. Meanwhile, the Gospel tells us constantly to run the risk of a face-to-face

encounter with others, with their physical presence which challenges us, with their pain and their
pleas, with their joy which infects us in our close and continuous interaction. True faith in the
incarnate Son of God is inseparable from self-giving, from membership in the community, from
service, from reconciliation with others. The Son of God, by becoming flesh, summoned us to the
revolution of tenderness.

89. Isolation, which is a version of immanentism, can find expression in a false autonomy which
has no place for God. But in the realm of religion it can also take the form of a spiritual
consumerism tailored to one’s own unhealthy individualism. The return to the sacred and the quest
for spirituality which mark our own time are ambiguous phenomena. Today, our challenge is not so
much atheism as the need to respond adequately to many people’s thirst for God, lest they try to
satisfy it with alienating solutions or with a disembodied Jesus who demands nothing of us with
regard to others. Unless these people find in the Church a spirituality which can offer healing and
liberation, and fill them with life and peace, while at the same time summoning them to fraternal
communion and missionary fruitfulness, they will end up by being taken in by solutions which
neither make life truly human nor give glory to God.