He does not however stop at the rebuke, but having by this reproved and
roused them, and shamed them with all strength of expression, by another
argument He also comforts them, saying, "For your Heavenly Father knows that
you have need of all these things." He said not, "God knows," but, "your Father
knows;" to lead them to a greater hope. For if He be a Father, and such a Father,
He will not surely be able to overlook His children in extremity of evils; seeing
that not even men, being fathers, bear to do so.
And He adds along with this yet another argument. Of what kind then is it?
That "you have need" of them. What He says is like this. What! Are these things
superfluous, that He should disregard them? Yet not even in superfluities did He
show Himself wanting in regard, in the instance of the grass: but now are these
things even necessary. So that what you consider a cause for your being anxious,
this I say is sufficient to draw you from such anxiety. I mean, if you say,
"Therefore I must needs take thought, because they are necessary;" on the
contrary, I say, "Nay, for this self-same reason take no thought, because they are
necessary." Since were they superfluities, not even then ought we to despair, but
to feel confident about the supply of them; but now that they are necessary, we
must no longer be in doubt. For what kind of father is he, who can endure to fail
in supplying to his children even necessaries? So that for this cause again God
will most surely bestow them.
For indeed He is the artificer of our nature, and He knows perfectly the
wants thereof. So that neither can you say, "He is indeed our Father, and the
things we seek are necessary, but He knows not that we stand in need of them."
For He that knows our nature itself, and was the framer of it, and formed it such
as it is; evidently He knows its need also better than thou, who art placed in want
of them: it having been by His decree, that our nature is in such need. He will
not therefore oppose Himself to what He has willed, first subjecting it of
necessity to so great want, and on the other hand again depriving it of what it
wants, and of absolute necessaries.
Let us not therefore be anxious, for we shall gain nothing by it, but

tormenting ourselves. For whereas He gives both when we take thought, and
when we do not, and more of the two, when we do not; what do you gain by
your anxiety, but to exact of yourself a superfluous penalty? Since one on the
point of going to a plentiful feast, will not surely permit himself to take thought
for food; nor is he that is walking to a fountain anxious about drink. Therefore
seeing we have a supply more copious than either any fountain, or innumerable
banquets made ready, the providence of God; let us not be beggars, nor little
minded.
4. For together with what has been said, He puts also yet another reason for
feeling confidence about such things, saying,
"Seek the kingdom of Heaven, and all these things shall be added unto
you."
Thus when He had set the soul free from anxiety, then He made mention
also of Heaven. For indeed He came to do away with the old things, and to call
us to a greater country. Therefore He does all, to deliver us from things
unnecessary, and from our affection for the earth. For this cause He mentioned
the heathens also, saying that "the Gentiles seek after these things;" they whose
whole labor is for the present life, who have no regard for the things to come,
nor any thought of Heaven. But to you not these present are the chief things, but
other than these. For we were not born for this end, that we should eat and drink
and be clothed, but that we might please God, and attain unto the good things to
come. Therefore as things here are secondary in our labor, so also in our prayers
let them be secondary. Therefore He also said, "Seek the kingdom of Heaven, and
all these things shall be added unto you."
And He said not, "shall be given," but "shall be added," that you might
learn, that the things present are no great part of His gifts, compared with the
greatness of the things to come. Accordingly, He does not bid us so much as ask
for them, but while we ask for other things, to have confidence, as though these
also were added to those. Seek then the things to come, and you will receive the
things present also; seek not the things that are seen, and you shall surely attain