enjoy indeed their own property, but do not impart thereof to others; of those
who spend their patrimony at random. For neither are these clear from
reprehension. For how, tell me, will you escape reprov ing and blame, while your
parasite is pampered, and the dog that stands by you, but Christ's worth appears
to you even not equal to theirs? When the one receives so much for laughter's
sake, but the other for the Kingdom of Heaven not so much as the smallest
fraction thereof. And while the parasite, on saying something witty, goes away
filled; this Man, who has taught us, what if we had not learned we should have
been no better than the dogs—is He counted unworthy of even the same
treatment with such an one?
Do you shudder at being told it? Shudder then at the realities. Cast out the
parasites, and make Christ to sit down to meat with you. If He partake of your
salt, and of your table, He will be mild in judging you: He knows how to respect
a man's table. Yea, if robbers know this, much more the Lord. Think, for
instance, of that harlot, how at a table He justified her, and upbraids Simon,
saying, "You gave me no kiss." [Luke 7:54] I say, if He feed you, not doing these
things, much more will He reward you, doing them. Look not at the poor man,
that he comes to you filthy and squalid, but consider that Christ by him is setting
foot in your house, and cease from your fierceness, and your relentless words,
with which you are even aspersing such as come to you, calling them impostors,
idle, and other names more grievous than these.
And think, when you are talking so, of the parasites; what kind of works do
they accomplish? In what respect do they profit your house? Do they really
make your dinner pleasant to you? Pleasant, by their being beaten and saying
foul words? Nay, what can be more unpleasing than this, when you smite him
that is made after God's likeness, and from your insolence to him gatherest
enjoyment for yourself, making your house a theatre, and filling your banquet
with stage-players, thou who art well born and free imitating the actors with their
heads shaven? For among them too is laughter, and rude blows.
These things then do you call pleasure, I pray you, which are deserving of

many tears, of much mourning and lamentation? And when it were fit to urge
them to a good life, to give timely advice, do you lead them on to perjuries, and
disorderly language, and call the thing a delight? And that which procures hell,
do you account a subject of pleasure? Yea, and when they are at a loss for witty
sayings, they pay the whole reckoning with oaths and false swearing. Are these
things then worthy of laughter, and not of lamentations and tears? Nay, who
would say so, that has understanding?
And this I say, not forbidding them to be fed, but not for such a purpose.
Nay, let their maintenance have the motive of kindness, not of cruelty; let it be
compassion, not insolence. Because he is a poor man, feed him; because Christ
is fed, feed him; not for introducing satanical sayings, and disgracing his own
life. Look not at him outwardly laughing, but examine his conscience, and then
you will see him uttering ten thousand imprecations against himself, and
groaning, and wailing. And if he do not show it, this also is due to you.
10. Let the companions of your meals then be men that are poor and free,
not perjured persons, nor stage-players. And if you must needs ask of them a
requital for their food, enjoin them, should they see anything done that is amiss,
to rebuke, to admonish, to help you in your care over your household, in the
government of your servants. Have you children? Let these be joint fathers to
them, let them divide your charge with you, let them yield you such profits as
God loves. Engage them in a spiritual traffic. And if you see one needing
protection, bid them succor, command them to minister. By these do thou track
the strangers out, by these clothe the naked, by these send to the prison, put an
end to the distresses of others.
Let them give you, for their food, this requital, which profits both you and
them, and carries with it no condemnation.
Hereby friendship also is more closely riveted. For now, though they seem
to be loved, yet for all that they are ashamed, as living without object in your
house; but if they accomplish these purposes, both they will be more pleasantly
situated, and you will have more satisfaction in maintaining them, as not