to seek water; and the robbers must necessarily come across him, if he goes out of the
house; and if they come across him, he must be killed. Therefore from first to last it is
necessary for this man eating salt meat to be killed by robbers. The philosopher
concludes that it is not true that, positing the cause, the effect must be posited, because
there are some causes that may fail. Nor again is it true that every effect has a
proper cause: for any accidental effect, e.g., of this man wishing to look for water and
falling in with robbers, has no cause.

speaking of a `necessary cause' St Thomas is in fact thinking of a physical cause which
is not likely to be counteracted, or to have any of its requisite conditions fail, e.g., the
rotation of the earth producing sun-rise. In speaking of a contingent cause, -- so far as
the phrase may be used without bringing free will into the field, -- he has in view a
physical cause, the action of which may readily be counteracted by the interference of
other physical causes, or may fail of effect because some one of its many requisite
conditions is not present. A contingent physical cause, uninterfered with and having all
its conditions present, works as a necessary cause.

CHAPTERS XCV, XCVI--That the Immutability of Divine Providence does not bar the
Utility of Prayer
AS the immutability of divine providence does not impose necessity on things foreseen,
so neither does it bar the utility of prayer. For prayer is not poured out to God that the
eternal arrangement of providence may be changed, -- that is impossible, -- but that
man may gain what he desires of God. It is fitting for God to assent to the pious desires
of His rational creatures, not that our desires move the immutability of God, but it is an
outcome of His goodness suitably to carry out what we desire.
4. It is proper for friends to will the same thing. Now God loves His creature (B. I, Chap.

There were others on the contrary who said that the divine arrangement was reversible
by prayer. And the prima facie rendering of certain texts of scripture seems to favour
this view. Thus, after Isaias by divine command had said to King Ezechias: Put thine
house in order, for thou shalt die and not live; yet upon Ezechias's prayer the word of
the Lord came to Isaias, saying: Go and tell Ezechias: I have heard thy prayer, lo I will
add to thy days fifteen years (Isa. xxxviii, 1-5). Again it is said in the person of the Lord: I
will suddenly speak against a nation and against a kingdom, to root out and pull down
and destroy it. If that nation against which I have spoken shall repent of their evil, I also
will repent of the evil that I have thought to do to them (Jer. xviii, 7, 8); Turn to the Lord
your God, for he is gracious and merciful: who knoweth but he will turn and forgive?
(Joel ii, 13, 14.) But against construing these texts to mean that the will of God is
changeable, or that anything happens to God in time, or that temporal events in creation
are the cause of anything coming to exist in God, there are other authorities of Holy
Writ, containing infallible and express truth. Thus it is said: God is not as man, that he
should die, nor as the son of man, that he should change. Has he said then and shall
not do? Has he spoken and shall not fulfil? (Num. xxiii, 19): The victorious one in Israel
will not spare, and will not be moved to repentance: for he is not a man that he should
repent (1 Kings xv, 29): I am the Lord and change not (Malach. iii, 6).
On careful consideration it will appear that all mistakes in this matter arise from failing to
note the difference between the system of the universe and any particular system
(universalem ordinem et particularem). There is nothing to hinder any particular system
being changed, whether by prayer or by any other means; for there is that existing
beyond the bounds of the system which is capable of changing it. But beyond the
system that embraces all things nothing can be posited whereby such system could
possibly be changed, depending as it does on the universal cause. Therefore the Stoics
laid it down that the system established by God could nowise be changed. But they
failed in a right appreciation of this general system in supposing that prayers were
useless, which was taking for granted that the wills of men, and their desires whence
their prayers proceed, are not comprehended in that general system. For when they say
that the same effect follows whether prayers are put up or not, -- follows, that is, as part
of the univeral system of things, -- they manifestly reserve and except prayers as not
entering into that general system. Supposing prayers included in the system, then
effects will follow from them by divine appointment as from other causes. One might as
well exclude the effects of other every-day causes as exclude the effect of prayer. And if
the immutability of the divine plan does not withdraw the effects of other causes, neither
does it take away the efficacy of prayer.
Prayers then avail, not as changing a system arranged from eternity, but as being
themselves part of that system. And there is no difficulty in the efficacy of prayer
changing the particular system of some inferior cause, by the doing of God, who
overpasses all causes, and who consequently is not bound by the necessity of any
system depending on any cause; but on the contrary every necessity of system
dependent on any inferior cause is checked by Him, as having been instituted by Him.