The above assertions are confirmed by divine authority. The unlawfulness of any
emission of semen, upon which offspring cannot be consequent, is evident from such
texts as these: Thou shalt not lie with mankind as with womankind: Thou shalt not lie
with any beast (Levit. xviii, 22, 23): Nor the effeminate, nor sodomites, shall possess the
kingdom of God (1 Cor. vi, 10). The unlawfulness of fornication and of all connexion with
any other woman than one's own wife is clear from Deut. xxiii, 17: There shall be no
whore among the daughters of Israel, nor whoremonger among the sons of Israel: Keep
thyself from all fornication, and beyond thine own wife suffer not the charge of knowing
another (Job. iv, 13): Fly fornication (1 Cor. vi, 18).
Hereby is refuted the error of those who say that there is no more sin in the emission of
the semen than in the ejection of other superfluous products from the body.

## CHAPTER CXXIII--That Marriage ought to be Indissoluble
LOOKING at the matter rightly, one must see that the aforesaid reasons not only argue
a long duration for that natural human partnership of male and female, which we call
marriage, but further imply that the partnership ought to be lifelong.
1. Property is a means to the preservation of human life. And because natural life
cannot be preserved in one and the same person of the father living on for all time,
nature arranges for its preservation by the son succeeding his father in likeness of
species: wherefore it is appropriate that the son should succeed his father in his
property. It is natural therefore that the father's interest in his son should continue to the
end of his life, and that father and mother should dwell together to the end.
2. Woman is taken into partnership with man for the need of childbearing: therefore
when the fertility and beauty of woman ceases, there is a bar against her being taken up
by another man. If then a man, taking a woman to wife in the time of her youth, when
beauty and fertility wait upon her, could send her away when she was advanced in
years, he would do the woman harm, contrary to natural equity.
3. It is manifestly absurd for the woman to be able to send away the man, seeing that
woman is naturally subject to the rule of man, and it is not in the power of a subject to
run away from control. It being then against the order of nature for the woman to be
allowed to desert the man, if the man were allowed to desert the woman, the
partnership of man and woman would not be on fair terms, but would be a sort of
slavery on the woman's side.
4. Men show a natural anxiety to be sure of their own offspring; and whatever stands in
the way of that assurance runs counter to the natural instinct of the race. But if the man
could send away the woman, or the woman the man, and form a connexion with
another, certainty as to parentage would be difficult, when a woman had intercourse first
with one man and then with another.
5. The greater the love, the more need for it to be firm and lasting. But the love of man
and woman is counted strongest of all; seeing that they are united, not only in the union
of the sexes, which even among beasts makes a sweet partnership, but also for the
sharing in common of all domestic life, as a sign whereof a man leaves even father and
mother for the sake of his wife (Gen. ii, 24). It is fitting therefore for marriage to be quite
indissoluble.
6. Of natural acts, generation alone is directed to the good of (the specific) nature: for
eating and the separation from the body of other excretions concern the individual, but
generation has to do with the preservation of the species. Hence, as law is instituted for
the common good, the function of procreation ought to be regulated by laws divine and
human. Now the laws laid down ought to proceed on the basis of the dictate of nature
(ex naturali instinctu), if they are human laws, as in the exact sciences every human
discovery takes its origin from principles naturally known: but if they are divine laws,