there? Do you pluck your hair, and rend your garments, and wail loudly, and join
the dance, and keep throughout a resemblance to Bacchanalian women, and do
you not think that you are offending God? What madness is this? Will not the
heathen laugh? Will they not deem our doctrines fables? They will say, "There is
no resurrection— the doctrines of the Christians are mockeries, trickery, and
contrivance. For their women lament as though there were nothing after this
world; they give no heed to the words engraven in their books; all those words
are fictions, and these women show that they are so. Since had they believed that
he who has died is not dead, but has removed to a better life, they would not
have mourned him as no longer being, they would not have thus beaten
themselves, they would not have uttered such words as these, full of unbelief, 'I
shall never see you more, I shall never more regain you,' all their religion is a
fable, and if the very chief of good things is thus wholly disbelieved by them,
much more the other things which are reverenced among them." The heathen are
not so womanish, among them many have practiced heavenly wisdom; and a
woman hearing that her child had fallen in battle, straightway asked, "And in
what state are the affairs of the city?" Another truly wise, when being garlanded
he heard that his son had fallen for his country, took off the garland, and asked
which of the two; then when he had learned which it was, immediately put the
garland on again. Many also gave their sons and their daughters for slaughter in
honor of their evil deities; and Lacedæmonian women exhort their sons either to
bring back their shield safe from war, or to be brought back dead upon it.
Wherefore I am ashamed that the heathen show true wisdom in these matters,
and we act unseemly. Those who know nothing about the Resurrection act the
part of those who know; and those who know, the part of those who know not.
And ofttimes many do through shame of men what they do not for the sake of
God. For women of the higher class neither tear their hair nor bare their arms;
which very thing is a most heavy charge against them, not because they do not
strip themselves, but because they act as they do not through piety, but that they
may not be thought to disgrace themselves. Is their shame stronger than grief,

and the fear of God not stronger? And must not this deserve severest censure?
What the rich women do because of their riches, the poor ought to do through
fear of God; but at present it is quite the contrary; the rich act wisely through
vainglory, the poor through littleness of soul act unseemly. What is worse than
this anomaly? We do all for men, all for the things of earth. And these people
utter words full of madness and much ridicule. The Lord says indeed, "Blessed
are they that mourn" [Matthew 5:4], speaking of those who mourn for their sins;
and no one mourns that kind of mourning, nor cares for a lost soul; but this other
we were not bidden to practice, and we practice it. "What then?" says some one,
"Is it possible being man not to weep?" No, neither do I forbid weeping, but I
forbid the beating yourselves, the weeping immoderately. I am neither brutal nor
cruel. I know that our nature asks and seeks for its friends and daily companions;
it cannot but be grieved. As also Christ showed, for He wept over Lazarus. So do
thou; weep, but gently, but with decency, but with the fear of God. If so you
weep, you do so not as disbelieving the Resurrection, but as not enduring the
separation. Since even over those who are leaving us, and departing to foreign
lands, we weep, yet we do this not as despairing.
5. And so do thou weep, as if you were sending one on his way to another
land. These things I say, not as giving a rule of action, but as condescending (to
human infirmity). For if the dead man have been a sinner, and one who has in
many things offended God, it behooves to weep (or rather not to weep only,
since that is of no avail to him, but to do what one can to procure some comfort
for him by almsgivings and offerings; ) but it behooves also to rejoice at this,
that his wickedness has been cut short. If he have been righteous, it again
behooves to be glad, that what is his is now placed in security, free from the
uncertainty of the future; if young, that he has been quickly delivered from the
common evils of life; if old, that he has departed after taking to satiety that
which is held desirable. But you, neglecting to consider these things, incitest
your hand-maidens to act as mourners, as if forsooth thou were honoring the
dead, when it is an act of extreme dishonor. For honor to the dead is not wailings