he also often envies him who has invited him to the feast, and returns home
having received no benefit at all. But with regard to the house of mourning,
nothing of this sort can be said. On the contrary, much spiritual wisdom is to be
gained there, as well as sobriety. For when once a person has passed the
threshold of a house which contains a corpse, and has seen the departed one
lying speechless, and the wife tearing her hair, mangling her cheeks, and
wounding her arms, he is subdued; his countenance becomes sad; and every one
of those who sit down together can say to his neighbour but this, "We are
nothing, and our wickedness is inexpressible!" What can be more full of wisdom
than these words, when we both acknowledge the insignificance of our nature,
and accuse our own wickedness, and account present things as nothing? Giving
utterance, though in different words, to that very sentiment of Solomon— that
sentiment which is so marvellous and pregnant with Divine wisdom— "Vanity of
vanities, all is vanity." [Ecclesiastes 1:2] He who enters the house of mourning,
weeps immediately for the departed, even though he be an enemy. Do you see
how much better that house is than the other? For there, though he be a friend, he
envies; but here, though he be an enemy, he weeps. This is a thing which God
requires of us above all, that we should not insult over those who have
occasioned us grief. And not only may we gather these advantages, but others
also which are not less than these. For each one is also put in mind of his own
sins, and of the fearful Tribunal; of the great Account, and of the Judgment; and
although he may have been suffering a thousand evils from others, and have a
cause for sadness at home, he will receive and take back with him the medicine
for all these things. For reflecting that he himself, and all those who swell with
pride, will in a little while suffer the same thing; and that all present things,
whether pleasant or painful, are transitory; he thus returns to his house,
disburdened of all sadness and envy, with a light and buoyant heart; and hence
he will hereafter be more meek, and gentle, and benignant to all; as well as more
wise; the fear of things to come having made its way into his soul, and consumed
all the thorns.

6. All this Solomon perceived when he said, "It is better to go to the house
of mourning than to the house of drinking." [Ecclesiastes 7:3] From the one
grows listlessness, from the other an earnest anxiety. From the one, contempt;
from the other, fear; a fear which conducts us to the practice of every virtue. If
fear were not a good thing, Christ would not have expended such long and
frequent discourses on the subject of punishment, and vengeance to come. Fear
is nothing less than a wall, and a defence, and an impregnable tower. For indeed
we stand in need of much defence, seeing that there are many ambushments on
every side. Even as this same Solomon again says admonishingly, "Perceive that
you go in the midst of snares, and that you walk on the battlements of cities."
[Sirach 9:13] Oh with how many good things is this saying pregnant! Yea, not
less than the former! Let us then, write it, each of us, upon our minds, and carry
it about ever in our memories, and we shall not easily commit sin. Let us write it
there, having first learned it with the utmost exactness. For he does not say,
"Observe" that you go in the midst of snares; but, "Perceive!" And for what
reason did he say, "Discern?" He tells us that the snare is concealed; for this is
indeed a snare, when the destruction does not appear openly, and the injury is not
manifest, which lies hidden on all sides. Therefore he says, "Perceive!" Thou
needest much reflection and diligent scrutiny. For even as boys conceal traps
with earth, so the devil covers up our sins with the pleasures of this life.
7. But "perceive;" scrutinizing diligently; and if any kind of gain falls in
your way, look not only at the gain, but inspect it carefully, lest somewhere death
and sin lurk within the gain; and should you perceive this, fly from it. Again,
when some delight or pleasure may chance to present itself, look not only at the
pleasure; but lest somewhere in the depth of the pleasure some iniquity should
lie enveloped, search closely, and if you discover it, hasten away! And should
any one counsel, or flatter, or cajole, or promise honours, or any other such thing
whatever, let us make the closest investigation; and look at the matter on all
sides, lest something pernicious, something perilous, should perchance befall us
through this advice, or honour, or attention, and we run upon it hastily and