holding converse with it , and yet scarce do so for the smallest fraction of their
life?
"To remember His commandments, to keep His judgments." Do you see
what an excellent chain is here? And how each link hangs by the next compacted
with more strength and beauty than any chain of gold? For having asked for a
Godly mind, he tells whereby this may be produced. Whereby? By continually
practising it. And how might this be brought about? By constantly giving heed to
the Law. And how might men be persuaded to this? If they should keep His
Commandments: yea rather, from giving heed to the law comes also the keeping
His Commandments; as likewise from minding the things which be His and from
having a Godly mind, comes the practising the things which be His. For each of
the things mentioned jointly procures and is procured by the next, both linking it
and being linked by it.
9. "Let us beseech for them yet more earnestly." For since by length of
speaking the soul uses to grow drowsy, he again arouses it up, for he purposes to
ask again certain great and lofty things. Wherefore he says, "Let us beseech for
them yet more earnestly." And what is this? "That He would deliver them from
every evil and inordinate thing." Here we ask for them that they may not enter
into temptation, but be delivered from every snare, a deliverance as well bodily
as spiritual. Wherefore also he goes on to say, "from every devilish sin and from
every besetment of the adversary," meaning, temptations and sins. For sin does
easily beset, taking its stand on every side, before, behind, and so casting down.
For, after telling us what ought to be done by us, namely, to be occupied in His
law, to remember His Commandments, to keep His judgments, he assures us
next that not even is this enough, except Himself stand by and succor. For,
"Except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build it;" [Psalm 127:1]
and especially in the case of those who are yet exposed to the devil and are under
his dominion. And ye that are initiated know this well. For call to mind, for
instance, those words wherein ye renounced his usurped rule, and bent the knee
and deserted to The King, and uttered those awful words whereby we are taught

in nothing whatever to obey him. But he calls him adversary and accuser,
because he both accuses God to man and us to God, and us again one to another.
For at one time he accused Job to God, saying, "Does Job serve the Lord for
nought?" [Job 1:16] at another time God to Job, "Fire came down from heaven."
And again, God to Adam, [Genesis 3:5] when He said their eyes would be
opened. And to many men at this day, saying, that God takes no care for the
visible order of things, but has delegated your affairs to demons. And to many of
the Jews he accused Christ, calling Him a deceiver and a sorcerer. But perchance
some one wishes to hear in what manner he works. When he finds not a godly
mind, finds not a sound understanding, then, as into a soul left empty, he leads
his revel there ; when one remembers not the commandments of God nor keeps
His judgments, then he takes him captive and departs. Had Adam, for instance,
remembered the commandment which said, "Of every tree you may eat:"
[Genesis 2:16] had he kept the judgment which said, "In the day in which you
eat thereof, then shall you surely die;" it had not fared with him as it did.
"That He would count them worthy in due season of the regeneration of the
laver, of the remission of sins." For we ask some things to come now, some to
come hereafter; and we expound the doctrine of the laver, and in asking instruct
them to know its power. For what is said thenceforth familiarizes them to know
already that what is there done is a regeneration, and that we are born again of
the waters, just as of the womb; that they say not after Nicodemus, "How can
one be born when he is old! Can he enter into his mother's womb, and be born
again?" Then, because he had spoken of "remission of sins," he confirms this by
the words next following, "of the clothing of incorruption;" for he that puts on
sonship plainly becomes incorruptible. But what is that "in due season?" When
any is well disposed, when any comes thereunto with earnestness and faith; for
this is the "due season" of the believer.
10. "That He would bless their coming in and their going out, the whole
course of their life." Here they are directed to ask even for some bodily good, as
being yet somewhat weak. "Their houses and their households," that is, if they