## Homily 16 on Second Corinthians

2 Corinthians 7:13
And in your comfort, we joyed the more exceedingly for the joy of Titus,
because his spirit has been refreshed by you all.
See again how he exalts their praises, and shows their love. For having said,
'I was pleased that my Epistle wrought so much and that you gained so much,'
for "I rejoice," he says, "not that you were made sorry, but that you were made
sorry unto repentance;" and having shown his own love, for he says, "Though I
wrote unto you, I wrote not for his cause that did the wrong, nor for his cause
that suffered the wrong, but that our care for you might be made manifest to
you:" again he mentions another sign of their good will, which brings them great
praise and shows the genuineness of their affection. For, "in your comfort ," he
says, "we joyed the more exceedingly for the joy of Titus." And yet this is no sign
of one that loves them exceedingly; rejoicing rather for Titus than for them.
'Yes,' he replies, 'it is, for I joyed not so much for his cause as for yours.'
Therefore also he subjoins the reason, saying, "because his bowels were
refreshed by you all." He said not, 'he,' but "his bowels;" that is, 'his love for
you.' And how were they refreshed? "By all." For this too is a very great praise.

2 Corinthians 7:14
"For if in anything I have gloried to him on your behalf."
It is high praise when the teacher boasted, for he says, "I was not put to
shame." I therefore rejoiced, because ye showed yourselves to be amended and
proved my words by your deeds. So that the honor accruing to me was twofold;
first, in that you had made progress; next, in that I was not found to fall short of
the truth.
2 Corinthians 7:14. "But as we spoke always to you in truth, so our glorying
also which I made before Titus was found to be truth."
Here he alludes to something further. As we spoke all things among you in
truth, (for it is probable that he had also spoken to them much in praise of this
man ,) so also, what we said of you to Titus has been proved true.

2 Corinthians 7:15
"And his inward affection is more abundant toward you."
What follows is in commendation of him, as exceedingly consumed with
love and attached to them. And he said not 'his love.' Then that he may not
appear to be flattering, he everywhere mentions the causes of his affection; in
order that he may, as I said, both escape the imputation of flattery and the more
encourage them by making the praise redound unto them, and by showing that it
was they who had infused into him the beginning and ground of this so great
love. For having said, "his inward affection is more abundant toward you;" he
added,
"Whilst he remembers the obedience of you all." Now this both shows that
Titus was grateful to his benefactors, seeing he had returned, having them all in
his heart, and continually remembers them, and bears them on his lips and in his
mind; and also is a greater distinction to the Corinthians, seeing that so
vanquished they sent him away. Then he mentions their obedience also,
magnifying their zeal: wherefore also he adds these words,
"How with fear and trembling ye received him." Not with love only, but also
with excessive honor. Do you see how he bears witness to a twofold virtue in
them, both that they loved him as a father and had feared him as a ruler, neither
for fear dimming love, nor for love relaxing fear. He expressed this also above,
"That ye sorrow after a godly sort, what earnest care it wrought in you; yea what
fear, yea what longing."