SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.56, C.3.

unchangeable, must needs be such always and everywhere. But
man's nature is changeable, wherefore that which is natural to man
may sometimes fail. Thus the restitution of a deposit to the depositor
is in accordance with natural equality, and if human nature were
always right, this would always have to be observed; but since it
happens sometimes that man's will is unrighteous there are cases in
which a deposit should not be restored, lest a man of unrighteous
will make evil use of the thing deposited: as when a madman or an
enemy of the common weal demands the return of his weapons.
Reply to Objection 2: The human will can, by common agreement,
make a thing to be just provided it be not, of itself, contrary to
natural justice, and it is in such matters that positive right has its
place. Hence the Philosopher says (Ethic. v, 7) that "in the case of
the legal just, it does not matter in the first instance whether it takes
one form or another, it only matters when once it is laid down." If,
however, a thing is, of itself, contrary to natural right, the human will
cannot make it just, for instance by decreeing that it is lawful to steal
or to commit adultery. Hence it is written (Is. 10:1): "Woe to them that
make wicked laws."
Reply to Objection 3: The Divine right is that which is promulgated
by God. Such things are partly those that are naturally just, yet their
justice is hidden to man, and partly are made just by God's decree.
Hence also Divine right may be divided in respect of these two
things, even as human right is. For the Divine law commands certain
things because they are good, and forbids others, because they are
evil, while others are good because they are prescribed, and others
evil because they are forbidden.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.56, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the right of nations is the same as the

natural right?
Objection 1: It would seem that the right of nations is the same as
the natural right. For all men do not agree save in that which is
natural to them. Now all men agree in the right of nations; since the
jurist [Ulpian: Digest. i, 1; De Just. et Jure i] "the right of nations is
that which is in use among all nations." Therefore the right of
nations is the natural right.
Objection 2: Further, slavery among men is natural, for some are
naturally slaves according to the Philosopher (Polit. i, 2). Now
"slavery belongs to the right of nations," as Isidore states (Etym. v,
4). Therefore the right of nations is a natural right.
Objection 3: Further, right as stated above (Article 2) is divided into
natural and positive. Now the right of nations is not a positive right,
since all nations never agreed to decree anything by common
agreement. Therefore the right of nations is a natural right.
On the contrary, Isidore says (Etym. v, 4) that "right is either natural,
or civil, or right of nations," and consequently the right of nations is
distinct from natural right.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 2), the natural right or just is
that which by its very nature is adjusted to or commensurate with
another person. Now this may happen in two ways; first, according
as it is considered absolutely: thus a male by its very nature is
commensurate with the female to beget offspring by her, and a
parent is commensurate with the offspring to nourish it. Secondly a
thing is naturally commensurate with another person, not according
as it is considered absolutely, but according to something resultant
from it, for instance the possession of property. For if a particular
piece of land be considered absolutely, it contains no reason why it
should belong to one man more than to another, but if it be
considered in respect of its adaptability to cultivation, and the
unmolested use of the land, it has a certain commensuration to be
the property of one and not of another man, as the Philosopher
shows (Polit. ii, 2).
Now it belongs not only to man but also to other animals to