SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.186, C.2.

I answer that, A thing is declared to be unlawful to a person in two
ways. First, because there is something in him contrary to that which
is declared unlawful to him: thus to no man is it lawful to sin,
because each man has in himself reason and an obligation to God's
law, to which things sin is contrary. And in this way it is said to be
unlawful for a person to preach, teach, or do like things, because
there is in him something incompatible with these things, either by
reason of a precept---thus those who are irregular by ordinance of
the Church may not be raised to the sacred orders---or by reason of
sin, according to Ps. 49:16, "But to the sinner God hath said: Why
dost thou declare My justice?"
In this way it is not unlawful for religious to preach, teach, and do
like things, both because they are bound neither by vow nor by
precept of their rule to abstain from these things, and because they
are not rendered less apt for these things by any sin committed, but
on the contrary they are the more apt through having taken upon
themselves the practice of holiness. For it is foolish to say that a
man is rendered less fit for spiritual duties through advancing
himself in holiness; and consequently it is foolish to declare that the
religious state is an obstacle to the fulfilment of such like duties.
This error is rejected by Pope Boniface [Boniface IV] for the reasons
given above. His words which are quoted (XVI, qu. i, can. Sunt.
nonnulli) are these: "There are some who without any dogmatic
proof, and with extreme daring, inspired with a zeal rather of
bitterness than of love, assert that monks though they be dead to the
world and live to God, are unworthy of the power of the priestly
office, and that they cannot confer penance, nor christen, nor
absolve in virtue of the power divinely bestowed on them in the
priestly office. But they are altogether wrong." He proves this first
because it is not contrary to the rule; thus he continues: "For neither
did the Blessed Benedict the saintly teacher of monks forbid this in
any way," nor is it forbidden in other rules. Secondly, he refutes the
above error from the usefulness of the monks, when he adds at the
end of the same chapter: "The more perfect a man is, the more
effective is he in these, namely in spiritual works."
Secondly, a thing is said to be unlawful for a man, not on account of
there being in him something contrary thereto, but because he lacks
that which enables him to do it: thus it is unlawful for a deacon to
say mass, because he is not in priestly orders; and it is unlawful for
a priest to deliver judgment because he lacks the episcopal

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.186, C.2.

authority. Here, however, a distinction must be made. Because those
things which are a matter of an order, cannot be deputed to one who
has not the order, whereas matters of jurisdiction can be deputed to
those who have not ordinary jurisdiction: thus the delivery of a
judgment is deputed by the bishop to a simple priest. In this sense it
is said to be unlawful for monks and other religious to preach, teach,
and so forth, because the religious state does not give them the
power to do these things. They can, however, do them if they receive
orders, or ordinary jurisdiction, or if matters of jurisdiction be
delegated to them.
Reply to Objection 1: It results from the words quoted that the fact of
their being monks does not give monks the power to do these
things, yet it does not involve in them anything contrary to the
performance of these acts.
Reply to Objection 2: Again, this ordinance of the Council of Nicea
forbids monks to claim the power of exercising those acts on the
ground of their being monks, but it does not forbid those acts being
delegated to them.
Reply to Objection 3: These two things are incompatible, namely, the
ordinary cure of ecclesiastical duties, and the observance of the
monastic rule in a monastery. But this does not prevent monks and
other religious from being sometimes occupied with ecclesiastical
duties through being deputed thereto by superiors having ordinary
cure; especially members of religious orders that are especially
instituted for that purpose, as we shall say further on (Question 188,
Article 4).