better would it have been, if necessity so required, to run into danger; yea, to
suffer in castigating and correcting such persons (which would have brought us a
martyr's crown), than now to fear, to tremble, and to expect death, from the
insubordination of such persons! Behold, the crime was that of a few, but the
blame comes on all! Behold, through these, we are all now placed in fear, and
are ourselves suffering the punishment of what these men dared to do! But if we
had taken them in time, and cast them out of the city, and chastised them, and
corrected the sick member, we should not have been subjected to our present
terror. I know that the manners of this city have been of a noble character from
old times; but that certain strangers, and men of mixed race—accursed and
pernicious characters—hopeless of their own safety, have perpetrated what has
been perpetrated. For this very reason I was always lifting up my voice, and
unceasingly bearing my testimony, saying, Let us punish the madness of those
blasphemers—let us control their spirit, and provide for their salvation—yea,
though it be necessary to die in doing it, the deed would yet bring us great gain:
let us not overlook the insult done to our common Lord; overlooking such things
will bring forth some great evil to our city!
11. These things I foretold, and they have now actually taken place—and
we are paying the penalty of that listlessness! You overlooked the insult that was
done unto God!— Behold, he has permitted the Emperor to be insulted, and peril
to the utmost to hang over all, in order that we might pay by this fear the penalty
of that listlessness; was it then vainly, and to no purpose I foretold these things,
and assiduously urged your Charity? But nevertheless, nothing was done. Let it,
however, be done now; and being chastened by our present calamity, let us now
restrain the disorderly madness of these men. Let us shut up their mouths, even
as we close up pestiferous fountains; and let us turn them to a contrary course,
and the evils which have taken hold of the city shall undoubtedly be stayed. The
Church is not a theatre, that we should listen for amusement. With profit ought
we to depart hence, and some fresh and great gain should we acquire ere we
leave this place. For it is but vainly and irrationally we meet together, if we have

been but captivated for a time, and return home empty, and void of all
improvement from the things spoken.
12. What need have I of these plaudits, these cheers and tumultuous signs
of approval? The praise I seek, is that you show forth all I have said in your
works. Then am I an enviable and happy man, not when you approve, but when
you perform with all readiness, whatsoever ye hear from me? Let every one then
correct his neighbour, for "edify ye one another," [1 Thessalonians 5:11] it is
said, and if we do not this, the crimes of each one will bring some general and
intolerable damage to the city. Behold, while we are unconscious of any part in
this transaction, we are no less affrighted than those who were daringly engaged
in it! We are dreading lest the wrath of the Emperor should descend upon all; and
it is not sufficient for us to say in defence, "I was not present; I was not an
accomplice, nor a participator in these acts." "For this reason," he may reply,
"you shall be punished, and pay the extreme penalty, because thou were not
present; and did not check, nor restrain the rioters, and did not run any risk for
the honour of the Emperor! Had you no part in these audacious deeds? I
commend this, and take it well. But thou did not check these things when being
done. This is a cause of accusation!" Such words as these, we shall also hear
from God, if we silently suffer the continuance of the injuries and insults
committed against Him. For he also who had buried his talent in the earth, was
called to account, not for crimes done by himself, for he had given back the
whole of that which was entrusted to him, but because he had not increased it;
because he had not instructed others; because he had not deposited it in the
hands of the bankers; that is, he had not admonished, or counselled, or rebuked,
or amended those unruly sinners who were his neighbours. On this account he
was sent away without reprieve to those intolerable punishments! But I fully
trust that though ye did not before, you will now at least perform this work of
correction, and not overlook insult committed against God. For the events which
have taken place are sufficient, even if no one had given any warning, to
convince men ever so disposed to be insensible, that they must exert themselves