other circumstances of this nature. What then should I reply to those who make
such observations? Why, that if he who was captured was innocent of the present
sedition, he had wrought some other transgression before this still more
grievous, for which, not having afterwards repented, he has paid the penalty at
the present time. For thus is the custom of God to deal with us. When we sin, He
does not straightway visit the transgression, but lets it pass, giving us space for
repentance, in order that we may be amended and converted. But if, because we
have not paid the penalty, we suppose that the offense too is blotted out, and
make light of it; then somewhere, where we think not of it, we are sure
afterwards to be punished. And this takes place in order that, when we sin and
are not punished, we may not be free from fear, unless we amend, knowing that
we shall certainly fall into punishment where we do not expect it. So that if you
sin, beloved, and art not punished, do not grow presumptuous, but for this very
cause be the more alarmed, knowing that it is an easy matter with God to
recompense again when he pleases. For this reason then he has not punished
you, that you might receive space for repentance. Let us not therefore say, that
such a person while innocent incurred punishment; and another while guilty
escaped, for he who incurred it, being guiltless, as I observed, paid the
punishment of other transgressions; and he who now escapes it, if he repents not,
will be captured in another snare. If our minds are thus disposed, we shall never
forget our own sins, but, always fearful and trembling lest we should have to pay
the penalty, we shall readily recollect them. For nothing is so apt to bring sin to
remembrance as punishment and chastisement. And this is shown by Joseph's
brethren. For when they had sold the just man, and thirteen years had passed
away, suspecting they had fallen into punishment, and fearing for their lives,
they remembered their sin, and said one to another, "We are verily guilty
concerning our brother Joseph." [Genesis 42:21] Do you see, how fear brought
their guilt to recollection? And yet when they were sinning they perceived it not,
but when they were fearful of being punished, then they remembered it?
Knowing, therefore, all these things, let us make a change and amendment of our

lives; and let us think of religion and virtue, before we think of deliverance from
the impending distress.
21. And in the meanwhile I desire to fix three precepts in your mind, to the
end that you may accomplish me these during the fast,— viz. to speak ill of no
one; to hold no one for an enemy; and to expel from the mouth altogether the
evil custom of oaths. And as when we hear that some money tax is imposed,
each one going within, and calling his wife and children and servants, considers
and consults with them how he may pay this tribute, so also let us do with
respect to these spiritual precepts. Let every one when he has returned home call
together his wife and children, and let him say, that a spiritual tribute was
imposed this day: a tribute by which there will be some deliverance and removal
of these evils; a tribute which does not make those who pay it poor, but richer;
that is to say, to have no enemy, to speak evil of no man, and to swear not at all.
Let us consider; let us think; let us resolve how we may fulfill these precepts. Let
us exert every endeavour. Let us admonish each other. Let us correct each other,
that we may not go to the other world as debtors, and then, needing to borrow of
others, suffer the fate of the foolish virgins, and fall from immortal salvation. If
we thus set our lives in order, I warrant you and promise, that from this there will
be deliverance from the present calamity, and a removal of these dreadful ills;
and what is greater than all, there will be the enjoyment of the good things to
come. For it were fitting that I should commit to you the whole body of virtue;
but I think it the best method of correction, to take the laws by parts, and reduce
them to practice, and then to proceed to others. For as in a given field, the
husbandman, digging it all up piecemeal, gradually comes to the end of his task;
so we too if we make this rule for ourselves, in any wise to reduce to a correct
practice these three precepts during the present Lent, and to commit them to the
safe custody of good habit, we shall proceed with greater ease to the rest; and by
this means arriving at the summit of spiritual wisdom, we shall both reap the
fruit of a favourable hope in the present life; and in the life to come we shall
stand before Christ with great confidence, and enjoy those unspeakable