and to his seed." And yet the events showed the contrary: namely, after he came,
he had not "so much as to set his foot on," had not a child; which very things
were contrary to his faith.
These things having seen, let us likewise, whatever God shall promise,
receive the same, however contrary may be the events. And yet in our case, they
are not contrary, but very suitable. For where the promises are, there, when the
contraries turn out, they are really contrary; but in our case it is just the reverse:
for He has told us that we should have tribulation here, but our rest there. Why
do we confound the times? Why do we turn things upside down? Say, are you
afflicted, and livest in poverty, and in dejection? Be not troubled: for it were
worth being troubled at, were thou destined to be afflicted in that world: as for
this present affliction, it is the cause of rest. "This sickness," says He, "is not
unto death." [John 11:4] That affliction is punishment: this, schooling and
correction. It is a contest, this life present: if so, to fight is our business now: it is
war and battle. In war one does not seek to have rest, in war one does not seek to
have dainty living, one is not anxious about riches, one's care is not about a wife
then: one thing only he looks at, how he may overcome his foes. Be this our care
likewise: if we overcome, and return with the victory, God will give us all things.
Be this alone our study, how we may overcome the devil: though after all it is
not our own study that does it, but God's grace does the whole business. Be it our
one study, how we may attract His grace, how we may draw to ourselves that
assistance. "If God be for us, who can be against us?" [Romans 8:31] Let us
make one thing our study; that He be not our enemy, that He turn not away from
us.
Not the being afflicted is an evil; the evil is, to sin. This is the sore
affliction, however we may pass our days in luxury:— not to speak of the life to
come, it is so even in this life present. Think how our conscience is stung with
remorse, and whether this is not worse than any kind of torture! I should like to
put the question searchingly to those who live in evil ways ([ἐ] [ν κακοἵς]),
whether they never come to reflect upon their own sins, whether they do not

tremble, and are in fear and anguish, whether they do not think those blessed
who live in abstinence, them of the mountains, them of the strict rule? ([τοὺς ἐν
πολλῇ φιλοσοφί& 139Apostles rejoiced when scourged. Paul gives this
exhortation, saying, "Rejoice in the Lord." Philippians 4:4] And how can there
be rejoicing, where there are bonds, where there are tortures; where there are
courts of justice? There, most of all, is rejoicing. But say, how can there be
rejoicing, where these are not? For he who is conscious of no evil, will have a
sort of exceeding delight, insomuch that in what degree you speak of tribulation,
in the same you tell of his delight. The soldier who has received numberless
wounds and has come home again, will he not return with exceeding delight,
with his wounds as his title for speaking up boldly, and as evidence of his glory
and renown? And thou, if you be able to exclaim as Paul does, "I bear the marks
of Jesus" [Galatians 6:17], will be able to become great and glorious and
renowned. "But there is no persecution." Make your stand against glory: and
should any one speak anything against you, fear not to be evil-spoken of for
Christ's sake: make your stand against the tyranny of pride, against the fighting
of anger, against the torment of concupiscence. These also are "marks," these
also are torments. For, I ask, what is the worst in tortures? Is it not, that the soul
is pained, and is on fire? For in the other case, the body too has its share: but in
this, the whole belongs to the soul. On the soul alone comes all the smart, when
one is angry, when one is envious, whatever else of this kind one does, or rather
suffers. For, in fact, it is not action, but passion, not a doing, but a suffering— to
be angered, to feel envy: therefore indeed they are called passions (or sufferings)
([πάθη], perturbationes) of the soul, yea wounds, and bruises. For it is indeed a
suffering, and worse than suffering. Bethink you, you that are angry, that you do
such things in "passion," in a state of suffering. Therefore he who is not angry
suffers not. Do you mark that not he who is abused is the sufferer, but he that
abuses, as I said above? For that he is a sufferer, is plain in the first place from
the very fact, that such a thing is called by this name of passion: and it is also
plain from the (effects on the) body: for these are the affections ([πάθη]) for