been strengthened, should abound; and having abounded, should recover [from the disease of sin];
and having recovered, should be glorified; and being glorified, should see his Lord. For God is He
who is yet to be seen, and the beholding of God is productive of immortality, but immortality
renders one nigh unto God.
4. Irrational, therefore, in every respect, are they who await not the time of increase, but ascribe
to God the infirmity of their nature. Such persons know neither God nor themselves, being insatiable
and ungrateful, unwilling to be at the outset what they have also been created—men subject to
passions; but go beyond the law of the human race, and before that they become men, they wish
to be even now like God their Creator, and they who are more destitute of reason than dumb animals
[insist] that there is no distinction between the uncreated God and man, a creature of to-day. For
these, [the dumb animals], bring no charge against God for not having made them men; but each
one, just as he has been created, gives thanks that he has been created. For we cast blame upon
Him, because we have not been made gods from the beginning, but at first merely men, then at
length gods; although God has adopted this course out of His pure benevolence, that no one may
impute to Him invidiousness or grudgingness. He declares, "I have said, Ye are gods; and ye are
all sons of the Highest." But since we could not sustain the power of divinity, He adds, "But ye
shall die like men," setting forth both truths—the kindness of His free gift, and our weakness, and
also that we were possessed of power over ourselves. For after His great kindness He graciously
conferred good [upon us], and made men like to Himself, [that is] in their own power; while at the
same time by His prescience He knew the infirmity of human beings, and the consequences which
would flow from it; but through [His] love and [His] power, He shall overcome the substance of
created nature. For it was necessary, at first, that nature should be exhibited; then, after that, that
what was mortal should be conquered and swallowed up by immortality, and the corruptible by
incorruptibility, and that man should be made after the image and likeness of God, having received
the knowledge of good and evil.

### Chapter XXXIX.—Man is endowed with the faculty of distinguishing good and evil; so that,
without compulsion, he has the power, by his own will and choice, to perform God's
commandments, by doing which he avoids the evils prepared for the rebellious.
1. Man has received the knowledge of good and evil. It is good to obey God, and to believe in
Him, and to keep His commandment, and this is the life of man; as not to obey God is evil, and
this is his death. Since God, therefore, gave [to man] such mental power (magnanimitatem) man
knew both the good of obedience and the evil of disobedience, that the eye of the mind, receiving
experience of both, may with judgment make choice of the better things; and that he may never