His own promise, "I am with you always, even unto the end of the world."
[Matthew 28:20] And again, when He appeared to him, He said, "Be not afraid,
but speak, for I am with you, and no man shall set on you to harm you." [96 9,
10] Again, He stood by him in a dream, and said, "Be of good cheer, for as you
have testified concerning me at Jerusalem, so must thou bear witness also at
Rome." [Acts 23:11]
The saints, though they are at all times a glorious sight, and are full of
abundant grace, yet are so, most of all, when they are in perils for Christ's sake,
when they are prisoners; for as a brave soldier is at all times and of himself a
pleasing spectacle to them that behold him, but most of all when he is standing,
and in ranks at the king's side; thus also imagine to yourselves Paul, how great a
thing it was to see him teaching in his bonds.
Shall I mention, in passing, a thought, which just at this moment occurs to
me? The blessed martyr Babylas was bound, and he too for the very same cause
as John also was, because he reproved a king in his transgression. This man
when he was dying gave charge that his bonds should be laid with his body, and
that the body should be buried bound; and to this day the fetters lie mingled with
his ashes, so devoted was his affection for the bonds he had worn for Christ's
sake. "He was laid in chains of iron" as the Prophet says of Joseph. [Psalm
105:18] And even women have before now had trial of these bonds.
We however are not in bonds, nor am I recommending this, since now is not
the time for them. But you, bind not your hands, but bind your heart and mind.
There are yet other bonds, and they that wear not the one, shall have to wear the
other. Hear what Christ says, "Bind him hand and foot." [Matthew 22:13] But
God forbid we should have trial of those bonds! But of these may He grant us
even to take our fill!
On these accounts he says, "I, the prisoner in the Lord, beseech you to walk
worthily of the calling wherewith you were called." But what is this calling? You
were called as His body, it is said. You have Christ as your head; and though you
were "enemies," and had committed misdeeds out of number, yet "has He raised

you up with Him and made you to sit with Him." [Ephesians 2:6] A high calling
this, and to high privileges, not only in that we have been called from that former
state, but in that we are called both to such privileges, and by such a method.
But how is it possible to "walk worthily" of it? "With all lowliness." Such an
one walks worthily. This is the basis of all virtue. If you be lowly, and bethink
you what you are, and how you were saved, you will take this recollection as a
motive to all virtue. You will neither be elated with bonds, nor with those very
privileges which I mentioned, but as knowing that all is of grace, you will
humble yourself. The lowly-minded man is able to be at once a generous and a
grateful servant. "For what have you," says he, "that thou did not receive?" [1
Corinthians 4:7] And again, hear his words, "I labored more abundantly than
they all; yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me." [1 Corinthians
15:10]
"With all lowliness," says he; not that which is in words, nor that which is in
actions only, but even in one's very bearing and tone of voice: not lowly towards
one, and rude towards another; be lowly towards all men, be he friend or foe, be
he great or small. This is lowliness. Even in your good deeds be lowly; for hear
what Christ says, "Blessed are the poor in spirit;" [Matthew 5:3] and He places
this first in order. Wherefore also the Apostle himself says, "With all lowliness,
and meekness, and long-suffering." For it is possible for a man to be lowly, and
yet quick and irritable, and thus all is to no purpose; for oftentimes he will be
possessed by his anger, and ruin all.
"Forbearing," he proceeds, "one another in love."
How is it possible to forbear, if a man be passionate or censorious? He has
told us therefore the manner: "in love," says he. If you, he would say, are not
forbearing to your neighbor, how shall God be forbearing to you? If you bear not
with your fellow-servant, how shall the Master bear with you? Wherever there is
love, all things are to be borne.
"Giving diligence ," says he, "to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of
peace." Bind therefore your hands with moderation. Again that goodly name of