Nothing is such an enemy of our nature as vice. And from many things it is
evident, how vice is at enmity with us, and virtue friendly toward us. What will
you? That I should speak of fornication? It makes men subject to reproach, poor,
objects of ridicule, despicable to all, just as enemies treat them. Ofttimes it has
involved men in disease and danger; many men have perished or been wounded
in behalf of their mistresses. And if fornication produces these things, much
rather does adultery. But does almsgiving so? By no means. But as a loving
mother sets her son in great propriety, in good order, in good report, and gives
him leisure to engage in necessary work, thus almsgiving does not release us nor
lead us away from our necessary work, but even renders the soul more wise. For
nothing is more foolish than a mistress.
But what do you will? To look upon covetousness? It too treats us like an
enemy. And how? It makes us hated by all. It prepares all men to vaunt
themselves against us; both those who have been treated unjustly by us, and
those who have not, who share the grief of the former, and are in fear for
themselves. All men look upon us as their common foes, as wild beasts, as
demons. Everywhere are there innumerable accusations, plots against us,
envyings, all which are the acts of enemies. But justice, on the contrary, makes
all men friends, all men sociable, all men well disposed towards us, by all men
prayers are made in our behalf; our affairs are in perfect safety, there is no
danger, there is no suspicion. But sleep also fearlessly comes over us with
perfect safety, no care is there, no lamenting.
How much better this sort of life is! And what? Is it best to envy, or to
rejoice with one another? Let us search out all these things, and we shall find
that virtue, like a truly kind mother, places us in safety, while vice is a
treacherous thing, and full of danger. For hear the prophet, who says, "The Lord
is a stronghold of them that fear Him, and His covenant is to show them." [Psalm
25:14, Septuagint] He fears no one, who is not conscious to himself of any
wickedness; on the contrary, he who lives in crime is never confident, but
trembles at his domestics, and looks at them with suspicion. Why say, his

domestics? He cannot bear the tribunal of his own conscience. Not only those
who are without, but his inward thoughts affect him likewise, and suffer him not
to be in quiet. What then, says Paul? Ought we to live dependent on praise? He
said not, look to praise, but do praiseworthy actions, yet not for the sake of
praise.
"Whatsoever things are true," for the things we have been speaking of are
false. "Whatsoever things are honorable." That which is "honorable" belongs to
external virtue, that which is "pure" to the soul. Give no cause of stumbling, says
he, nor handle of accusation. Because he had said, "Whatsoever things are of
good report," lest you should think that he means only those things which are so
in the sight of men, he proceeds, "if there be any virtue, and if there be any
praise, think on these things"— do these things. He wills us ever to be in these
things, to care for these things, to think on these things. For if we will be at
peace with each other, God too will be with us, but if we raise up war, the God of
peace will not be with us. For nothing is so hostile to the soul as vice. That is,
peace and virtue place it in safety. Wherefore we must make a beginning on our
part, and then we shall draw God toward us.
God is not a God of war and fighting. Make war and fighting to cease, both
that which is against Him, and that which is against your neighbor. Be at peace
with all men, consider with what character God saves you. "Blessed are the
peacemakers, for they shall be called sons of God." [Matthew 5:9] Such always
imitate the Son of God: do thou imitate Him too. Be at peace. The more your
brother wars against you, by so much the greater will be your reward. For hear
the prophet who says, "With the haters of peace I was peaceful." [Psalm 120:7,
Septuagint] This is virtue, this is above man's understanding, this makes us near
God; nothing so much delights God as to remember no evil. This sets you free
from your sins, this looses the charges against you: but if we are fighting and
buffeting, we become far off from God: for enmities are produced by conflict,
and from enmity springs remembrance of evil.
Cut out the root, and there will be no fruit. Thus shall we learn to despise