they should turn things upside down, if they should treat them as enemies, they
would not threaten them, nor correct them, nor punish them, nor even grieve
them with a word, would this be any proof of goodness? I maintain that this is
the extreme of cruelty, not only because the wife and children are betrayed by
this unreasonable kindness, but because the slaves themselves are destroyed
before them. For they will be drunkards, wanton, dissolute, and more irrational
than any beasts. Is this, tell me, a proof of goodness, to trample upon the noble
nature of the soul, and to destroy both themselves and others beside? Do you see
that to call men to account is a proof of great goodness? But why do I speak of
slaves, who more readily fall into these sins? But let a man have sons, and let
him permit them to do everything they will, and let him not punish them; will
they not be worse than anything? Tell me. In the case of men then, it is a mark of
goodness to punish, and of cruelty not to punish, and is it not so in the case of
God? So that because He is good, therefore He has prepared a hell.
And do you wish that I should speak of another instance of God's
goodness? It is not only this, but that He does not suffer the good to become bad.
For if they were destined to meet with the same things, they would all be bad.
But now this also does not a little console the good. For hear the Prophet, saying,
"The righteous shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance upon the ungodly, he
shall wash his hands in the blood of the sinner." [Psalm 58:10] Not rejoicing on
account of it, God forbid! But fearing lest he should suffer the same things, he
will render his own life more pure. This then is a mark of His great care. Yes,
you say, but He ought only to threaten, and not to punish also. But if He does
punish, and still you say it is a matter of threat, and on that account become more
slothful, if it were really but a threat, would you not become more supine? If the
Ninevites had known it was a matter of threat, they would not have repented. But
because they repented, they cause the threat to stop at words only. Do you wish it
to be a threat only? You have the disposal of that matter. Become a better man,
and it stops only at the threat. But if, which be far from you! Thou despises the
threat, you will come to the experience of it. The men before the flood, if they

had feared the threat, would not have experienced the execution of it. And we, if
we fear the threat, shall not expose ourselves to experience the reality. God
forbid we should. And may the merciful God grant that we all henceforth,
having been brought to sound mind, may obtain those unspeakable blessings. Of
which may we all be thought worthy, through the grace and lovingkindness of
our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom to the Father, together with the Holy Ghost, be
glory, power, and honor, now and for ever and ever. Amen.