2. And on this account does Paul declare to the Corinthians, "I have fed you with milk, not with
meat, for hitherto ye were not able to bear it." That is, ye have indeed learned the advent of our
Lord as a man; nevertheless, because of your infirmity, the Spirit of the Father has not as yet rested
upon you. "For when envying and strife," he says, "and dissensions are among you, are ye not
carnal, and walk as men?" That is, that the Spirit of the Father was not yet with them, on account
of their imperfection and shortcomings of their walk in life. As, therefore, the apostle had the power
to give them strong meat—for those upon whom the apostles laid hands received the Holy Spirit,
who is the food of life [eternal] —but they were not capable of receiving it, because they had the
sentient faculties of the soul still feeble and undisciplined in the practice of things pertaining to
God; so, in like manner, God had power at the beginning to grant perfection to man; but as the
latter was only recently created, he could not possibly have received it, or even if he had received
it, could he have contained it, or containing it, could he have retained it. It was for this reason that
the Son of God, although He was perfect, passed through the state of infancy in common with the
rest of mankind, partaking of it thus not for His own benefit, but for that of the infantile stage of
man's existence, in order that man might be able to receive Him. There was nothing, therefore,
impossible to and deficient in God, [implied in the fact] that man was not an uncreated being; but
this merely applied to him who was lately created, [namely] man.
3. With God there are simultaneously exhibited power, wisdom, and goodness. His power and
goodness [appear] in this, that of His own will He called into being and fashioned things having
no previous existence; His wisdom [is shown] in His having made created things parts of one
harmonious and consistent whole; and those things which, through His super-eminent kindness,
receive growth and a long period of existence, do reflect the glory of the uncreated One, of that
God who bestows what is good ungrudgingly. For from the very fact of these things having been
created, [it follows] that they are not uncreated; but by their continuing in being throughout a long
course of ages, they shall receive a faculty of the Uncreated, through the gratuitous bestowal of
eternal existence upon them by God. And thus in all things God has the pre-eminence, who alone
is uncreated, the first of all things, and the primary cause of the existence of all, while all other
things remain under God's subjection. But being in subjection to God is continuance in immortality,
and immortality is the glory of the uncreated One. By this arrangement, therefore, and these
harmonies, and a sequence of this nature, man, a created and organized being, is rendered after the
image and likeness of the uncreated God,—the Father planning everything well and giving His
commands, the Son carrying these into execution and performing the work of creating, and the
Spirit nourishing and increasing [what is made], but man making progress day by day, and ascending
towards the perfect, that is, approximating to the uncreated One. For the Uncreated is perfect, that
is, God. Now it was necessary that man should in the first instance be created; and having been
created, should receive growth; and having received growth, should be strengthened; and having