enjoyed your patronage. This man's disease you cured, another you rid of false
accusation, another being a stranger you took in, another being naked you
clothed." Wealth inexhaustible and many treasures are not so good as such
sayings. They draw all men's gaze more powerfully than your golden vestments,
and horses, and slaves. For these make a man appear even odious: ([φορτικόν], a
conj. of Saville's for [φορτικά]) they cause him to be hated as a common foe; but
the former proclaim him as a common father and benefactor. And, what is
greatest of all, Favor from God waits on you in every part of your proceedings.
What I mean is, let one man say, He helped to portion out my daughter: another,
And he afforded my son the means of taking his station among men: ([εἰς ἄνδρας
ἐμφανῆναι]) another, He made my calamity to cease: another, He delivered me
from dangers. Better than golden crowns are words such as these, that a man
should have in his city innumerable persons to proclaim his beneficence. Voices
such as these are pleasanter far, and sweeter than the voices of the heralds
marching before the archons; to be called saviour, benefactor, defender, (the very
names of God;) and not, covetous, proud, insatiate, and mean. Let us not, I
beseech you, let us not have a fancy for any of these titles, but the contrary. For
if these, spoken on earth, make one so splendid and illustrious; when they are
written in heaven, and God proclaims them on the day that shall come, think
what renown, what splendor you shall enjoy! Which may it be the lot of us all to
obtain, through the grace and loving-kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ; with
Whom unto the Father and the Holy Spirit, be glory, power, honor, now and
always and unto everlasting ages. Amen.

## Homily 11 on First Corinthians

1 Corinthians 4:3-5
But with me it is a very small thing that I should be judged of you, or of
man's judgment: yea I judge not my own self. For I know nothing against
myself, yet am I not hereby justified: but He that judges me is the Lord.
Together with all other ills, I know not how, there has come upon man's
nature the disease of restless prying and of unseasonable curiosity, which Christ
Himself chastised, saying, [Matthew 7:1] "Judge not, that you be not judged." A
kind of thing, which has no pleasure as all other sins have, but only punishment
and vengeance. For though we are ourselves full of ten thousand evils, and
bearing the "beams" in our own eyes, we become exact inquisitors of the
offenses of our neighbor which are not at all bigger than "motes." And so this
matter at Corinth was falling out. Religious men and dear to God were ridiculed
and cast out for their want of learning; while others, brimful of evils
innumerable, were classed highly because of their fluent speech. Then like
persons sitting in public to try causes, these were the sort of votes they kept
rashly passing: "such an one is worthy: such an one is better than such another;
this man is inferior to that; that, better than this." And, leaving off to mourn for
their own bad ways, they had become judges of others; and in this way again
were kindling grievous warfare.
Mark then, how wisely Paul corrects them, doing away with this disease.
For since he had said, "Moreover, it is required in stewards that a man be found
faithful," and it seemed as if he were giving them an opening to judge and pry
into each man's life, and this was aggravating the party feeling; lest such should
be the effect on them, he draws them away from that kind of petty disputation,
saying, "With me it is a very small thing that I should be judged of you;" again in