consider what an act it was, not to send an angel, or archangel, or any other of
his fellow-servants, but that the Lord Himself should have descended to him
who had fallen from the right way, and should have raised him when thus cast
down; and should have approached him, One to one, as a friend comes to a
friend when he is unfortunate, and is plunged in great distress! For that He acted
thus out of His great kindness, the very words too which He spoke to him
evidently show His ineffable affection. And why do I say, all the words? The
first utterance signifies at once His tenderness. For He said not, what it was
probable a person treated so contemptuously would say, "O wicked, yea most
wicked man! When you had enjoyed so great favour from Me, and had been
honoured with such a sovereignty, being exalted above all the creatures upon the
earth for no merit of your own; and having received in actual deeds the pledges
of My care, and a true manifestation of My Providence, did you esteem a wicked
and pestiferous demon, the enemy of your salvation, to be worthy of more credit
than your Lord and Benefactor? What proof did he give of regard for you, like
that which I have done? Did I not make for you the heaven, the earth, the sea,
the sun, the moon, and all the stars? For truly none of the angels needed this
work of creation; but for you, and for your recreation, I made so great and
excellent a world; and did you esteem mere words alone, a false engagement,
and a promise full of deceit, as more worthy to be believed than the kindness and
providence that was manifested by deeds; that you gave yourself over to him,
and trampled My laws under foot!" These words, and more of this kind, one who
had been treated contemptuously would probably say. But God acted not so; but
quite in the contrary manner. For by His first word He at once raised him up
from his dejection, and gave the fearful and trembling man confidence, by being
the first Himself to call him, or rather, not by merely calling him first, but by
addressing him by his own familiar appellation, and saying, "Adam, where are
you?" Thus He showed His tenderness, and the great regard He had for him. For
you must all know, that this is a mark of intimate friendship. And thus those who
call upon the dead are wont to do, continually repeating their names. And so, on

the other hand, those who entertain hatred and enmity against any, cannot bear to
mention the very names of those who have aggrieved them. Saul, for instance,
though he had sustained no injury from David, but had wronged him
exceedingly, since he abhorred and hated him, could not endure to mention his
proper name; but when all were seated together, not seeing David to be present,
what said he? He said not, "Where is David? But, 'Where is the son of Jesse?'"
[1 Kings 20:27] calling him by his father's name. And again, the Jews did the
same with respect to Christ, for since they abhorred and hated Him, they did not
say, "Where is Christ?" but, "Where is that man?" [John 7:11]
7. But God, willing to show even by this that sin had not quenched His
tenderness, nor disobedience taken away His favor toward him, and that He still
exercised His Providence and care for the fallen one, said, "Adam, where are
you?" not being ignorant of the place where he was, but because the mouth of
those who have sinned is closed up; sin turning the tongue backward, and
conscience taking hold of it; so that such persons remain speechless, held fast in
silence as by a kind of chain. And God wishing therefore to invite him to
freedom of utterance, and to give him confidence, and to lead him to make an
apology for his offenses, in order that he might obtain some forgiveness, was
Himself the first to call; cutting off much of Adam's distress by the familiar
appellation, and dispelling his fear, and opening by this address the mouth that
was shut. Hence also it was that he said, "Adam, where are you?" "I left you,"
says he, "in one situation, and I find you in another. I left you in confidence and
glory; and I now find you in disgrace and silence!" And observe the care of God
in this instance. He called not Eve;— He called not the serpent—but him who
had sinned in the lightest degree of all, he brings first to the tribunal, in order
that beginning from him who was able to find some degree of excuse, He might
pass a more merciful sentence, even against her who had sinned the most. And
judges, indeed, do not deign to make inquiry in their own person of their fellowservants, and those who are partakers of a common nature with them, but putting
forward some one of their attendants to intervene, they instruct him to convey