He also shows that the mode of inquiry used must always correspond to the kind of investigation
undertaken, by reference to the authority of the Philosopher in I Ethic. when he says: "For it has
been wisely said that it is a scholar's duty to formulate his belief about anything according to its
real nature." So, in regard to a doctrine of faith, the same principle must be applied: for in all
cases, equal certitude and demonstrative evidence cannot be demanded. And these are the very
words of the Philosopher in I Ethic.: "It is the duty of the scholar to demand as much certitude in
his investigation of each thing as the nature of that thing permits."

In the second place, when he says: "Speculative science may be divided into three kinds," he
inquires into the method of his own investigation, testing its congruousness by distinguishing it
from the methods employed in other sciences; and, since method ought to correspond to the
matter under investigation, he therefore divides this part of his consideration into two sections.

First, he distinguishes sciences according to the matter with which each is concerned. Secondly,
he indicates the methods suitable for each kind of matter, beginning, "Physics deals."

In regard to the first point, he does three things. First, he shows what the objects of natural
philosophy are. Secondly, he indicates the objects of mathematics. Thirdly, he speaks of the
truths with which divine science is concerned, when he says: "Theology does not."

Therefore he says: "It has been wisely said that it is a scholar's duty to formulate his
belief about anything according to its real nature." For, since there are three divisions of
speculative science (or philosophy), and he calls it "speculative" to differentiate it from ethics,
which is operative or practical; in each of these the method must be in conformity with the matter.
The three divisions of speculative science indicated are physics or natural science, mathematics,
and divine science or theology. While, I say, there are three divisions, natural philosophy, which
is one of the, three, "deals with motion and,is not abstract," that is, it is concerned with things in
motion and not abstracted from matter. This he proves by examples, as is evident in his treatise.
When, however, he says: "Form takes on the movement of the particular thing to which it is
annexed," his words should be understood as follows: that what is composite of matter and
form, inasmuch as it is due the nature of a thing of this kind, has motion; or, in other words, a
form existing in matter is the principle of motion. Therefore the consideration of things that are

material and of things that are in motion is the same.

He then indicates the subject matter of mathematics, saying: "Mathematics does not deal
with motion"; that is, it involves no consideration of motion or of movable things, and on this
point it differs from natural philosophy. Mathematics, moreover, is said to be "not abstract"; that
is, it considers forms which according to their existence are not abstract from matter, and in this
respect it is in agreement with natural philosophy. He then explains. how this is: Mathematics
considers forms which are without matter and hence without motion, because wherever there is
matter there is motion, as is proved in X Metaph. For according as things have matter there will
also be motion, and thus the speculations of a mathematician are without matter and without
motion, although these forms, namely, those about which the mathematician speculates, "being
connected with matter, cannot really be separated from bodies," according to their being [real
existence]; but according to speculation, they can be considered as separable.