FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.100, C.11.

charity. On the other hand, some have said that the mode of charity
is altogether outside the precept.
Both these opinions are true up to a certain point. Because the act of
charity can be considered in two ways. First, as an act by itself: and
thus it falls under the precept of the law which specially prescribes
it, viz. "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God," and "Thou shalt love thy
neighbor." In this sense, the first opinion is true. Because it is not
impossible to observe this precept which regards the act of charity;
since man can dispose himself to possess charity, and when he
possesses it, he can use it. Secondly, the act of charity can be
considered as being the mode of the acts of the other virtues, i.e.
inasmuch as the acts of the other virtues are ordained to charity,
which is "the end of the commandment," as stated in 1 Tim. i, 5: for it
has been said above (Question 12, Article 4) that the intention of the
end is a formal mode of the act ordained to that end. In this sense
the second opinion is true in saying that the mode of charity does
not fall under the precept, that is to say that this commandment,
"Honor thy father," does not mean that a man must honor his father
from charity, but merely that he must honor him. Wherefore he that
honors his father, yet has not charity, does not break this precept:
although he does break the precept concerning the act of charity, for
which reason he deserves to be punished.
Reply to Objection 1: Our Lord did not say, "If thou wilt enter into
life, keep one commandment"; but "keep" all "the commandments":
among which is included the commandment concerning the love of
God and our neighbor.
Reply to Objection 2: The precept of charity contains the injunction
that God should be loved from our whole heart, which means that all
things would be referred to God. Consequently man cannot fulfil the
precept of charity, unless he also refer all things to God. Wherefore
he that honors his father and mother, is bound to honor them from
charity, not in virtue of the precept, "Honor thy father and mother,"
but in virtue of the precept, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with
thy whole heart." And since these are two affirmative precepts, not
binding for all times, they can be binding, each one at a different
time: so that it may happen that a man fulfils the precept of honoring
his father and mother, without at the same time breaking the precept
concerning the omission of the mode of charity.
Reply to Objection 3: Man cannot fulfil all the precepts of the law,

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.100, C.11.

unless he fulfil the precept of charity, which is impossible without
charity. Consequently it is not possible, as Pelagius maintained, for
man to fulfil the law without grace.