awestriking; he gives us the Lord Himself for a garment, the King Himself: for
he that is clad with Him, has absolutely all virtue. But in saying, "Put on," he
bids us be girt about with Him upon every side. As in another place he says, "But
if Christ be in you." [Romans 8:10] And again, "That Christ may dwell in the
inner man." [Ephesians 3:16-17, al. punct.] For He would have our soul to be a
dwelling for Himself, and Himself to be laid round about us as a garment, that
He may be unto us all things both from within and from without. For He is our
fullness; for He is "the fullness of Him that fills all in all" [Ephesians 1:23]: and
the Way, and the Husband, and the Bridegroom;— for "I have espoused you as a
chaste virgin to one husband," [2 Corinthians 11:2]: and a root, and drink, and
meat, and life—for he says, "I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me;" [Galatians
2:20] and Apostle, and High-Priest, and Teacher, and Father, and Brother, and
Joint-heir, and sharer of the tomb and Cross;— for it says, "We were buried
together with Him," and "planted together in the likeness of His Death" [Romans
6:4-5]: and a Suppliant;— "For we are ambassadors in Christ's stead" [2
Corinthians 5:20]: and an "Advocate to the Father;"— for "He also makes," it
says, "intercession for us:" [Romans 8:34] and house and inhabitant—for He
says, "He that abides in Me and I in Him" [John 15:5]: and a Friend; for, "You
are My friends" [John 15:14]: and a Foundation, and Cornerstone. And we are
His members and His heritage, and building, and branches, and fellow-workers.
For what is there that He is not minded to be to us, when He makes us cleave
and fit on to Him in every way? And this is a sign of one loving exceedingly. Be
persuaded then, and rousing you from sleep, put Him on, and when you have
done so, give your flesh up to His bridle. For this is what he intimates in saying,
"And make not provision for the flesh, to fulfil the lusts thereof." For as he
does not forbid drinking, but drinking to excess, not marrying, but doing
wantonness; so too he does not forbid making provision for the flesh either, but
doing so with a view "to fulfil the lusts thereof," as, for instance, by going
beyond necessaries. For that he does bid make provision for it, hear from what
he says to Timothy, "Use a little wine for your stom- ach's sake, and your

frequent infirmities." [1 Timothy 5:23] So here too he is for taking care of it, but
for health, and not wantonness. For this would cease to be making provision for
it, when you were lighting up the flame, when you were making the furnace
powerful. But that you may form a clearer notion what "making provision" for it
"to fulfil the lusts thereof" is, and may shun such a provision, just call to mind
the drunken, the gluttonous, those that pride themselves in dress, those that are
effeminate, them that live a soft and relaxed life, and you will see what is meant.
For they do everything not that they may be healthy, but that they may be
wanton and kindle desire. But do thou, who hast put on Christ, prune away all
those things, and seek for one thing only, to have your flesh in health. And to
this degree do make provision for it, and not any further, but spend all your
industry on the care of spiritual things. For then you will be able to rouse
yourself out of this sleep, without being weighed down with these manifold
desires. For the present life is a sleep, and the things in it are no way different
from dreams. And as they that are asleep often speak and see things other than
healthful, so do we also, or rather we see much worse even. For he that does
anything disgraceful or says the like in a dream, when he is rid of his sleep, is rid
of his disgrace, also, and is not to be punished. But in this case it is not so, but
the shame, and also the punishment, are immortal. Again, they that grow rich in
a dream, when it is day are convicted of having been rich to no purpose. But in
this case even before the day the conviction often comes upon them, and before
they depart to the other life, those dreams have flown away.
Let us then shake off this evil sleep, for if the day find us sleeping, a
deathless death will succeed, and before that day we shall be open to the attacks
of all the enemies that are of this world, both men and devils: and if they be
minded to undo us, there is nobody to hinder them. For if there were many
watching, then the danger would not be so great; since however, one perhaps
there is, or two, who have lighted a candle, and would be as it were watching in
the depth of night, while men were sleeping; therefore now we have need of
much sleeplessness, much guardedness, to prevent our falling into the most