circumspection: whence also I conjecture that you have some argument ready for
your defence. Tell me, then, whether there is any fair excuse which I can make to
those who accuse us.
For I do not demand any account for the wrongs which I have sustained at
your hands, nor for the deceit or treachery you have practised, nor for the
advantage which you have derived from me in the past. For I placed my very
life, so to say, in your hands, yet you have treated me with as much guile as if it
had been your business to guard yourself against an enemy. Yet if you knew this
decision of ours to be profitable, you ought not to have avoided the gain: if on
the contrary injurious, you should have saved me also from the loss, as you
always said that you esteemed me before every one else. But you have done
everything to make me fall into the snare: and you had no need of guile and
hypocrisy in dealing with one who was wont to display the utmost sincerity and
candor in speech and action towards you. Nevertheless, as I said, I do not now
accuse you of any of these things, or reproach you for the lonely position in
which you have placed me by breaking off those conferences from which we
often derived no small pleasure and profit; but all these things I pass by, and bear
in silence and meekness, not that you have acted meekly in transgressing against
me, but because from the day that I cherished your friendship I laid it down as a
rule for myself, that whatever sorrow you might cause me I would never force
you to the necessity of an apology. For you know yourself that you have inflicted
no small loss on me if at least you remember what we were always saying
ourselves, and the outside world also said concerning us, that it was a great gain
for us to be of one mind and be guarded by each other's friendship. Every one
said, indeed, that our concord would bring no small advantage to many besides
ourselves; I never perceived, however, so far as I am concerned, how it could be
of advantage to others: but I did say that we should at least derive this benefit
from it: that those who wished to contend with us would find us difficult to
master. And I never ceased reminding you of these things: saying the age is a
cruel one, and designing men are many, genuine love is no more, and the deadly

pest of envy has crept into its place: we walk in the midst of snares, and on the
edge of battlements; those who are ready to rejoice in our misfortunes, if any
should befall us, are many and beset us from many quarters: whereas there is no
one to condole with us, or at least the number of such may be easily counted.
Beware that we do not by separation incur much ridicule, and damage worse
than ridicule. Brother aided by brother is like a strong city, and well fortified
kingdom. Do not dissolve this genuine intimacy, nor break down the fortress.
Such things and more I was continually saying, not indeed that I ever suspected
anything of this kind, but supposing you to be entirely sound in your relation
towards me, I did it as a superfluous precaution, wishing to preserve in health
one who was already sound; but unwittingly, as it seems, I was administering
medicines to a sick man: and even so I have not been fortunate enough to do any
good, and have gained nothing by my excess of forethought. For having totally
cast away all these considerations, without giving them a thought, you have
turned me adrift like an unballasted vessel on an untried ocean, taking no heed of
those fierce billows which I must encounter. For if it should ever be my lot to
undergo calumny, or mockery, or any other kind of insult or menace (and such
things must frequently occur), to whom shall I fly for refuge: to whom shall I
impart my distress, who will be willing to succour me and drive back my
assailants and put a stop to their assaults? Who will solace me and prepare me to
bear the coarse ribaldry which may yet be in store for me. There is no one since
you stand aloof from this terrible strife, and cannot even hear my cry. Do you see
then what mischief you have wrought? Now that you have dealt the blow, do you
perceive what a deadly wound you have inflicted? But let all this pass: for it is
impossible to undo the past, or to find a path through pathless difficulties. What
shall I say to the outside world? What defence shall I make to their accusations.
8. Chrysostom: Be of good cheer, I replied, for I am not only ready to
answer for myself in these matters, but I will also endeavor as well as I am able
to render an account of those for which you have not held me answerable.
Indeed, if you wish it, I will make them the starting-point of my defence. For it