sorrow not even as others who have no hope."
And not only from the New Testament but from the Old also it is possible to
receive abundant consolation. For when you hear of Job after the loss of his
property, after the destruction of his herds, after the loss not of one, or two, or
three, but of a whole troop of sons in the very flower of their age, after the great
excellence of soul which he displayed, even if you are the weakest of men, you
will easily be able to repent and regain your courage. For thou, O man, hast
constantly attended your sick son, and hast seen him laid upon the bed, and hast
heard him uttering his last words, and stood beside him while he was drawing
his last breath and hast closed his eyes, and shut his mouth: but he was not
present at the death struggle of his sons, he did not see them breathing their last
gasp, but the house became the common grave of them all, and on the same table
brains and blood were poured forth, and pieces of wood and tiles, and dust, and
fragments of flesh, and all these things were mingled together in like manner.
Nevertheless after such great calamities of this kind he was not petulant, but
what does he say— "The Lord gave, the Lord has taken away; as it seemed good
unto the Lord even so has it come to pass, blessed be the name of the Lord for
ever." Let this speech be our utterance also over each event which befalls us;
whether it be loss of property, or infirmity of body, or insult, or false accusation
or any other form of evil incident to mankind, let us say these words "The Lord
gave, the Lord has taken away; as it seemed good to the Lord so has it come to
pass; blessed be the name of the Lord for ever." If we practise this spiritual
wisdom, we shall never experience any evil, even if we undergo countless
sufferings, but the gain will be greater than the loss, the good will exceed the
evil: by these words you will cause God to be merciful unto you, and wilt defend
yourself against the tyranny of Satan. For as soon as your tongue has uttered
these words immediately the Devil hastens from you: and when he has hastened
away, the cloud of dejection also is dispelled and the thoughts which afflict us
take to flight, hurrying off in company with him, and in addition to all this you
will win all manner of blessings both here and in Heaven. And you have a

convincing example in the case of Job, and of the Apostle, who having for God's
sake despised the troubles of this world, obtained the everlasting blessings. Let
us then be trustful and in all things which befall us let us rejoice and give thanks
to the merciful God, that we may pass through this present life with serenity, and
obtain the blessings to come, by the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus
Christ to whom be glory, honour and might always, now and ever, world without
end. Amen.