## Homily 20 on Ephesians

Ephesians 5:22-24
Wives, be in subjection unto your own husbands, as unto the Lord. For the
husband is the head of the wife, as Christ also is the head of the Church: being
Himself the Saviour of the body. But as the Church is subject to Christ, so let the
wives also be to their husbands in everything.
A certain wise man, setting down a number of things in the rank of
blessings, set down this also in the rank of a blessing, "A wife agreeing with her
husband." [Sirach 25:1] And elsewhere again he sets it down among blessings,
that a woman should dwell in harmony with her husband. [Sirach 40:23] And
indeed from the beginning, God appears to have made special provision for this
union; and discoursing of the two as one, He said thus, "Male and female created
He them" [Genesis 1:27]; and again, "There is neither male nor female."
[Galatians 3:28] For there is no relationship between man and man so close as
that between man and wife, if they be joined together as they should be. And
therefore a certain blessed man too, when he would express surpassing love, and
was mourning for one that was dear to him, and of one soul with him, did not
mention father, nor mother, nor child, nor brother, nor friend, but what? "Your
love to me was wonderful," says he, "passing the love of women." [2 Samuel
1:26] For indeed, in very deed, this love is more despotic than any despotism: for
others indeed may be strong, but this passion is not only strong, but unfading.
For there is a certain love deeply seated in our nature, which imperceptibly to
ourselves knits together these bodies of ours. Thus even from the very beginning
woman sprang from man, and afterwards from man and woman sprang both man
and woman. Perceivest thou the close bond and connection? And how that God
suffered not a different kind of nature to enter in from without? And mark, how
many providential arrangements He made. He permitted the man to marry his

own sister; or rather not his sister, but his daughter; nay, nor yet his daughter, but
something more than his daughter, even his own flesh. And thus the whole He
framed from one beginning, gathering all together, like stones in a building, into
one. For neither on the one hand did He form her from without, and this was that
the man might not feel towards her as towards an alien; nor again did He confine
marriage to her, that she might not, by contracting herself, and making all center
in herself, be cut off from the rest. Thus as in the case of plants, they are of all
others the best, which have but a single stem, and spread out into a number of
branches; (since were all confined to the root alone, all would be to no purpose,
whereas again had it a number of roots, the tree would be no longer worthy of
admiration;) so, I say, is the case here also. From one, namely Adam, He made
the whole race to spring, preventing them by the strongest necessity from being
ever torn asunder, or separated; and afterwards, making it more restricted, He no
longer allowed sisters and daughters to be wives, lest we should on the other
hand contract our love to one point, and thus in another manner be cut off from
one another. Hence Christ said, "He which made them from the beginning, made
them male and female." [Matthew 19:4]
For great evils are hence produced, and great benefits, both to families and
to states. For there is nothing which so welds our life together as the love of man
and wife. For this many will lay aside even their arms, for this they will give up
life itself. And Paul would never without a reason and without an object have
spent so much pains on this subject, as when he says here, "Wives, be in
subjection unto your own husbands, as unto the Lord." And why so? Because
when they are in harmony, the children are well brought up, and the domestics
are in good order, and neighbors, and friends, and relations enjoy the fragrance.
But if it be otherwise, all is turned upside down, and thrown into confusion. And
just as when the generals of an army are at peace one with another, all things are
in due subordination, whereas on the other hand, if they are at variance,
everything is turned upside down; so, I say, is it also here. Wherefore, says he,
"Wives, be in subjection unto your own husbands, as unto the Lord."