poverty. For if no one would like so much as to go to a meal, unless the inviter
were to feel obliged to the guest, how can it be honorable to take one's share of
any property by compulsion? Do we not on this account get out of the way of
dogs and fly from their baying, because by their much besetting they fairly force
us off? This also our rich men do.
"But, that fear should accompany the gift, is more dignified." Nay, this is of
all most disgraceful. For he who moves heaven and earth about his gains, who
can be so laughed to scorn as he? For even unto dogs, not seldom, through fear,
we throw whatever we had hold of. Which I ask again, is more disgraceful? That
one clothed with rags should beg, or one who wears silk? Thus when a rich man
pays court to old and poor persons, so as to get possession of their property, and
this when there are children, what pardon can he deserve?
Further: If you will, let us examine the very words; what the rich beggars
say, and what the poor. What then says the poor man? That he who gives alms
will never have to give by measure ([μετριάσει] perhaps corrupt: conj.
[πεινάσει], will never hunger); that he is giving of what is God's: that God is
loving unto men, and recompenses more abundantly; all which are words of high
morality, and exhortation, and counsel. For he recommends you to look unto the
Lord, and he takes away your fear of the poverty to come. And one may perceive
much instruction in the words of those who ask alms: but of what kind are those
of the rich? Why, of swine, and dogs, and wolves, and all other wild beasts. For
some of them discourse perpetually on banquets, and dishes, and delicacies, and
wine of all sorts, and ointments, and vestures, and all the rest of that
extravagance. And others about the interest of money and loans. And making out
accounts and increasing the mass of debts to an intolerable amount, as if it had
begun in the time of men's fathers or grandfathers, one they rob of his house,
another of his field, and another of his slave, and of all that he has. Why should
one speak of their wills, which are written in blood instead of ink? For either by
surrounding them with some intolerable danger, or else bewitching them with
some paltry promises, whomsoever they may see in possession of some small

property, those they persuade to pass by all their relations, and that oftentimes
when perishing through poverty, and instead of them to enter their own names. Is
there any madness and ferocity of wild beasts of any sort which these things do
not throw into the shade?
8. Wherefore I beseech you, all such wealth as this let us flee, disgraceful as
it is and in deaths abundant; and let us obtain that which is spiritual, and let us
seek after the treasures in the heavens. For whoso possess these, they are the
rich, they are the wealthy, both here and there enjoying things; even all things.
Since whoso will be poor, according to the word of God, has all men's houses
opened to him. For unto him that for God's sake has ceased to possess any thing,
every one will contribute of his own. But whoso will hold a little with injustice,
shuts the doors of all against him. To the end, then, that we may attain both to
the good things here and to those which are there, let us choose the wealth which
cannot be removed, that immortal abundance: which may God grant us all to
obtain, through the grace and loving-kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.