that is, the circumcision and the uncircumcision, enlarging Japhet, and placing him in the dwelling
of Shem.

Chapter VI—The Holy Ghost, throughout the Old Testament Scriptures, made mention of
no other God or Lord, save him who is the true God.

1. Therefore neither would the Lord, nor the Holy Spirit, nor the apostles, have ever named as
God, definitely and absolutely, him who was not God, unless he were truly God; nor would they
have named any one in his own person Lord, except God the Father ruling over all, and His Son
who has received dominion from His Father over all creation, as this passage has it: "The Lord said
unto my Lord, Sit Thou at my right hand, until I make Thine enemies Thy footstool." Here the
[Scripture] represents to us the Father addressing the Son; He who gave Him the inheritance of the
heathen, and subjected to Him all His enemies. Since, therefore, the Father is truly Lord, and the
Son truly Lord, the Holy Spirit has fitly designated them by the title of Lord. And again, referring
to the destruction of the Sodomites, the Scripture says, "Then the Lord rained upon Sodom and
upon Gomorrah fire and brimstone from the Lord out of heaven." For it here points out that the
Son, who had also been talking with Abraham, had received power to judge the Sodomites for
their wickedness. And this [text following] does declare the same truth: "Thy throne, O God, is for
ever and ever; the sceptre of Thy kingdom is a right sceptre. Thou hast loved righteousness, and
hated iniquity: therefore God, Thy God, hath anointed Thee." For the Spirit designates both [of
them] by the name, of God—both Him who is anointed as Son, and Him who does anoint, that is,
the Father. And again: "God stood in the congregation of the gods, He judges among the gods."
He [here] refers to the Father and the Son, and those who have received the adoption; but these are
the Church. For she is the synagogue of God, which God—that is, the Son Himself—has gathered
by Himself. Of whom He again speaks: "The God of gods, the Lord hath spoken, and hath called
the earth." Who is meant by God? He of whom He has said, "God shall come openly, our God,
and shall not keep silence;" that is, the Son, who came manifested to men who said, "I have
openly appeared to those who seek Me not." But of what gods [does he speak]? [Of those] to

Ps. xlv. 6.

Isa. lxv. 1.

whom He says, "I have said, Ye are gods, and all sons of the Most High." To those, no doubt,
who have received the grace of the "adoption, by which we cry, Abba Father."
2. Wherefore, as I have already stated, no other is named as God, or is called Lord, except Him
who is God and Lord of all, who also said to Moses, "I am that I am. And thus shalt thou say to the
children of Israel: He who is, hath sent me unto you;" and His Son Jesus Christ our Lord, who
makes those that believe in His name the sons of God. And again, when the Son speaks to Moses,
He says, "I am come down to deliver this people." For it is He who descended and ascended for
the salvation of men. Therefore God has been declared through the Son, who is in the Father, and
has the Father in Himself —He who is, the Father bearing witness to the Son, and the Son announcing
the Father.—As also Esaias says, "I too am witness," he declares, "saith the Lord God, and the Son
whom I have chosen, that ye may know, and believe, and understand that I am."
3. When, however, the Scripture terms them [gods] which are no gods, it does not, as I have
already remarked, declare them as gods in every sense, but with a certain addition and signification,
by which they are shown to be no gods at all. As with David: "The gods of the heathen are idols
of demons;" and, "Ye shall not follow other gods." For in that he says "the gods of the
heathen"—but the heathen are ignorant of the true God—and calls them "other gods," he bars their
claim [to be looked upon] as gods at all. But as to what they are in their own person, he speaks
concerning them; "for they are," he says, "the idols of demons." And Esaias: "Let them be
confounded, all who blaspheme God, and carve useless things; even I am witness, saith God."
He removes them from [the category of] gods, but he makes use of the word alone, for this [purpose],
that we may know of whom he speaks. Jeremiah also says the same: "The gods that have not made
the heavens and earth, let them perish from the earth which is under the heaven." For, from the
fact of his having subjoined their destruction, he shows them to be no gods at all. Elias, too, when
all Israel was assembled at Mount Carmel, wishing to turn them from idolatry, says to them, "How