body?
Objection 1: It would seem that subtlety is not a property of the
glorified body. For the properties of glory surpass the properties of
nature, even as the clarity of glory surpasses the clarity of the sun,
which is the greatest in nature. Accordingly if subtlety be a property
of the glorified body, it would seem that the glorified body will be
more subtle than anything which is subtle in nature, and thus it will
be "more subtle than the wind and the air," which was condemned
by Gregory in the city of Constantinople, as he relates (Moral. xiv,
56).
Objection 2: Further, as heat and cold are simple qualities of bodies,
i.e. of the elements, so is subtlety. But heat and other qualities of the
elements will not be intensified in the glorified bodies any more than
they are now, in fact, they will be more reduced to the mean. Neither,
therefore, will subtlety be in them more than it is now.
Objection 3: Further, subtlety is in bodies as a result of scarcity of
matter, wherefore bodies that have less matter within equal
dimensions are said to be more subtle; as fire in comparison with
air, and air as compared with water, and water as compared with
earth. But there will be as much matter in the glorified bodies as
there is now, nor will their dimensions be greater. Therefore they will
not be more subtle then than now.
On the contrary, It is written (1 Cor. 15:44): "It is sown a corruptible
body, it shall rise a spiritual," i.e. a spirit-like, "body." But the
subtlety of a spirit surpasses all bodily subtlety. Therefore the
glorified bodies will be most subtle.
Further, the more subtle a body is the more exalted it is. But the
glorified bodies will be most exalted. Therefore they will be most
subtle.
I answer that, Subtlety takes its name from the power to penetrate.
Hence it is said in De Gener. ii that "a subtle thing fills all the parts
and the parts of parts." Now that a body has the power of penetrating
may happen through two causes. First, through smallness of
quantity, especially in respect of depth and breadth, but not of

length, because penetration regards depth, wherefore length is not
an obstacle to penetration. Secondly, through paucity of matter,
wherefore rarity is synonymous with subtlety: and since in rare
bodies the form is more predominant over the matter, the term
"subtlety" has been transferred to those bodies which are most
perfectly subject to their form, and are most fully perfected thereby:
thus we speak of subtlety in the sun and moon and like bodies, just
as gold and similar things may be called subtle, when they are most
perfectly complete in their specific being and power. And since
incorporeal things lack quantity and matter, the term "subtlety" is
applied to them, not only by reason of their substance, but also on
account of their power. For just as a subtle thing is said to be
penetrative, for the reason that it reaches to the inmost part of a
thing, so is an intellect said to be subtle because it reaches to the
insight of the intrinsic principles and the hidden natural properties of
a thing. In like manner a person is said to have subtle sight, because
he is able to perceive by sight things of the smallest size: and the
same applies to the other senses. Accordingly people have differed
by ascribing subtlety to the glorified bodies in different ways.
For certain heretics, as Augustine relates (De Civ. Dei xiii, 22),
ascribed to them the subtlety whereby spiritual substances are said
to be subtle: and they said that at the resurrection the body will be
transformed into a spirit, and that for this reason the Apostle
describes as being "spiritual" the bodies of those who rise again (1
Cor. 15:44). But this cannot be maintained. First, because a body
cannot be changed into a spirit, since there is no community of
matter between them: and Boethius proves this (De Duab. Nat.).
Secondly, because, if this were possible, and one's body were
changed into a spirit, one would not rise again a man, for a man
naturally consists of a soul and body. Thirdly, because if this were
the Apostle's meaning, just as he speaks of spiritual bodies, so
would he speak of natural [animale] bodies, as being changed into
souls [animam]: and this is clearly false.
Hence certain heretics said that the body will remain at the
resurrection, but that it will be endowed with subtlety by means of
rarefaction, so that human bodies in rising again will be like the air
or the wind, as Gregory relates (Moral. xiv, 56). But this again cannot
be maintained, because our Lord had a palpable body after the
Resurrection, as appears from the last chapter of Luke, and we must
believe that His body was supremely subtle. Moreover the human
body will rise again with flesh and bones, as did the body of our