The dispensation in our behalf he calls a "mystery," and well may it be so
called, since it is not manifest to all, nay, it was not manifest to the Angels, for
how could it, when it was "made known by the Church"? [Ephesians 3:10]
Therefore he says, "without controversy great is the mystery." Great indeed was
it. For God became Man, and Man became God. A Man was seen without sin! A
Man was received up, was preached in the world! Together with us the Angels
saw Him. This is indeed a mystery! Let us not then expose this mystery. Let us
not lay it forth everywhere, but let us live in a manner worthy of the mystery.
They to whom a mystery is entrusted are great persons. We account it a mark of
favor, if a king entrusts a secret to us. But God has committed His mystery to us,
yet are we ungrateful to our Benefactor, as if we had not received the greatest
benefits. Our insensibility to such a kindness should strike us with horror. And
how is that a mystery which all know? In the first place all do not know it, and
before then too they knew it not, but now it is made manifest.
Moral. In keeping this mystery, then, let us be faithful to our trust. So great
a mystery has He entrusted to us, and we do not trust Him even with our money,
though He has bid us lay up our wealth with Him, where none can take it away,
neither can moth nor thief waste it. And He promises to pay us a hundred-fold,
yet we obey Him not. Yet here if we entrust any with a deposit, we receive
nothing back in addition, but are thankful if that is restored which we deposited.
If a thief steals it there, He says, set that to My account; I say not to you, a thief
has taken it, or moth devoured it. He repays a hundred-fold here, and eternal life
is superadded hereafter, yet do we not lay up our treasure there! "But," you say,
"He repays slowly." Well this too is a proof of the greatness of His gift, that He
does not repay here in this mortal life; or rather He does repay even here a
hundred-fold. For did not Paul leave here his tools, Peter his rod and hook, and
Matthew his seat of custom? And was not the whole world opened to them more
than to kings? Were not all things laid at their feet? Were they not appointed
rulers, and lords? Did not men commit their lives into their hands? suspend
themselves wholly upon their counsel, and enlist in their service? And do we not

see many similar occurrences even now? Many men of poor and humble means,
who did but handle the spade, and had hardly a sufficiency of necessary food,
having but the character of monks, have been celebrated above all men, and
honored of kings.
Are these things inconsiderable? Well, consider that these are but additions,
the principal sum is stored up for the life to come. Despise riches, if you would
have riches. If you would be truly rich, become poor. For such are the paradoxes
of God. He would not have you rich from your own care, but from His grace.
Leave these things to Me, He says; make spiritual things your concern, that you
may know My power. Flee from that yoke of slavery, which riches impose. As
long as you cleave to them, you are poor. When you despise them, you are
doubly rich, in that such things shall flow in upon you from every side, and in
that you shall want none of those things, which the multitude want. For not to
possess much, but to need little, is to be rich indeed. The king, so long as he
wants anything, differs not from the poor man. For this is poverty, to stand in
need of others; and by this argument the king is poor, in so far as he stands in
need of his subjects. But he that is crucified, to the world is not so; he wants for
nothing; for his hands are sufficient for his subsistence, as Paul said, "These
hands have ministered to my necessities, and to them that were with me." [Acts
20:34] These are his words who says, "As having nothing, yet possessing all
things." [2 Corinthians 6:20] This is he who was thought a God by the
inhabitants of Lystra. If you would obtain worldly things, seek Heaven; if you
would enjoy things here, despise them. For, "Seek first the kingdom of God," He
says, "and all these things shall be added unto you." [Matthew 6:33]
Why do you admire these trifles? Why long for things of no real worth?
How long is one poor? how long a beggar? Raise your eyes to heaven, think of
the riches there, and smile at gold; think of how little use it is; that the enjoyment
of it lasts but for the present life, and that compared with eternity, the present life
is as a grain of sand, or as a drop of water to the boundless ocean. This wealth is
not a possession, it is not property, it is a loan for use. For when you die,