blind, and dealt unfairly, and the tribunal was corrupt. For these reasons then He
replies to nothing, but holds His peace, yet answering briefly (so as not to get the
reputation of arrogance from continual silence) when the high priest adjured
Him, when the governor asked, but in reply to their accusations He no longer
says anything; for He was not now likely to persuade them. Even as the prophet
declaring this self-same thing from of old, said, "In His humiliation His
judgment was taken away."
At these things the governor marvelled, and indeed it was worthy of
admiration to see Him showing such great forbearance, and holding His peace,
Him that had countless things to say. For neither did they accuse Him from
knowing of any evil thing in Him, but from jealousy and envy only. At least
when they had set false witness, wherefore, having nothing to say, did they still
urge their point? And when they saw Judas was dead, and that Pilate had washed
his hands of it, why were they not pricked with remorse. For indeed He did
many things even at the very time, that they might recover themselves, but by
none were they amended.
What then says Pilate? "Do you not hear how many things these witness
against you?" He wished that He should defend Himself and be acquitted,
wherefore also he said these things; but since He answered nothing, he devises
another thing again.
Of what nature was this? It was a custom for them to release one of the
condemned, and by this means he attempted to deliver Him. For if you are not
willing to release Him as innocent, yet as guilty pardon Him for the feast's sake.
Do you see order reversed? For the petition in behalf of the condemned it
was customary to be with the people, and the granting it with the rulers; but now
the contrary has come to pass, and the ruler petitions the people; and not even so
do they become gentle, but grow more savage and bloodthirsty, driven to frenzy
by the passion of envy. For neither had they whereof they should accuse Him,
and this though He was silent, but they were refuted even then by reason of the
abundance of His righteous deeds, and being silent He overcame them that say

ten thousand things, and are maddened.
"And when he was set down on the judgment seat, his wife sent unto him,
saying, have thou nothing to do with this just man, for I have suffered many
things this day in a dream because of Him." See what a thing takes place again,
sufficient to recall them all. For together with the proof from the things done, the
dream too was no small thing. And wherefore does he not see it himself? Either
because she was more worthy, or because he, if he had seen it, would not have
been equally believed; or would not so much as have told it. Therefore it was
ordered that the wife should see it, so that it might be manifest to all. And she
does not merely see it, but also suffers many things, that from his feeling
towards his wife, the man may be made more reluctant to the murder. And the
time too contributed not a little, for on the very night she saw it.
But it was not safe, it may be said, for him to let Him go, because they said
He made Himself a king. He ought then to have sought for proofs, and a
conviction, and for all the things that are infallible signs of an usurpation, as, for
instance, whether He levied forces, whether He collected money, whether He
forged arms, whether He attempted any other such thing. But he is led away at
random, therefore neither does Christ acquit him of the blame, in saying, "He
that betrays me unto you has greater sin." So that it was from weakness that he
yielded and scourged Him, and delivered Him up.
He then was unmanly and weak; but the chief priests wicked and criminal.
For since he had found out a device, namely, the law of the feast requiring him to
release a condemned person, what do they contrive in opposition to that? "They
persuaded the multitude," it is said, "that they should ask Barabbas."
2. See how much care he takes for them to relieve them from blame, and
how much diligence they employed, so as not to leave to themselves so much as
a shadow of an excuse. For which was right? To let go the acknowledged
criminal, or Him about whose guilt there was a question? For, if in the case of
acknowledged offenders it was fit there should be a liberation, much more in
those of whom there was a doubt. For surely this man did not seem to them