John 17:12
"While I was with them in the world, I kept them in Your Name."
Again He speaks as a man and as a Prophet, since nowhere does He appear
to have done anything by the Name of God.
"Those that You gave Me I have kept, and none of them is lost, but the son
of perdition, that the Scripture might be fulfilled."
And in another place He says, "Of all that You gave Me, I will surely lose
nothing." [John 6:39] Yet not only was he lost, but also many afterwards; how
then says He, "I will in nowise lose"? "For My part, I will not lose." So in
another place, declaring the matter was more clearly, He said, "I will in nowise
cast out." [John 6:37] "Not through fault of Mine, not because I either instigate
or abandon them; but if they start away of themselves, I draw them not by
necessity."

John 17:13
"But now I come to you."
Do you see that the discourse is composed rather in a human manner? So
that should any wish from these words to lower the Son, he will lower the Father
also. Observe, in proof of this, how from the beginning He speaks partly as
though informing and explaining to Him, partly as enjoining. Informing, as when
He says, "I pray not for the world"; enjoining, as, "I have kept them until now,"
"and none of them is lost"; and, "do Thou therefore now keep them," He says.
And again, "Yours they were, and You have given them unto Me" and "While I
was in the world I kept them." But the solution of all is, that the words were
addressed to their infirmity.
But after having said that "none of them was lost but the son of perdition,"
He added, "that the Scripture might be fulfilled." Of what Scripture does He
speak? That which foretells many things concerning Him. Not that He perished
on that account, in order that the Scripture might be fulfilled. But we have before
spoken at length on this point, that this is the peculiar manner of Scripture,
which puts things which fall out in accordance with it, as though they were
caused by it. And it is needful to enquire exactly into all, both the manner of the
speaker, his argument, and the laws of Scripture, if at least we are minded not to
draw wrong conclusions. For, "Brethren, be not children in your minds." [1
Corinthians 14:20]
3. This it is necessary to consider well, not only for the understanding the
Scriptures, but also for earnestness in one's way of life. For so little children do
not desire great things, but are wont to admire those which are worth nothing;
they are pleased at seeing chariots, and horses, and the muleteer, and wheels, all
made out of earthenware; but if they see a king sitting upon a chariot, and a pair
of white mules, and great magnificence, they do not even turn their heads. And
they deck out as brides dolls made of the same material, but the actual brides,

real and beautiful, they do not even notice; and this is their case in many other
matters. Now this many men also undergo at this time; for when they hear of
heavenly things, they do not even give heed to them, but toward all the things of
clay they are as eager as children, and stupidly admire the wealth which is of
earth, and honor the glory and luxury of the present life. Yet these are just as
much toys as those; but the other are the causes of life, and glory, and repose.
But as children deprived of their playthings cry, and do not know how even to
desire the realities, so also are many of those who seem to be men. Wherefore it
says, "Be not children in your minds." [1 Corinthians 14:20] Desirest thou riches,
tell me, and do you not desire the wealth that lasts, but childish toys? If you
should see a man admiring a leaden coin, and stooping to pick it up, you would
pronounce his penury to be extreme; and do you, who collectest more worthless
things than this, number yourself among the rich? How can this consist with
reason? We will call him rich who despises all present things. For no one, no one
will choose to laugh at these little things, silver and gold, and other things of
show, unless he have the desire of greater things; just as the man would not
despise the leaden coin, unless he possessed coins of gold. Do thou, therefore,
when you see a man running by all worldly things, deem that he does so from no
other motive than because he looks to a greater world. So the husbandman
despises a few grains of wheat, when he expects a larger harvest. But if, when
the hope is uncertain, we despise things which are, much more ought we to do so
in a case where the expectation is sure. Wherefore I pray and beseech you not to
bring loss on yourselves, nor, keeping hold of mire, rob yourselves of the
treasures which are above, bringing your vessel to port laden with straw and
chaff. Let each say what he will concerning us, let him be angry at our continual
admonitions, let him call us silly, tedious, tiresome, still we will not desist from
exhorting you on these matters continually, and from continually repeating to
you that of the Prophet, "'Break off your sins by almsgiving, and your iniquities
by showing mercy to the poor' [Daniel 4:27], and bind them upon your neck."
Do not act in this way today, and desist tomorrow. For even this body has need