example. For I should in that case make it appear that what has been said is
much less than it ought to be.
And these things indeed are so here. But from God the reward of friendship
is so great, that it cannot be expressed. He gives a reward, that we may love one
another, the thing for which we owe a reward. "Pray," He says, "and receive a
reward," for that for which we owe a reward, because we ask for good things.
"For that which you ask," He says, "receive a reward. Fast, and receive a
reward. Be virtuous, and receive a reward," though you rather owe a reward. But
as fathers, when they have made their children virtuous, then further give them a
reward; for they are debtors, because they have afforded them a pleasure; so also
God acts. "Receive a reward," He says, "if you be virtuous, for you delight your
Father, and for this I owe you a reward. But if you be evil, not so: for you
provoke Him that begot you." Let us not then provoke God, but let us delight
Him, that we may obtain the kingdom of Heaven, in Christ Jesus our Lord, to
whom be the glory and the strength, world without end. Amen.

## Homily 3 on First Thessalonians

[1 Thessalonians 2:9-12]
"For you remember, brethren, our labor and travail: for working night and
day, that we might not burden any of you, we preached unto you the Gospel of
God. You are witnesses, and God also, how holily and righteously and
unblamably we behaved ourselves toward you that believe: as you know how we
dealt with each one of you, as a father with his own children, exhorting you, and
encouraging you, and testifying, to the end that you should walk worthily of God,
who calls you into His own kingdom and glory."
The teacher ought to do nothing with a feeling of being burdened, that tends
to the salvation of his disciples. For if the blessed Jacob was buffeted night and
day in keeping his flocks, much more ought he, to whom the care of souls is
entrusted, to endure all toils, though the work be laborious and mean, looking
only to one thing, the salvation of his disciples, and the glory thence arising to
God. See then, Paul, a man that was a Preacher, an Apostle of the world, and
raised to so great honor, worked with his hands that he might not be burdensome
to his disciples.
"For you remember," he says, "my brethren, our labor and travail." He had
said previously, "we might have been burdensome as the Apostles of Christ," as
he also says in the Epistle to the Corinthians, "Do you not know that they which
minister about sacred things eat of the things of the Temple? Even so also did
Christ ordain that they which proclaim the Gospel should live of the Gospel." [1
Corinthians 9:13-14] But I, he says, would not, but I labored; and he did not
merely work, but with much diligence. Observe then what he says; "For you
remember," he has not said, the benefits received from me, but, "our labor and
travail: for working night and day, that we might not burden any of you, we
preached unto you the Gospel of God." And to the Corinthians he said a different