signify those who are blackened by their lusts; or those who lack
kindly feelings, for the raven did not return when once it had been let
loose from the ark. The ostrich which, though a bird, cannot fly, and
is always on the ground, signifies those who fight God's cause, and
at the same time are taken up with worldly business. The owl, which
sees clearly at night, but cannot see in the daytime, denotes those
who are clever in temporal affairs, but dull in spiritual matters. The
gull, which flies both in the air and swims in the water, signifies
those who are partial both to Circumcision and to Baptism: or else it
denotes those who would fly by contemplation, yet dwell in the
waters of sensual delights. The hawk, which helps men to seize the
prey, is a figure of those who assist the strong to prey on the poor.
The screech-owl, which seeks its food by night but hides by day,
signifies the lustful man who seeks to lie hidden in his deeds of
darkness. The cormorant, so constituted that it can stay a long time
under water, denotes the glutton who plunges into the waters of
pleasure. The ibis is an African bird with a long beak, and feeds on
snakes; and perhaps it is the same as the stork: it signifies the
envious man, who refreshes himself with the ills of others, as with
snakes. The swan is bright in color, and by the aid of its long neck
extracts its food from deep places on land or water: it may denote
those who seek earthly profit though an external brightness of
virtue. The bittern is a bird of the East: it has a long beak, and its
jaws are furnished with follicules, wherein it stores its food at first,
after a time proceeding to digest it: it is a figure of the miser, who is
excessively careful in hoarding up the necessaries of life. The coot
has this peculiarity apart from other birds, that it has a webbed foot
for swimming, and a cloven foot for walking: for it swims like a duck
in the water, and walks like a partridge on land: it drinks only when it
bites, since it dips all its food in water: it is a figure of a man who will
not take advice, and does nothing but what is soaked in the water of
his own will. The heron, commonly called a falcon, signifies those
whose "feet are swift to shed blood" (Ps. 13:3). The plover, which is
a garrulous bird, signifies the gossip. The hoopoe, which builds its
nest on dung, feeds on foetid ordure, and whose song is like a
groan, denotes worldly grief which works death in those who are
unclean. The bat, which flies near the ground, signifies those who
being gifted with worldly knowledge, seek none but earthly things.
Of fowls and quadrupeds those alone were permitted which have the
hind-legs longer than the forelegs, so that they can leap: whereas
those were forbidden which cling rather to the earth: because those
who abuse the doctrine of the four Evangelists, so that they are not
lifted up thereby, are reputed unclean. By the prohibition of blood, fat