run away; and particularly when they have done this with robbery, even if they
have good masters, how their anger is increased. This anger then having taken
all these pains to soothe, and having first persuaded him readily to serve him in
anything whatever, and having prepared his soul to all obedience, then he
introduces his request, and says, "I beseech you," and with the addition of
praises, "for my son whom I have begotten in my bonds."
Again the chains are mentioned to shame him into compliance, and then the
name. For he has not only extinguished his anger, but has caused him to be
delighted. For I would not have called him my son, he says, if he were not
especially profitable. What I called Timothy, that I call him also. And repeatedly
showing his affection, he urges him by the very period of his new birth, "I have
begotten him in my bonds," he says, so that on this account also he was worthy
to obtain much honor, because he was begotten in his very conflicts, in his trials
in the cause of Christ.
"Onesimus,"
Ver. 11. "Which in time past was to you unprofitable."
See how great is his prudence, how he confesses the man's faults, and
thereby extinguishes his anger. I know, he says, that he was unprofitable.
"But now" he will be "profitable to you and to me."
He has not said he will be useful to you, lest he should contradict it, but he
has introduced his own person, that his hopes may seem worthy of credit, "But
now," he says, "profitable to you and to me." For if he was profitable to Paul,
who required so great strictness, much more would he be so to his master.
Ver. 12. "Whom I have sent again to you."
By this also he has quenched his anger, by delivering him up. For masters
are then most enraged, when they are entreated for the absent, so that by this
very act he mollified him the more.
Ver. 12. "Thou therefore receive him, that is my own bowels."
And again he has not given the bare name, but uses with it a word that
might move him, which is more affectionate than son. He has said, "son," he has

said, "I have begotten" him, so that it was probable he would love him much,
because he begot him in his trials. For it is manifest that we are most inflamed
with affection for those children, who have been born to us in dangers which we
have escaped, as when the Scripture says, "Woe, Barochabel!" and again when
Rachel names Benjamin, "the son of my sorrow." [Genesis 35:18]
"Thou therefore," he says, "receive him, that is my own bowels." He shows
the greatness of his affection. He has not said, Take him back, he has not said,
Be not angry, but "receive him"; that is, he is worthy not only of pardon, but of
honor. Why? Because he has become the son of Paul.
Ver. 13. "Whom I would have retained with me, that in your stead he might
have ministered unto me in the bonds of the Gospel."
Do you see after how much previous preparation, he has at length brought
him honorably before his master, and observe with how much wisdom he has
done this. See for how much he makes him answerable, and how much he
honors the other. You have found, he says, a way by which you may through him
repay your service to me. Here he shows that he has considered his advantage
more than that of his slave, and that he respects him exceedingly.
Ver. 14. "But without your mind," he says, "would I do nothing; that your
benefit should not be, as it were, of necessity, but willingly."
This particularly flatters the person asked, when the thing being profitable
in itself, it is brought out with his concurrence. For two good effects are
produced thence, the one person gains, and the other is rendered more secure.
And he has not said, That it should not be of necessity, but "as it were of
necessity." For I knew, he says, that not having learned it, but coming to know it
at once, you would not have been angry, but nevertheless out of an excess of
consideration, that it should "not be as it were of necessity."
Ver. 15, 16. "For perhaps he was therefore parted from you for a season
that you should have him for ever; no longer as a bond-servant."
He has well said, "perhaps," that the master may yield. For since the flight
arose from perverseness, and a corrupt mind, and not from such intention, he has