FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.89, C.5.

are acts of charity, so that no venial sin can be in them. On the other
hand, wicked angels are moved to nothing except in subordination
to the end which is their sin of pride. Therefore they sin mortally in
everything that they do of their own will. This does not apply to the
appetite for the natural good, which appetite we have stated to be in
them (FP, Question 63, Article 4; Question 64, Article 2, ad 5).
Reply to Objection 1: Man does indeed agree with the angels in the
mind or intellect, but he differs in his mode of understanding, as
stated above.
Reply to Objection 2: An angel could not love a creature less than
God, without, at the same time, either referring it to God, as the last
end, or to some inordinate end, for the reason given above.
Reply to Objection 3: The demons incite man to all such things
which seem venial, that he may become used to them, so as to lead
him on to mortal sin. Consequently in all such things they sin
mortally, on account of the end they have in view.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.89, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether the first movements of the sensuality in

unbelievers are mortal sin?
Objection 1: It would seem that the first movements of the sensuality
in unbelievers are mortal sins. For the Apostle says (Rm. 8:1) that
"there is . . . no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who
walk not according to the flesh": and he is speaking there of the
concupiscence of the sensuality, as appears from the context (Rm.
7). Therefore the reason why concupiscence is not a matter of
condemnation to those who walk not according to the flesh, i.e. by
consenting to concupiscence, is because they are in Christ Jesus.
But unbelievers are not in Christ Jesus. Therefore in unbelievers this
is a matter of condemnation. Therefore the first movements of
unbelievers are mortal sins.
Objection 2: Further Anselm says (De Gratia et Lib. Arb. vii): "Those
who are not in Christ, when they feel the sting of the flesh, follow the
road of damnation, even if they walk not according to the flesh." But
damnation is not due save to mortal sin. Therefore, since man feels
the sting of the flesh in the first movements of the concupiscence, it
seems that the first movements of concupiscence in unbelievers are
mortal sins.
Objection 3: Further, Anselm says (De Gratia et Lib. Arb. vii): "Man
was so made that he was not liable to feel concupiscence." Now this
liability seems to be remitted to man by the grace of Baptism, which
the unbeliever has not. Therefore every act of concupiscence in an
unbeliever, even without his consent, is a mortal sin, because he
acts against his duty.
On the contrary, It is stated in Acts 10:34 that "God is not a respecter
of persons." Therefore he does not impute to one unto
condemnation, what He does not impute to another. But he does not
impute first movements to believers, unto condemnation. Neither
therefore does He impute them to unbelievers.
I answer that, It is unreasonable to say that the first movements of
unbelievers are mortal sins, when they do not consent to them. This
is evident for two reasons. First, because the sensuality itself could
not be the subject of mortal sin, as stated above (Question 79, Article
4). Now the sensuality has the same nature in unbelievers as in