10:13).
The disposition of the orders which is mentioned by Gregory is also
reasonable. For since the "Dominations" appoint and order what
belongs to the Divine ministrations, the orders subject to them are
arranged according to the disposition of those things in which the
Divine ministrations are effected. Still, as Augustine says (De Trin.
iii), "bodies are ruled in a certain order; the inferior by the superior;
and all of them by the spiritual creature, and the bad spirit by the
good spirit." So the first order after the "Dominations" is called that
of "Principalities," who rule even over good spirits; then the
"Powers," who coerce the evil spirits; even as evil-doers are coerced
by earthly powers, as it is written (Rm. 13:3,4). After these come the
"Virtues," which have power over corporeal nature in the working of
miracles; after these are the "Angels" and the "Archangels," who
announce to men either great things above reason, or small things
within the purview of reason.
Reply to Objection 1: The angel's subjection to God is greater than
their presiding over inferior things; and the latter is derived from the
former. Thus the orders which derive their name from presiding are
not the first and highest; but rather the orders deriving their name
from their nearness and relation to God.
Reply to Objection 2: The nearness to God designated by the name
of the "Thrones," belongs also to the "Cherubim" and "Seraphim,"
and in a more excellent way, as above explained.
Reply to Objection 3: As above explained (Question 27, Article 3),
knowledge takes place accordingly as the thing known is in the
knower; but love as the lover is united to the object loved. Now
higher things are in a nobler way in themselves than in lower things;
whereas lower things are in higher things in a nobler way than they
are in themselves. Therefore to know lower things is better than to
love them; and to love the higher things, God above all, is better than
to know them.
Reply to Objection 4: A careful comparison will show that little or no
difference exists in reality between the dispositions of the orders
according to Dionysius and Gregory. For Gregory expounds the
name "Principalities" from their "presiding over good spirits," which
also agrees with the "Virtues" accordingly as this name expressed a

certain strength, giving efficacy to the inferior spirits in the
execution of the Divine ministrations. Again, according to Gregory,
the "Virtues" seem to be the same as "Principalities" of Dionysius.
For to work miracles holds the first place in the Divine ministrations;
since thereby the way is prepared for the announcements of the
"Archangels" and the "Angels."

### ARTICLE 7. Whether the orders will outlast the Day of

Judgment?
Objection 1: It would seem that the orders of angels will not outlast
the Day of Judgment. For the Apostle says (1 Cor. 15:24), that Christ
will "bring to naught all principality and power, when He shall have
delivered up the kingdom to God and the Father," and this will be in
the final consummation. Therefore for the same reason all others will
be abolished in that state.
Objection 2: Further, to the office of the angelic orders it belongs to
cleanse, enlighten, and perfect. But after the Day of Judgment one
angel will not cleanse, enlighten, or perfect another, because they
will not advance any more in knowledge. Therefore the angelic
orders would remain for no purpose.
Objection 3: Further, the Apostle says of the angels (Heb. 1:14), that
"they are all ministering spirits, sent to minister to them who shall
receive the inheritance of salvation"; whence it appears that the
angelic offices are ordered for the purpose of leading men to
salvation. But all the elect are in pursuit of salvation until the Day of
Judgment. Therefore the angelic offices and orders will not outlast
the Day of Judgment.
On the contrary, It is written (Judges 5:20): "Stars remaining in their
order and courses," which is applied to the angels. Therefore the
angels will ever remain in their orders.
I answer that, In the angelic orders we may consider two things; the
distinction of grades, and the execution of their offices. The
distinction of grades among the angels takes place according to the
difference of grace and nature, as above explained (Article 4); and
these differences will ever remain in the angels; for these differences
of natures cannot be taken from them unless they themselves be
corrupted. The difference of glory will also ever remain in them
according to the difference of preceding merit. As to the execution of
the angelic offices, it will to a certain degree remain after the Day of
Judgment, and to a certain degree will cease. It will cease
accordingly as their offices are directed towards leading others to
their end; but it will remain, accordingly as it agrees with the
attainment of the end. Thus also the various ranks of soldiers have