have their perfection at once from the beginning. Hence the angelic
and the Divine intellect have the entire knowledge of a thing at once
and perfectly; and hence also in knowing the quiddity of a thing they
know at once whatever we can know by composition, division, and
reasoning. Therefore the human intellect knows by composition,
division and reasoning. But the Divine intellect and the angelic
intellect know, indeed, composition, division, and reasoning, not by
the process itself, but by understanding the simple essence.
Reply to Objection 1: Composition and division of the intellect are
made by differentiating and comparing. Hence the intellect knows
many things by composition and division, as by knowing the
difference and comparison of things.
Reply to Objection 2: Although the intellect abstracts from the
phantasms, it does not understand actually without turning to the
phantasms, as we have said (Article 1; Question 84, Article 7). And
forasmuch as it turns to the phantasms, composition and division of
the intellect involve time.
Reply to Objection 3: The likeness of a thing is received into the
intellect according to the mode of the intellect, not according to the
mode of the thing. Wherefore something on the part of the thing
corresponds to the composition and division of the intellect; but it
does not exist in the same way in the intellect and in the thing. For
the proper object of the human intellect is the quiddity of a material
thing, which comes under the action of the senses and the
imagination. Now in a material thing there is a twofold composition.
First, there is the composition of form with matter; and to this
corresponds that composition of the intellect whereby the universal
whole is predicated of its part: for the genus is derived from
common matter, while the difference that completes the species is
derived from the form, and the particular from individual matter. The
second comparison is of accident with subject: and to this real
composition corresponds that composition of the intellect, whereby
accident is predicated of subject, as when we say "the man is white."
Nevertheless composition of the intellect differs from composition of
things; for in the latter the things are diverse, whereas composition
of the intellect is a sign of the identity of the components. For the
above composition of the intellect does not imply that "man" and
"whiteness" are identical, but the assertion, "the man is white,"
means that "the man is something having whiteness": and the
subject, which is a man, is identified with a subject having

whiteness. It is the same with the composition of form and matter:
for animal signifies that which has a sensitive nature; rational, that
which has an intellectual nature; man, that which has both; and
Socrates that which has all these things together with individual
matter; and according to this kind of identity our intellect predicates
the composition of one thing with another.