one were to permit a damsel, comely, chaste, free-born, of good family, and
handsome, to be trampled on, and every way insulted by a serving woman, that
was savage, and disgustful, and impure; drunkenness being something of this
sort. And who, being in his senses, would not choose to die a thousand deaths,
rather than live a single day in this way? For even if at daylight he were to get
up, and seem to be sober from that revelling (or absurd show, [κωμῳδίας], 1
manuscript [κώμου]) of his, still even then it is not the clear brightness of
temperance which he enjoys, since the cloud from the storm of drunkenness still
is hanging before his eyes. And even if we were to grant him the clearness of
sobriety, what were he the better? For this soberness would be of no service to
him, except to let him see his accusers. For when he is in the midst of his
unseemly deeds, he is so far a gainer in not perceiving those that laugh at him.
But when it is day he loses this comfort even, and while his servants are
murmuring, and his wife is ashamed, and his friends accuse him, and his
enemies make sport of him, he knows it too. What can be more miserable than a
life like this, to be laughed at all day by everybody, and when it is evening to do
the same unseemly things afresh. But what if you would let me put the covetous
before you? For this is another, and even a worse intoxication. But if it be an
intoxication, then it must be a worse death by far than the former, since the
intoxication is more grievous. And indeed it is not so sad to be drunk with wine
as with covetousness. For in the former case, the penalty ends with the sufferings
(several manuscript "sufferer,") and results in insensibility, and the drunkard's
own ruin. But in this case the mischief passes on to thousands of souls, and
kindles wars of sundry kinds upon all sides. Come then and let us put this beside
the other, and let us see what are the points they have in common, and in what
again this is worse than it, and let us make a comparison of drunkards today. For
with that blissful man, who lives to the Spirit, let them not be put at all in
comparison, but only tried by one another. And again, let us bring the moneytable before you, laden as it is with blood. What then have they in common, and
in what are they like each other? It is in the very nature of the disease. For the

species of drunkenness is different, as one comes of wine, the other of money,
but its way of affecting them is similar, both being alike possessed with an
exorbitant desire. For he who is drunken with wine, the more glasses he has
drunk off, the more he longs for; and he that is in love with money, the more he
compasses, the more he kindles the flame of desire, and the more importunate he
renders his thirst. In this point then they resemble each other. But in another the
covetous man has the advantage (in a bad sense). Now what is this? Why that the
other's affection is a natural one. For the wine is hot, and adds to one's natural
drought, and so makes drunkards thirsty. But what is there to make the other man
always keep desiring more? How comes it that when he is increased in riches,
then he is in the veriest poverty? This complaint then is a perplexing one, and
has more of paradox about it. But if you please, we will take a view of them after
the drunkenness also. Or rather, there is no such thing as ever seeing the
covetous man after his drunkenness, so continual a state of intoxication is he in!
Let us then view them both in the state of drunkenness, and let us get a distinct
notion which is the most ridiculous, and let us again figure to ourselves a correct
sketch of them. We shall see then the man who dotes with his wine at eventide
with his eyes open, seeing no one, but moving about at mere hap-hazard, and
stumbling against such as fall in his way, and spewing, and convulsed, and
exposing his nakedness in an unseemly manner. [See Habakkuk 2:16] And if his
wife be there, or his daughter, or his maid-servant, or anybody else, they will
laugh at him heartily. And now let us bring before you the covetous man. Here
what happens is not deserving of laughter only, but even of a curse, and
exceeding wrath, and thunderbolts without number. At present however let us
look at the ridiculous part, for this man as well as the other has an ignorance of
all, whether friend or foe. And like him too, though his eyes are open, he is
blinded. And as the former takes all he sees for wine, so does this man take all
for money. And his spewing is even more disgusting. For it is not food that he
vomits, but words of abuse, of insolence, of war, of death, that draws upon his
own head lightnings without number from above. And as the body of the