THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.5, C.2.

fictitious in His work, since He is the Truth. Hence our Lord Himself
deigned to refute this error (Lk. 24:37,39), when the disciples,
"troubled and frighted, supposed that they saw a spirit," and not a
true body; wherefore He offered Himself to their touch, saying:
"Handle, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as you see
Me to have."
Reply to Objection 1: This likeness indicates the truth of the human
nature in Christ---just as all that truly exist in human nature are said
to be like in species---and not a mere imaginary likeness. In proof of
this the Apostle subjoins (Phil. 2:8) that He became "obedient unto
death, even to the death of the cross"; which would have been
impossible, had it been only an imaginary likeness.
Reply to Objection 2: By assuming a true body the dignity of the Son
of God is nowise lessened. Hence Augustine [Fulgentius] says (De
Fide ad Petrum ii): "He emptied Himself, taking the form of a servant,
that He might become a servant; yet did He not lose the fulness of
the form of God." For the Son of God assumed a true body, not so as
to become the form of a body, which is repugnant to the Divine
simplicity and purity---for this would be to assume a body to the
unity of the nature, which is impossible, as is plain from what has
been stated above (Question 2, Article 1): but, the natures remaining
distinct, He assumed a body to the unity of Person.
Reply to Objection 3: The figure ought to correspond to the reality as
regards the likeness and not as regards the truth of the thing. For if
they were alike in all points, it would no longer be a likeness but the
reality itself, as Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii, 26). Hence it was
more fitting that the apparitions of the old Testament should be in
appearance only, being figures; and that the apparition of the Son of
God in the world should be in a real body, being the thing prefigured
by these figures. Hence the Apostle says (Col. 2:17): "Which are a
shadow of things to come, but the body is Christ's."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.5, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the Son of God ought to have assumed a

carnal or earthly body?
Objection 1: It would seem that Christ had not a carnal or earthly, but
a heavenly body. For the Apostle says (1 Cor. 15:41): "The first man
was of the earth, earthy; the second man from heaven, heavenly."
But the first man, i.e. Adam, was of the earth as regards his body, as
is plain from Gn. 1. Therefore the second man, i.e. Christ, was of
heaven as regards the body.
Objection 2: Further, it is said (1 Cor. 15:50): "Flesh and blood shall
not possess the kingdom of God." But the kingdom of God is in
Christ chiefly. Therefore there is no flesh or blood in Him, but rather
a heavenly body.
Objection 3: Further, whatever is best is to be attributed to God. But
of all bodies a heavenly body is the best. Therefore it behooved
Christ to assume such a body.
On the contrary, our Lord says (Lk. 24:39): "A spirit hath not flesh
and bones, as you see Me to have." Now flesh and bones are not of
the matter of heavenly bodies, but are composed of the inferior
elements. Therefore the body of Christ was not a heavenly, but a
carnal and earthly body.
I answer that, By the reasons which proved that the body of Christ
was not an imaginary one, it may also be shown that it was not a
heavenly body. First, because even as the truth of the human nature
of Christ would not have been maintained had His body been an
imaginary one, such as Manes supposed, so likewise it would not
have been maintained if we supposed, as did Valentine, that it was a
heavenly body. For since the form of man is a natural thing, it
requires determinate matter, to wit, flesh and bones, which must be
placed in the definition of man, as is plain from the Philosopher
(Metaph. vii, 39). Secondly, because this would lessen the truth of
such things as Christ did in the body. For since a heavenly body is
impassible and incorruptible, as is proved De Coel. i, 20, if the Son of
God had assumed a heavenly body, He would not have truly
hungered or thirsted, nor would he have undergone His passion and
death. Thirdly, this would have detracted from God's truthfulness.
For since the Son of God showed Himself to men, as if He had a