shine out, so as to bring them over to the knowledge of His Godhead. For it is
evident from the event that the inhabitants of that city were a sort of senseless
people; for when they ought to have adored and marvelled at His power, they
sent Him away, and "besought Him that He would depart out of their coasts."
But for what intent did the devils destroy the swine? Everywhere they have
labored to drive men to dismay, and everywhere they rejoice in destruction. This,
for instance, the devil did with respect to Job, although in that case too God
suffered it, but neither in that case as complying with the devil, but willing to
show His own servant the more glorious, cutting off from the evil spirit all
pretext for his shamelessness, and turning on his own head what was done
against the righteous man. Because now also the contrary of what they wished
came to pass. For the power of Christ was gloriously proclaimed, and the
wickedness of the demons, from which He delivered those possessed by them,
was more plainly indicated; and how they want power to touch even swine,
without permission from the God of all.
And if any would take these things in a hidden sense, there is nothing to
hinder. For the history indeed is this, but we are to know assuredly, that the
swinish sort of men are especially liable to the operations of the demons. And as
long as they are men that suffer such things, they are often able yet to prevail;
but if they have become altogether swine, they are not only possessed, but are
also cast down the precipice. And besides, lest any should suppose what was
done to be mere acting, instead of distinctly believing that the devils had gone
out; by the death of the swine this is rendered manifest.
And mark also His meekness together with His power. For when the
inhabitants of that country, after having received such benefits, were driving Him
away, He resisted not, but retired, and left those who had shown themselves
unworthy of His teaching, having given them for teachers them that had been
freed from the demons, and the swine-herds, that they might of them learn all
that had happened; while Himself retiring leaves the fear vigorous in them. For
the greatness withal of the loss was spreading the fame of what had been done,

and the event penetrated their mind. And from many quarters were wafted
sounds, proclaiming the strangeness of the miracle; from the cured, and from the
drowned, from the owners of the swine, from the men that were feeding them.
5. These things any one may see happening now also, even many in the
tombs possessed of evil spirits, whom nothing restrains from their madness; not
iron, nor chain, nor multitude of men, nor advice, nor admonition, nor terror, nor
threat, nor any other such thing.
For so when any man is dissolute, eager after all embraces, he differs not at
all from the demoniac, but goes about naked like him, clad indeed in garments,
but deprived of the true covering, and stripped of his proper glory; cutting
himself not with stones, but with sins more hurtful than many stones. Who then
shall be able to bind such a one? Who, to stay his unseemliness and frenzy, his
way of never coming to himself, but forever haunting the tombs? For such are
the resorts of the harlots, full of much evil savor, of much rottenness.
And what of the covetous man? Is he not like this? For who will be able
ever to bind him? Are there not fears and daily threats, and admonitions, and
counsels? Nay, all these bonds he bursts asunder; and if any one come to set him
free, he adjures him that he may not be freed, accounting it the greatest torture
not to be in torture: than which what can be more wretched? For as to that evil
spirit, even though he despised men, yet he yielded to the command of Christ,
and quickly sprang out of the man's body; but this man yields not even to His
commandment. See at least how he daily hears Him saying, "You cannot serve
God and mammon," [Matthew 6:24] and threatening hell, and the incurable
torments, and obeys not: not that He is stronger than Christ, but because against
our will Christ corrects us not. Therefore such men live as in desert places,
though they be in the midst of cities. For who, that has reason, would choose to
be with such men? I for my part would sooner consent to dwell with ten
thousand demoniacs, than with one diseased in this way.
And that I am not mistaken in saying this, is manifest from their respective
feelings. For these last account him an enemy that has done them no wrong, and