SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.128, C.4.

possesses through the gift of God; and something defective which
accrues to him through the weakness of nature. Accordingly
magnanimity makes a man deem himself worthy of great things in
consideration of the gifts he holds from God: thus if his soul is
endowed with great virtue, magnanimity makes him tend to perfect
works of virtue; and the same is to be said of the use of any other
good, such as science or external fortune. On the other hand,
humility makes a man think little of himself in consideration of his
own deficiency, and magnanimity makes him despise others in so far
as they fall away from God's gifts: since he does not think so much
of others as to do anything wrong for their sake. Yet humility makes
us honor others and esteem them better than ourselves, in so far as
we see some of God's gifts in them. Hence it is written of the just
man (Ps. 14:4): "In his sight a vile person is contemned," which
indicates the contempt of magnanimity, "but he honoreth them that
fear the Lord," which points to the reverential bearing of humility. It
is therefore evident that magnanimity and humility are not contrary
to one another, although they seem to tend in contrary directions,
because they proceed according to different considerations.
Reply to Objection 5: These properties in so far as they belong to a
magnanimous man call not for blame, but for very great praise. For
in the first place, when it is said that the magnanimous is not mindful
of those from whom he has received favors, this points to the fact
that he takes no pleasure in accepting favors from others unless he
repay them with yet greater favor; this belongs to the perfection of
gratitude, in the act of which he wishes to excel, even as in the acts
of other virtues. Again, in the second place, it is said that he is
remiss and slow of action, not that he is lacking in doing what
becomes him, but because he does not busy himself with all kinds of
works, but only with great works, such as are becoming to him. He is
also said, in the third place, to employ irony, not as opposed to truth,
and so as either to say of himself vile things that are not true, or
deny of himself great things that are true, but because he does not
disclose all his greatness, especially to the large number of those
who are beneath him, since, as also the Philosopher says (Ethic. iv,
3), "it belongs to a magnanimous man to be great towards persons
of dignity and affluence, and unassuming towards the middle class."
In the fourth place, it is said that he cannot associate with others:
this means that he is not at home with others than his friends:
because he altogether shuns flattery and hypocrisy, which belong to
littleness of mind. But he associates with all, both great and little,
according as he ought, as stated above (ad 1). It is also said, fifthly,