Rev. i. 12.

betray Him, declared: "I am the first and the last, and He who liveth, and was dead, and behold I
am alive for evermore, and have the keys of death and of hell." And after these things, seeing the
same Lord in a second vision, he says: "For I saw in the midst of the throne, and of the four living
creatures, and in the midst of the elders, a Lamb standing as it had been slain, having seven horns,
and seven eyes, which are the seven spirits of God, sent forth into all the earth." And again, he
says, speaking of this very same Lamb: "And behold a white horse; and He that sat upon him was
called Faithful and True; and in righteousness doth He judge and make war. And His eyes were as
a flame of fire, and on His head were many crowns; having a name written, that no man knoweth
but Himself: and He was girded around with a vesture sprinkled with blood: and His name is called
The Word of God. And the armies of heaven followed Him upon white horses, clothed in pure
white linen. And out of His mouth goeth a sharp sword, that with it He may smite the nations; and
He shall rule (pascet) them with a rod of iron: and He treadeth the wine-press of the fierceness of
the wrath of God Almighty. And He hath upon His vesture and upon His thigh a name written,
King of Kings and Lord of Lords." Thus does the Word of God always preserve the outlines, as
it were, of things to come, and points out to men the various forms (species), as it were, of the
dispensations of the Father, teaching us the things pertaining to God.
12. However, it was not by means of visions alone which were seen, and words which were
proclaimed, but also in actual works, that He was beheld by the prophets, in order that through
them He might prefigure and show forth future events beforehand. For this reason did Hosea the
prophet take "a wife of whoredoms," prophesying by means of the action, "that in committing
fornication the earth should fornicate from the Lord," that is, the men who are upon the earth;
and from men of this stamp it will be God's good pleasure to take out a Church which shall be
sanctified by fellowship with His Son, just as that woman was sanctified by intercourse with the
prophet. And for this reason, Paul declares that the "unbelieving wife is sanctified by the believing
husband." Then again, the prophet names his children, "Not having obtained mercy," and "Not
a people," in order that, as says the apostle, "what was not a people may become a people; and
she who did not obtain mercy may obtain mercy. And it shall come to pass, that in the place where
it was said, This is not a people, there shall they be called the children of the living God." That

Rev. xix. 11—17.
consideration.]

which had been done typically through his actions by the prophet, the apostle proves to have been
done truly by Christ in the Church. Thus, too, did Moses also take to wife an Ethiopian woman,
whom he thus made an Israelitish one, showing by anticipation that the wild olive tree is grafted
into the cultivated olive, and made to partake of its fatness. For as He who was born Christ according
to the flesh, had indeed to be sought after by the people in order to be slain, but was to be set free
in Egypt, that is, among the Gentiles, to sanctify those who were there in a state of infancy, from
whom also He perfected His Church in that place (for Egypt was Gentile from the beginning, as
was Ethiopia also); for this reason, by means of the marriage of Moses, was shown forth the marriage
of the Word; and by means of the Ethiopian bride, the Church taken from among the Gentiles
was made manifest; and those who do detract from, accuse, and deride it, shall not be pure. For
they shall be full of leprosy, and expelled from the camp of the righteous. Thus also did Rahab the
harlot, while condemning herself, inasmuch as she was a Gentile, guilty of all sins, nevertheless
receive the three spies, who were spying out all the land, and hid them at her home; [which three
were] doubtless [a type of] the Father and the Son, together with the Holy Spirit. And when the
entire city in which she lived fell to ruins at the sounding of the seven trumpets, Rahab the harlot
was preserved, when all was over [in ultimis], together with all her house, through faith of the
scarlet sign; as the Lord also declared to those who did not receive His advent,—the Pharisees, no
doubt, nullify the sign of the scarlet thread, which meant the passover, and the redemption and
exodus of the people from Egypt,—when He said, "The publicans and the harlots go into the
kingdom of heaven before you."