With Massuet and Stieren, we here supply esse.

Spirit bears testimony to these opinions, when He declares, "For He spake, and they were made;
He commanded, and they were created: He hath established them for ever, yea, forever and ever."
And again, He thus speaks respecting the salvation of man: "He asked life of Thee, and Thou gavest
him length of days for ever and ever;" indicating that it is the Father of all who imparts
continuance for ever and ever on those who are saved. For life does not arise from us, nor from our
own nature; but it is bestowed according to the grace of God. And therefore he who shall preserve
the life bestowed upon him, and give thanks to Him who imparted it, shall receive also length of
days for ever and ever. But he who shall reject it, and prove himself ungrateful to his Maker,
inasmuch as he has been created, and has not recognised Him who bestowed [the gift upon him],
deprives himself of [the privilege of] continuance for ever and ever. And, for this reason, the
Lord declared to those who showed themselves ungrateful towards Him: "If ye have not been
faithful in that which is little, who will give you that which is great?" indicating that those who,
in this brief temporal life, have shown themselves ungrateful to Him who bestowed it, shall justly
not receive from Him length of days for ever and ever.
4. But as the animal body is certainly not itself the soul, yet has fellowship with the soul as long
as God pleases; so the soul herself is not life, but partakes in that life bestowed upon her by God.
Wherefore also the prophetic word declares of the first-formed man, "He became a living soul,"
teaching us that by the participation of life the soul became alive; so that the soul, and the life which
it possesses, must be understood as being separate existences. When God therefore bestows life
and perpetual duration, it comes to pass that even souls which did not previously exist should
henceforth endure [for ever], since God has both willed that they should exist, and should continue
in existence. For the will of God ought to govern and rule in all things, while all other things give
way to Him, are in subjection, and devoted to His service. Thus far, then, let me speak concerning
the creation and the continued duration of the soul.

### Chapter XXXV.—Refutation of Basilides, and of the opinion that the prophets uttered their
predictions under the inspiration of different gods.
to the Egyptians.

1. Moreover, in addition to what has been said, Basilides himself will, according to his own
principles, find it necessary to maintain not only that there are three hundred and sixty-five heavens
made in succession by one another, but that an immense and innumerable multitude of heavens
have always been in the process of being made, and are being made, and will continue to be made,
so that the formation of heavens of this kind can never cease. For if from the efflux of the first
heaven the second was made after its likeness, and the third after the likeness of the second, and
so on with all the remaining subsequent ones, then it follows, as a matter of necessity, that from
the efflux of our heaven, which he indeed terms the last, another be formed like to it, and from that
again a third; and thus there can never cease, either the process of efflux from those heavens which
have been already made, or the manufacture of [new] heavens, but the operation must go on ad
infinitum, and give rise to a number of heavens which will be altogether indefinite.
2. The remainder of those who are falsely termed Gnostics, and who maintain that the prophets
uttered their prophecies under the inspiration of different gods, will be easily overthrown by this
fact, that all the prophets proclaimed one God and Lord, and that the very Maker of heaven and
earth, and of all things which are therein; while they moreover announced the advent of His Son,
as I shall demonstrate from the Scriptures themselves, in the books which follow.
3. If, however, any object that, in the Hebrew language, diverse expressions [to represent God]
occur in the Scriptures, such as Sabaoth, Elo‘, Adonai, and all other such terms, striving to prove
from these that there are different powers and gods, let them learn that all expressions of this kind
are but announcements and appellations of one and the same Being. For the term Elo‘ in the Jewish
language denotes God, while El eim and Ele uth in the Hebrew language signify "that which
contains all." As to the appellation Adonai, sometimes it denotes what is nameable and admirable;
but at other times, when the letter Daleth in it is doubled, and the word receives an initial guttural
sound—thus Addonai—[it signifies], "One who bounds and separates the land from the water," so
that the water should not subsequently submerge the land. In like manner also, Sabaoth, when