THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.37, C.3.

father or some other relation; and thus the kinsfolk of John the
Baptist wished to call him "by his father's name Zachary," not by the
name John, because "there" was "none of" his "kindred that" was
"called by this name," as related Lk. 1:59-61. Or, again, from some
occurrence; thus Joseph "called the name of" the "first-born
Manasses, saying: God hath made me to forget all my labors" (Gn.
41:51). Or, again, from some quality of the person who receives the
name; thus it is written (Gn. 25:25) that "he that came forth first was
red and hairy like a skin; and his name was called Esau," which is
interpreted "red."
But names given to men by God always signify some gratuitous gift
bestowed on them by Him; thus it was said to Abraham (Gn. 17:5):
"Thou shalt be called Abraham; because I have made thee a father of
many nations": and it was said to Peter (Mt. 16:18): "Thou art Peter,
and upon this rock I will build My Church." Since, therefore, this
prerogative of grace was bestowed on the Man Christ that through
Him all men might be saved, therefore He was becomingly named
Jesus, i.e. Saviour: the angel having foretold this name not only to
His Mother, but also to Joseph, who was to be his foster-father.
Reply to Objection 1: All these names in some way mean the same
as Jesus, which means "salvation." For the name "Emmanuel, which
being interpreted is 'God with us,'" designates the cause of
salvation, which is the union of the Divine and human natures in the
Person of the Son of God, the result of which union was that "God is
with us."
When it was said, "Call his name, Hasten to take away," etc., these
words indicate from what He saved us, viz. from the devil, whose
spoils He took away, according to Col. 2:15: "Despoiling the
principalities and powers, He hath exposed them confidently."
When it was said, "His name shall be called Wonderful," etc., the way
and term of our salvation are pointed out: inasmuch as "by the
wonderful counsel and might of the Godhead we are brought to the
inheritance of the life to come," in which the children of God will
enjoy "perfect peace" under "God their Prince."
When it was said, "Behold a Man, the Orient is His name," reference
is made to the same, as in the first, viz. to the mystery of the
Incarnation, by reason of which "to the righteous a light is risen up

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.37, C.3.

in darkness" (Ps. 111:4).
Reply to Objection 2: The name Jesus could be suitable for some
other reason to those who lived before Christ---for instance, because
they were saviours in a particular and temporal sense. But in the
sense of spiritual and universal salvation, this name is proper to
Christ, and thus it is called a "new" name.
Reply to Objection 3: As is related Gn. 17, Abraham received from
God and at the same time both his name and the commandment of
circumcision. For this reason it was customary among the Jews to
name children on the very day of circumcision, as though before
being circumcised they had not as yet perfect existence: just as now
also children receive their names in Baptism. Wherefore on Prov.
4:3, "I was my father's son, tender, and as an only son in the sight of
my mother," the gloss says: "Why does Solomon call himself an only
son in the sight of his mother, when Scripture testifies that he had an
elder brother of the same mother, unless it be that the latter died
unnamed soon after birth?" Therefore it was that Christ received His
name at the time of His circumcision.