Matt. v. 33, etc.

and subjection to the king increased, so that no one who is converted should appear unworthy to
Him who set him free, but that the piety and obedience due to the Master of the household should
be equally rendered both by servants and children; while the children possess greater confidence
[than the servants], inasmuch as the working of liberty is greater and more glorious than that
obedience which is rendered in [a state of] slavery.
3. And for this reason did the Lord, instead of that [commandment], "Thou shalt not commit
adultery," forbid even concupiscence; and instead of that which runs thus, "Thou shalt not kill,"
He prohibited anger; and instead of the law enjoining the giving of tithes, [He told us] to share
all our possessions with the poor; and not to love our neighbours only, but even our enemies; and
not merely to be liberal givers and bestowers, but even that we should present a gratuitous gift to
those who take away our goods. For "to him that taketh away thy coat," He says, "give to him thy
cloak also; and from him that taketh away thy goods, ask them not again; and as ye would that men
should do unto you, do ye unto them:" so that we may not grieve as those who are unwilling to
be defrauded, but may rejoice as those who have given willingly, and as rather conferring a favour
upon our neighbours than yielding to necessity. "And if any one," He says, "shall compel thee [to
go] a mile, go with him twain;" so that thou mayest not follow him as a slave, but may as a free
man go before him, showing thyself in all things kindly disposed and useful to thy neighbour, not
regarding their evil intentions, but performing thy kind offices, assimilating thyself to the Father,
"who maketh His sun to rise upon the evil and the good, and sendeth rain upon the just and
unjust." Now all these [precepts], as I have already observed, were not [the injunctions] of one
doing away with the law, but of one fulfilling, extending, and widening it among us; just as if one
should say, that the more extensive operation of liberty implies that a more complete subjection
and affection towards our Liberator had been implanted within us. For He did not set us free for
this purpose, that we should depart from Him (no one, indeed, while placed out of reach of the
Lord's benefits, has power to procure for himself the means of salvation), but that the more we
receive His grace, the more we should love Him. Now the more we have loved Him, the more glory
shall we receive from Him, when we are continually in the presence of the Father.
4. Inasmuch, then, as all natural precepts are common to us and to them (the Jews), they had
in them indeed the beginning and origin; but in us they have received growth and completion. For
to yield assent to God, and to follow His Word, and to love Him above all, and one's neighbour as
one's self (now man is neighbour to man), and to abstain from every evil deed, and all other things
of a like nature which are common to both [covenants], do reveal one and the same God. But this
is our Lord, the Word of God, who in the first instance certainly drew slaves to God, but afterwards
He set those free who were subject to Him, as He does Himself declare to His disciples: "I will not