Monogenes and Macaria. These are the ten Æons whom they declare to have been produced by
Logos and Zoe. They then add that Anthropos himself, along with Ecclesia, produced twelve Æons,
to whom they give the following names: Paracletus and Pistis, Patricos and Elpis, Metricos and
Agape, Ainos and Synesis, Ecclesiasticus and Macariotes, Theletos and Sophia.
3. Such are the thirty Æons in the erroneous system of these men; and they are described as
being wrapped up, so to speak, in silence, and known to none [except these professing teachers].
Moreover, they declare that this invisible and spiritual Pleroma of theirs is tripartite, being divided
into an Ogdoad, a Decad, and a Duodecad. And for this reason they affirm it was that the "Saviour"—
for they do not please to call Him "Lord"—did no work in public during the space of thirty years,
thus setting forth the mystery of these Æons. They maintain also, that these thirty Æons are most
plainly indicated in the parable of the labourers sent into the vineyard. For some are sent about
the first hour, others about the third hour, others about the sixth hour, others about the ninth hour,
and others about the eleventh hour. Now, if we add up the numbers of the hours here mentioned,
the sum total will be thirty: for one, three, six, nine, and eleven, when added together, form thirty.
And by the hours, they hold that the Æons were pointed out; while they maintain that these are
great, and wonderful, and hitherto unspeakable mysteries which it is their special function to develop;
and so they proceed when they find anything in the multitude of things contained in the Scriptures
which they can adopt and accommodate to their baseless speculations.

### Chapter II.—The Propator was known to Monogenes alone. Ambition, disturbance, and
danger into which Sophia fell; her shapeless offspring: she is restored by Horos. The production
of Christ and of the Holy Spirit, in order to the completion of the Æons. Manner of the
production of Jesus.
1. They proceed to tell us that the Propator of their scheme was known only to Monogenes,
who sprang from him; in other words, only to Nous, while to all the others he was invisible and
Bythus, Profundity; Proarche, First-Beginning; Propator, First-Father; EnnÏa, Idea; Charis, Grace; Sige, Silence; Nous,
Intelligence; Aletheia, Truth; Logos, Word; Zoe, Life; Anthropos, Man; Ecclesia, Church; Bythius, Deep; Mixis, Mingling;
Ageratos, Undecaying; Henosis, Union; Autophyes, Self-existent; Hedone, Pleasure; Acinetos, Immoveable; Syncrasis, Blending;
Monogenes, Only-Begotten; Macaria, Happiness; Paracletus, Advocate; Pistis, Faith; Patricos, Ancestral; Elpis, Hope; Metricos,
Metrical; Agape, Love; Ainos, Praise; Synesis, Understanding; Ecclesiasticus, Ecclesiastical; Macariotes, Felicity; Theletos,
Desiderated; Sophia, Wisdom.