are they? Yea rather what infamy are they not? Your house has become a brothel,
madness, and fury; and are you not ashamed to call this pleasure? If then it be
allowed to use them, greater than all pleasure is the shame, and the discomfort
which arises from the shame, to make one's house a brothel, like hogs in
wallowing in the mire? But if so far only be allowed as to see them, lo! Again
the pain is greater. For to see is no pleasure, where to use is not allowed, but the
lust becomes only the greater, and the flame the fiercer.
But would you learn the end? Those, indeed, when they rise up from the
table, are like the madmen and those that have lost their wits; foolhardy,
quarrelsome, laughing-stocks for the very slaves; and the servants indeed retire
sober, but these, drunk. O the shame! But with the other is nothing of this sort;
but closing the table with thanksgiving, they so retire to their homes, with
pleasure sleeping, with pleasure waking, free from all shame and accusation.
If you will consider also the guests themselves, you will see that the one are
within just what the others are without; blind, maimed, lame; and as are the
bodies of these, such are the souls of those, laboring under dropsy and
inflammation. For of such sort is pride; for after the luxurious gratification a
maiming takes place; of such sort is surfeiting and drunkenness, making men
lame and maimed. And you will see too that these have souls like the bodies of
the others, brilliant, ornamented. For they who live in giving of thanks, who seek
nothing beyond a sufficiency, they whose philosophy is of this sort are in all
brightness.
But let us see the end both here and there. There, indeed, is unchaste
pleasure, loose laughter, drunkenness, buffoonery, filthy language; (for since
they in their own persons are ashamed to talk filthily, this is brought about by
means of the harlots;) but here is love of mankind, gentleness. Near to him who
invites those stands vainglory arming him, but near the other, love of man, and
gentleness. For the one table, love of man prepares, but the other, vainglory, and
cruelty, out of injustice and grasping. And that one ends in what I have said, in
loss of wits, in delirium, in madness; (for such are the offshoots of vainglory;)

but this one in thanksgiving and the glory of God. And the praise too, which
comes of men, attends more abundantly upon this; for that man is even regarded
with an envious eye, but this all men regard as their common father, even they
who have received no benefit at his hands. And as with the injured even they
who have not been injured sympathize, and all become in common enemies (to
the injurer): so too, when some receive kindness, they also who have not
received any, not less than they who have, praise and admire him that conferred
it. And there indeed is much envy, but here much tender solicitude, many prayers
from all.
And so much indeed here; but There, when Christ has come, this one
indeed shall stand with much boldness, and shall hear before the whole world,
"Thou saw Me an hungered, and fed Me; naked, and clothed Me; a stranger, and
took Me in" [Matthew 25:35]; and all the like words: but the other shall hear the
contrary; "Wicked and slothful servant" [Matthew 25:26]; and again, "Woe unto
them that luxuriate upon their couches, and sleep upon beds of ivory, and drink
the refined wine, and anoint themselves with the chief ointments; they counted
upon these things as staying, and not as fleeting." [Amos 6:4-6; Septuagint]
I have not said this without purpose, but with the view of changing your
minds; and that you should do nothing that is fruitless. What then, says one, of
the fact that I do both the one and the other? This argument is much resorted to
by all. And what need, tell me, when everything might be done usefully, to make
a division, and to expend part on what is not wanted, but even without any
purpose at all, and part usefully? Tell me, had you, when sowing, cast some upon
a rock, and some upon very good ground; is it likely that you would have been
contented so, and have said, Where is the harm, if we cast some to no purpose,
and some upon very good ground? For why not all into the very good ground?
Why lessen the gain? And if you have occasion to be getting money together,
you will not talk in that way, but wilt get it together from every quarter; but in
the other case thou dost not so. And if to lend on usury; you will not say,
"Wherefore shall we give some to the poor, and some to the rich," but all is given