Reply to Objection 1: God loves all men and all creatures, inasmuch
as He wishes them all some good; but He does not wish every good
to them all. So far, therefore, as He does not wish this particular
good---namely, eternal life---He is said to hate or reprobated them.
Reply to Objection 2: Reprobation differs in its causality from
predestination. This latter is the cause both of what is expected in
the future life by the predestined---namely, glory---and of what is
received in this life---namely, grace. Reprobation, however, is not the
cause of what is in the present---namely, sin; but it is the cause of
abandonment by God. It is the cause, however, of what is assigned
in the future---namely, eternal punishment. But guilt proceeds from
the free-will of the person who is reprobated and deserted by grace.
In this way, the word of the prophet is true---namely, "Destruction is
thy own, O Israel."
Reply to Objection 3: Reprobation by God does not take anything
away from the power of the person reprobated. Hence, when it is
said that the reprobated cannot obtain grace, this must not be
understood as implying absolute impossibility: but only conditional
impossibility: as was said above (Question 19, Article 3), that the
predestined must necessarily be saved; yet a conditional necessity,
which does not do away with the liberty of choice. Whence, although
anyone reprobated by God cannot acquire grace, nevertheless that
he falls into this or that particular sin comes from the use of his freewill. Hence it is rightly imputed to him as guilt.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the predestined are chosen by God?

Objection 1: It seems that the predestined are not chosen by God.
For Dionysius says (Div. Nom. IV, 1) that as the corporeal sun sends
his rays upon all without selection, so does God His goodness. But
the goodness of God is communicated to some in an especial
manner through a participation of grace and glory. Therefore God
without any selection communicates His grace and glory; and this
belongs to predestination.
Objection 2: Further, election is of things that exist. But
predestination from all eternity is also of things which do not exist.
Therefore, some are predestined without election.
Objection 3: Further, election implies some discrimination. Now God
"wills all men to be saved" (1 Tim. 2:4). Therefore, predestination
which ordains men towards eternal salvation, is without election.
On the contrary, It is said (Eph. 1:4): "He chose us in Him before the
foundation of the world."
I answer that, Predestination presupposes election in the order of
reason; and election presupposes love. The reason of this is that
predestination, as stated above (Article 1), is a part of providence.
Now providence, as also prudence, is the plan existing in the
intellect directing the ordering of some things towards an end; as
was proved above (Question 22, Article 2). But nothing is directed
towards an end unless the will for that end already exists. Whence
the predestination of some to eternal salvation presupposes, in the
order of reason, that God wills their salvation; and to this belong
both election and love:---love, inasmuch as He wills them this
particular good of eternal salvation; since to love is to wish well to
anyone, as stated above (Question 20, Articles 2,3):---election,
inasmuch as He wills this good to some in preference to others;
since He reprobates some, as stated above (Article 3). Election and
love, however, are differently ordered in God, and in ourselves:
because in us the will in loving does not cause good, but we are
incited to love by the good which already exists; and therefore we
choose someone to love, and so election in us precedes love. In
God, however, it is the reverse. For His will, by which in loving He
wishes good to someone, is the cause of that good possessed by