Homily 3 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts I. 12
"Then returned they unto Jerusalem from the mount called Olivet, which is
from Jerusalem a sabbath day's journey."
"Then returned they," it is said: namely, when they had heard. For they
could not have borne it, if the angel had not ([ὑ] [περέθετο]) referred them to
another Coming. It seems to me, that it was also on a sabbath-day that these
things took place; for he would not thus have specified the distance, saying,
"from the mount called Olivet, which is from Jerusalem a sabbath day's
journey," unless they were then going on the sabbath-day a certain definite
distance. "And when they had come in," it says, "they went up into an upper
room, where they were making their abode:" so they then remained in Jerusalem
after the Resurrection: "both Peter, and James, and John:" no longer is only the
latter together with his brother mentioned, but together with Peter the two: "and
Andrew, and Philip, and Thomas, Bartholomew, and Matthew, and James (the
son) of Alphæus, and Simon Zelotes, and Judas, (the brother) of James." [Acts
1:13] He has done well to mention the disciples: for since one had betrayed
Christ, and another had been unbelieving, he thereby shows that, except the first,
all of them were preserved.
"These were all continuing with one accord in prayer together with the
women." [Acts 1:14] For this is a powerful weapon in temptations; and to this
they had been trained. ["Continuing with one accord."] Good. ([καλὥς]).
Besides, the present temptation directed them to this: for they exceedingly feared
the Jews. "With the women," it is said: for he had said that they had followed
Him: "and with Mary the mother of Jesus." [Luke 23:55] How then [is it said,
that "that disciple"] took her to his own home [John 19:26], at that time? But
then the Lord had brought them together again, and so returned. "And with His

brethren." [John 17:5] These also were before unbelieving. "And in those days,"
it says, "Peter stood up in the midst of the disciples, and said." [Acts 1:15] Both
as being ardent, and as having been put in trust by Christ with the flock, and as
having precedence in honor, he always begins the discourse. ("The number of the
names together were about an hundred and twenty.) Men and brethren," he says,
"this Scripture must needs have been fulfilled, which the Holy Ghost spoke
before," [etc.] [Acts 1:16] Why did he not ask Christ to give him some one in the
room of Judas? It is better as it is. For in the first place, they were engaged in
other things; secondly, of Christ's presence with them, the greatest proof that
could be given was this: as He had chosen when He was among them, so did He
now being absent. Now this was no small matter for their consolation. But
observe how Peter does everything with the common consent; nothing
imperiously. And he does not speak thus without a meaning. But observe how he
consoles them concerning what had passed. In fact, what had happened had
caused them no small consternation. For if there are many now who canvass this
circumstance, what may we suppose they had to say then?
"Men and brethren," says Peter. For if the Lord called them brethren, much
more may he. ["Men," he says]: they all being present. See the dignity of the
Church, the angelic condition! No distinction there, "neither male nor female." I
would that the Churches were such now! None there had his mind full of some
worldly matter, none was anxiously thinking about household concerns. Such a
benefit are temptations, such the advantage of afflictions!
"This Scripture," says he, "must needs have been fulfilled, which the Holy
Ghost spoke before." Always he comforts them by the prophecies. So does
Christ on all occasions. In the very same way, he shows here that no strange
thing had happened, but what had already been foretold. "This Scripture must
needs have been fulfilled," he says, "which the Holy Ghost by the mouth of David
spoke before." He does not say, David, but the Spirit through him. See what kind
of doctrine the writer has at the very outset of the book. Do you see, that it was
not for nothing that I said in the beginning of this work, that this book is the