and not money, give the pleasure. Cast these from your soul, and what appeared
so precious will seem to you more worthless than clay. Those who are in a fever
long for mud when they see it, as if it were spring water; but those in sound
health seldom wish even for water. Cast off this morbid longing, and you will
see things as they are. And to prove that I do not speak falsely, know, that I can
point out many who have done so. Quench this flame, and you will see that these
things are of less worth than flowers.
Is gold good? Yes, it is good for almsgiving, for the relief of the poor; it is
good, not for unprofitable use, to be hoarded up or buried in the earth, to be
worn on the hands or the feet or the head. It was discovered for this end, that
with it we should loose the captives, not form it into a chain for the image of
God. Use your gold for this, to loose him that is bound, not to chain her that is
free. Tell me, why do you value above all things what is of so little worth? Is it
the less a chain, because it is of gold? Does the material make any difference?
whether it be gold or iron, it is still a chain; nay the gold is the heavier. What
then makes it light, but vainglory, and the pleasure of being seen to wear a chain,
of which you ought rather to be ashamed? To make this evident, fasten it, and
place the wearer in a wilderness or where there is no one to see, and the chain
will at once be felt heavy, and thought burdensome.
Beloved, let us fear, lest we be doomed to hear those terrible words, "Bind
him hand and foot." [Matthew 22:13] And why, O woman, do you now do so to
yourself? No prisoner has both his hands and his feet bound. Why do you bind
your head too? For you are not content with hands and feet, but bindest your
head and your neck with many chains. I pass over the care that comes of these
things, the fear, the alarm, the strife occasioned by them with your husband if
ever he wants them, the death it is to people when they lose any of them. Can
you call this a pleasure? To gratify the eyes of others, do you subject yourself to
chains, and cares, and perils, and uneasiness, and daily quarrels? This is
deserving of every censure and condemnation. Nay, I entreat you, let us not do
thus, let us burst every "bond of iniquity" [Acts 8:23]; let us break our bread to

the hungry, and let us do all other things, which may ensure to us confidence
before God, that we may obtain the blessings promised through Jesus Christ our
Lord, with whom, etc.

## Homily 8 on First Timothy

1 Timothy 2:8-10
"I will therefore that men pray everywhere, lifting up holy hands, without
wrath and doubting. In like manner also, that women adorn themselves in
modest apparel, with shamefacedness and sobriety; not with broidered hair, or
gold, or pearls, or costly array; but (which becomes women professing
godliness) with good works."
"When you pray," says Christ, "you shall not be as the hypocrites are; for
they love to pray standing in the synagogues and in the corners of the streets,
that they may be seen of men. Verily I say unto you, they have their reward. But
you, when you pray, enter into your closet, and when you have shut your door,
pray to your Father, which is in secret; and your Father, which sees in secret,
shall reward you openly." [Matthew 6:5-6] What then says Paul? "I will therefore
that men pray everywhere, lifting up holy hands, without wrath and doubting."
This is not contrary to the other, God forbid, but quite in harmony with it. But
how, and in what way? We must first consider what means, "enter into your
closet," and why Christ commands this, if we are to pray in every place? Or
whether we may not pray in the church, nor in any other part of the house, but
the closet? What then means that saying? Christ is recommending us to avoid
ostentation, when He bids us offer our prayers not only privately, but secretly.
For, when He says, "Let not your left hand know what your right hand does"
[Matthew 6:3], it is not the hands that He considers, but He is bidding them use
the utmost caution against ostentation: and He is doing the like here; He did not
limit prayer to one place, but required one thing alone, the absence of vainglory.
The object of Paul is to distinguish the Christian from the Jewish prayers,
therefore observe what he says: "In every place lifting up holy hands," which
was not permitted the Jews, for they were not allowed to approach God, to