THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.78, C.4.

Reply to Objection 6: It is called the "Sacrament of Faith," as being
an object of faith: because by faith alone do we hold the presence of
Christ's blood in this sacrament. Moreover Christ's Passion justifies
by faith. Baptism is called the "Sacrament of Faith" because it is a
profession of faith. This is called the "Sacrament of Charity," as
being figurative and effective thereof.
Reply to Objection 7: As stated above (ad 2), the blood consecrated
apart represents Christ's blood more expressively; and therefore
mention is made of Christ's Passion and its fruits, in the
consecration of the blood rather than in that of the body.
Reply to Objection 8: The blood of Christ's Passion has its efficacy
not merely in the elect among the Jews, to whom the blood of the
Old Testament was exhibited, but also in the Gentiles; nor only in
priests who consecrate this sacrament, and in those others who
partake of it; but likewise in those for whom it is offered. And
therefore He says expressly, "for you," the Jews, "and for many,"
namely the Gentiles; or, "for you" who eat of it, and "for many," for
whom it is offered.
Reply to Objection 9: The Evangelists did not intend to hand down
the forms of the sacraments, which in the primitive Church had to be
kept concealed, as Dionysius observes at the close of his book on
the ecclesiastical hierarchy; their object was to write the story of
Christ. Nevertheless nearly all these words can be culled from
various passages of the Scriptures. Because the words, "This is the
chalice," are found in Lk. 22:20, and 1 Cor. 11:25, while Matthew says
in chapter 26:28: "This is My blood of the New Testament, which
shall be shed for many unto the remission of sins." The words
added, namely, "eternal" and "mystery of faith," were handed down
to the Church by the apostles, who received them from our Lord,
according to 1 Cor. 11:23: "I have received of the Lord that which
also I delivered unto you."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.78, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether in the aforesaid words of the forms there

be any created power which causes the consecration?
Objection 1: It seems that in the aforesaid words of the forms there
is no created power which causes the consecration. Because
Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iv): "The change of the bread into
Christ's body is caused solely by the power of the Holy Ghost." But
the power of the Holy Ghost is uncreated. Therefore this sacrament
is not caused by any created power of those words.
Objection 2: Further, miraculous works are wrought not by any
created power, but solely by Divine power, as was stated in the FP,
Question 110, Article 4. But the change of the bread and wine into
Christ's body and blood is a work not less miraculous than the
creation of things, or than the formation of Christ's body in the
womb of a virgin: which things could not be done by any created
power. Therefore, neither is this sacrament consecrated by any
created power of the aforesaid words.
Objection 3: Further, the aforesaid words are not simple, but
composed of many; nor are they uttered simultaneously, but
successively. But, as stated above (Question 75, Article 7), this
change is wrought instantaneously. hence it must be done by a
simple power. Therefore it is not effected by the power of those
words.
On the contrary, Ambrose says (De Sacram. iv): "If there be such
might in the word of the Lord Jesus that things non-existent came
into being, how much more efficacious is it to make things existing
to continue, and to be changed into something else? And so, what
was bread before consecration is now the body of Christ after
consecration, because Christ's word changes a creature into
something different."
I answer that, Some have maintained that neither in the above words
is there any created power for causing the transubstantiation, nor in
the other forms of the sacraments, or even in the sacraments
themselves, for producing the sacramental effects. This, as was
shown above (Question 62, Article 1), is both contrary to the
teachings of the saints, and detracts from the dignity of the
sacraments of the New Law. Hence, since this sacrament is of