thing enjoined was exceeding burthensome and galling, He promised to give
that, which most of all made it light. Wherefore, if you will be comforted,
mourn: and think not this a dark saying. For when God does comfort, though
sorrows come upon you by thousands like snow-flakes, you will be above them
all. Since in truth, as the returns which God gives are always far greater than our
labors; so He has wrought in this case, declaring them that mourn to be blessed,
not after the value of what they do, but after His own love towards man. For they
that mourn, mourn for misdoings, and to such it is enough to enjoy forgiveness,
and obtain wherewith to answer for themselves. But forasmuch as He is full of
love towards man, He does not limit His recompense either to the removal of our
punishments, or to the deliverance from our sins, but He makes them even
blessed, and imparts to them abundant consolation.
But He bids us mourn, not only for our own, but also for other men's
misdoings. And of this temper were the souls of the saints: such was that of
Moses, of Paul, of David; yea, all these many times mourned for evils not their
own.
5. "Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth." Tell me, what
kind of earth? Some say a figurative earth, but it is not this, for nowhere in
Scripture do we find any mention of an earth that is merely figurative. But what
can the saying mean? He holds out a sensible prize; even as Paul also does, in
that when he had said, "Honor your father and your mother," [Ephesians 6:2] he
added, "For so shall you live long upon the earth." And He Himself unto the
thief again, "Today shall you be with me in Paradise." [Luke 23:43]
Thus He does not incite us by means of the future blessings only, but of the
present also, for the sake of the grosser sort of His hearers, and such as before
the future seek those others.
Thus, for example, further on also He said, "Agree with your adversary."
[Matthew 5:25] Then He appoints the reward of such self-command, and says,
"Lest at any time the adversary deliver you to the judge, and the judge to the
officer." [Matthew 5:25] Do you see whereby He alarmed us? By the things of

sense, by what happens before our eyes. And again, "Whosoever shall say to his
brother, Raca, shall be in danger of the council." [Matthew 5:22]
And Paul too sets forth sensible rewards at great length, and uses things
present in his exhortations; as when he is discoursing about virginity. For having
said nothing about the heavens there, for the time he urges it by things present,
saying, "Because of the present distress," and, "But I spare you," and, "I would
have you without carefulness."
Thus accordingly Christ also with the things spiritual has mingled the
sensible. For whereas the meek man is thought to lose all his own, He promises
the contrary, saying, "Nay, but this is he who possesses his goods in safety,
namely, he who is not rash, nor boastful: while that sort of man shall often lose
his patrimony, and his very life."
And besides, since in the Old Testament the prophet used to say continually,
"The meek shall inherit the earth;" He thus weaves into His discourse the words
to which they were accustomed, so as not everywhere to speak a strange
language.
And this He says, not as limiting the rewards to things present, but as
joining with these the other sort of gifts also. For neither in speaking of any
spiritual thing does He exclude such as are in the present life; nor again in
promising such as are in our life, does He limit his promise to that kind. For He
says, "Seek the kingdom of God, and all these things shall be added unto you."
[Matthew 6:33] And again: "Whosoever has left houses or brethren, shall receive
an hundred fold in this world, and in the future shall inherit everlasting life."
6. "Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness."
[Matthew 5:6]
What sort of righteousness? He means either the whole of virtue, or that
particular virtue which is opposed to covetousness. For since He is about to give
commandment concerning mercy, to show how we must show mercy, as, for
instance, not of rapine or covetousness, He blesses them that lay hold of
righteousness.