you may learn how they employed their wealth? Behold him in the parable of
Lazarus, how he imparted not so much as a share of his crumbs. Behold Ahab,
how not even the vineyard is free from his extortion: behold Gehazi: behold all
such. Thus they on the one hand who make just acquisitions, as having received
from God, spend on the commands of God: but they who in act of acquiring
offend God, in the expending also do the same: consuming it on harlots and
parasites, or burying and shutting it up, but laying out nothing upon the poor.
"And wherefore," says one, "does God suffer such men to be rich?" Because
He is long-suffering: because He would bring us to repentance; because He has
prepared hell; because "He has appointed a day in which He is to judge the
world." [Acts 17:31] Whereas did He use at once to punish them that are rich
and not virtuously, Zacchæus would not have had an appointed time for
repentance, so as even to restore fourfold whatever he had unjustly taken, and to
add half of his goods; nor Matthew, to be converted and become an Apostle,
taken off as he would have been before the due season; nor yet many other such.
Therefore does He bear with them, calling all to repentance. But if they will not,
but continue in the same, they shall hear Paul saying that after their hardness and
impenitent heart they treasure up unto themselves wrath against the day of
wrath, and revelation, and righteous judgment of God: [Romans 2:5] which
wrath that we may escape, let us become rich with the riches of heaven, and
follow after the laudable sort of poverty. For thus shall we obtain also the good
things to come: the which may we all obtain through the grace and mercy of our
Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father, with the Holy Ghost, be glory,
power, and honor, now and for ever, and world without end. Amen.

## Homily 35 on First Corinthians

1 Corinthians 14:1
Follow after love, yet desire earnestly spiritual gifts; but rather that you
may prophesy.
Thus, inasmuch as he had with exactness rehearsed unto them all the
excellence of love, he exhorts them in what follows, with alacrity to lay hold of
it. Wherefore also he said, "Follow after:" for he that is in chase beholds that
only which is chased, and towards that he strains himself, and leaves not off until
he lay hold of it. He that is in chase, when by himself he cannot, by those that
are before him he does overtake the fugitive, beseeching those who are near with
much eagerness to seize and keep it so seized for him until he shall come up.
This then let us also do. When of ourselves we do not reach unto love, let us bid
them that are near her to hold her, till we come up with her, and when we have
apprehended, no more let her go, that she may not again escape us. For
continually she springs away from us, because we use her not as we ought, but
prefer all things unto her. Therefore we ought to make every effort, so as
perfectly to retain her. For if this be done, we require not henceforth much labor,
nay rather scarce any; but taking our ease, and keeping holiday , we shall march
on in the narrow path of virtue. Wherefore he says, "Follow after her."
Then that they might not suppose that for no other end he brought in the
discourse of charity, except that he might extinguish the gifts, he subjoins as
follows;
"Yet desire earnestly spiritual gifts; but rather that you may prophesy."