bounty , and not extortion. He begins first with that which is pleasantest and
lighter; namely, the 'not of necessity,' for, it is "bounty" he says. Observe how in
the form of his exhortation he represents at once the fruit as springing up, and
the givers as filled with blessing. And by the term employed he won them over,
for no one gives a blessing with pain. Yet neither was he content with this; but
added, "not as of extortion." 'Think not,' he says, 'that we take it as extortioners,
but that we may be the cause of a blessing unto you.' For extortion belongs to the
unwilling, so that whoso gives alms unwillingly gives of extortion. Then from
this he passed on again unto that, the giving munificently.

2 Corinthians 9:6
"But this I say:" that is, along with this I say also that. What?
"He that sows sparingly, shall reap also sparingly; and he that sows
bountifully shall reap also bountifully." And he did not say niggardly, but a
milder expression, employing the name of the sparing. And he called the thing
sowing; that you might at once look unto the recompense, and having in mind
the harvest, might feel that you receive more than you give. Wherefore he did
not say, 'He that gives,' but "He that sows:" and he said not 'ye, if you sow,' but
made what he said general. Neither did he say, 'largely,' but "bountifully," which
is far greater than this. And again, he betakes himself to that former point of
gladness; saying,

2 Corinthians 9:7
"Let each man do according as he has purposed in his heart." For a man
when left to himself, does a thing more readily than when compelled. Wherefore
also he dwells upon this: for having said, "according as he is disposed," he
added,
"Not grudgingly, nor of necessity." And neither was he content with this,
but he adds a testimony from Scripture also, saying,
"For God loves a cheerful giver." Do you see how frequently he lays this
down? "I speak not by commandment:" and, "Herein I give my advice:" and, "as
a matter of bounty, and not as of extortion," and again, "not grudgingly, nor of
necessity; for God loves a cheerful giver." In this passage I am of opinion that a
large [giver] is intended; the Apostle however has taken it as giving with
readiness. For because the example of the Macedonians and all those other
things were enough to produce sumptuousness, he does not say many things on
that head, but upon giving without reluctance. For if it is a work of virtue, and
yet all that is done of necessity is shorn of its reward , with reason also he labors
at this point. And he does not advise merely, but also adds a prayer, as his wont
is to do, saying,

2 Corinthians 9:8
"And may God , that is able, fulfill all grace towards you."
By this prayer he takes out the way a thought which lay in wait against this
liberality and which is now also an hinderance to many. For many persons are
afraid to give alms, saying, 'Lest perchance I become poor,' 'lest perchance I
need aid from others.' To do away with this fear then, he adds this prayer, saying,
May "He make all grace abound towards you." Not merely fulfil, but "make it
abound." And what is "make grace abound?" 'Fill you,' he means, 'with so great
things, that you may be able to abound in this liberality.'
"That ye, having always all sufficiency in every thing, may abound to every
good work."
Observe, even in this his prayer, his great philosophy. He prays not for
riches nor for abundance, but for all sufficiency. Nor is this all that is admirable
in him; but that as he prayed not for superfluity, so he does not press sore on
them nor compel them to give of their want, condescending to their weakness;
but asks for a "sufficiency," and shows at the same time that they ought not to
abuse the gifts received from God. "That ye may abound," he says, "to every
good work." 'It is therefore,' says he, 'I ask for this, that you may bestow on
others also.' Yet he did not say, 'bestow,' but 'abound.' For in carnal things he
asks for a sufficiency for them, but in spiritual things for abundance even; not in
almsgiving only, but in all other things also, "unto every good work." Then he
brings forward unto them the prophet for a counsellor, having sought out a
testimony inviting them to bountifulness, and says,