Homily 39 on the Gospel of John
John 5:23-24
"For My Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment to the Son; that
all men should honor the Son, even as they honor the Father."
1. Beloved, we need great diligence in all things, for we shall render
account of and undergo a strict enquiry both of words and works. Our interests
stop not with what now is, but a certain other condition of life shall receive us
after this, and we shall be brought before a fearful tribunal. "For we must appear
before the Judgment-seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in
his body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or bad." [2
Corinthians 5:10] Let us ever bear in mind this tribunal, that we may thus be
enabled at all times to continue in virtue; for as he who has cast out from his soul
that day, rushes like a horse that has burst his bridle to precipices, (for "his ways
are always defiled" [Psalm 10:5]) and then assigning the reason the Psalmist has
added, "He puts Your judgments far away out of his sight";) so he that always
retains this fear will walk soberly. "Remember," says one, "your last things, and
you shall never do amiss." [Sirach 7:40] For He who now has remitted our sins,
will then sin in judgment; He who has died for our sake will then appear again to
judge all mankind. "Unto them that look for Him," says the Apostle, "shall He
appear the second time without sin unto salvation." [Hebrews 9:28] Wherefore
in this place also He says, "My Father judges no man, but has committed all
judgment unto the Son; that all men should honor the Son; even as they honor
the Father."
"Shall we then," says some one, "also call Him Father?" Away with the
thought. He uses the word "Son" that we may honor Him still remaining a Son,
as we honor the Father; but he who calls Him "Father" does not honor the Son

as the Father, but has confounded the whole. Moreover as men are not so much
brought to by being benefited as by being punished, on this account He has
spoken thus terribly, that even fear may draw them to honor Him. And when He
says "all," His meaning is this, that He has power to punish and to honor, and
does either as He will. The expression "has given," is used that you may not
suppose Him not to have been Begotten, and so think that there are two Fathers.
For all that the Father is, this the Son is also, Begotten, and remaining a Son.
And that you may learn that "has given" is the same as "has begotten," hear this
very thing declared by another place. "As," says Christ, "the Father has life in
Himself, so has He given to the Son to have life in Himself." [John 5:26] "What
then? Did he first beget and then give Him life? For he who gives, gives to
something which is. Was He then begotten without life?" Not even the devils
could imagine this, for it is very foolish as well as impious. As then "has given
life" is "has begotten Him who is Life," so, "has given judgment" is "has
begotten Him who shall be Judge."
That you may not when you hear that He has the Father for His cause
imagine any difference of essence or inferiority of honor, He comes to judge
you, by this proving His Equality. For He who has authority to punish and to
honor whom He will, has the same Power with the Father. Since, if this be not
the case, if having been begotten He afterwards received the honor, how came it
that He was afterwards [thus] honored, by what mode of advancement reached
He so far as to receive and be appointed to this dignity? Are ye not ashamed thus
impudently to apply to that Pure Nature which admits of no addition these carnal
and mean imaginations?
"Why then," says some one, "does Christ so speak?" That His words may
be readily received, and to clear the way for sublime sayings; therefore He mixes
these with those, and those with these. And observe how (He does it); for it is
good to see this from the beginning. He said, "My Father works, and I work"
[John 5:17, etc.]: declaring by this their Equality and Equal honor. But they
"sought to kill Him." What does He then? He lowers His form of speech indeed,