the wildness of their passion. For they say not, "I would fain have the substance
of such a person or of such another," only, but they want the very mountains to
be gold, and the houses and all that they see; and they go forth into another
world, and this passion they feel to a boundless degree, and at no point cease
from their lusting. What discourse can set before us the tempest of those
thoughts, the waves, the darkness? And where the waves and tempest are so
great, what pleasure can there be? There is not any; but tumult, and anguish, and
black clouds which instead of rain bring great sorrow of heart: the kind of thing
which is wont to happen in the case of those who are enamoured of beauty not
their own. Wherefore they who have no passionate love at all are in more
pleasure than any lovers.
5. This however no man would gainsay. But to me even he who loves, but
restrains his passion, seems to live more pleasurably than he who continually
enjoys his mistress. For though the proof be rather difficult, nevertheless even at
that disadvantage the argument must be ventured on: the cause of the increased
difficulty not being the nature of the thing, but because of the want of meet
hearers for this high morality. Thus: whether is it pleasanter, tell me, to the lover,
to be despised by his beloved, or to be honored, and to look down upon her?
Evidently the latter. Whom then, tell me, will the harlot value more? Him that is
a slave to her and is already led captive at her will, or him that is above her nets
and soars higher than her arrows? Every one must see, the latter. And about
whom will she take more thought, the fallen, or him that is not yet so? Him that
is not yet so, of course. And which will be more an object of desire, he who is
subdued, or he who is not yet taken? He who up to this time is not yet taken.
And if you disbelieve it, I will produce my proof from what takes place within
yourselves. As thus: of which woman would a man be more enamored; one that
easily submits and gives herself up to him, or one that denies, and gives him
trouble? Evidently of this last; since hereby the longing is more vehemently
kindled. Of course then in the woman's case also exactly the same thing will
happen. And him will they honor and admire more who looks down upon them.

But if this be true, so likewise is the other, that he enjoys greater pleasure who is
more honored and beloved. Since the general too lets alone the city that has been
once taken, but that which stands out and maintains the struggle he besets with
all diligence: and the hunter, when the animal is caught, keeps it shut up in
darkness as the harlot does her lover, but pursues that which flies from him.
But I shall be told, "the one enjoys his desire, the other not so." But
freedom from disgrace, and from being a slave under her tyrannical commands,
the not being led and dragged about by her as a drudge, beaten, spit upon,
pitched head foremost; do you consider this to be a small pleasure, tell me? Nay,
if one would accurately examine these things, and were able to gather into one
their insults, complaints, everlasting quarrels, some arising from their tempers,
others from their wantonness, their enmities, and all the rest, such as they only
that feel them know—he will find that there is no war but has more truces than
this wretched life of theirs. What pleasure then do you mean, tell me? The
temporary and brief enjoyment of intercourse? But this speedily does strife
overtake, and storms, and rage, and the same madness again.
6. And these things have been said by us, as one would speak discoursing
with licentious youths, who do not very patiently submit to hear our discourses
of the kingdom and of hell.
And now that we are bringing forward these topics also, it is not even
possible to say how great is the pleasure of the continent; if one frame in one's
own mind his crowns, his rewards, his converse with the angels, the proclaiming
of him before the world, his boldness, those blessed and immortal hopes of his.
"But intercourse has a certain pleasure:" for this they are continually
repeating: "while the continent continually suffers pain contending with the
tyranny of nature." Nay, but one shall find just the contrary result. For this
violence and tumult is present with the unchaste rather: there being in his body a
violent tempest, and no sea in a storm so grievously vexed as he; never
withstanding his passion, but ever receiving blows from it; as the possessed and
they that are continually rent in the midst by evil spirits. Whereas the temperate