John 19:4-5
"I find no fault against him. He therefore went forth, wearing the crown."
But not even so was their rage quenched, but they cried out,

John 19:6
"Crucify him, crucify him."
Then Pilate, seeing that all was done in vain, said,
"Take ye him, and crucify him."
Whence it is clear that he had permitted what had been done before,
because of their madness.
"For I," he says, "find no fault in him."
2. See in how many ways the judge makes His defense, continually
acquitting Him of the charges; but none of these things shamed the dogs from
their purpose. For the, "Take ye him and crucify him," is the expression of one
clearing himself of the guilt, and thrusting them forward to an action not
permitted to them. They therefore had brought Him, in order that the thing might
be done by the decision of the governor; but the contrary fell out, that He was
rather acquitted than condemned by the governor's decision. Then, because they
were ashamed,

John 19:7
"We have," they said, "a law, and by our law he ought to die, because he made
himself the Son of God."
"How then when the judge said, 'Take ye him, and judge him according to
your law,' did ye reply, 'It is not lawful for us to put any man to death,' while here
ye fly to the law? And consider the charge, 'He made himself the Son of God.'
Tell me, is this a ground of accusation, that He who performed the deeds of the
Son of God should call Himself the Son of God?" What then does Christ? While
they held this dialogue one with the other, He held His peace, fulfilling that
saying of the Prophet, that "He opens not his mouth: in His humiliation His
judgment was taken away." [Isaiah 53:7-8, Septuagint]
Then Pilate is alarmed when he hears from them, that He made Himself the
Son of God, and dreads lest the assertion may possibly be true, and he should
seem to transgress; but these men who had learned this, both by His deeds and
words, did not shudder, but are putting Him to death for the very reasons for
which they ought to have worshipped Him. On this account he no more asks
Him, "What have you done?" but, shaken by fear, he begins the enquiry again,
saying, "Are you the Christ?" But He answered not. For he who had heard, "To
this end was I born, and for this came I," and, "My Kingdom is not of this
world," he, when he ought to have opposed His enemies and delivered Him, did
not so, but seconded the fury of the Jews. Then they being in every way silenced,
make their cry issue in a political charge, saying, "He that makes himself a king,
speaks against Cæsar." [John 19:12] Pilate ought therefore to have accurately
enquired, whether He had aimed at sovereignty, and set His hand to expel Cæsar
from the kingdom. But he makes not an exact enquiry, and therefore Christ
answered him nothing, because He knew that he asked all the questions idly.
Besides, since His works bore witness to Him, He would not prevail by word,
nor compose any defense, showing that He came voluntarily to this condition.