grass of the field, which today is, and tomorrow is cast into the fire " [Matthew
6:30]; and speaking of the birds He said, "Your Heavenly Father feeds them."
3. In that place then He did all on the Sabbath day by words only, and added
nothing more, but refuted their charges by what was done in the Temple and
from their own practice. But here where He commanded a work to be done, the
taking up a bed, (a thing of no great importance as regarded the miracle, though
by it He showed one point, a manifest violation of the Sabbath,) He leads up His
discourse to something greater, desiring the more to awe them by reference to
the dignity of the Father, and to lead them up to higher thought. Therefore when
His discourse is concerning the Sabbath, He makes not His defense as man only,
or as God only, but sometimes in one way, sometimes in the other; because He
desired to persuade them both of the condescension of the Dispensation, and the
Dignity of His Godhead. Therefore He now defends Himself as God, since had
He always conversed with them merely as a man, they would have continued in
the same low condition. Wherefore that this may not be, He brings forward the
Father. Yet the creation itself "works" on the Sabbath, (for the sun runs, rivers
flow, fountains bubble, women bear,) but that you may learn that He is not of
creation, He said not, "Yea, I work, for creation works," but, "Yea, I work, for My
Father works."

John 5:18
"Therefore the Jews sought the more to kill Him, because He not only had
broken the Sabbath, but said also that God was His Father, making Himself
equal with God."
And this he asserted not by words merely, but by deeds, for not in speech
alone, but also yet oftener by actions He declared it. Why so? Because they
might object to His words and charge Him with arrogance, but when they saw
the truth of His actions proved by results, and His power proclaimed by works,
after that they could say nothing against Him.
But they who will not receive these words in a right mind assert, that
"Christ made not Himself equal to God, but that the Jews suspected this." Come
then let us go over what has been said from the beginning. Tell me, did the Jews
persecute Him, or did they not? It is clear to every one that they did. Did they
persecute Him for this or for something else? It is again allowed that it was for
this. Did He then break the Sabbath, or did He not? Against the fact that He did,
no one can have anything to say. Did He call God His Father, or did He not call
Him so? This too is true. Then the rest also follows by the same consequence;
for as to call God His Father, to break the Sabbath, and to be persecuted by the
Jews for the former and more especially for the latter reason, belonged not to a
false imagination, but to actual fact, so to make Himself equal to God was a
declaration of the same meaning.
And this one may see more clearly from what He had before said, for "My
Father works, and I work," is the expression of One declaring Himself equal to
God. For in these words He has marked no difference. He said not, "He works,
and I minister," but, "As He works, so work I"; and has declared absolute
Equality. But if He had not wished to establish this, and the Jews had supposed
so without reason, He would not have allowed their minds to be deceived, but
would have corrected this. Besides, the Evangelist would not have been silent on