SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.76, C.4.

I answer that, It is always unlawful to give anyone an occasion of
danger or loss, although a man need not always give another the
help or counsel which would be for his advantage in any way; but
only in certain fixed cases, for instance when someone is subject to
him, or when he is the only one who can assist him. Now the seller
who offers goods for sale, gives the buyer an occasion of loss or
danger, by the very fact that he offers him defective goods, if such
defect may occasion loss or danger to the buyer---loss, if, by reason
of this defect, the goods are of less value, and he takes nothing off
the price on that account---danger, if this defect either hinder the use
of the goods or render it hurtful, for instance, if a man sells a lame
for a fleet horse, a tottering house for a safe one, rotten or
poisonous food for wholesome. Wherefore if such like defects be
hidden, and the seller does not make them known, the sale will be
illicit and fraudulent, and the seller will be bound to compensation
for the loss incurred.
On the other hand, if the defect be manifest, for instance if a horse
have but one eye, or if the goods though useless to the buyer, be
useful to someone else, provided the seller take as much as he
ought from the price, he is not bound to state the defect of the
goods, since perhaps on account of that defect the buyer might want
him to allow a greater rebate than he need. Wherefore the seller may
look to his own indemnity, by withholding the defect of the goods.
Reply to Objection 1: Judgment cannot be pronounced save on what
is manifest: for "a man judges of what he knows" (Ethic. i, 3). Hence
if the defects of the goods offered for sale be hidden, judgment of
them is not sufficiently left with the buyer unless such defects be
made known to him. The case would be different if the defects were
manifest.
Reply to Objection 2: There is no need to publish beforehand by the
public crier the defects of the goods one is offering for sale, because
if he were to begin by announcing its defects, the bidders would be
frightened to buy, through ignorance of other qualities that might
render the thing good and serviceable. Such defect ought to be
stated to each individual that offers to buy: and then he will be able
to compare the various points one with the other, the good with the
bad: for nothing prevents that which is defective in one respect
being useful in many others.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.76, C.4.

Reply to Objection 3: Although a man is not bound strictly speaking
to tell everyone the truth about matters pertaining to virtue, yet he is
so bound in a case when, unless he tells the truth, his conduct
would endanger another man in detriment to virtue: and so it is in
this case.
Reply to Objection 4: The defect in a thing makes it of less value now
than it seems to be: but in the case cited, the goods are expected to
be of less value at a future time, on account of the arrival of other
merchants, which was not foreseen by the buyers. Wherefore the
seller, since he sells his goods at the price actually offered him, does
not seem to act contrary to justice through not stating what is going
to happen. If however he were to do so, or if he lowered his price, it
would be exceedingly virtuous on his part: although he does not
seem to be bound to do this as a debt of justice.