FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.109, C.10.

Now with regard to the first kind of help, man does not need a further
help of grace, e.g. a further infused habit. Yet he needs the help of
grace in another way, i.e. in order to be moved by God to act
righteously, and this for two reasons: first, for the general reason
that no created thing can put forth any act, unless by virtue of the
Divine motion. Secondly, for this special reason---the condition of
the state of human nature. For although healed by grace as to the
mind, yet it remains corrupted and poisoned in the flesh, whereby it
serves "the law of sin," Rm. 7:25. In the intellect, too, there seems
the darkness of ignorance, whereby, as is written (Rm. 8:26): "We
know not what we should pray for as we ought"; since on account of
the various turns of circumstances, and because we do not know
ourselves perfectly, we cannot fully know what is for our good,
according to Wis. 9:14: "For the thoughts of mortal men are fearful
and our counsels uncertain." Hence we must be guided and guarded
by God, Who knows and can do all things. For which reason also it is
becoming in those who have been born again as sons of God, to
say: "Lead us not into temptation," and "Thy Will be done on earth
as it is in heaven," and whatever else is contained in the Lord's
Prayer pertaining to this.
Reply to Objection 1: The gift of habitual grace is not therefore given
to us that we may no longer need the Divine help; for every creature
needs to be preserved in the good received from Him. Hence if after
having received grace man still needs the Divine help, it cannot be
concluded that grace is given to no purpose, or that it is imperfect,
since man will need the Divine help even in the state of glory, when
grace shall be fully perfected. But here grace is to some extent
imperfect, inasmuch as it does not completely heal man, as stated
above.
Reply to Objection 2: The operation of the Holy Ghost, which moves
and protects, is not circumscribed by the effect of habitual grace
which it causes in us; but beyond this effect He, together with the
Father and the Son, moves and protects us.
Reply to Objection 3: This argument merely proves that man needs
no further habitual grace.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.109, C.10.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.109, C.11.

### ARTICLE 10. Whether man possessed of grace needs the help

of grace in order to persevere?
Objection 1: It would seem that man possessed of grace needs no
help to persevere. For perseverance is something less than virtue,
even as continence is, as is clear from the Philosopher (Ethic. vii,
7,9). Now since man is justified by grace, he needs no further help of
grace in order to have the virtues. Much less, therefore, does he
need the help of grace to have perseverance.
Objection 2: Further, all the virtues are infused at once. But
perseverance is put down as a virtue. Hence it seems that, together
with grace, perseverance is given to the other infused virtues.
Objection 3: Further, as the Apostle says (Rm. 5:20) more was
restored to man by Christ's gift, than he had lost by Adam's sin. But
Adam received what enabled him to persevere; and thus man does
not need grace in order to persevere.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Persev. ii): "Why is
perseverance besought of God, if it is not bestowed by God? For is it
not a mocking request to seek what we know He does not give, and
what is in our power without His giving it?" Now perseverance is
besought by even those who are hallowed by grace; and this is seen,
when we say "Hallowed be Thy name," which Augustine confirms by
the words of Cyprian (De Correp. et Grat. xii). Hence man, even when
possessed of grace, needs perseverance to be given to him by God.
I answer that, Perseverance is taken in three ways. First, to signify a
habit of the mind whereby a man stands steadfastly, lest he be
moved by the assault of sadness from what is virtuous. And thus
perseverance is to sadness as continence is to concupiscence and
pleasure, as the Philosopher says (Ethic. vii, 7). Secondly,
perseverance may be called a habit, whereby a man has the purpose
of persevering in good unto the end. And in both these ways
perseverance is infused together with grace, even as continence and
the other virtues are. Thirdly, perseverance is called the abiding in
good to the end of life. And in order to have this perseverance man
does not, indeed, need another habitual grace, but he needs the
Divine assistance guiding and guarding him against the attacks of
the passions, as appears from the preceding article. And hence after