speak, that both ye may be more approved, and we may rejoice over you, in all
things giving glory to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ: to Him be
glory and dominion now and ever, and world without end. Amen.

Homily 20 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts IX. 10, 12
"And there was a certain disciple at Damascus, named Ananias; and to him
said the Lord in a vision, Ananias. And he said, Behold, I am here, Lord. And the
Lord said unto him, Arise, and go into the street which is called Straight, and
inquire in the house of Judas for one called Saul, of Tarsus: for, behold, he
prays, and has seen in a vision a man named Ananias coming in, and putting his
hand on him, that he might receive his sight."
What may be the reason that He neither drew any one of high authority and
importance, nor caused such to be forthcoming for the purpose of instructing
Paul? It was, because it was not meet that he should be induced by men, but only
by Christ Himself: as in fact this man taught him nothing, but merely baptized
him; for, as soon as baptized ([φωτισθείς]), he was to draw upon himself the
grace of the Spirit, by his zeal and exceeding earnestness. And that Ananias was
no very distinguished person, is plain. For, "the Lord," it says, "spoke unto him
in a vision, and Ananias answered and said, Lord, I have heard by many of this
man, how much evil he has done to Your saints at Jerusalem." [Acts 9:13] For if
he spoke in objection to Him, much more would he have done so, had He sent an
Angel. And this is why, in the former instance, neither is Philip told what the
matter is; but he sees the Angel, and then the Spirit bids him go near to the
chariot. But observe here how the Lord relieves him of his fear: "He is blind,"
says He, "and prays, and are you afraid?" In the same way Moses also is afraid:
so that the words betokened that he was afraid, and shrunk from the task, not that
he did not believe. He said, have heard from many concerning this man. What do
you say? God speaks, and you hesitate. They did not yet well know the power of
Christ. "And here he has authority from the chief priests to bind all that call on
Your name." [Acts 9:14] How was that known? It is likely that they, being in

fear, made minute enquiries. He does not say this, as thinking that Christ does
not know the fact, but, "such being the case, how," says he, "can these things
be?" As in fact those (in the Gospel) say, "Who can be saved?"— [Mark 10:26]
This is done, in order that Paul may believe him that shall come to him: "he has
seen in a vision:" it has showed him beforehand: "he prays," says (the Lord):
fear not. And observe, He speaks not to him of the success achieved: teaching us
not to speak of our achievements. And, though He saw him afraid, for all this He
said it not. "You shall not be disbelieved:" "he has seen," says He, "in a vision a
man (named) Ananias:" for this is why it was "in a vision," namely, because he
was blind. And not even the exceeding wonderfulness of the thing took
possession of the disciple's mind, so greatly was he afraid. But observe: Paul
being blind, in this way He restored to sight. "But the Lord said unto him, Go
your way: for he is a chosen vessel unto Me, to bear My name before the
Gentiles, and kings, and the children of Israel: for I will show him how great
things he must suffer for My name's sake." (v. 15, 16.) "Not only," says He, shall
he be a believer, but even a teacher, and great boldness shall he show: 'before
Gentiles and kings'— such shall be the spread of the doctrine!— that just as He
astonished (him) by the former, so He may (startle him even more) by the latter.
"And Ananias went, and entered into the house, and laid his hands upon him,
and said, Brother Saul"— he straightway addresses him as a friend by that name
— "Jesus, Who appeared unto you in the way in which you came"— and yet
Christ had not told him this, but he learned it from the Spirit— "has sent me unto
you, that you may receive your sight, and be filled with the Holy Ghost." [Acts
9:17] As he said this, he laid his hands upon him. "And immediately there fell
from his eyes as it had been scales." [Acts 9:18] Some say this was a sign of his
blindness. Why did he not blind his eyes (entirely)? This was more wonderful,
that, with his eyes open, he did not see: [Acts 9:8] which was just his case in
respect of the Law, until the Name of Jesus was put on him. "And he received
sight immediately, and arose, and was baptized. And having taken food, he
recovered strength." [Acts 9:19] He was faint, therefore, both from his journey