SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.173, C.4.

strongly upon him, and as the flax ['Lina.'] is wont to be consumed at
the approach of fire, so the bands with which he was bound were
broken and loosed." The second degree of prophecy is when a man
is enlightened by an inward light so as to know certain things, which,
however, do not go beyond the bounds of natural knowledge: thus it
is related of Solomon (3 Kgs. 4:32,33) that "he spoke . . . parables . . .
and he treated about trees from the cedar that is in Libanus unto the
hyssop that cometh out of the wall, and he discoursed of beasts and
of fowls, and of creeping things and of fishes": and all of this came
from divine inspiration, for it was stated previously (3 Kgs. 4:29):
"God gave to Solomon wisdom and understanding exceeding
much."
Nevertheless these two degrees are beneath prophecy properly so
called, because they do not attain to supernatural truth. The
prophecy wherein supernatural truth is manifested through
imaginary vision is differentiated first according to the difference
between dreams which occur during sleep, and vision which occurs
while one is awake. The latter belongs to a higher degree of
prophecy, since the prophetic light that draws the soul away to
supernatural things while it is awake and occupied with sensible
things would seem to be stronger than that which finds a man's soul
asleep and withdrawn from objects of sense. Secondly the degrees
of this prophecy are differentiated according to the expressiveness
of the imaginary signs whereby the intelligible truth is conveyed.
And since words are the most expressive signs of intelligible truth, it
would seem to be a higher degree of prophecy when the prophet,
whether awake or asleep, hears words expressive of an intelligible
truth, than when he sees things significative of truth, for instance
"the seven full ears of corn" signified "seven years of plenty" (Gn.
41:22,26). In such like signs prophecy would seem to be the more
excellent, according as the signs are more expressive, for instance
when Jeremias saw the burning of the city under the figure of a
boiling cauldron (Jer. 1:13). Thirdly, it is evidently a still higher
degree of prophecy when a prophet not only sees signs of words or
deeds, but also, either awake or asleep, sees someone speaking or
showing something to him, since this proves the prophet's mind to
have approached nearer to the cause of the revelation. Fourthly, the
height of a degree of prophecy may be measured according to the
appearance of the person seen: for it is a higher degree of prophecy,
if he who speaks or shows something to the waking or sleeping
prophet be seen by him under the form of an angel, than if he be
seen by him under the form of man: and higher still is it, if he be

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.173, C.4.