SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.170, C.2.

things of God; hence the text continues: "And I heard Him speaking
to me." Accordingly inspiration is requisite for prophecy, as regards
the raising of the mind, according to Job 32:8, "The inspiration of the
Almighty giveth understanding": while revelation is necessary, as
regards the very perception of Divine things, whereby prophecy is
completed; by its means the veil of darkness and ignorance is
removed, according to Job 12:22, "He discovereth great things out of
darkness."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.170, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether prophecy is a habit?

Objection 1: It would seem that prophecy is a habit. For according to
Ethic. ii, 5, "there are three things in the soul, power, passion, and
habit." Now prophecy is not a power, for then it would be in all men,
since the powers of the soul are common to them. Again it is not a
passion, since the passions belong to the appetitive faculty, as
stated above (FS, Question 22, Article 2); whereas prophecy pertains
principally to knowledge, as stated in the foregoing Article.
Therefore prophecy is a habit.
Objection 2: Further, every perfection of the soul, which is not
always in act, is a habit. Now prophecy is a perfection of the soul;
and it is not always in act, else a prophet could not be described as
asleep. Therefore seemingly prophecy is a habit.
Objection 3: Further, prophecy is reckoned among the gratuitous
graces. Now grace is something in the soul, after the manner of a
habit, as stated above (FS, Question 110, Article 2). Therefore
prophecy is a habit.
On the contrary, A habit is something "whereby we act when we
will," as the Commentator [Averroes] says (De Anima iii). But a man
cannot make use of prophecy when he will, as appears in the case of
Eliseus (4 Kgs. 3:15), "who on Josaphat inquiring of him concerning
the future, and the spirit of prophecy failing him, caused a minstrel
to be brought to him, that the spirit of prophecy might come down
upon him through the praise of psalmody, and fill his mind with
things to come," as Gregory observes (Hom. i super Ezech.).
Therefore prophecy is not a habit.
I answer that, As the Apostle says (Eph. 5:13), "all that is made
manifest is light," because, to wit, just as the manifestation of the
material sight takes place through material light, so too the
manifestation of intellectual sight takes place through intellectual
light. Accordingly manifestation must be proportionate to the light by
means of which it takes place, even as an effect is proportionate to
its cause. Since then prophecy pertains to a knowledge that
surpasses natural reason, as stated above (Article 1), it follows that
prophecy requires an intellectual light surpassing the light of natural
reason. Hence the saying of Micah 7:8: "When I sit in darkness, the