image, after our likeness." Therefore, because the form of God took the
form of a servant, both is God and both is man; but both God, on account
of God who takes; and both man, on account of man who is taken. For
neither by that taking is the one of them turned and changed into the
other: the Divinity is not changed into the creature, so as to cease to be
Divinity; nor the creature into Divinity, so as to cease to be creature.

### CHAP. 8.—THE TEXTS OF SCRIPTURE EXPLAINED RESPECTING THE SUBJECTION OF THE SON TO THE FATHER, WHICH HAVE BEEN MISUNDERSTOOD. CHRIST WILL NOT SO GIVE UP THE KINGDOM TO THE FATHER, AS TO TAKE IT AWAY FROM HIMSELF. THE BEHOLDING HIM IS THE PROMISED END OF ALL ACTIONS. THE HOLY SPIRIT IS SUFFICIENT TO OUR BLESSEDNESS EQUALLY WITH THE FATHER.

15. As for that which the apostle says, "And when all things shall be
subdued unto Him, then shall the Son also Himself be subject unto Him
that put all things under Him:" either the text has been so turned, lest any
one should think that the "fashion" of Christ, which He took according to
the human creature, was to be transformed hereafter into the Divinity, or
(to express it more precisely) the Godhead itself, who is not a creature,
but is the unity of the Trinity,—a nature incorporeal, and unchangeable,
and consubstantial, and co-eternal with itself; or if any one contends, as
some have thought, that the text, "Then shall the Son also Himself be
subject unto Him that put all things under Him," is so turned in order
that one may believe that very "subjection" to be a change and conversion
hereafter of the creature into the substance or essence itself of the
Creator, that is, that that which had been the substance of a creature shall
become the substance of the Creator;—such an one at any rate admits
this, of which in truth there is no possible doubt, that this had not yet
taken place, when the Lord said, "My Father is greater than I." For He
said this not only before He ascended into heaven, but also before He had
suffered, and had risen from the dead. But they who think that the
human nature in Him is to be changed and converted into the substance
of the Godhead, and that it was so said, "Then shall the Son also Himself
be subject unto Him that put all things under Him,"—as if to say, Then
also the Son of man Himself, and the human nature taken by the Word of

God, shall be changed into the nature of Him who put all things under
Him,—must also think that this will then take place, when, after the day
of judgment, "He shall have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the
Father." And hence even still, according to this opinion, the Father is
greater than that form of a servant which was taken of the Virgin. But if
some affirm even further, that the man Christ Jesus has already been
changed into the substance of God, at least they cannot deny that the
human nature still remained, when He said before His passion, "For my
Father is greater than I;" whence there is no question that it was said in
this sense, that the Father is greater than the form of a servant; to whom
in the form of God the Son is equal. Nor let any one, hearing what the
apostle says, "But when He saith all things are put under Him, it is
manifest that He is excepted which did put all things under Him," think
the words, that He hath put all things under the Son, to be so understood
of the Father, as that He should not think that the Son Himself put all
things under Himself. For this the apostle plainly declares, when he says
to the Philippians, "For our conversation is in heaven; from whence also
we look for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ: who shall change our vile
body, that it may be fashioned like unto His glorious body, according to
the working whereby He is able even to subdue2 all things unto Himself."
For the working of the Father and of the Son is indivisible. Otherwise,
neither hath the Father Himself put all things under Himself, but the Son
hath put all things under Him, who delivers the kingdom to Him, and
puts down all rule and all authority and power. For these words are
spoken of the Son: "When He shall have delivered up," says the apostle,
"the kingdom to God, even the Father; when He shall have put down4 all
rule, and all authority, and all power." For the same that puts down, also
makes subject.
16. Neither may we think that Christ shall so give up the kingdom to God,
even the Father, as that He shall take it away from Himself. For some
vain talkers have thought even this. For when it is said, "He shall have
delivered up the kingdom to God, even the Father," He Himself is not
excluded; because He is one God together with the Father. But that word
"until" deceives those who are careless readers of the divine Scriptures,
but eager for controversies. For the text continues, "For He must reign,
until He hath put all enemies under His feet;" as though, when He had so