SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.71, C.2.

essence, i.e. as audible sound injure no man, except perhaps by
jarring of the ear, as when a person speaks too loud. But, considered
as signs conveying something to the knowledge of others, they may
do many kinds of harm. Such is the harm done to a man to the
detriment of his honor, or of the respect due to him from others.
Hence the reviling is greater if one man reproach another in the
presence of many: and yet there may still be reviling if he reproach
him by himself. in so far as the speaker acts unjustly against the
respect due to the hearer.
Reply to Objection 2: One man slights another by deeds in so far as
such deeds cause or signify that which is against that other man's
honor. In the former case it is not a matter of reviling but of some
other kind of injustice, of which we have spoken above (Questions
64,65,66): where as in the latter case there is reviling, in so far as
deeds have the significant force of words.
Reply to Objection 3: Railing and taunts consist in words, even as
reviling, because by all of them a man's faults are exposed to the
detriment of his honor. Such faults are of three kinds. First, there is
the fault of guilt, which is exposed by "reviling" words. Secondly,
there is the fault of both guilt and punishment, which is exposed by
"taunts" [convicium], because "vice" is commonly spoken of in
connection with not only the soul but also the body. Hence if one
man says spitefully to another that he is blind, he taunts but does
not revile him: whereas if one man calls another a thief, he not only
taunts but also reviles him. Thirdly, a man reproaches another for his
inferiority or indigence, so as to lessen the honor due to him for any
kind of excellence. This is done by "upbraiding" words, and properly
speaking, occurs when one spitefully reminds a man that one has
succored him when he was in need. Hence it is written (Ecclus.
20:15): "He will give a few things and upbraid much." Nevertheless
these terms are sometimes employed one for the other.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.71, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether reviling or railing is a mortal sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that reviling or railing is not a mortal sin.
For no mortal sin is an act of virtue. Now railing is the act of a virtue,
viz. of wittiness eutrapelia [FS, Question 60, Article 5] to which it
pertains to rail well, according to the Philosopher (Ethic. iv, 8).
Therefore railing or reviling is not a mortal sin.
Objection 2: Further, mortal sin is not to be found in perfect men;
and yet these sometimes give utterance to railing or reviling. Thus
the Apostle says (Gal. 3:1): "O senseless Galatians!," and our Lord
said (Lk. 24:25): "O foolish and slow of heart to believe!" Therefore
railing or reviling is not a mortal sin.
Objection 3: Further, although that which is a venial sin by reason of
its genus may become mortal, that which is mortal by reason of its
genus cannot become venial, as stated above (FS, Question 88,
Articles 4,6). Hence if by reason of its genus it were a mortal sin to
give utterance to railing or reviling, it would follow that it is always a
mortal sin. But this is apparently untrue, as may be seen in the case
of one who utters a reviling word indeliberately or through slight
anger. Therefore reviling or railing is not a mortal sin, by reason of
its genus.
On the contrary, Nothing but mortal sin deserves the eternal
punishment of hell. Now railing or reviling deserves the punishment
of hell, according to Mt. 5:22, "Whosoever shall say to his brother . . .
Thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire." Therefore railing or reviling
is a mortal sin.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), words are injurious to
other persons, not as sounds, but as signs, and this signification
depends on the speaker's inward intention. Hence, in sins of word, it
seems that we ought to consider with what intention the words are
uttered. Since then railing or reviling essentially denotes a
dishonoring, if the intention of the utterer is to dishonor the other
man, this is properly and essentially to give utterance to railing or
reviling: and this is a mortal sin no less than theft or robbery, since a
man loves his honor no less than his possessions. If, on the other
hand, a man says to another a railing or reviling word, yet with the
intention, not of dishonoring him, but rather perhaps of correcting