affliction, let us consider these things. Let us not rejoice at the punishment of
others as being avenged, but as ourselves escaping from such punishment and
vengeance. For what advantage is it to us when others are punished? Let us not, I
beseech you, have such souls. Let us be invited to virtue by the prospect of the
kingdom. For he indeed who is exceedingly virtuous is induced neither by fear
nor by the prospect of the kingdom, but for Christ's sake alone, as was the case
with Paul. Let us, however, even thus consider the blessings of the kingdom, the
miseries of hell, and thus regulate and school ourselves; let us in this way bring
ourselves to the things that are to be practiced. When you see anything good and
great in the present life, think of the kingdom, and you will consider it as
nothing. When you see anything terrible, think of hell, and you will deride it.
When you are possessed by carnal desire, think of the fire, think also of the
pleasure of sin itself, that it is nothing worth, that it has not even pleasure in it.
For if the fear of the laws that are enacted here has so great power as to
withdraw us from wicked actions, how much more should the remembrance of
things future, the vengeance that is immortal, the punishment that is everlasting?
If the fear of an earthly king withdraws us from so many evils, how much more
the fear of the King Eternal?
Whence then can we constantly have this fear? If we continually hearken to
the Scriptures. For if the sight only of a dead body so depresses the mind, how
much more must hell and the fire unquenchable, how much more the worm that
never dies. If we always think of hell, we shall not soon fall into it. For this
reason God has threatened punishment; if it was not attended with great
advantage to think of it, God would not have threatened it. But because the
remembrance of it is able to work great good, for this reason He has put into our
souls the terror of it, as a wholesome medicine. Let us not then overlook the
great advantage arising from it, but let us continually advert to it, at our dinners,
at our suppers. For conversation about pleasant things profits the soul nothing,
but renders it more languid, while that about things painful and melancholy cuts
off all that is relaxed and dissolute in it, and converts it, and braces it when

unnerved. He who converses of theaters and actors does not benefit the soul, but
inflames it more, and renders it more careless. He who concerns himself and is
busy in other men's matters, often even involves it in dangers by this curiosity.
But he who converses about hell incurs no dangers, and renders it more sober.
But do you fear the offensiveness of such words? Have you then, if you are
silent, extinguished hell? Or if you speak of it, have you kindled it? Whether you
speak of it or not, the fire boils forth. Let it be continually spoken of, that you
may never fall into it. It is not possible that a soul anxious about hell should
readily sin. For hear the most excellent advice, "Remember," it says, "your latter
end" [Sirach 28:6], and you will not sin for ever. A soul that is fearful of giving
account cannot but be slow to transgression. For fear being vigorous in the soul
does not permit anything worldly to exist in it. For if discourse raised concerning
hell so humbles and brings it low, does not the reflection constantly dwelling
upon the soul purify it more than any fire?
Let us not remember the kingdom so much as hell. For fear has more power
than the promise. And I know that many would despise ten thousand blessings, if
they were rid of the punishment, inasmuch as it is even now sufficient for me to
escape vengeance, and not to be punished. No one of those who have hell before
their eyes will fall into hell. No one of those who despise hell will escape hell.
For as among us those who fear the judgment-seats will not be apprehended by
them, but those who despise them are chiefly those who fall under them, so it is
also in this case. If the Ninevites had not feared destruction, they would have
been overthrown, but because they feared, they were not overthrown. If in the
time of Noah they had feared the deluge, they would not have been drowned.
And if the Sodomites had feared they would not have been consumed by fire. It
is a great evil to despise a threat. He who despises threatening will soon
experience its reality in the execution of it. Nothing is so profitable as to
converse concerning hell. It renders our souls purer than any silver. For hear the
prophet saying, "Your judgments are always before me." [From Psalm 17:22,
Septuagint] For although it pains the hearer, it benefits him very much.