contrary to the ceremonial laws of the Jews, though not contrary to
the law of nature. Wherefore the apostles inserted the prohibition of
fornication among that of other ceremonial observances, because in
both cases there was a difference of opinion between Jews and
Gentiles.
Reply to Objection 2: This law was the result of the darkness just
mentioned, into which the Gentiles had fallen, by not giving due
honor to God as stated in Rm. 1:21, and did not proceed from the
instinct of the natural law. Hence, when the Christian religion
prevailed, this law was abolished.
Reply to Objection 3: In certain cases no evil results ensue if a
person surrenders his right to a thing whether absolutely or for a
time, so that in neither case is the surrender against the natural law.
But that does not apply to the case in point, wherefore the argument
does not prove.
Reply to Objection 4: Injury is opposed to justice. Now the natural
law forbids not only injustice, but also whatever is opposed to any of
the virtues: for instance it is contrary to the natural law to eat
immoderately, although by doing so a man uses his own property
without injury to anyone. Moreover although a bondswoman is her
master's property that she may serve him, she is not his that she
may be his concubine. And again it depends how a person makes
use of his property. For such a man does an injury to the offspring
he begets, since such a union is not directed to its good, as stated
above.
Reply to Objection 5: The wife has power of her husband's body, not
simply and in all respects, but only in relation to marriage, and
consequently she cannot transfer her husband's body to another to
the detriment of the good of marriage.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether it is a mortal sin to have intercourse with

a concubine?
Objection 1: It would seem that it is not a mortal sin to have
intercourse with a concubine. For a lie is a greater sin than simple
fornication: and a proof of this is that Juda, who did not abhor to
commit fornication with Thamar, recoiled from telling a lie, saying
(Gn. 38:23): "Surely she cannot charge us with a lie." But a lie is not
always a mortal sin. Neither therefore is simple fornication.
Objection 2: Further, a deadly sin should be punished with death.
But the Old Law did not punish with death intercourse with a
concubine, save in a certain case (Dt. 22:25). Therefore it is not a
deadly sin.
Objection 3: Further, according to Gregory (Moral. xxxiii, 12), the
sins of the flesh are less blameworthy than spiritual sins. Now pride
and covetousness, which are spiritual sins, are not always mortal
sins. Therefore fornication, which is a sin of the flesh, is not always a
mortal sin.
Objection 4: Further, where the incentive is greater the sin is less
grievous, because he sins more who is overcome by a lighter
temptation. But concupiscence is the greatest incentive to lust.
Therefore since lustful actions are not always mortal sins, neither is
simple fornication a mortal sin.
On the contrary, Nothing but mortal sin excludes from the kingdom
of God. But fornicators are excluded from the kingdom of God (1
Cor. 6:9,10). Therefore simple fornication is a mortal sin.
Further, mortal sins alone are called crimes. Now all fornication is a
crime according to Tobias 4:13, "Take heed to keep thyself . . . from
all fornication, and beside thy wife never endure to know crime."
Therefore, etc.
I answer that, As we have already stated (Sent. ii, D, 42, Question 1,
Article 4), those sins are mortal in their genus which violate the bond
of friendship between man and God, and between man and man; for
such sins are against the two precepts of charity which is the life of
the soul. Wherefore since the intercourse of fornication destroys the