FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.55, C.4.

is perfect in reference to that which belongs to its own kind, even in
direct opposition to reason, or with some falling away therefrom. But
the perfection of that power, since it is compatible with a falling away
from reason, cannot be called a human virtue.
Reply to Objection 3: Reason is shown to be so much the more
perfect, according as it is able to overcome or endure more easily
the weakness of the body and of the lower powers. And therefore
human virtue, which is attributed to reason, is said to be "made
perfect in infirmity," not of the reason indeed, but of the body and of
the lower powers.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.55, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether virtue is suitably defined?

Objection 1: It would seem that the definition, usually given, of
virtue, is not suitable, to wit: "Virtue is a good quality of the mind, by
which we live righteously, of which no one can make bad use, which
God works in us, without us." For virtue is man's goodness, since
virtue it is that makes its subject good. But goodness does not seem
to be good, as neither is whiteness white. It is therefore unsuitable to
describe virtue as a "good quality."
Objection 2: Further, no difference is more common than its genus;
since it is that which divides the genus. But good is more common
than quality, since it is convertible with being. Therefore "good"
should not be put in the definition of virtue, as a difference of quality.
Objection 3: Further, as Augustine says (De Trin. xii, 3): "When we
come across anything that is not common to us and the beasts of
the field, it is something appertaining to the mind." But there are
virtues even of the irrational parts; as the Philosopher says (Ethic. iii,
10). Every virtue, therefore, is not a good quality "of the mind."
Objection 4: Further, righteousness seems to belong to justice;
whence the righteous are called just. But justice is a species of
virtue. It is therefore unsuitable to put "righteous" in the definition of
virtue, when we say that virtue is that "by which we live righteously."
Objection 5: Further, whoever is proud of a thing, makes bad use of
it. But many are proud of virtue, for Augustine says in his Rule, that
"pride lies in wait for good works in order to slay them." It is untrue,
therefore, "that no one can make bad use of virtue."
Objection 6: Further, man is justified by virtue. But Augustine
commenting on Jn. 15:11: "He shall do greater things than these,"
says [Tract. xxvii in Joan.: Serm. xv de Verb. Ap. 11]: "He who
created thee without thee, will not justify thee without thee." It is
therefore unsuitable to say that "God works virtue in us, without us."
On the contrary, We have the authority of Augustine from whose
words this definition is gathered, and principally in De Libero
Arbitrio ii, 19.