prey to fever and gasping out life; and then will I discourse with you and will
ask, What has become of all that profuse ornament? Whither has that crowd of
flatterers vanished, that attendance of slaves, that abundance of wealth and
possessions? What wind has visited and blown all away? Nay, even stretched
upon the bier, he bears the tokens of that wealth and that pride; a splendid
garment thrown over him, poor and rich following him forth, the assembled
crowds breathing words of good omen. Surely this also is a very mockery;
howbeit even this besides is presently proved naught, like a blossom that
perishes. For when we have passed over the threshold of the city gates, and after
having delivered over the body to the worms, return, I will ask you again, where
is that vast crowd gone to? What has become of the clamor and uproar? Where
are the torches? Where the bands of women? Are not these things, then, a
dream? And what too has become of the shouts? Where are those many lips that
cried, and bade him 'be of good cheer, for no man is immortal?' These things
ought not now to be said to one that hears not, but when he made prey of others,
when he was overreaching, then with a slight change should it have been said to
him, 'Be not of good cheer, no man is immortal; hold in your madness,
extinguish your lust;' but 'Be of good cheer' is for the injured party. For to chant
such things over this man now, is but like men exulting over him and speaking
irony; for he ought not for this now to be of good cheer, but to fear and tremble.
And if even this advice is now of no use to him since he has run his course,
yet at least let those of the rich who labor under the same disease, and follow
him to the tomb, hear it. For although beforehand through the intoxication of
wealth, they have no such thing in mind, yet at that season when the sight of him
that is laid out even confirms what is said, let them be sober, let them be
instructed: reflecting that yet a little while and they will come that shall bear
them away to that fearful account, and to suffer the penalty of their acts of
rapacity and extortion. 'And what is this to the poor?' says one. Why, to many
this also is a satisfaction, to see him that has wronged them punished. 'But to us
it is no satisfaction, but the escaping suffering ourselves.' I praise you

exceedingly and approve of you in that you exult not over the calamities of
others, but seek only your own safety. Come then, I will ensure you this also. For
if we suffer evil at the hands of men, we cut off no small part of our debt by
bearing what is done to us nobly. We receive therefore no injury; for God
reckons the ill-treatment towards our debt, not according to the principle of
justice but of His loving-kindness; and because He succored not him that
suffered evil. 'Whence does this appear?' says one. The Jews once suffered evil
at the hand of the Babylonians; and God did not prevent it: but they were carried
away, children and women; yet afterwards did this captivity become a
consolation to them in respect of their sins. Therefore He says to Isaiah,
"Comfort ye, comfort ye My people, you priests: speak unto the heart of
Jerusalem, for she has received of the Lord's hand double for sins." [Isaiah 40:12] And again; "Grant us peace, for You have repaid us every thing." [Isaiah
26:12, Septuagint] And David says; "Behold mine enemies, for they are
multiplied; and forgive all my sins." [Psalm 25:19] And when he bore with
Shimei cursing him, he said, "Let him alone, that the Lord may see my
abasement, and requite me good for this day." [389 11, 12] For when He aids us
not when we suffer wrong, then most of all are we advantaged; for He sets it to
the account of our sins, if we bear it thankfully.
8. So that when you see a rich man plundering a poor, leave him that suffers
wrong, and weep for the plunderer. For the one puts off filth, the other bedaubs
himself with more filth. Such was the fate of Elisha's servant in the story of
Naaman [2 Kings 5:20, etc.] For though he took not by violence, yet he did a
wrong; for to get money by deceit is a wrong. What then befell? With the wrong
he received also the leprosy; and he that was wronged was benefited, but he that
did the wrong received the greatest possible harm. The same happens now also
in the case of the soul. And this is of so great force that often by itself it has
propitiated God; yea though he who suffers evil be unworthy of aid; yet when he
so suffers in excess, by this alone he draws God unto the forgiveness of himself,
and to the punishment of him that did the wrong. Wherefore also God said of old