things in order to deceive the hearers. For if it were possible for a soul to enter
into the substance of an evil spirit, much more into its own body.
And besides, it stands not to reason that the injured soul should co-operate
with the wrong-doer, or that a man should be able to change an incorporeal
power into another substance. For if in bodies this were impossible, and one
could not make a man's body become that of an ass; much more were this
impossible in the invisible soul; neither could one transform it into the substance
of an evil spirit. So that these are the sayings of besotted old wives, and spectres
to frighten children.
Nor indeed is it possible for a soul, torn away from the body, to wander
here any more. For "the souls of the righteous are in the hand of God;"
[Wisdom 3:1] and if of the righteous, then those children's souls also; for neither
are they wicked: and the souls too of sinners are straightway led away hence.
And it is evident from Lazarus and the rich man; and elsewhere too Christ says,
"This day they require your soul of you." [Luke 12:20] And it may not be that a
soul, when it is gone forth from the body, should wander here; nor is the reason
hard to see. For if we, going about on the earth which is familiar and well known
to us, being encompassed with a body, when we are journeying in a strange road,
know not which way to go unless we have some one to lead us; how should the
soul, being rent away from the body, and having gone out from all her
accustomed region, know where to walk without one to show her the way?
And from many other things too one might perceive, that it is not possible
for a disembodied soul to remain here. For both Stephen says, "Receive my
spirit;" [Acts 7:59] and Paul, "To depart and to be with Christ is far better;"
[Philippians 1:23] and of the patriarch too the Scripture says, that "he was
gathered unto his fathers, being cherished in a good old age." And as to the
proof, that neither can the souls of sinners continue here; hear the rich man
making much entreaty for this, and not obtaining it; since had it been at all
possible, he would have come, and have told what had come to pass there.
[Luke 16:27-28] Whence it is evident that after their departure hence our souls

are led away into some place, having no more power of themselves to come back
again, but awaiting that dreadful day.
4. Now, should any one say, "And wherefore did Christ fulfill the devils'
request, suffering them to depart into the herd of swine?" this would be our
reply, that He did so, not as yielding to them, but as providing for many objects
thereby. One, to teach them that are delivered from those wicked tyrants, how
great the malice of their insidious enemies: another, that all might learn, how not
even against swine are they bold, except He allow them; a third, that they would
have treated those men more grievously than the swine, unless even in their
calamity they had enjoyed much of God's providential care. For that they hate us
more than the brutes is surely evident to every man. So then they that spared not
the swine, but in one moment of time cast them all down the precipice, much
more would they have done so to the men whom they possessed, leading them
towards the desert, and carrying them away, unless even in their very tyranny the
guardian care of God had abounded, to curb and check the excess of their
violence. Whence it is manifest that there is no one, who does not enjoy the
benefit of God's providence. And if not all alike, nor after one manner, this is
itself a very great instance of providence; in that according to each man's profit,
the work also of providence is displayed.
And besides what has been mentioned, there is another thing also, which we
learn from this; that His providence is not only over all in common, but also over
each in particular; which He also declared with respect to His disciples, saying,
"But the very hairs of your head are numbered." [Matthew 10:30] And from
these demoniacs too, one may clearly perceive this; who would have "been
choked" long before, if they had not enjoyed the benefit of much tender care
from above.
For these reasons then He suffered them to depart into the herd of swine,
and that they also who dwelt in those places should learn His power. For where
His name was great, He did not greatly display Himself: but where no one knew
Him, but they were still in an insensible condition, He made His miracles to