which it is evident that He Himself glorifies His saints: for, "Whom He
did predestinate, them He also called; and whom He called, them He also
justified; and whom He justified, them He also glorified." Of Him
accordingly it is said, that He justifieth the ungodly;12 of Him it is said,
that He is just and a justifier. If, therefore, He has also glorified those
whom He has justified, He who justifies, Himself also glorifies; who is, as
I have said, the Lord of glory. Yet, according to the form of a servant, He
replied to His disciples, when inquiring about their own glorification: "To
sit on my right hand and on my left is not mine to give, but  for whom it is prepared by my Father."
25. But that which is prepared by His Father is prepared also by the Son
Himself, because He and the Father are one. For we have already shown,
by many modes of speech in the divine Scriptures, that, in this Trinity,
what is said of each is also said of all, on account of the indivisible
working of the one and same substance. As He also says of the Holy
Spirit, "If I depart, I will send Him unto you." He did not say, We will
send; but in such way as if the Son only should send Him, and not the
Father; while yet He says in another place, "These things have I spoken
unto you, being yet present with you; but the Comforter, which is the
Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, He shall teach you
all things." Here again it is so said as if the Son also would not send Him,
but the Father only. As therefore in these texts, so also where He says,
"But for them for whom it is prepared by my Father," He meant it to be
understood that He Himself, with the Father, prepares seats of glory for
those for whom He will. But some one may say: There, when He spoke of
the Holy Spirit, He so says that He Himself will send Him, as not to deny
that the Father will send Him; and in the other place, He so says that the
Father will send Him, as not to deny that He will do so Himself; but here
He expressly says, "It is not mine to give," and so goes on to say that these
things are prepared by the Father. But this is the very thing which we
have already laid down to be said according to the form of a servant: viz.,
that we are so to understand "It is not mine to give," as if it were said,
This is not in the power of man to give; that so He may be understood to
give it through that wherein He is God equal to the Father. "It is not
mine," He says, "to give;" that is, I do not give these things by human
power, but "to those for whom it is prepared by my Father;" but then take

care you understand also, that if "all things which the Father hath are
mine," then this certainly is mine also, and I with the Father have
prepared these things.
26. For I ask again, in what manner this is said, "If any man hear not my
words, I will not judge him?" For perhaps He has said here, "I will not
judge him," in the same sense as there, "It is not mine to give." But what
follows here? "I came not," He says, "to judge the world, but to save the
world;" and then He adds, "He that rejecteth me, and receiveth not my
words, hath one that judgeth him." Now here we should understand the
Father, unless He had added, "The word that I have spoken, the same
shall judge him in the last day." Well, then, will neither the Son judge,
because He says, "I will not judge him," nor the Father, but the word
which the Son hath spoken? Nay, but hear what yet follows: "For I," He
says, "have not spoken of myself; but the Father which sent me, He gave
me a commandment, what I should say, and what I should speak; and I
know that His commandment is life everlasting: whatsoever I speak
therefore, even as the Father said unto me, so I speak." If therefore the
Son judges not, but "the word which the Son hath spoken;" and the word
which the Son hath spoken therefore judges, because the Son "hath not
spoken of Himself, but the Father who sent Him gave Him a
commandment what He should say, and what He should speak:" then the
Father assuredly judges, whose word it is which the Son hath spoken; and
the same Son Himself is the very Word of the Father. For the
commandment of the Father is not one thing, and the word of the Father
another; for He hath called it both a word and a commandment. Let us
see, therefore, whether perchance, when He says, "I have not spoken of
myself," He meant to be understood thus,—I am not born of myself. For if
He speaks the word of the Father, then He speaks Himself, because He is
Himself the Word of the Father. For ordinarily He says, "The Father gave
to me;" by which He means it to be understood that the Father begat
Him: not that He gave anything to Him, already existing and not
possessing it; but that the very meaning of, To have given that He might
have, is, To have begotten that He might be. For it is not, as with the
creature, so with the Son of God before the incarnation and before He
took upon Him our flesh, the Only-begotten by whom all things were
made; that He is one thing, and has another: but He is in such way as to