dowered with certain gifts.
Further, a dowry is appointed to carnal marriage for the ease of
marriage. But the spiritual marriage is more blissful than the carnal
marriage. Therefore a dowry should be especially assigned thereto.
Further, the adornment of the bride is part of the dowry. Now the
saints are adorned when they are taken into glory, according to Is.
61:10, "He hath clothed me with the garments of salvation . . . as a
bride adorned with her jewels." Therefore the saints in heaven have a
dowry.
I answer that, Without doubt the blessed when they are brought into
glory are dowered by God with certain gifts for their adornment, and
this adornment is called their dowry by the masters. Hence the
dower of which we speak now is defined thus: "The dowry is the
everlasting adornment of soul and body adequate to life, lasting for
ever in eternal bliss." This description is taken from a likeness to the
material dowry whereby the bride is adorned and the husband
provided with an adequate support for his wife and children, and yet
the dowry remains inalienable from the bride, so that if the marriage
union be severed it reverts to her. As to the reason of the name there
are various opinions. For some say that the name "dowry" is taken
not from a likeness to the corporeal marriage, but according to the
manner of speaking whereby any perfection or adornment of any
person whatever is called an endowment; thus a man who is
proficient in knowledge is said to be endowed with knowledge, and
in this sense ovid employed the word "endowment" (De Arte Amandi
i, 538): "By whatever endowment thou canst please, strive to
please." But this does not seem quite fitting, for whenever a term is
employed to signify a certain thing principally, it is not usually
transferred to another save by reason of some likeness. Wherefore
since by its primary signification a dowry refers to carnal marriage, it
follows that in every other application of the term we must observe
some kind of likeness to its principal signification. Consequently
others say that the likeness consists in the fact that in carnal
marriage a dowry is properly a gift bestowed by the bridegroom on
the bride for her adornment when she is taken to the bridegroom's
dwelling: and that this is shown by the words of Sichem to Jacob
and his sons (Gn. 34:12): "Raise the dowry, and ask gifts," and from
Ex. 22:16: "If a man seduce a virgin . . . and lie with her, he shall
endow her, and have her to wife." Hence the adornment bestowed by
Christ on the saints, when they are brought into the abode of glory,

is called a dowry. But this is clearly contrary to what jurists say, to
whom it belongs to treat of these matters. For they say that a dowry,
properly speaking, is a donation on the part of the wife made to
those who are on the part of the husband, in view of the marriage
burden which the husband has to bear; while that which the
bridegroom gives the bride is called "a donation in view of
marriage." In this sense dowry is taken (3 Kgs. 9:16) where it is
stated that "Pharoa, the king of Egypt, took Gezer . . . and gave it for
a dowry to his daughter, Solomon's wife." Nor do the authorities
quoted prove anything to the contrary. For although it is customary
for a dowry to be given by the maiden's parents, it happens
sometimes that the bridegroom or his father gives the dowry instead
of the bride's father; and this happens in two ways: either by reason
of his very great love for the bride as in the case of Sichem's father
Hemor, who on account of his son's great love for the maiden
wished to give the dowry which he had a right to receive; or as a
punishment on the bridegroom, that he should out of his own
possessions give a dowry to the virgin seduced by him, whereas he
should have received it from the girl's father. In this sense Moses
speaks in the passage quoted above. Wherefore in the opinion of
others we should hold that in carnal marriage a dowry, properly
speaking, is that which is given by those on the wife's side to those
on the husband's side, for the bearing of the marriage burden, as
stated above. Yet the difficulty remains how this signification can be
adapted to the case in point, since the heavenly adornments are
given to the spiritual spouse by the Father of the Bridegroom. This
shall be made clear by replying to the objections.
Reply to Objection 1: Although in carnal marriage the dowry is given
to the bridegroom for his use, yet the ownership and control belong
to the bride: which is evident by the fact that if the marriage be
dissolved, the dowry reverts to the bride according to law (Cap.
1,2,3, De donat. inter virum et uxorem). Thus also in spiritual
marriage, the very adornments bestowed on the spiritual bride,
namely the Church in her members, belong indeed to the
Bridegroom, in so far as they conduce to His glory and honor, yet to
the bride as adorned thereby.
Reply to Objection 2: The Father of the Bridegroom, that is of Christ,
is the Person of the Father alone: while the Father of the bride is the
whole Trinity, since that which is effected in creatures belongs to the
whole Trinity. Hence in spiritual marriage these endowments,
properly speaking, are given by the Father of the bride rather than by