he knows for the first time that a thing is good for him, though he did
not know it before; hence we take counsel in order to know what is
good for us. Now it has already been shown that both the substance
of God and His knowledge are entirely unchangeable (Question 9,
Article 1; Question 14, Article 15). Therefore His will must be entirely
unchangeable.
Reply to Objection 1: These words of the Lord are to be understood
metaphorically, and according to the likeness of our nature. For
when we repent, we destroy what we have made; although we may
even do so without change of will; as, when a man wills to make a
thing, at the same time intending to destroy it later. Therefore God is
said to have repented, by way of comparison with our mode of
acting, in so far as by the deluge He destroyed from the face of the
earth man whom He had made.
Reply to Objection 2: The will of God, as it is the first and universal
cause, does not exclude intermediate causes that have power to
produce certain effects. Since however all intermediate causes are
inferior in power to the first cause, there are many things in the
divine power, knowledge and will that are not included in the order of
inferior causes. Thus in the case of the raising of Lazarus, one who
looked only on inferior causes might have said: "Lazarus will not rise
again," but looking at the divine first cause might have said:
"Lazarus will rise again." And God wills both: that is, that in the
order of the inferior cause a thing shall happen; but that in the order
of the higher cause it shall not happen; or He may will conversely.
We may say, then, that God sometimes declares that a thing shall
happen according as it falls under the order of inferior causes, as of
nature, or merit, which yet does not happen as not being in the
designs of the divine and higher cause. Thus He foretold to
Ezechias: "Take order with thy house, for thou shalt die, and not
live" (Is. 38:1). Yet this did not take place, since from eternity it was
otherwise disposed in the divine knowledge and will, which is
unchangeable. Hence Gregory says (Moral. xvi, 5): "The sentence of
God changes, but not His counsel"---that is to say, the counsel of His
will. When therefore He says, "I also will repent," His words must be
understood metaphorically. For men seem to repent, when they do
not fulfill what they have threatened.
Reply to Objection 3: It does not follow from this argument that God
has a will that changes, but that He sometimes wills that things
should change.

Reply to Objection 4: Although God's willing a thing is not by
absolute necessity, yet it is necessary by supposition, on account of
the unchangeableness of the divine will, as has been said above
(Article 3).

### ARTICLE 8. Whether the will of God imposes necessity on the

things willed?
Objection 1: It seems that the will of God imposes necessity on the
things willed. For Augustine says (Enchiridion 103): "No one is
saved, except whom God has willed to be saved. He must therefore
be asked to will it; for if He wills it, it must necessarily be."
Objection 2: Further, every cause that cannot be hindered, produces
its effect necessarily, because, as the Philosopher says (Phys. ii, 84)
"Nature always works in the same way, if there is nothing to hinder
it." But the will of God cannot be hindered. For the Apostle says (Rm.
9:19): "Who resisteth His will?" Therefore the will of God imposes
necessity on the things willed.
Objection 3: Further, whatever is necessary by its antecedent cause
is necessary absolutely; it is thus necessary that animals should die,
being compounded of contrary elements. Now things created by God
are related to the divine will as to an antecedent cause, whereby they
have necessity. For the conditional statement is true that if God wills
a thing, it comes to pass; and every true conditional statement is
necessary. It follows therefore that all that God wills is necessary
absolutely.
On the contrary, All good things that exist God wills to be. If
therefore His will imposes necessity on things willed, it follows that
all good happens of necessity; and thus there is an end of free will,
counsel, and all other such things.
I answer that, The divine will imposes necessity on some things
willed but not on all. The reason of this some have chosen to assign
to intermediate causes, holding that what God produces by
necessary causes is necessary; and what He produces by
contingent causes contingent.
This does not seem to be a sufficient explanation, for two reasons.
First, because the effect of a first cause is contingent on account of
the secondary cause, from the fact that the effect of the first cause is
hindered by deficiency in the second cause, as the sun's power is
hindered by a defect in the plant. But no defect of a secondary cause
can hinder God's will from producing its effect. Secondly, because if