THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.53, C.3.

would His Resurrection be true. But to establish the truth of Christ's
death, it was enough for His rising to be deferred until the third day,
for within that time some signs of life always appear in one who
appears to be dead whereas he is alive.
Furthermore, by His rising on the third day, the perfection of the
number "three" is commended, which is "the number of everything,"
as having "beginning, middle, and end," as is said in De Coelo i.
Again in the mystical sense we are taught that Christ by "His one
death" (i.e. of the body) which was light, by reason of His
righteousness, "destroyed our two deaths" (i.e. of soul and body),
which are as darkness on account of sin; consequently, He remained
in death for one day and two nights, as Augustine observes (De Trin.
iv).
And thereby is also signified that a third epoch began with the
Resurrection: for the first was before the Law; the second under the
Law; and the third under grace. Moreover the third state of the saints
began with the Resurrection of Christ: for, the first was under figures
of the Law; the second under the truth of faith; while the third will be
in the eternity of glory, which Christ inaugurated by rising again.
Reply to Objection 1: The head and members are likened in nature,
but not in power; because the power of the head is more excellent
than that of the members. Accordingly, to show forth the excellence
of Christ's power, it was fitting that He should rise on the third day,
while the resurrection of the rest is put off until the end of the world.
Reply to Objection 2: Detention implies a certain compulsion. But
Christ was not held fast by any necessity of death, but was "free
among the dead": and therefore He abode a while in death, not as
one held fast, but of His own will, just so long as He deemed
necessary for the instruction of our faith. And a task is said to be
done "at once" which is performed within a short space of time.
Reply to Objection 3: As stated above (Question 51, Article 4, ad 1,2),
Christ rose early when the day was beginning to dawn, to denote
that by His Resurrection He brought us to the light of glory; just as
He died when the day was drawing to its close, and nearing to
darkness, in order to signify that by His death He would destroy the
darkness of sin and its punishment. Nevertheless He is said to have
risen on the third day, taking day as a natural day which contains

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.53, C.3.

twenty-four hours. And as Augustine says (De Trin. iv): "The night
until the dawn, when the Lord's Resurrection was proclaimed,
belongs to the third day. Because God, who made the light to shine
forth from darkness, in order that by the grace of the New Testament
and partaking of Christ's rising we might hear this---'once ye were
darkness, but now light in the Lord'---insinuates in a measure to us
that day draws its origin from night: for, as the first days are
computed from light to darkness on account of man's coming fall, so
these days are reckoned from darkness to light owing to man's
restoration." And so it is evident that even if He had risen at
midnight, He could be said to have risen on the third day, taking it as
a natural day. But now that He rose early, it can be affirmed that He
rose on the third day, even taking the artificial day which is caused
by the sun's presence, because the sun had already begun to
brighten the sky. Hence it is written (Mk. 16:2) that "the women come
to the sepulchre, the sun being now risen"; which is not contrary to
John's statement "when it was yet dark," as Augustine says (De
Cons. Evang. iii), "because, as the day advances the more the light
rises, the more are the remaining shadows dispelled." But when
Mark says "'the sun being now risen,' it is not to be taken as if the
sun were already apparent over the horizon, but as coming presently
into those parts."