SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.105, C.3.

wherefore on the part of the giver the favor may be greater on two
counts. First, owing to the quantity of the thing given: and in this
way the innocent owes greater thanksgiving, because he receives a
greater gift from God, also, absolutely speaking, a more continuous
gift, other things being equal. Secondly, a favor may be said to be
greater, because it is given more gratuitously; and in this sense the
penitent is more bound to give thanks than the innocent, because
what he receives from God is more gratuitously given: since,
whereas he was deserving of punishment, he has received grace.
Wherefore, although the gift bestowed on the innocent is, considered
absolutely, greater, yet the gift bestowed on the penitent is greater in
relation to him: even as a small gift bestowed on a poor man is
greater to him than a great gift is to a rich man. And since actions
are about singulars, in matters of action, we have to take note of
what is such here and now, rather than of what is such absolutely, as
the Philosopher observes (Ethic. iii) in treating of the voluntary and
the involuntary.
This suffices for the Replies to the Objections.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.105, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether a man is bound to give thanks to every

benefactor?
Objection 1: It seems that the a man is not bound to give thanks to
every benefactor. For a man may benefit himself just as he may harm
himself, according to Ecclus. 14:5, "He that is evil to himself, to
whom will he be good?" But a man cannot thank himself, since
thanksgiving seems to pass from one person to another. Therefore
thanksgiving is not due to every benefactor.
Objection 2: Further, gratitude is a repayment of an act of grace. But
some favors are granted without grace, and are rudely, slowly and
grudgingly given. Therefore gratitude is not always due to a
benefactor.
Objection 3: Further, no thanks are due to one who works for his
own profit. But sometimes people bestow favors for their own profit.
Therefore thanks are not due to them.
Objection 4: Further, no thanks are due to a slave, for all that he is
belongs to his master. Yet sometimes a slave does a good turn to his
master. Therefore gratitude is not due to every benefactor .
Objection 5: Further, no one is bound to do what he cannot do
equitably and advantageously. Now it happens at times that the
benefactor is very well off, and it would be of no advantage to him to
be repaid for a favor he has bestowed. Again it happens sometimes
that the benefactor from being virtuous has become wicked, so that
it would not seem equitable to repay him. Also the recipient of a
favor may be a poor man, and is quite unable to repay. Therefore
seemingly a man is not always bound to repayment for favors
received.
Objection 6: Further, no one is bound to do for another what is
inexpedient and hurtful to him. Now sometimes it happens that
repayment of a favor would be hurtful or useless to the person
repaid. Therefore favors are not always to be repaid by gratitude.
On the contrary, It is written (1 Thess. 5:18): "In all things give
thanks."