rather the occasion of greater confidence: what shall be able to harm the
temperate man? There is nothing, even should he have the whole world in arms
against him. But, some one may say, in their case God stood beside them, and
plucked them out of the flame. Certainly He did; and if you will play your part to
the best of your power, the help which God supplies will assuredly follow.
17. Nevertheless the reason why I admire those youths, and pronounce
them blessed, and enviable, is not because they tramped on the flame, and
vanquished the force of the fire: but because they were bound, and cast into the
furnace, and delivered to the fire for the sake of true doctrine. For this it was
which constituted the completeness of their triumph, and the wreath of victory
was placed on their brows as soon as they were cast into the furnace and before
the issue of events it began to be weaved for them from the moment that they
uttered those words which they spoke with much boldness and freedom of
speech to the king when they were brought into his presence. "We have no need
to answer you concerning this thing: for our God in Heaven whom we serve is
able to rescue us out of the burning fiery furnace: and He will deliver us out of
your hands, O King. But if not, be it known unto you, O King, that we will not
serve your Gods nor worship the golden image which you have set up."
[Daniel 3:16-18] After the utterance of these words I proclaimed them
conquerors; after these words having grasped the prize of victory, they hastened
on to the glorious crown of martyrdom, following up the confession which they
made through their words with the confession made through their deeds. But if
when they had been cast into it, the fire had respect for their bodies, and undid
their bonds, and suffered them to go down into it without fear, and forgot its
natural force, so that the furnace of fire became as a fountain of cool water, this
marvel was the effect of God's grace and of the divine wonder-working power.
Yet the heroes themselves even before these things took place, as soon as they
set foot in the flames had erected their trophy, and won their victory, and put on
their crown, and had been proclaimed conquerors both in Heaven and on earth,
and so far as they were concerned nothing was wanting for their renown. What

then would you have to say to these things? Have you been driven into exile, and
expelled from your country? Behold so also were they. Have you suffered
captivity, and become the servant of barbarian masters. Well! This also you will
find befell these men. But you have no one present there to regulate your state
nor to advise or instruct you? Well! Of attention of this kind these men were
destitute. Or you have been bound, burned, put to death? For you can not tell me
of anything more painful than these things. Yet lo! These men having gone
through them all, were made more glorious by each one of them, yea more
exceedingly illustrious, and increased the store of their treasures in Heaven. And
the Jews indeed who had both temple, and altar, and ark and cherubim, and
mercy-seat, and veil, and an infinite multitude of priests, and daily services, and
morning and evening sacrifices, and continually heard the voices of the prophets,
both living and departed, sounding in their ears, and carried about with them the
recollection of the wonders which were done in Egypt, and in the wilderness,
and all the rest, and turned the story of these things over in their hands, and had
them inscribed upon their door posts and enjoyed the benefit at that time of
much supernatural power and every other kind of help were yet no wise profited,
but rather damaged, having set up idols in the temple itself, and having
sacrificed their sons and daughters under trees, and in almost every part of the
country in Palestine having offered those unlawful and accursed sacrifices, and
perpetrated countless other deeds yet more monstrous. But these men although in
the midst of a barbarous and hostile land, having their occupation in a tyrant's
house, deprived of all that care of which I have been speaking, led away to
execution, and subjected to burning, not only suffered no harm there from small
or great, but became the more illustrious. Knowing then these things, and
collecting instances of the like kind from the inspired divine Scriptures (for it is
possible to find many such examples in the case of various other persons) we
deem that neither a difficulty arising from seasons or events, nor compulsion and
force, nor the arbitrary authority of potentates furnish a sufficient excuse for us
when we transgress. I will now conclude my discourse by repeating what I said