that even an enemy should prophesy this. This might draw over others also. For
in respect of his will, matters fell out contrariwise, since, when He died, the
faithful were on this account delivered from the punishment to come. What
means, "That He might gather together those near and those afar off" [John
11:52]? He made them one Body. The dweller in Rome deems the Indians a
member of himself. What is equal to this "gathering together"? And the Head of
all is Christ.

John 11:53
"From that day forth the Jews took counsel to put Him to death."
And, in truth, had sought to do so before; for the Evangelist says,
"Therefore the Jews sought to kill Him" [John 5:18]; and, "Why do you seek to
kill Me?" [John 7:19] But then they only sought, now they ratified their
determination, and treated the action as their business.

John 11:54
"But Jesus walked no more openly in Jewry."
2. Again He saves Himself in a human manner, and this He does
continually. But I have mentioned the reason for which He often departed and
withdrew. And at this time He dwelt in Ephratah, near the wilderness, and there
He tarried with His disciples. How do you think that those disciples were
confounded when they beheld Him saving Himself after the manner of a man?
After this no man followed Him. For since the Feast was near, all were running
to Jerusalem; but they, at a time when all others were rejoicing and holding
solemn assembly, hide themselves, and are in danger. Yet still they tarried with
Him. For they hid themselves in Galilee, at the time of the Passover and the
Feast of Tabernacles; and after this again during the Feast, they only of all were
with their Master in flight and concealment, manifesting their good will to Him.
Hence Luke records that He said, "I abode with you in temptations"; and this He
said, showing that they were strengthened by His influence.

John 11:55
"And many went up from the country to purify themselves."

John 11:57
"And the High Priests and Pharisees had commanded that they should lay hands
on Him."
A marvelous purification, with a murderous will, with homicidal intentions,
and bloodstained hands!

John 11:56
"And they said, Think ye that he will not come to the feast?"
By means of the Passover they plotted against Him, and made the time of
feasting a time of murder, that is, He there would fall into their hands, because
the season summoned Him. What impiety! When they needed greater
carefulness, and to forgive those who had been taken for the worst offenses, then
they attempted to ensnare One who had done no wrong. Yet by acting thus they
had already not only profited nothing, but become ridiculous. For this end
coming among them continually He escapes, and restrains them when they take
counsel to kill Him, and makes them to be in perplexity, desiring to prick them
by the display of His power; that when they took Him, they might know that
what had been done was done, not by their power, but by His permission. For
not even at that time could they take Him, and this though Bethany was near;
and when they did take Him, He cast them backwards.