"But we were gentle," he says; we exhibited nothing that was offensive or
troublesome, nothing displeasing, or boastful. And the expression "in the midst
of you," is as if one should say, we were as one of you, not taking the higher lot.
"As when a nurse cherishes her own children." So ought the teacher to be. Does
the nurse flatter that she may obtain glory? Does she ask money of her little
children? Is she offensive or burdensome to them? Are they not more indulgent
to them than mothers? Here he shows his affection. "Even so, being
affectionately desirous of you," he says, we are so bound to you, he says, and we
not only take nothing of you, but if it be necessary even to impart to you our
souls, we should not have refused. Tell me, then, is this of a human view? And
who is so foolish as to say this? "We were well pleased to impart to you," he
says, "not the Gospel of God only, but also our own souls." So that this is greater
than the other. And what is the gain? For from the Gospel is gain, but to give our
souls, is with respect to difficulty a greater thing than that. For merely to preach
is not the same thing as to give the soul. For that indeed is more precious, but the
latter is a matter of more difficulty. We were willing, he says, if it were possible,
even to spend our souls upon you. And this we should have been willing to do;
for if we had not been willing, we should not have endured the necessity. Since
then he praised, and does praise, on this account he says, that, not seeking
money, nor flattering you, nor desiring glory, do we do this. For observe; they
had contended much, and so ought to be praised and admired even
extraordinarily, that they might be more firm; the praise was suspicious. On this
account he says all these things, by way of repelling the suspicion. And he also
mentions the dangers. And again, that he may not be thought to speak of the
dangers on this account, as if laboring for them, and claiming to be honored by
them, therefore again, as he had to mention the dangers, he added, "Because you
had become very dear to us"; we would willingly have given our souls for you,
because we were vehemently attached to you. The Gospel indeed we proclaim,
because God commanded it; but so much do we love you, that, if it were
possible, we would have given even our souls.

He who loves, ought so to love, that if he were asked even for his soul, and
it were possible, he would not refuse it. I do not say "if he were asked," but so
that he would even run to present him with the gift. For nothing, nothing can be
sweeter than such love; nothing will fall out there that is grievous. Truly "a
faithful friend is the medicine of life." [Sirach 6:16] Truly "a faithful friend is a
strong defense." [Sirach 6:14] For what will not a genuine friend perform? What
pleasure will he not afford? What benefit? What security? Though you should
name infinite treasures, none of them is comparable to a genuine friend. And
first let us speak of the great delight of friendship itself. A friend rejoices at
seeing his friend, and expands with joy. He is knit to him with an union of soul
that affords unspeakable pleasure. And if he only calls him to remembrance, he
is roused in mind, and transported.
I speak of genuine friends, men of one soul, who would even die for each
other, who love fervently. Do not, thinking of those who barely love, who are
table-companions, mere nominal friends, suppose that my discourse is refuted. If
any one has a friend such as I speak of, he will acknowledge the truth of my
words. He, though he sees his friend every day, is not satiated. For him he prays
for the same things as for himself. I know one, who calling upon holy men in
behalf of his friend, besought them to pray first for him, and then for himself. So
dear a thing is a good friend, that times and places are loved on his account. For
as bodies that are luminous spread their radiance to the neighboring places, so
also friends leave a grace of their own in the places to which they have come.
And oftentimes in the absence of friends, as we have stood on those places, we
have wept, and remembering the days which we passed together, have sighed. It
is not possible to represent by speech, how great a pleasure the intercourse with
friends affords. But those only know, who have experience. From a friend we
may both ask a favor, and receive one without suspicion. When they enjoin
anything upon us, then we feel indebted to them; but when they are slow to do
this, then we are sorrowful. We have nothing which is not theirs. Often despising
all things here, on their account we are not willing to depart hence; and they are