On the contrary, Dionysius says in his Mystical Theology, speaking to Timothy: "O beloved
Timothy, in mystic contemplation abandon the senses." But the imagination has to do only with
the sensible, for it is a movement produced by the sense in act, as the De Anima says. Therefore,
since the considerations of divine things are eminently mystical, we should not have recourse to
images in them.

Moreover, in the procedure of any science we should avoid what leads to error in it. But, as
Augustine says, the principal error regarding divine things is the mistake of those who try
transfer to them what they know of the corporeal world. Therefore, since the imagination has to
do only with the corporeal, it seems that in divine science we should not go to images.

Moreover, as is clear from Boethius, a lower power does not extend to that which is proper to a

higher power. But it belongs to an intellect and to an intelligence to know the divine and the
spiritual, as is sid in the De Spiritu et Anima. Therefore, since, as is said in the same work,
imagination is below intelligence and intellect, it seems that in the domain of the divine and the
spiritual we should no go to the imagination.

Reply: In all knowledge two factors must be taken into account: the beginning and the end.
Knowledge begins with apprehension but it ends with judgment, for it is there that knowledge is
completed.

Now all our knowledge begins in the senses; from sense perception results the apprehension of
the imagination (which is a movement arising from sensory knowledge, as the Philosopher
says), and from it in turn springs our intellectual apprehension, for images are like objects to the
intellectual soul, as is clear in the De Anima.

But knowledge does not always terminate in the same way. Sometimes it terminates in the
senses, sometimes in the imagination, and sometimes in the intellect alone. In some cases the
properties and accidents of a thing disclosed by the senses adequately reveal its nature, and then
the intellect's judgment of that nature must conform to what the senses reveal about it. All natural
things, which are bound up with sensible matter, are of this kind. So the terminus of knowledge
in natural science must be in the senses, with the result that we judge of natural beings as the
senses manifest them, as is evident in the De Caelo et Mundo. Accordingly, the man who
neglects the senses when dealing with natural things falls into error. By natural things I mean
those that are bound up with sensible matter and motion both in existence and in thought.

Our judgment about some things, however, does not depend upon what the sense perceives,
because even though they exist in sensible matter they abstract from it when their essences are
defined, and we judge of anything chiefly according to the definition of its essence. But because
they do not abstract from every kind of matter when their essences are defined but only from
sensible matter, and because an object for the imagination remains after sensible characteristics
have been set aside, we must judge about such things according to what the imagination reveals.
Now the objects of mathematics are of this kind. Accordingly, the knowledge we have through
judgment in mathematics must terminate in the imagination and not in the senses, because
mathematical judgment goes beyond sensory perception. Thus, the judgment about a
mathematical line is not always the same as that about a sensible line. For example, that a straight
line touches a sphere at only one point is true of an abstract straight line but not of a straight line
in matter, as is said in the De Anima.