THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.16, C.11.

instance were one to say: "Christ as 'this' Man is a creature."
Reply to Objection 1: Although Christ is not the human nature, He
has human nature. Now the word "creature" is naturally predicated
not only of abstract, but also of concrete things; since we say that
"manhood is a creature" and that "man is a creature."
Reply to Objection 2: Man as placed in the subject refers to the
suppositum---and as placed in the reduplication refers to the nature,
as was stated above. And because the nature is created and the
suppositum uncreated, therefore, although it is not granted that "this
man is a creature," yet it is granted that "Christ as Man is a
creature."
Reply to Objection 3: It belongs to every man who is a suppositum of
human nature alone to have his being only in human nature. Hence
of every such suppositum it follows that if it is a creature as man, it
is a creature simply. But Christ is a suppositum not merely of human
nature, but also of the Divine Nature, in which He has an uncreated
being. Hence it does not follow that, if He is a creature as Man, He is
a creature simply.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.16, C.12.

### ARTICLE 11. Whether this is true: "Christ as Man is God"?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ, as Man, is God. For Christ is
God by the grace of union. But Christ, as Man, has the grace of
union. Therefore Christ as Man is God.
Objection 2: Further, to forgive sins is proper to God, according to
Is. 43:25: "I am He that blot out thy iniquities for My own sake." But
Christ as Man forgives sin, according to Mt. 9:6: "But that you may
know that the Son of Man hath power on earth to forgive sins," etc.
Therefore Christ as Man is God.
Objection 3: Further, Christ is not Man in common, but is this
particular Man. Now Christ, as this Man, is God, since by "this Man"
we signify the eternal suppositum which is God naturally. Therefore
Christ as Man is God.
On the contrary, Whatever belongs to Christ as Man belongs to every
man. Now, if Christ as Man is God, it follows that every man is God--which is clearly false.
I answer that, This term "man" when placed in the reduplication may
be taken in two ways. First as referring to the nature; and in this way
it is not true that Christ as Man is God, because the human nature is
distinct from the Divine by a difference of nature. Secondly it may be
taken as referring to the suppositum; and in this way, since the
suppositum of the human nature in Christ is the Person of the Son of
God, to Whom it essentially belongs to be God, it is true that Christ,
as Man, is God. Nevertheless because the term placed in the
reduplication signifies the nature rather than the suppositum, as
stated above (Article 10), hence this is to be denied rather than
granted: "Christ as Man is God."
Reply to Objection 1: It is not with regard to the same, that a thing
moves towards, and that it is, something; for to move belongs to a
thing because of its matter or subject---and to be in act belongs to it
because of its form. So too it is not with regard to the same, that it
belongs to Christ to be ordained to be God by the grace of union,
and to be God. For the first belongs to Him in His human nature, and
the second, in His Divine Nature. Hence this is true: "Christ as Man
has the grace of union"; yet not this: "Christ as Man is God."