THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.44, C.4.

principally by changing its lower powers. Hence Jerome,
commenting on Mt. 9:9, "He rose up and followed Him," says: "Such
was the splendor and majesty of His hidden Godhead, which shone
forth even in His human countenance, that those who gazed on it
were drawn to Him at first sight." And on Mt. 21:12, "(Jesus) cast out
all them that sold and bought," the same Jerome says: "Of all the
signs worked by our Lord, this seems to me the most wondrous--that one man, at that time despised, could, with the blows of one
scourge, cast out such a multitude. For a fiery and heavenly light
flashed from His eyes, and the majesty of His Godhead shone in His
countenance." And Origen says on Jn. 2:15 that "this was a greater
miracle than when He changed water into wine, for there He shows
His power over inanimate matter, whereas here He tames the minds
of thousands of men." Again, on Jn. 18:6, "They went backward and
fell to the ground," Augustine says: "Though that crowd was fierce
in hate and terrible with arms, yet did that one word . . . without any
weapon, smite them through, drive them back, lay them prostrate:
for God lay hidden in that flesh." Moreover, to this must be referred
what Luke says (4:30) ---namely, that Jesus, "passing through the
midst of them, went His way," on which Chrysostom observes (Hom.
xlviii in Joan.): "That He stood in the midst of those who were lying
in wait for Him, and was not seized by them, shows the power of His
Godhead"; and, again, that which is written Jn. 8:59, "Jesus hid
Himself and went out of the Temple," on which Theophylact says:
"He did not hide Himself in a corner of the Temple, as if afraid, or
take shelter behind a wall or pillar; but by His heavenly power
making Himself invisible to those who were threatening Him, He
passed through the midst of them."
From all these instances it is clear that Christ, when He willed,
changed the minds of men by His Divine power, not only by the
bestowal of righteousness and the infusion of wisdom, which
pertains to the end of miracles, but also by outwardly drawing men
to Himself, or by terrifying or stupefying them, which pertains to the
miraculous itself.
Reply to Objection 2: Christ came to save the world, not only by
Divine power, but also through the mystery of His Incarnation.
Consequently in healing the sick He frequently not only made use of
His Divine power, healing by way of command, but also by applying
something pertaining to His human nature. Hence on Lk. 4:40, "He,
laying His hands on every one of them, healed them," Cyril says:
"Although, as God, He might, by one word, have driven out all

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.44, C.4.

diseases, yet He touched them, showing that His own flesh was
endowed with a healing virtue." And on Mk. 8:23, "Spitting upon his
eyes, laying His hands on him," etc., Chrysostom [Victor of Antioch]
says: "He spat and laid His hands upon the blind man, wishing to
show that His Divine word, accompanied by His operation, works
wonders: for the hand signifies operation; the spittle signifies the
word which proceeds from the mouth." Again, on Jn. 9:6, "He made
clay of the spittle, and spread the clay upon the eyes of the blind
man," Augustine says: "Of His spittle He made clay---because 'the
Word was made flesh.'" Or, again, as Chrysostom says, to signify
that it was He who made man of "the slime of the earth."
It is furthermore to be observed concerning Christ's miracles that
generally what He did was most perfect. Hence on Jn. 2:10, "Every
man at first setteth forth good wine," Chrysostom says: "Christ's
miracles are such as to far surpass the works of nature in splendor
and usefulness." Likewise in an instant He conferred perfect health
on the sick. Hence on Mt. 8:15, "She arose and ministered to them,"
Jerome says: "Health restored by our Lord returns wholly and
instantly."
There was, however, special reason for the contrary happening in
the case of the man born blind, and this was his want of faith, as
Chrysostom [Victor of Antioch] says. Or as Bede observes on Mk.
8:23: "Whom He might have healed wholly and instantly by a single
word, He heals little by little, to show the extent of human blindness,
which hardly, and that only by degrees, can come back to the light:
and to point out that each step forward in the way of perfection is
due to the help of His grace."
Reply to Objection 3: As stated above (Question 43, Article 2), Christ
worked miracles by Divine power. Now "the works of God are
perfect" (Dt. 32:4). But nothing is perfect except it attain its end. Now
the end of the outward healing worked by Christ is the healing of the
soul. Consequently it was not fitting that Christ should heal a man's
body without healing his soul. Wherefore on Jn. 7:23, "I have healed
the whole man on a Sabbath day," Augustine says: "Because he was
cured, so as to be whole in body; he believed, so as to be whole in
soul." To the man sick of the palsy it is said specially, "Thy sins are
forgiven thee," because, as Jerome observes on Mt. 9:5,6: "We are
hereby given to understand that ailments of the body are frequently
due to sin: for which reason, perhaps, first are his sins forgiven, that
the cause of the ailment being removed, health may return."