though he were an enemy, you would count him thenceforward among the first
of your friends: and do you reckon him that gladdens the countenance of Christ's
Body, that is, the Church, and is your friend, to be yet an enemy? How else then
couldest thou show war against Christ? For this cause, even if a man do
miracles, have celibacy to show, and fasting, and lying on the bare ground, and
does by this virtue advance even to the angels, yet shall he be most accursed of
all, while he has this defect, and shall be a greater breaker of the Law than the
adulterer, and the fornicator, and the robber, and the violator of supulchres. And,
that no one may condemn this language of hyperbole, I should be glad to put this
question to you. If any one had come with fire and mattock, and were destroying
and burning this House, and digging down this Altar, would not each one of
those here stone him with stones as accursed and a law-breaker? What then, if
one were to bring a flame yet more consuming than that fire, I mean envy, that
does not ruin the buildings of stone nor dig down an Altar of gold, but subverts
and scornfully mars what is far more precious than either walls or Altar, the
Teachers' building, what sufferance would he deserve? For let no one tell me,
that he has often endeavored and been unable: for it is from the spirit that the
actions are judged. For Saul did kill David, even though he did not hit him. [1
Samuel 19:10] Tell me, do you not perceive that you are plotting against the
sheep of Christ when you war with His Shepherd? Those sheep for whom also
Christ shed His Blood, and bade us both to do and to suffer all things? Do you
not remind yourself that your Master sought your glory and not His own, but you
are seeking not that of your Master but your own? And yet if you saw His then
you would have obtained your own also. But by seeking your own before His,
you will not ever gain even this.
What then will be the remedy? Let us all join in prayer, and let us lift up our
voice with one accord in their behalf as for those possessed, for indeed these are
more wretched than they, inasmuch as their madness is of choice. For this
affliction needs prayer and much entreaty. For if he that loves not his brother,
even though he empty out his money, yea, and have the glory of martyrdom, is

no whit advantaged; consider what punishment the man deserves who even wars
with him that has not wronged him in anything; he is even worse than the
Gentiles: for if to love them that love us does not let us have any advantage over
them, in what grade shall he be placed, tell me, that envies them that love him?
For envying is even worse than warring; since he that wars, when the cause of
the war is at an end, puts an end to his hatred also: but the grudger would never
become a friend. And the one shows an open kind of battle, the other a covert:
and the one often has a reasonable cause to assign for the war, the other, nothing
else but madness, and a Satanic spirit. To what then is one to compare a soul of
this kind? To what viper? To what asp? To what canker-worm? To what
scorpion? Since there is nothing so accursed or so pernicious as a soul of this
sort. For it is this, it is this, that has subverted the Churches, this that has
gendered the heresies, this it was that armed a brother's hand, and made his right
hand to be dipped in the blood of the righteous, and plucked away the laws of
nature, and set open the gates for death, and brought that curse into action, and
suffered not that wretch to call to mind either the birth-pangs, or his parents, or
anything else, but made him so furious, and led him to such a pitch of phrenzy,
that even when God exhorted him and said, "Unto you shall be his recourse, and
you shall rule over him" [Genesis 4:7, Septuagint]; he did not even then give in.
Yet did He both forgive him the fault, and make his brother subject to him: but
his complaint is so incurable, that even if thousands of medicines are applied, it
keeps sloughing with its own corruption. For wherefore are you so vexed, you
most miserable of men? Is it because God has had honor shown Him? Nay, this
would show a Satanical spirit. Is it then because your brother outstrips you in
good name? As for that, it is open to you in turn to outstrip him. And so, if you
would be a conqueror, kill not, destroy not, but let him abide still, that the
material for the struggle may be preserved, and conquer him living. For in this
way your crown had been a glorious one; but by thus destroying you pass a
harder sentence of defeat upon yourself. But a grudging spirit has no sense of all
this. And what ground have you to covet glory in such solitude? For those were