behave thus. We too sit in an inn, waiting for our friends who travel the same
road; when we are all collected, then they shall know whom they insult. These
men then shall hang their heads; then they shall say, "This is he whom we" fools
"had in derision." [Wisdom 5:3]
4. With these two things then let us comfort ourselves, that we are not
insulted, for they know not who we are, and that, if we wish to obtain
satisfaction, they shall hereafter give us a most bitter one. But God forbid that
any should have a soul so cruel and inhuman. "What then if we be insulted by
our kinsmen? For this is the burdensome thing." Nay, this is the light thing.
"Why, pray?" Because we do not bear those whom we love when they insult us,
in the same way as we bear those whom we do not know. For instance, in
consoling those who have been injured, we often say, "It is a brother who has
injured you, bear it nobly; it is a father; it is an uncle." But if the name of
"father" and "brother" puts you to shame, much more if I name to you a
relationship more intimate than these; for we are not only brethren one to
another, but also members, and one body. Now if the name of brother shame
you, much more that of member. Have you not heard that Gentile proverb, which
says, that "it behooves to keep friends with their defects"? Have you not heard
Paul say, "Bear ye one another's burdens"? Do you see not lovers? For I am
compelled, since I cannot draw an instance from you, to bring my discourse to
that ground of argument. This also Paul does, thus saying, "Furthermore we have
had fathers in our flesh, which corrected us, and we gave them reverence."
[Hebrews 12:9] Or rather, that is more apt which he says to the Romans, "As you
have yielded your members servants to uncleanness and to iniquity unto iniquity,
even so now yield your members servants to righteousness." For this reason let
us confidently keep hold of the illustration. Now do you not observe lovers, what
miseries these suffer when inflamed with desire for harlots, cuffed, beaten, and
laughed at, enduring a harlot, who turns away from and insults them in ten
thousand ways; yet if they see but once anything sweet or gentle, all is well to do
with them, all former things are gone, all goes on with a fair wind, be it poverty,

be it sickness, be it anything else besides these. For they count their own life as
miserable or blessed, according as they may have her whom they love disposed
towards them. They know nothing of mortal honor or disgrace, but even if one
insult, they bear all easily through the great pleasure and delight which they
receive from her; and though she revile, though she spit in their face, they think,
when they are enduring this, that they are being pelted with roses. And what
wonder, if such are their feelings as to her person? For her very house they think
to be more splendid than any, though it be but of mud, though it be falling down.
But why speak I of walls? When they even see the places which they frequent in
the evening, they are excited. Allow me now for what follows to speak the word
of the Apostle. As he says, "As you have yielded your members servants to
uncleanness, so yield your members servants unto righteousness"; so in like
manner now I say, "as we have loved these women, let us love one another, and
we shall not think that we suffer anything terrible." And why say I, "one
another"? Let us so love God. Do ye shudder, when you hear that I require as
much love in the case of God, as we have shown towards a harlot? But I shudder
that we do not show even thus much. And, if you will, let us go on with the
argument, though what is said be very painful. The woman beloved promises her
lovers nothing good, but dishonor, shame, and insolence. For this is what the
waiting upon a harlot makes a man, ridiculous, shameful, dishonored. But God
promises us heaven, and the good things which are in heaven; He has made us
sons, and brethren of the Only-begotten, and has given you ten thousand things
while living, and when you die, resurrection, and promises that He will give us
such good things as it is not possible even to imagine, and makes us honored and
revered. Again, that woman compels her lovers to spend all their substance for
the pit and for destruction; but God bids us sow the heaven, and gives us an
hundred-fold, and eternal life. Again, she uses her lover like a slave, giving
commands more hardly than any tyrant; but God says, "I no longer call you
servants, but friends." [John 15:15]
5. Have ye seen the excess both of the evils here and the blessings there ?