THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.10, C.3.

not merely to such things as are in act at some time, but even to
such things as are in potentiality, and never have been nor ever will
be reduced to act. Now some of these are in the Divine power alone,
and not all of these does the soul of Christ know in the Word. For
this would be to comprehend all that God could do, which would be
to comprehend the Divine power, and, consequently, the Divine
Essence. For every power is known from the knowledge of all it can
do. Some, however, are not only in the power of God, but also in the
power of the creature; and all of these the soul of Christ knows in the
Word; for it comprehends in the Word the essence of every creature,
and, consequently, its power and virtue, and all things that are in the
power of the creature.
Reply to Objection 1: Arius and Eunomius understood this saying,
not of the knowledge of the soul, which they did not hold to be in
Christ, as was said above (Question 9, Article 1), but of the Divine
knowledge of the Son, Whom they held to be less than the Father as
regards knowledge. But this will not stand, since all things were
made by the Word of God, as is said Jn. 1:3, and, amongst other
things, all times were made by Him. Now He is not ignorant of
anything that was made by Him.
He is said, therefore, not to know the day and the hour of the
Judgment, for that He does not make it known, since, on being asked
by the apostles (Acts 1:7), He was unwilling to reveal it; and, on the
contrary, we read (Gn. 22:12): "Now I know that thou fearest God," i.
e. "Now I have made thee know." But the Father is said to know,
because He imparted this knowledge to the Son. Hence, by saying
but the Father, we are given to understand that the Son knows, not
merely in the Divine Nature, but also in the human, because, as
Chrysostom argues (Hom. lxxviii in Matth.), if it is given to Christ as
man to know how to judge---which is greater---much more is it given
to Him to know the less, viz. the time of Judgment. Origen, however
(in Matth. Tract. xxx), expounds it of His body, which is the Church,
which is ignorant of this time. Lastly, some say this is to be
understood of the adoptive, and not of the natural Son of God.
Reply to Objection 2: God knows His Essence so much the more
perfectly than the soul of Christ, as He comprehends it. And hence
He knows all things, not merely whatever are in act at any time,
which things He is said to know by knowledge of vision, but also
what ever He Himself can do, which He is said to know by simple
intelligence, as was shown in the FP, Question 14, Article 9.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.10, C.3.

Therefore the soul of Christ knows all things that God knows in
Himself by the knowledge of vision, but not all that God knows in
Himself by knowledge of simple intelligence; and thus in Himself
God knows many more things than the soul of Christ.
Reply to Objection 3: The extent of knowledge depends not merely
on the number of knowable things, but also on the clearness of the
knowledge. Therefore, although the knowledge of the soul of Christ
which He has in the Word is equal to the knowledge of vision as
regards the number of things known, nevertheless the knowledge of
God infinitely exceeds the knowledge of the soul of Christ in
clearness of cognition, since the uncreated light of the Divine
intellect infinitely exceeds any created light received by the soul of
Christ; although, absolutely speaking, the Divine knowledge exceeds
the knowledge of the soul of Christ, not only as regards the mode of
knowing, but also as regards the number of things known, as was
stated above.