decision, in selecting out of what is put before them; but from points which they
are themselves well aware of, they many times disparage that which the
uninstructed approve, and decide upon what they disparage: and horse-breakers
often do this with horses, and so the judges of precious stones, and workmen in
other arts: much more will the God that loves man, the infinite Wisdom, Who
alone has a clear knowledge of all things, not allow of man's guesses, but will
out of His own exact and unfailing Wisdom pass his sentence upon all men.
Hence it was that He chose the publican, the thief, and the harlot; but dishonored
priests, and elders, and rulers, and cast them out. And this one may see
happening in the martyrs' case also. Many accordingly of those who were utterly
cast aside, have in the time of trial been crowned. And, on the other hand, some
that have been held great ones by many have stumbled and fallen. Do not then
call the Creator to account, nor say, Why is it that one was crowned and another
punished? For He knows how to do these things with exactness. Whence also he
says, "Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated." That it was with justice, you
indeed know from the result: but Himself even before the result knew it clearly.
For it is not a mere exhibition of works that God searches after, but a nobleness
of choice and an obedient temper ([γνώμην εὐγνώμονα]) besides. For a man of
this kind, if he should ever sin through some surprise, will speedily recover
himself. And if he should even stay long haply in a state of vice, he will not be
overlooked, but God Who knows all things will speedily draw him out. And so
he that is herein corrupted, even if he seem to do some good things, will perish,
in that he does this with an ill intention. Hence even David, after committing
murder and adultery, since he did this as being carried away by surprise, and not
from habitual practice of wickedness, speedily washed it out. The Pharisee,
however, who had not perpetrated any such crime [Luke 18:11], but even had
good deeds besides to boast of, lost all by the bad spirit he had chosen.
Ver. 14. "What shall we say then? Is there unrighteousness with God? God
forbid."
Hence there is no such thing in the case of us and the Jews. And then he

goes on with another thing, a more clear than this. And of what sort is it?
Ver. 15. For he says to Moses, I will have mercy on whom I will have
mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I will have compassion.
Here again he adds force to the objection by dividing it in two and meeting
it, and starting another fresh difficulty. But to make what I have said clearer, one
must needs explain it. God, he means, said that "the elder shall serve the
younger," before the travail. What then? "Is God unrighteous?" By no means.
Now listen to what follows also. For in that case the virtue or the vice, might be
the decisive thing. But here there was one sin on which all the Jews joined, that
of the molten calf, and still some were punished, and some were not punished.
And this is why He says, "I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I
will have compassion on whom I will have compassion." [Exodus 33:19: observe
context] For it is not yours to know, O Moses, he means, which are deserving of
My love toward man, but leave this to Me. But if Moses had no right to know,
much less have we. And this is why he did not barely quote the passage, but also
called to our minds to whom it was said. For it is Moses, he means, that he is
speaking to, that at least by the dignity of the person he might make the objector
modest. Having then given a solution of the difficulties raised, he divides it in
two, by bringing forward another objection besides, as follows:
Ver. 16, 17. "So then it is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of
God that shows mercy. For the Scripture says unto Pharaoh, Even for this same
purpose have I raised you up, that I might show my power in you, and that my
name might be declared throughout all the earth."
As then in the one case, he means, some were saved and some were
punished, so here also. This man was reserved for this very purpose. And then he
again urges the objection.
Ver. 18, 19. "Therefore He has mercy on whom He will have mercy, and
whom He will He hardens. You will say then unto me, Why does he then find
fault? For who has resisted His will?"
See what pains he takes to embarrass the subject in every way. And the