the rest. He says therefore, Do ye by all means desire gifts? I show unto you a
way of gifts not merely excelling but far more excellent. Then he says, "Though
I speak with the tongues of Angels, and have not charity, I am nothing. And
though I have faith so as to remove mountains, and have not charity, I am
nothing." [1 Corinthians 13:1-2]
Have you seen the gift? Covet earnestly this gift. This is greater than raising
the dead. This is far better than all the rest. And that it is so, hear what Christ
Himself says, discoursing with His disciples, "By this shall all men know that
you are My disciples." [John 13:35] And showing how, He mentioned not the
miracles, but what? "If you have love one with another." And again He says to
the Father, "Hereby shall they know that You have sent Me, if they be one." [John
17:21] And He said to His disciples, "A new commandment I give to you, that
you love one another." [John 13:34] Such an one therefore is more venerable and
glorious than those who raise the dead; with reason. For that indeed is wholly of
God's grace, but this, of your own earnestness also. This is of one who is a
Christian indeed: this shows the disciple of Christ, the crucified, the man that has
nothing common with earth. Without this, not even martyrdom can profit.
And as a proof, see this plainly. The blessed Paul took two of the highest
virtues, or rather three; namely, those which consist in miracles, in knowledge, in
life. And without this the others, he said, are nothing. And I will say how these
are nothing. "Though I give my goods to feed the poor," he says, "and have not
charity, I am nothing." [1 Corinthians 13:3] For it is possible not to be charitable
even when one feeds the poor and exhausts one's means.
11. And indeed these things have been sufficiently declared by us, in the
place concerning Charity: and there we refer the readers. Meanwhile, as I was
saying, let us covet earnestly the Gift, let us love one another; and we shall need
nothing else for the perfect acquisition of virtue, but all will be easy to us
without toils and we shall do all perfectly with much diligence.
But see, even now, it is said, we love one another. For one man has two
friends, and another three. But this is not to love for God's sake, but for the sake

of being beloved. But to love for God's sake has not this as its principle of Love;
but such an one will be disposed towards all men as towards brethren; loving
those that are of the same faith as being true brothers; heretics and Heathen and
Jews, brothers indeed by nature, but vile and unprofitable—pitying and wearing
himself out and weeping for them. Herein we shall be like God if we love all
men, even our enemies; not, if we work miracles. For we regard even God with
admiration when He works wonders, yet much more, when He shows love
towards man, when He is long-suffering. If then even in God this is worthy of
much admiration, much more in men is it evident that this renders us admirable.
This then let us zealously seek after: and we shall be no way inferior to Paul
and Peter and those who have raised innumerable dead, though we may not be
able to drive away a fever. But without this [Love]; though we should work
greater miracles even than the Apostles themselves, though we should expose
ourselves to innumerable dangers for the faith: there will be to us no profit from
any. And these things it is not I that say, but he, the very nourisher of Charity,
knows these things. To him then let us be obedient; for thus we shall be able to
attain to the good things promised, of which may we all be made partakers, by
the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom to the Father with the Holy
Ghost, be the glory, now and for ever and world without end. Amen.