"For the irksome things, says He, that you will undergo are finished
together with the present life, since at least even this world itself shall come to
an end, but the good things which you shall enjoy remain immortal, as I have
often told you before." Thus having invigorated and roused their minds, by the
remembrance of that day, He sent them forth. For that day to them that live in
good works is to be desired, even as on the other hand to those in sin, it is
terrible as to the condemned.
But let us not fear only, and shudder, but let us change too, while there is
opportunity, and let us rise out of our wickedness, for we can, if we be willing.
For if before grace many did this, much more after grace.
3. For what grievous things are we enjoined? To cleave mountains asunder?
To fly into the air? Or to cross the Tuscan sea? By no means, but a way of life so
easy, as not so much as to want any instruments, but a soul and purpose only. For
what instruments had these apostles, who effected such things? Did they not go
about with one vestment and unshod? And they got the better of all.
For what is difficult of the injunctions? Have no enemy. Hate no man.
Speak ill of no man. Nay, the opposites of these things are the greater hardships.
But He said, you reply, Throw away your money. Is this then the grievous thing?
In the first place, He did not command, but advised it. Yet even if it were a
command, what is it grievous not to carry about burdens and unseasonable
cares?
But oh covetousness! All things have become money; for this cause all
things are turned upside down. If anyone declares another happy, he mentions
this; should he pronounce him wretched, hence is derived the description of
wretchedness. And all reckonings are made on this account, how such an one
gets rich, how such an one gets poor. Should it be military service, should it be
marriage, should it be a trade, should it be what you will that any man takes in
hand, he does not apply to what is proposed, until he see these riches are coming
in rapidly upon him. After this shall we not meet together and consult how we
shall drive away this pest? Shall we not regard with shame the good deeds of our

fathers? Of the three thousand, of the five thousand, who had all things
common?
What is the profit of this present life, when we do not use it for our future
gain? How long do ye not enslave the mammon that has enslaved you? How
long are you slaves of money? How long have ye no love for liberty, and do not
rend in pieces the bargains of covetousness? But while, if you should have
become slaves of men, you do all things, if any one should promise you liberty;
yet being captives of covetousness, you do not so much as consider how ye may
be delivered from this bitter bondage. And yet the one were nothing terrible, the
other is the most bitter tyranny.
Consider how great a price Christ paid for us. He shed His own blood; He
gave up Himself. But you, even after all this, are grown supine; and the most
grievous thing of all is, that you even take delight in the slavery, you luxuriate in
the dishonor, and that, from which you ought to flee, has become an object of
desire to you.
But since it is right not only to lament and to blame, but also to correct, let
us see from what cause this passion and this evil have become an object of desire
to you. Whence then, whence has this come to be an object of desire? Because,
you say, it makes me to be in honor and in security. In what kind of security, I
pray you? In the confidence, not to suffer hunger, nor cold, not to be harmed, not
to be despised. Will you then, if we promise you this security, refrain from being
rich? For if it is for this that riches are an object of desire, if it be in your power
to have security without these, what need have you of these any more? "And how
is it possible," you say, "for one who is not rich to attain to this?" Nay, how is it
possible (for I say the opposite thing) if one is rich? For it is necessary to flatter
many, both rulers and subjects, and to entreat countless numbers, and to be a
base slave, and to be in fear and trembling, and to regard with suspicion the eyes
of the envious, and to fear the tongues of false accusers, and the desires of other
covetous men. But poverty is not like this, but altogether the contrary. It is a
place of refuge and security, a calm harbor, a wrestling ground, and school of