They shall be inebriated by the plenty of thy house, and thou wilt make them drink of the
torrent of thy pleasure (Ps. xxxv, 9).
7. There is also a natural desire common to all things, in that they all desire selfpreservation, so far as possible; by the immoderation of which desire men are rendered
timid and spare themselves too much from labours. This desire also shall be perfectly
fulfilled when the Blessed attain to perfect everlasting duration, secure from all hurt,
according to the text: They shall not hunger nor thirst any more, neither shall the sun fall
upon them, nor any heat (Isa. xlix, 10; Apoc. vii, 16).
Thus it appears that by the vision of God subsistent intelligences gain true happiness, in
which every desire is wholly laid to rest, and in which there is abundant sufficiency of all
good things, which Aristotle considers a requisite of happiness. Nothing in this life
is so like this final and perfect happiness as the life of them who contemplate truth so far
as possible. For the contemplation of truth begins in this life, but will be consummated in
the life to come, whereas the life of action and the political life do not transcend the
bounds of this present.

## CHAPTER LXIV--That God governs things by His Providence
THE foregoing conclusions sufficiently show that God is the end of all things. Hence it
may be further gathered that by His providence He governs and rules all things. For
whatever things are referred to an end, are all subject to His management to whom
principally that end belongs, as appears in an army: for all the components of the army
and all their works are referred to one last end, the good of the general, which is victory,
and therefore it belongs to the general to govern the whole army. In like manner the art
which is concerned with the end gives commands and laws to the art which is
concerned with the means, as politics to the art of war, the art of war to the
management of cavalry, navigation to shipbuilding. Since therefore all things are
referred to an end, which is the divine goodness (Chapp.XVII,XVIII), God, to
whom that goodness principally belongs, -- as being His own substance, possessed,
understood, and loved, -- must have the chief control of all things.
5. Things that are distinct in their natures do not combine into one system, unless they
be bound up in one by one directing control (ab uno ordinante). But in the universe
there are things, having distinct and contrary natures, which nevertheless all combine in
one system, some things taking up the activities of other things, some things being
aided or even wrought by others. There must then be one ordainer and governor of the
universe.
8. Every agent that intends an end cares more for that which is nearer to the last end.
But the last end of the divine will is the divine goodness, and the nearest thing to that in
creation is the goodness of the order of the entire universe, that being the end to which
every particular good of this or that thing is referred, as the less perfect is referred to the
more perfect, and every part is for its whole. What therefore God most cares for in
creation is the order of the universe: He is therefore its controller.
Hence Holy Scripture ascribes the course of events to the divine command: Who giveth
command to the sun, and it riseth not, and encloseth the stars as under a seal (Job ix,
7): He hath given a command, and it shall not pass away (Ps. cxlviii, 6).