too when you pass judgment of your own opinion? Why, I shall be able to prove
the contrary, both from what He said, and from what He did. [See John 5:22] For
if you will not believe by the punishments that are to come, at least believe by
those that have happened already. For what have happened, and have come forth
into reality, surely are not threats and words. Who then was it that flooded the
whole world, and affected that baleful wreck, and the utter destruction of our
whole race! Who was it that after this hurled those thunders and lightnings upon
the land of Sodom? Who that drowned all Egypt in the sea? Who that consumed
the six hundred thousand men in the wilderness? Who that burnt up the
synagogue of Abiram? Who that bade the earth open her mouth for the company
of Core and Dathan, and swallow them up? Who that carried off the threescore
and ten thousand at one sweep in David's time? Shall I mention also those that
were punished individually! Cain, who was given up to a continual vengeance?
(the son of) Charmi, who was stoned with his whole family? Or him, that
suffered the same thing for gathering sticks on the sabbath? The forty children
who were consumed by those beasts, and obtained no pardon even on the score
of their age? And if you would see these same things even after the times of
grace, just consider what great suffering the Jews had, how the women ate their
children, some roasting them, and some consuming them in other ways: how
after being given up to irremediable famine, and wars varied and severe, they
threw all previous catastrophes into the shade by the exceeding greatness of their
own calamities. For that it was Christ Who did these things unto them, hear Him
declaring as much, both by parables, and clearly and explicitly. By parables, as
when He says, "But those that would not that I should reign over them, bring
hither and slay them" [Luke 19:27]; and by that of the vineyard, and that of the
marriage. But clearly and explicitly, as when He threatens that they shall fall by
the edge of the sword, and shall be led away captive into the nations, and there
shall be upon the earth "distress of nations with perplexity, at the roaring of the
sea and waves; men's hearts failing them for fear." (ib. 21:24, 25, 26.) "And
there shall be tribulation, such as there never was, no, nor ever shall be."

[Matthew 24:21] And what a punishment Ananias too and Sapphira suffered, for
the theft of a few pieces of money, you all know. Do you see not the daily
calamities also? Or have these too not taken place? Do you see not now men that
are pining with famine? Those that suffer elephantiasis, or are maimed in body?
Those that live in constant poverty, those that suffer countless irreparable evils?
Now then will it be reasonable for some to be punished, and some not? For if
God be not unjust (and unjust He is not), thou also wilt assuredly suffer
punishment, if you sin. But if because He is merciful He does not punish, then
ought not these either to have been punished. But now because of these words of
yours, God even here punishes many, that when you believe not the words of the
threatening, the deeds of vengeance ye may at least believe.
And since things of old do not affright you so much, by things which
happen in every generation, He corrects those that in every generation are
growing listless. And what is the reason, it may be said, why He does not punish
all here? That He may give the others an interval for repentance. Why then does
He not take vengeance upon all in the next world? It is lest many should
disbelieve in His providence. How many robbers are there who have been taken,
and how many that have left this life unpunished? Where is the mercy of God
then? It is my turn now to ask of you. For supposing no one at all had vengeance
taken upon him, then you might have taken refuge in this. But now that some are
punished, and some are not, though they be the worse sinners, how can it be
reasonable that there be not the same punishments for the same sins? How can
those punished appear to be else than wronged? What reason is there then why
all are not punished here? Hear His own defence for these things. For when
some had died by the falling of a tower on them: He said to those who raised a
question upon this, "Suppose ye that they were sinners above all men? I tell you
nay, but except ye repent, you shall all likewise perish" [Luke 13:4-5]; so
exhorting us not to feel confident when others suffer punishment, and we
ourselves, though we have committed many transgressions, do not. For except
we change our conduct, we assuredly shall suffer. And how, it may be said, is it