intensified to infinity, but only to a certain limit, neither is the
aforesaid aptitude diminished or remitted infinitely, as appears in the
active and passive qualities of the elements; for coldness and
humidity, whereby the aptitude of matter to the form of fire is
diminished or remitted, cannot be infinitely multiplied. But if the
contrary dispositions can be infinitely multiplied, the aforesaid
aptitude is also infinitely diminished or remitted; yet, nevertheless, it
is not wholly taken away, because its root always remains, which is
the substance of the subject. Thus, if opaque bodies were interposed
to infinity between the sun and the air, the aptitude of the air to light
would be infinitely diminished, but still it would never be wholly
removed while the air remained, which in its very nature is
transparent. Likewise, addition in sin can be made to infinitude,
whereby the aptitude of the soul to grace is more and more
lessened; and these sins, indeed, are like obstacles interposed
between us and God, according to Is. 59:2: "Our sins have divided
between us and God." Yet the aforesaid aptitude of the soul is not
wholly taken away, for it belongs to its very nature.
Reply to Objection 1: The good which is opposed to evil is wholly
taken away; but other goods are not wholly removed, as said above.
Reply to Objection 2: The aforesaid aptitude is a medium between
subject and act. Hence, where it touches act, it is diminished by evil;
but where it touches the subject, it remains as it was. Therefore,
although good is like to itself, yet, on account of its relation to
different things, it is not wholly, but only partially taken away.
Reply to Objection 3: Some, imagining that the diminution of this
kind of good is like the diminution of quantity, said that just as the
continuous is infinitely divisible, if the division be made in an ever
same proportion (for instance, half of half, or a third of a third), so is
it in the present case. But this explanation does not avail here. For
when in a division we keep the same proportion, we continue to
subtract less and less; for half of half is less than half of the whole.
But a second sin does not necessarily diminish the above mentioned
aptitude less than a preceding sin, but perchance either equally or
more.
Therefore it must be said that, although this aptitude is a finite thing,
still it may be so diminished infinitely, not "per se," but accidentally;
according as the contrary dispositions are also increased infinitely,
as explained above.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether evil is adequately divided into pain and

fault?
Objection 1: It would seem that evil is not adequately divided into
pain and fault. For every defect is a kind of evil. But in all creatures
there is the defect of not being able to preserve their own existence,
which nevertheless is neither a pain nor a fault. Therefore evil is
inadequately divided into pain and fault.
Objection 2: Further, in irrational creatures there is neither fault nor
pain; but, nevertheless, they have corruption and defect, which are
evils. Therefore not every evil is a pain or a fault.
Objection 3: Further, temptation is an evil, but it is not a fault; for
"temptation which involves no consent, is not a sin, but an occasion
for the exercise of virtue," as is said in a gloss on 2 Cor. 12; not is it
a pain; because temptation precedes the fault, and the pain follows
afterwards. Therefore, evil is not sufficiently divided into pain and
fault.
Objection 4: On the contrary, It would seem that this division is
superfluous: for, as Augustine says (Enchiridion 12), a thing is evil
"because it hurts." But whatever hurts is penal. Therefore every evil
comes under pain.
I answer that, Evil, as was said above (Article 3) is the privation of
good, which chiefly and of itself consists in perfection and act. Act,
however, is twofold; first, and second. The first act is the form and
integrity of a thing; the second act is its operation. Therefore evil
also is twofold. In one way it occurs by the subtraction of the form,
or of any part required for the integrity of the thing, as blindness is
an evil, as also it is an evil to be wanting in any member of the body.
In another way evil exists by the withdrawal of the due operation,
either because it does not exist, or because it has not its due mode
and order. But because good in itself is the object of the will, evil,
which is the privation of good, is found in a special way in rational
creatures which have a will. Therefore the evil which comes from the
withdrawal of the form and integrity of the thing, has the nature of a
pain; and especially so on the supposition that all things are subject
to divine providence and justice, as was shown above (Question 22,
Article 2); for it is of the very nature of a pain to be against the will.