not take vengeance on some, and leave others unpunished, who have committed
the same or more grievous offenses, unless He designed to bring some
punishments upon them there.
By these arguments then and these examples let us also humble ourselves;
and let them who are obstinate unbelievers of the judgment believe it henceforth,
and become better men; that having lived here in a manner worthy of the
kingdom, we may attain unto the good things to come, by the grace and love
towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory forever and ever.
Amen.

## Homily 77 on Matthew

Matthew 24:33-34.
"Now learn a parable of the fig tree; when his branch is yet tender, and puts
forth leaves, you know that summer is near: so likewise ye, when you shall see
all these things, know that it is near, even at the doors."
Forasmuch as He had said, "Immediately after the tribulation of those
days;" but they sought of this, after how long a time it should be, and desired to
know in particular the very day, therefore He puts also the similitude of the fig
tree, indicating that the interval was not great, but that in quick succession would
occur His advent also. And this He declared not by the parable alone, but by the
words that follow, saying, "know that it is near, even at the doors."
Whereby He foretells another thing also, a spiritual summer, and a calm that
should be on that day (after the present tempest) for the righteous; but to the
sinners the contrary, winter after summer, which He declares in what follows,
saying, that the day shall come upon them, when they are living in luxury.
But not for this intent only did He put forward this about the fig tree, in
order to declare the interval; for it was possible to have set this before them in
other ways as well; but that he might hereby also confirm His saying, as
assuredly thus to come to pass. For as this of the fig tree is of necessity, so that
too. For thus, wherever He is minded to speak of that which will assuredly come
to pass, He brings forward the necessary courses of nature, both Himself, and the
blessed Paul imitating Him. Therefore also when speaking of His resurrection,
He says, "When the grain of wheat has fallen into the earth, except it die, it
abides alone; but if it die, it brings forth much fruit." [John 12:24] Whereby also
the blessed Paul being instructed uses the same similitude, "You fool," he says,
"that which you sow is not quickened, except it die." [1 Corinthians 15:36]
After this, that they might not straightway return to it again, and say,

"When?" he brings to their remembrance the things that had been said, saying,
"Verily I say unto you, This generation shall not pass, till all these things be
fulfilled!" All these things. What things? I pray you. Those about Jerusalem,
those about the wars, about the famines, about the pestilences, about the
earthquakes, about the false Christs, about the false prophets, about the sowing
of the gospel everywhere, the seditions, the tumults, all the other things, which
we said were to occur until His coming. How then, one may ask, did He say,
"This generation?" Speaking not of the generation then living, but of that of the
believers. For He is wont to distinguish a generation not by times only, but also
by the mode of religious service, and practice; as when He says, "This is the
generation of them that seek the Lord."
For what He said above, "All these must come to pass," [Matthew 24:6] and
again, "the gospel shall be preached," [Matthew 24:14] this He declares here
also, saying, All these things shall surely come to pass, and the generation of the
faithful shall remain, cut off by none of the things that have been mentioned. For
both Jerusalem shall perish, and the more part of the Jews shall be destroyed, but
over this generation shall nothing prevail, not famine, not pestilence, not
earthquake, nor the tumults of wars, not false Christs, not false prophets, not
deceivers, not traitors, not those that cause to offend, not the false brethren, nor
any other such like temptation whatever.
Then to lead them on more in faith, He says, "Heaven and earth shall pass
away, but my words shall not pass away;" [Matthew 24:35] that is, it were more
easy for these firm, fixed, and immoveable bodies to be blotted out, than for
ought of my words to fall to the ground. And he who gainsays these things, let
him test His sayings, and when he has found them true (for so he surely will find
them) from what is past, let him believe also the things to come, and let him
search out all things with diligence, and he will see the actual events bearing
witness to the truth of the prophecy. And the elements He has brought forward,
at once to declare, that the church is of more honor than Heaven and earth, and at
the same time to indicate Himself by this also to be maker of all. For since He