Mary's motherhood, completely pervaded by her spousal attitude as the "handmaid of the
Lord," constitutes the first and fundamental dimension of that mediation which the
Church confesses and proclaims in her regard and continually "commends to the hearts
of the faithful," since the Church has great trust in her. For it must be recognized that
before anyone else it was God himself, the Eternal Father, who entrusted himself to the
Virgin of Nazareth, giving her his own Son in the mystery of the Incarnation. Her
election to the supreme office and dignity of Mother of the Son of God refers, on the
ontological level, to the very reality of the union of the two natures in the person of the
Word (hypostatic union). This basic fact of being the Mother of the Son of God is from
the very beginning a complete openness to the person of Christ, to his whole work, to his
whole mission. The words "Behold, I am the handmaid of the Lord" testify to Mary's
openness of spirit: she perfectly unites in herself the love proper to virginity and the love
characteristic of motherhood, which are joined and, as it were, fused together.

For this reason Mary became not only the "nursing mother" of the Son of Man but also
the "associate of unique nobility" of the Messiah and Redeemer. As I have already
said, she advanced in her pilgrimage of faith, and in this pilgrimage to the foot of the
Cross there was simultaneously accomplished her maternal cooperation with the Savior's
whole mission through her actions and sufferings. Along the path of this collaboration

with the work of her Son, the Redeemer, Mary's motherhood itself underwent a singular
transformation, becoming ever more imbued with "burning charity" towards all those to
whom Christ's mission was directed. Through this "burning charity," which sought to
achieve, in union with Christ, the restoration of "supernatural life to souls," Mary
entered, in a way all her own, into the one mediation "between God and men" which is
the mediation of the man Christ Jesus. If she was the first to experience within herself the
supernatural consequences of this one mediation-in the Annunciation she had been
greeted as "full of grace"-then we must say that through this fullness of grace and
supernatural life she was especially predisposed to cooperation with Christ, the one
Mediator of human salvation. And such cooperation is precisely this mediation
subordinated to the mediation of Christ.

In Mary's case we have a special and exceptional mediation, based upon her "fullness of
grace," which was expressed in the complete willingness of the "handmaid of the Lord."
In response to this interior willingness of his Mother, Jesus Christ prepared her ever more
completely to become for all people their "mother in the order of grace." This is
indicated, at least indirectly, by certain details noted by the Synoptics (cf. Lk. 11:28;
8:20-21; Mk. 3:32-35; Mt. 12:47-50) and still more so by the Gospel of John , which I have already mentioned. Particularly eloquent in this regard are the
words spoken by Jesus on the Cross to Mary and John.