He is able even to subject all things unto Himself." He has power, says he, to
subject all things unto Himself, wherefore also destruction and death. Or rather,
He does this also with the same power. For tell me, which requires the greater
power, to subject demons, and Angels, and Archangels, and Cherubim, and
Seraphim, or to make the body incorruptible and immortal? The latter certainly
much more than the former; he showed forth the greater works of His power,
that you might believe these too. Wherefore, though ye see these men rejoicing,
and honored, yet stand firm, be not offended at them, be not moved. These our
hopes are sufficient to raise up even the most sluggish and indolent.
Chap. iv. ver. 1. "Wherefore," says he, "my brethren, beloved and longed
for, my joy and crown, so stand fast in the Lord, my beloved."
"So." How? Unmoved. See how he adds praise after exhortation, "my joy
and my crown," not simply joy but glory too, not simply glory but my crown too.
Which glory nought can equal, since it is the crown of Paul. "So stand fast in the
Lord, my beloved," i.e. in the hope of God.
Ver. 2, 3. "I exhort Euodia, and exhort Syntyche, to be of the same mind in
the Lord. Yea, I beseech you also, true yokefellow, help these women."
Some say Paul here exhorts his own wife; but it is not so, but some other
woman, or the husband of one of them. "Help these women, for they labored
with me in the Gospel, with Clement also, and the rest of my fellow-workers
whose names are in the book of life." Do you see how great a testimony he bears
to their virtue? For as Christ says to his Apostles, "Rejoice not that the spirits are
subject to you, but rejoice that your names are written in the book of life" [Luke
10:20]; so Paul testifies to them, saying, "whose names are in the book of life."
These women seem to me to be the chief of the Church which was there, and he
commends them to some notable man whom he calls his "yokefellow," to whom
perchance he was wont to commend them, as to a fellow-worker, and fellowsoldier, and brother, and companion, as he does in the Epistle to the Romans,
when he says, "I commend unto you Phebe our sister, who is a servant of the
Church that is at Cenchrea." [Romans 16:1] "Yokefellow;" either some brother

of theirs, or a husband of hers; as if he had said, Now you are a true brother, now
a true husband, because you have become a Member. "For they labored with me
in the Gospel." This protection came from home, not from friendship, but for
good deeds. "Labored with me." What do you say? Did women labor with you?
Yes, he answers, they too contributed no small portion. Although many were
they who wrought together with him, yet these women also acted with him
among the many. The Churches then were no little edified, for many good ends
are gained where they who are approved, be they men, or be they women, enjoy
from the rest such honor. For in the first place the rest were led on to a like zeal;
in the second place, they also gained by the respect shown; and thirdly, they
made those very persons more zealous and earnest. Wherefore you see that Paul
has everywhere a care for this, and commends such men for consideration. As he
says in the Epistle to the Corinthians: "Who are the first-fruits of Achaia," [1
Corinthians 16:15] Some say that the word "yokefellow," (Syzygus,) is a proper
name. Well, what? Whether it be so, or no, we need not accurately enquire, but
observe that he gives his orders, that these women should enjoy much protection.
All we have, says he, is in the heavens, our Saviour, our city, whatever a
man can name: "whence," says he, "we wait for a Saviour, the Lord Jesus
Christ." And this is an act of His kindness and love toward man. He Himself
again comes to us, he does not drag us there, but takes us, and so departs with us.
And this is a mark of great honor; for if He came to us when we were enemies,
much rather does He now when we have become friends. He does not commit
this to the Angels, nor to servants, but Himself comes to call us to His royal
mansion. See, we also "shall be caught up in the clouds" [1 Thessalonians 4:17],
doing him honor.
Who then is to be found "the faithful and wise servant"? Who are they that
are deemed worthy of such good things? How miserable are those who fail! For
if we were forever to weep, should we do anything worthy of the occasion? For
were you to make mention of hells innumerable, you would name nothing equal
to that pain which the soul sustains, when all the world is in confusion, when the