FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.58, C.3.

well it would suffice that his reason be perfect. Consequently, since
virtue is a habit perfecting man in view of his doing good actions, it
would follow that it is only in the reason, so that there would be none
but intellectual virtues. This was the opinion of Socrates, who said
"every virtue is a kind of prudence," as stated in Ethic. vi, 13. Hence
he maintained that as long as man is in possession of knowledge, he
cannot sin; and that every one who sins, does so through ignorance.
Now this is based on a false supposition. Because the appetitive
faculty obeys the reason, not blindly, but with a certain power of
opposition; wherefore the Philosopher says (Polit. i, 3) that "reason
commands the appetitive faculty by a politic power," whereby a man
rules over subjects that are free, having a certain right of opposition.
Hence Augustine says on Ps. 118 (Serm. 8) that "sometimes we
understand [what is right] while desire is slow, or follows not at all,"
in so far as the habits or passions of the appetitive faculty cause the
use of reason to be impeded in some particular action. And in this
way, there is some truth in the saying of Socrates that so long as a
man is in possession of knowledge he does not sin: provided,
however, that this knowledge is made to include the use of reason in
this individual act of choice.
Accordingly for a man to do a good deed, it is requisite not only that
his reason be well disposed by means of a habit of intellectual
virtue; but also that his appetite be well disposed by means of a
habit of moral virtue. And so moral differs from intellectual virtue,
even as the appetite differs from the reason. Hence just as the
appetite is the principle of human acts, in so far as it partakes of
reason, so are moral habits to be considered virtues in so far as they
are in conformity with reason.
Reply to Objection 1: Augustine usually applies the term "art" to any
form of right reason; in which sense art includes prudence which is
the right reason about things to be done, even as art is the right
reason about things to be made. Accordingly, when he says that
"virtue is the art of right conduct," this applies to prudence
essentially; but to other virtues, by participation, for as much as they
are directed by prudence.
Reply to Objection 2: All such definitions, by whomsoever given,
were based on the Socratic theory, and should be explained
according to what we have said about art (ad 1).

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.58, C.3.

The same applies to the Third Objection.
Reply to Objection 4: Right reason which is in accord with prudence
is included in the definition of moral virtue, not as part of its
essence, but as something belonging by way of participation to all
the moral virtues, in so far as they are all under the direction of
prudence.