THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.39, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether it is fitting to say that when Christ was

baptized the Holy Ghost came down on Him in the form of a
dove?
Objection 1: It would seem that it is not fitting to say that when Christ
was baptized the Holy Ghost came down on Him in the form of a
dove. For the Holy Ghost dwells in man by grace. But the fulness of
grace was in the Man-Christ from the beginning of His conception,
because He was the "Only-begotten of the Father," as is clear from
what has been said above (Question 7, Article 12; Question 34,
Article 1). Therefore the Holy Ghost should not have been sent to
Him at His baptism.
Objection 2: Further, Christ is said to have "descended" into the
world in the mystery of the Incarnation, when "He emptied Himself,
taking the form of a servant" (Phil. 2:7). But the Holy Ghost did not
become incarnate. Therefore it is unbecoming to say that the Holy
Ghost "descended upon Him."
Objection 3: Further, that which is accomplished in our baptism
should have been shown in Christ's baptism, as in an exemplar. But
in our baptism no visible mission of the Holy Ghost takes place.
Therefore neither should a visible mission of the Holy Ghost have
taken place in Christ's baptism.
Objection 4: Further, the Holy Ghost is poured forth on others
through Christ, according to Jn. 1:16: "Of His fulness we all have
received." But the Holy Ghost came down on the apostles in the
form, not of a dove, but of fire. Therefore neither should He have
come down on Christ in the form of a dove, but in the form of fire.
On the contrary, It is written (Lk. 3:22): "The Holy Ghost descended
in a bodily shape as a dove upon Him."
I answer that, What took place with respect to Christ in His baptism,
as Chrysostom says (Hom. iv in Matth. [Opus Imperfectum]), "is
connected with the mystery accomplished in all who were to be
baptized afterwards." Now, all those who are baptized with the
baptism of Christ receive the Holy Ghost, unless they approach
unworthily; according to Mt. 3:11: "He shall baptize you in the Holy
Ghost." Therefore it was fitting that when our Lord was baptized the

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.39, C.7.

Holy Ghost should descend upon Him.
Reply to Objection 1: As Augustine says (De Trin. xv): "It is most
absurd to say that Christ received the Holy Ghost, when He was
already thirty years old: for when He came to be baptized, since He
was without sin, therefore was He not without the Holy Ghost. For if
it is written of John that 'he shall be filled with the Holy Ghost from
his mother's womb,' what must we say of the Man-Christ, whose
conception in the flesh was not carnal, but spiritual? Therefore now,"
i.e. at His baptism, "He deigned to foreshadow His body," i.e. the
Church, "in which those who are baptized receive the Holy Ghost in
a special manner."
Reply to Objection 2: As Augustine says (De Trin. ii), the Holy Ghost
is said to have descended on Christ in a bodily shape, as a dove, not
because the very substance of the Holy Ghost was seen, for He is
invisible: nor as though that visible creature were assumed into the
unity of the Divine Person; since it is not said that the Holy Ghost
was the dove, as it is said that the Son of God is man by reason of
the union. Nor, again, was the Holy Ghost seen under the form of a
dove, after the manner in which John saw the slain Lamb in the
Apocalypse (5:6): "For the latter vision took place in the spirit
through spiritual images of bodies; whereas no one ever doubted
that this dove was seen by the eyes of the body." Nor, again, did the
Holy Ghost appear under the form of a dove in the sense in which it
is said (1 Cor. 10:4): "'Now, the rock was Christ': for the latter had
already a created existence, and through the manner of its action
was called by the name of Christ, whom it signified: whereas this
dove came suddenly into existence, to fulfil the purpose of its
signification, and afterwards ceased to exist, like the flame which
appeared in the bush to Moses."
Hence the Holy Ghost is said to have descended upon Christ, not by
reason of His being united to the dove: but either because the dove
itself signified the Holy Ghost, inasmuch as it "descended" when it
came upon Him; or, again, by reason of the spiritual grace, which is
poured out by God, so as to descend, as it were, on the creature,
according to James 1:17: "Every best gift and every perfect gift is
from above, coming down from the Father of lights."
Reply to Objection 3: As Chrysostom says (Hom. xii in Matth.): "At
the beginning of all spiritual transactions sensible visions appear,
for the sake of them who cannot conceive at all an incorporeal