2 Corinthians 5:5
"Now he that has wrought us for this very thing is God."
Hereby he shows that these things were prefigured from the first. For not
now was this decreed: but when at the first He fashioned us from earth and
created Adam; for not for this created He him, that he should die, but that He
might make him even immortal. Then as showing the credibility of this and
furnishing the proof of it, he added,
"Who also gave the earnest of the Spirit." For even then He fashioned us for
this; and now He has wrought unto this by baptism, and has furnished us with no
light security thereof, the Holy Spirit. And he continually calls It an earnest,
wishing to prove God to be a debtor of the whole, and thereby also to make what
he says more credible unto the grosser sort.

2 Corinthians 5:6
4. "Being therefore always of good courage, and knowing."
The word "of good courage" is used with reference to the persecutions, the
plottings, and the continual deaths: as if he had said, 'Does any vex and persecute
and slay you? Be not cast down, for your good all is done. Be not afraid: but of
good courage. For that which you groan and grievest for, that you are in bondage
to corruption, he removes from henceforward out of the way, and frees you the
sooner from this bondage.' Wherefore also he says, "Being therefore always of
good courage," not in the seasons of rest only, but also in those of tribulation;
"and knowing,"

2 Corinthians 5:7-8
"That while we are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord (for
we walk by faith, not by sight); we are of good courage, I say, and are willing to
be absent from the body, and to be at home with the Lord."
That which is greater than all he has put last, for to be with Christ is better,
than receiving an incorruptible [body.] But what he means is this: 'He quenches
not our life that wars against and kills us; be not afraid; be of good courage even
when hewn in pieces. For not only does he set you free from corruption and a
burden, but he also sends you quickly to the Lord.' Wherefore neither did he say,
"while we 'are' in the body:" as of those who are in a foreign and strange land.
"Knowing therefore that while we are at home in the body, we are absent from
the Lord: we are of good courage, I say, and willing to be absent from the body,
and to be at home with the Lord." Do you see how keeping back what was
painful, the names of death and the end, he has employed instead of them such
as excite great longing , calling them presence with God; and passing over those
things which are accounted to be sweet, the things of life, he has expressed them
by painful names, calling the life here an absence from the Lord? Now this he
did, both that no one might fondly linger among present things, but rather be
aweary of them; and that none when about to die might be disquieted , but might
even rejoice as departing unto greater goods. Then that none might say on
hearing that we are absent from the Lord, 'Why do you speak thus? Are we then
estranged from Him while we are here?' he in anticipation corrected such a
thought, saying, "For we walk by faith, not by sight." Even here indeed we know
Him, but not so clearly. As he says also elsewhere, [1 Corinthians 13:12] "in a
mirror," and "darkly."
"We are of good courage, I say, and willing." Wonderful! To what has he
brought round the discourse? To an extreme desire of death, having shown the