have edified innumerable souls. You know not, if you had it, whether it would
not be to your condemnation—whether envy, whether sloth, would not have
disposed you to hide your talent. Now, indeed, you are now free from all these,
and though thou give not "the portion of meat" [Luke 12:42], you are not called
to account: but then, you would have been responsible for many.
9. And besides, neither now are you without the gift. Show in the little,
what you would have been, if you had had the other. "For if" (he says) "you are
not faithful in that which is little, how shall any one give you that which is
great?" [Luke 16:11] Give such proof as did the widow; she had two farthings,
and she cast in all, whatsoever she possessed.
Do you seek riches? Prove that you think lightly of the few things, that I
may trust you also concerning the many things. But if you dost not think lightly
even of these, much less will you do so of the other.
Again, in speech, prove that you can use fitly exhortation and counsel.
Have you not external eloquence? Have you not store of thoughts? But
nevertheless you know these common things. You have a child, you have a
neighbor, you have a friend, you have a brother, you have kinsmen. And though
publicly before the Church, you are not able to draw out a long discourse, these
you can exhort in private. Here, there is no need of rhetoric, nor of elaborate
discourse: prove in these, that if you had skill of speech, you would not have
neglected it. But if in the small matter you are not in earnest, how shall I trust
you concerning the great?
For, that every man can do this, hear what Paul says, how he charged even
lay people; "Edify," he says, "one another, as also ye do." [1 Thessalonians 5:11]
And, "Comfort one another with these words." [1 Thessalonians 4:18] God
knows how He should distribute to every man. Are you better than Moses? Hear
how he shrinks from the hardship. "Am I," says he, "able to bear them? For You
said to me, Bear them up, as a nursing-father would bear up the sucking-child."
[Numbers 11:12] What then did God? He took of his spirit and gave unto the
others, showing that neither when he bare them was the gift his own, but of the

Spirit. If you had had the gift, you would perchance have been lifted up,
perchance would you have been turned out of the way. You know not yourself as
God knows you. Let us not say, To what end is that? On what account is this?
When God dispenses, let us not demand an account of Him: for this [is] of the
uttermost impiety and folly. We are slaves, and slaves far apart from our Master,
knowing not even the things which are before us.
10. Let us not then busy ourselves about the counsel of God, but
whatsoever He has given, this let us guard, though it be small, though it be the
lowest, and we shall be altogether approved. Or rather, none of the gifts of God
is small: are you grieved because you have not the gift of teaching? Then tell me,
which seems to you the greater, to have the gift of teaching, or the gift of driving
away diseases? Doubtless the latter. But what? Tell me; does it not seem to you
greater to give eyes to the blind than even to drive away diseases? But what? Tell
me; does it not seem to you greater to raise the dead than to give eyes to the
blind? What again, tell me; does it not seem to you greater to do this by shadows
and napkins, than by a word? Tell me then, which would you? Raise the dead
with shadows and napkins, or have the gift of teaching? Doubtless you will say
the former, to raise the dead with shadows and napkins. If then I should show to
you, that there is another gift far greater than this, and that thou dost not receive
it when it is in your power to receive it, are not you justly deprived of those
others? And this gift not one or two, but all may have. I know that you open
wide your mouths and are amazed, at being to hear that it is in your power to
have a greater gift than raising the dead, and giving eyes to the blind, doing the
same things which were done in the time of the Apostles. And it seems to you
past belief.
What then is this gift? charity. Nay, believe me; for the word is not mine,
but Christ's speaking by Paul. For what says he? "Covet earnestly the best gifts:
and yet show I unto you a more excellent way." [1 Corinthians 12:31] What is
this, "yet more excellent"? What he means is this. The Corinthians were proud
over their gifts, and those having tongues, the least gift, were puffed up against