SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.133, C.2.

his actions, because he lacks the wherewithal to perform
magnificent deeds. Nevertheless every liberal man has the habit of
magnificence, either actually or in respect of a proximate disposition
thereto, as explained above (Question 129, Article 3, ad 2), as also
(FS, Question 65, Article 1) when we were treating of the connection
of virtues.
Reply to Objection 2: It is true that magnificence observes the
extreme, if we consider the quantity of the thing done: yet it
observes the mean, if we consider the rule of reason, which it neither
falls short of nor exceeds, as we have also said of magnanimity
(Question 129, Article 3, ad 1).
Reply to Objection 3: It belongs to magnificence to do something
great. But that which regards a man's person is little in comparison
with that which regards Divine things, or even the affairs of the
community at large. Wherefore the magnificent man does not intend
principally to be lavish towards himself, not that he does not seek
his own good, but because to do so is not something great. Yet if
anything regarding himself admits of greatness, the magnificent man
accomplishes it magnificently: for instance, things that are done
once, such as a wedding, or the like; or things that are of a lasting
nature; thus it belongs to a magnificent man to provide himself with
a suitable dwelling, as stated in Ethic. iv.
Reply to Objection 4: As the Philosopher says (Ethic. vi, 5) "there
must needs be a virtue of act," i.e. a moral virtue, whereby the
appetite is inclined to make good use of the rule of act: and this is
what magnificence does. Hence it is not an act but a virtue.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.133, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether magnificence is a special virtue?

Objection 1: It seems that magnificence is not a special virtue. For
magnificence would seem to consist in doing something great. But it
may belong to any virtue to do something great, if the virtue be
great: as in the case of one who has a great virtue of temperance, for
he does a great work of temperance. Therefore, magnificence is not
a special virtue, but denotes a perfect degree of any virtue.
Objection 2: Further, seemingly that which tends to a thing is the
same as that which does it. But it belongs to magnanimity to tend to
something great, as stated above (Question 129, Articles 1,2).
Therefore it belongs to magnanimity likewise to do something great.
Therefore magnificence is not a special virtue distinct from
magnanimity.
Objection 3: Further, magnificence seems to belong to holiness, for
it is written (Ex. 15:11): "Magnificent in holiness," and (Ps. 95:6):
"Holiness and magnificence in His sanctuary." Now holiness is the
same as religion, as stated above (Question 81, Article 8). Therefore
magnificence is apparently the same as religion. Therefore it is not a
special virtue, distinct from the others.
On the contrary, The Philosopher reckons it with other special
virtues (Ethic. ii, 7; iv 2).
I answer that, It belongs to magnificence to do [facere] something
great, as its name implies. Now "facere" may be taken in two ways,
in a strict sense, and in a broad sense. Strictly "facere" means to
work something in external matter, for instance to make a house, or
something of the kind; in a broad sense "facere" is employed to
denote any action, whether it passes into external matter, as to burn
or cut, or remain in the agent, as to understand or will.
Accordingly if magnificence be taken to denote the doing of
something great, the doing [factio] being understood in the strict
sense, it is then a special virtue. For the work done is produced by
act: in the use of which it is possible to consider a special aspect of
goodness, namely that the work produced [factum] by the act is
something great, namely in quantity, value, or dignity, and this is
what magnificence does. In this way magnificence is a special virtue.