1 Corinthians 3:9
For we are God's fellow-workers: "you are God's husbandry, God's
building."
Do you see how to them also he has assigned no small work, having before
laid it down that the whole is of God? For since he is always persuading them to
obey those that have the rule over them, on this account he abstains from making
very light of their teachers.
"You are God's husbandry."
For because he had said, "I planted," he kept to the metaphor. Now if you
be God's husbandry, it is right that you should be called not from those who
cultivate you, but from God. For the field is not called the husbandman's, but the
householder's.
"You are God's building."
Again, the building is not the workman's, but the master's. Now if you be a
building, you must not be forced asunder: since this were no building. If you be
a farm, you must not be divided, but be walled in with a single fence, namely,
unanimity.

1 Corinthians 3:10
"According to the Grace of God which was given unto me, as a wise
master-builder I laid a foundation."
In this place he calls himself wise, not exalting himself, but to give them an
ensample, and to point out that this is a wise man's part, to lay a foundation. You
may observe as one instance of his modest bearing, that in speaking of himself
as wise, he allowed not this to stand as though it were something of his own; but
first attributing himself entirely unto God, then and not till then calls himself by
that name. For, "according to the Grace of God," says he, "which was given unto
me." Thus, at once he signifies both that the whole is of God; and that this most
of all is Grace, viz. the not being divided, but resting on One Foundation.
7. "Another builds thereon; but let each man take heed how he builds
thereon."
Here, I think, and in what follows, he puts them upon their trial concerning
practice, after that he had once for all knit them together and made them one.

1 Corinthians 3:11
"For other foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which is Jesus
Christ."
I say, no man can lay it so long as he is a master-builder; but if he lay it,
([τιθῃ] conj. for [τεθῃ] . Dounæus ap. Savil. viii. not. p. 261.) he ceases to be a
master-builder.
See how even from men's common notions he proves the whole of his
proposition. His meaning is this: "I have preached Christ, I have delivered unto
you the foundation. Take heed how you build thereon, lest haply it be in
vainglory, lest haply so as to draw away the disciples unto men." Let us not then
give heed unto the heresies. "For other foundation can no man lay than that
which is laid." Upon this then let us build, and as a foundation let us cleave to it,
as a branch to a vine; and let there be no interval between us and Christ. For if
there be any interval, immediately we perish. For the branch by its adherence
draws in the fatness, and the building stands because it is cemented together.
Since, if it stand apart it perishes, having nothing whereon to support itself. Let
us not then merely keep hold of Christ, but let us be cemented to Him, for if we
stand apart, we perish. "For they who withdraw themselves far from You, shall
perish;" [Psalm 72:27. Septuagint] so it is said. Let us cleave then unto Him, and
let us cleave by our works. "For he that keeps my commandments, the same
abides in Me" [John 14:21. in substance] And accordingly, there are many
images whereby He brings us into union. Thus, if you mark it, He is "the Head,"
we are "the body:" can there be any empty interval between the head and body?
He is "a Foundation," we "a building:" He "a Vine," we "branches:" He "the
Bridegroom," we "the bride:" He "the Shepherd," we "the sheep;" He is "the
Way," we "they who walk therein." Again, we are "a temple," He "the
Indweller:" He "the First-Begotten," we "the brethren:" He "the Heir," we "the