passive power, which is moved by the object existing in act. Thus
the active power is compared to its object as a being in act is to a
being in potentiality; whereas the passive power, on the contrary, is
compared to its object as being in potentiality is to a being in act.
Therefore there can be no other difference of powers in the intellect,
but that of passive and active. Wherefore it is clear that memory is
not a distinct power from the intellect: for it belongs to the nature of
a passive power to retain as well as to receive.
Reply to Objection 1: Although it is said (3 Sent. D, 1) that memory,
intellect, and will are three powers, this is not in accordance with the
meaning of Augustine, who says expressly (De Trin. xiv) that "if we
take memory, intelligence, and will as always present in the soul,
whether we actually attend to them or not, they seem to pertain to
the memory only. And by intelligence I mean that by which we
understand when actually thinking; and by will I mean that love or
affection which unites the child and its parent." Wherefore it is clear
that Augustine does not take the above three for three powers; but
by memory he understands the soul's habit of retention; by
intelligence, the act of the intellect; and by will, the act of the will.
Reply to Objection 2: Past and present may differentiate the
sensitive powers, but not the intellectual powers, for the reason give
above.
Reply to Objection 3: Intelligence arises from memory, as act from
habit; and in this way it is equal to it, but not as a power to a power.

### ARTICLE 8. Whether the reason is distinct from the intellect?

Objection 1: It would seem that the reason is a distinct power from
the intellect. For it is stated in De Spiritu et Anima that "when we
wish to rise from lower things to higher, first the sense comes to our
aid, then imagination, then reason, then the intellect." Therefore the
reason is distinct from the intellect, as imagination is from sense.
Objection 2: Further, Boethius says (De Consol. iv, 6), that intellect is
compared to reason, as eternity to time. But it does not belong to the
same power to be in eternity and to be in time. Therefore reason and
intellect are not the same power.
Objection 3: Further, man has intellect in common with the angels,
and sense in common with the brutes. But reason, which is proper to
man, whence he is called a rational animal, is a power distinct from
sense. Therefore is it equally true to say that it is distinct from the
intellect, which properly belongs to the angel: whence they are
called intellectual.
On the contrary, Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. iii, 20) that "that in
which man excels irrational animals is reason, or mind, or
intelligence or whatever appropriate name we like to give it."
Therefore, reason, intellect and mind are one power.
I answer that, Reason and intellect in man cannot be distinct powers.
We shall understand this clearly if we consider their respective
actions. For to understand is simply to apprehend intelligible truth:
and to reason is to advance from one thing understood to another,
so as to know an intelligible truth. And therefore angels, who
according to their nature, possess perfect knowledge of intelligible
truth, have no need to advance from one thing to another; but
apprehend the truth simply and without mental discussion, as
Dionysius says (Div. Nom. vii). But man arrives at the knowledge of
intelligible truth by advancing from one thing to another; and
therefore he is called rational. Reasoning, therefore, is compared to
understanding, as movement is to rest, or acquisition to possession;
of which one belongs to the perfect, the other to the imperfect. And
since movement always proceeds from something immovable, and
ends in something at rest; hence it is that human reasoning, by way
of inquiry and discovery, advances from certain things simply