SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.91, C.2.

shows (Ethic. iv, 1,2,3).
Accordingly superstition is a vice contrary to religion by excess, not
that it offers more to the divine worship than true religion, but
because it offers divine worship either to whom it ought not, or in a
manner it ought not.
Reply to Objection 1: Just as we speak metaphorically of good
among evil things---thus we speak of a good thief---so too
sometimes the names of the virtues are employed by transposition
in an evil sense. Thus prudence is sometimes used instead of
cunning, according to Lk. 16:8, "The children of this world are more
prudent in their generation than the children of light." It is in this way
that superstition is described as religion.
Reply to Objection 2: The etymology of a word differs from its
meaning. For its etymology depends on what it is taken from for the
purpose of signification: whereas its meaning depends on the thing
to which it is applied for the purpose of signifying it. Now these
things differ sometimes: for "lapis" [a stone] takes its name from
hurting the foot [laedere pedem], but this is not its meaning, else
iron, since it hurts the foot, would be a stone. In like manner it does
not follow that "superstition" means that from which the word is
derived.
Reply to Objection 3: Religion does not admit of excess, in respect
of absolute quantity, but it does admit of excess in respect of
proportionate quantity, in so far, to wit, as something may be done in
divine worship that ought not to be done.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.91, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether there are various species of

superstition?
Objection 1: It would seem that there are not various species of
superstition. According to the Philosopher (Topic. i, 13), "if one
contrary includes many kinds, so does the other." Now religion, to
which superstition is contrary, does not include various species; but
all its acts belong to the one species. Therefore neither has
superstition various species.
Objection 2: Further, opposites relate to one same thing. But
religion, to which superstition is opposed, relates to those things
whereby we are directed to God, as stated above (Question 81,
Article 1). Therefore superstition, which is opposed to religion, is not
specified according to divinations of human occurrences, or by the
observances of certain human actions.
Objection 3: Further, a gloss on Col. 2:23, "Which things have . . . a
show of wisdom in superstition," adds: "that is to say in a
hypocritical religion." Therefore hypocrisy should be reckoned a
species of superstition.
On the contrary, Augustine assigns the various species of
superstition (De Doctr. Christ. ii, 20).
I answer that, As stated above, sins against religion consist in going
beyond the mean of virtue in respect of certain circumstances
(Article 1). For as we have stated (FS, Question 72, Article 9), not
every diversity of corrupt circumstances differentiates the species of
a sin, but only that which is referred to diverse objects, for diverse
ends: since it is in this respect that moral acts are diversified
specifically, as stated above (FS, Question 1, Article 3; FS, Question
18, Articles 2,6).
Accordingly the species of superstition are differentiated, first on the
part of the mode, secondly on the part of the object. For the divine
worship may be given either to whom it ought to be given, namely, to
the true God, but "in an undue mode," and this is the first species of
superstition; or to whom it ought not to be given, namely, to any
creature whatsoever, and this is another genus of superstition,
divided into many species in respect of the various ends of divine