them that were bound for Christ's sake, I cannot leave off, I cannot hold my
peace. For if Paul in the prison, and in the night, kept not silence, no, nor under
the scourge; shall I, who am sitting here by daylight, and speaking so much at
my ease, shall I hold my peace, when men in bonds, and under the scourge, and
at midnight could not endure to do so? The holy Children were not silent, no, not
in the furnace and in the fire, and are not we ashamed to hold our peace? Let us
look then at this prison also. Here too, they were bound, but at once and from the
very outset it was evident that they were not about to be burned, but only to enter
as into a prison. For why do ye bind men who are about to be committed to the
flames? They were bound, as Paul was, hand and foot. They were bound with as
great violence as he was. For the jailor thrust him into the inner prison; and the
king commanded the furnace to be intensely heated. And now let us see the
issue. When Paul and Silas sang, the prison was shaken, and the doors were
opened. When the three Children sang, the bonds both of their feet and hands
were loosed. The prison was opened, and the doors of the furnace were opened:
for a dewy breeze whistled through it.
But many thoughts crowd around me. I know not which to utter first, and
which second. Wherefore, let no one, I entreat, require order of me, for the
subjects are closely allied.
They who were bound together with Paul and Silas were loosed, and yet
nevertheless they slept. In the case of the three Children, instead of that,
something else took place. The men who had cast them in, were themselves
burned to death. And then, as I was fain to tell you, the king beheld them loose,
and fell down before them: he heard them singing their song of praise, and
beheld four walking, and he called them. As Paul, though able to do so, came not
forth, until he who had cast him in, called him, and brought him forth: so neither
did the three Children come forth, until he who had cast them in commanded
them to come forth. What lesson are we taught from this? Not to be over hasty in
courting persecution, nor when in tribulation to be over eager for deliverance,
and on the other hand when they release us not to continue in it. Further, the

jailor, inasmuch as he was able to enter in where the saints were, fell down at
their feet. The king came but to the door and fell down. He dared not approach
into the prison which he had prepared for them in the fire. And now mark their
words. The one cried, "Sirs, what must I do to be saved?" [Acts 16:30] The
other, though not indeed with so great humility, yet uttered a voice no less sweet,
"Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, you servants of the most high God, come
forth, and come hither." [Daniel 3:26] Mighty dignity! "You servants of the most
high God, come forth, and come hither." How are they to come forth, O king?
Thou cast them into the fire bound; they have continued this long time in the
fire. Why, had they been made of adamant, had they been blocks of metal, in
singing that entire hymn, must they not have perished? On this account then they
were saved, because they sang praises to God. The fire reverenced their
readiness to suffer and afterwards it reverenced that wonderful song, and their
hymns of praise. By what title do you call them? I said before, "You servants of
the most high God." Yes, to the servants of God, all things are possible; for if
some, who are the servants of men, have, nevertheless, power, and authority, and
the disposal of their concerns, much more have the servants of God. He called
them by the name most delightful to them, he knew that by this means he
flattered them most: for indeed, if it was in order to continue servants of God,
that they entered into the fire, there could be no sound more delightful to them
than this. Had he called them kings, had he called them lords of the world, yet
would he not so truly have rejoiced them as when he said, "You servants of the
most high God." And why marvel at this? When, in writing to the mighty city, to
her who was mistress of the world, and prided herself upon her high dignities,
Paul set down as equivalent in dignity, nay, as far greater, yea incomparably
greater than consulship, or kingly name, or than the empire of the world, this
title, "Paul, a servant of Jesus Christ." [Romans 1:1] "You servants of the most
high God." "Yes," he would say, "if they show so great zeal as to be bondservants, doubtless this is the title by which we shall conciliate them."
Again, observe also the piety of the Children: they showed no indignation,