THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.68, C.3.

Secondly, the sacrament of Baptism may be wanting to anyone in
reality but not in desire: for instance, when a man wishes to be
baptized, but by some ill-chance he is forestalled by death before
receiving Baptism. And such a man can obtain salvation without
being actually baptized, on account of his desire for Baptism, which
desire is the outcome of "faith that worketh by charity," whereby
God, Whose power is not tied to visible sacraments, sanctifies man
inwardly. Hence Ambrose says of Valentinian, who died while yet a
catechumen: "I lost him whom I was to regenerate: but he did not
lose the grace he prayed for."
Reply to Objection 1: As it is written (1 Kgs. 16:7), "man seeth those
things that appear, but the Lord beholdeth the heart." Now a man
who desires to be "born again of water and the Holy Ghost" by
Baptism, is regenerated in heart though not in body. thus the Apostle
says (Rm. 2:29) that "the circumcision is that of the heart, in the
spirit, not in the letter; whose praise is not of men but of God."
Reply to Objection 2: No man obtains eternal life unless he be free
from all guilt and debt of punishment. Now this plenary absolution is
given when a man receives Baptism, or suffers martyrdom: for which
reason is it stated that martyrdom "contains all the sacramental
virtue of Baptism," i.e. as to the full deliverance from guilt and
punishment. Suppose, therefore, a catechumen to have the desire
for Baptism (else he could not be said to die in his good works,
which cannot be without "faith that worketh by charity"), such a one,
were he to die, would not forthwith come to eternal life, but would
suffer punishment for his past sins, "but he himself shall be saved,
yet so as by fire" as is stated 1 Cor. 3:15.
Reply to Objection 3: The sacrament of Baptism is said to be
necessary for salvation in so far as man cannot be saved without, at
least, Baptism of desire; "which, with God, counts for the
deed" (Augustine, Enarr. in Ps. 57).

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.68, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether Baptism should be deferred?

Objection 1: It seems that Baptism should be deferred. For Pope Leo
says (Epist. xvi): "Two seasons," i.e. Easter and Whitsuntide, "are
fixed by the Roman Pontiff for the celebration of Baptism. Wherefore
we admonish your Beatitude not to add any other days to this
custom." Therefore it seems that Baptism should be conferred not at
once, but delayed until the aforesaid seasons.
Objection 2: Further, we read in the decrees of the Council of Agde
(Can. xxxiv): "If Jews whose bad faith often "returns to the vomit,"
wish to submit to the Law of the Catholic Church, let them for eight
months enter the porch of the church with the catechumens; and if
they are found to come in good faith then at last they may deserve
the grace of Baptism." Therefore men should not be baptized at
once, and Baptism should be deferred for a certain fixed time.
Objection 3: Further, as we read in Is. 27:9, "this is all the fruit, that
the sin . . . should be taken away." Now sin seems to be taken away,
or at any rate lessened, if Baptism be deferred. First, because those
who sin after Baptism, sin more grievously, according to Heb. 10:29:
"How much more, do you think, he deserveth worse punishments,
who hath . . . esteemed the blood of the testament," i.e. Baptism,
"unclean, by which he was sanctified?" Secondly, because Baptism
takes away past, but not future, sins: wherefore the more it is
deferred, the more sins it takes away. Therefore it seems that
Baptism should be deferred for a long time.
On the contrary, It is written (Ecclus. 5:8): "Delay not to be converted
to the Lord, and defer it not from day to day." But the perfect
conversion to God is of those who are regenerated in Christ by
Baptism. Therefore Baptism should not be deferred from day to day.
I answer that, In this matter we must make a distinction and see
whether those who are to be baptized are children or adults. For if
they be children, Baptism should not be deferred. First, because in
them we do not look for better instruction or fuller conversion.
Secondly, because of the danger of death, for no other remedy is
available for them besides the sacrament of Baptism.
On the other hand, adults have a remedy in the mere desire for