schooled, from the grace of the Spirit, that these things took place not out of
weakness, but out of the permission of the Christ; in order that the truth might
shine abroad more largely; through bonds and imprisonments and tribulations
and straits increasing and rising, to a greater volume. Thus is the power of Christ
in weakness perfected. For indeed if his bonds had crippled Paul and made him
cowardly; either himself or those belonging to him; one could not but feel
difficulty; but if rather they prepared him into greater renown, one must be
astounded and marvel, how through a thing involving dishonour glory was
procured for the disciple— through a thing inspiring cowardice confidence and
encouragement resulted to them all. For who was not astounded at him then,
seeing him encircled with a chain? Then demons took to flight all the more,
when they saw him spending his time in a prison. For not so splendid does the
diadem make a royal head, as the chain his hands; not owing to their proper
nature, but owing to the grace that darted brightness on them. On this account it
was that great encouragement resulted to the disciples. For also they saw his
body indeed bound, but his tongue not bound, his hands indeed tightly manacled,
but his voice unshackled, and transversing the whole world more swiftly than the
solar ray. And this became to them an encouragement; learning as they did from
the facts that no one of present things is to be dreaded. For when the soul has
been genuinely imbued by divine longing and love, it pays regard to no one of
things present; but just as those who are mad venture themselves against fire and
sword and wild beasts and sea and all else, so these too, maddened with a most
noble and most spiritual frenzy, a frenzy arising from sanity, used to laugh at all
things that are seen. On this account, seeing their teachers bound, they the more
exulted, the more prided themselves; by facts giving to their adversaries a
demonstration that on all sides they were impregnable and indomitable.
9. Then therefore, when matters were in this state, some of the enemies of
Paul, desiring to fan up the war to greater vehemence, and to make the hatred of
the tyrant, which was felt towards him greater, pretended that they themselves
also preached; (and they did preach the right and sound faith,) for the sake of the

doctrine advancing more rapidly: and this they did, not with the desire to
disseminate the faith; but in order that Nero, having learned that the preaching
was increasing and the doctrine advancing, might the sooner have Paul led away
to execution. There were therefore two schools; that of Paul's scholars and that
of Paul's enemies; the one preaching out of sincerity, and the others out of love
of contention and the hatred they felt towards Paul. And by way of declaring this
he said, "Some indeed through envy and strife are preaching Christ," (pointing
out those his enemies) "but some also through good pleasure;" saying this about
his own scholars. [Philippians 1:15] Then next about those; "Some indeed out of
contentiousness," (his enemies,) not purely, not soundly, but, "thinking that they
are thereby bringing pressure upon my bonds; [ for the defence of the gospel."
For what? Nevertheless, in any way; whether in pretence or in sincerity, Christ is
being announced. Philippians 1:16-18] So that vainly and to no purpose is this
saying taken in reference to heresies. For those who then were preaching were
not preaching corrupt doctrine; but sound and right belief. For if they were
preaching corrupt doctrine, and were teaching other things contrary to Paul, what
they desired was certain not to succeed to them. Now what did they desire? That
the faith having grown, and the disciples of Paul having become numerous, it
should rouse Nero to greater hostility. And if they were preaching different
doctrines, they would not have made the disciples of Paul numerous; and by not
doing so, they would not have exasperated the tyrant. He does not therefore say
this— that they were bringing in corrupt doctrines— but that the motive from
which they were preaching, this was corrupt. For it is one thing to state the
pretext of their preaching itself was not sound. For the preaching does not
become sound when the doctrine is laden with deception; and the pretext does
not become sound when the preaching indeed is sound, but they who preach do
not preach for the sake of God, but either with a view of enmity, or with a view
to the favour of others.
10. He therefore does not say this— that they were bringing in heresies; but
that it was not from a right motive, nor through piety that they were preaching