FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.107, C.3.

to the Old as the perfect to the imperfect. Now everything perfect
fulfils that which is lacking in the imperfect. And accordingly the
New Law fulfils the Old by supplying that which was lacking in the
Old Law.
Now two things of every law is to make men righteous and virtuous,
as was stated above (Question 92, Article 1): and consequently the
end of the Old Law was the justification of men. The Law, however,
could not accomplish this: but foreshadowed it by certain
ceremonial actions, and promised it in words. And in this respect,
the New Law fulfils the Old by justifying men through the power of
Christ's Passion. This is what the Apostle says (Rm. 8:3,4): "What
the Law could not do . . . God sending His own Son in the likeness of
sinful flesh . . . hath condemned sin in the flesh, that the justification
of the Law might be fulfilled in us." And in this respect, the New Law
gives what the Old Law promised, according to 2 Cor. 1:20:
"Whatever are the promises of God, in Him," i.e. in Christ, "they are
'Yea'." Again, in this respect, it also fulfils what the Old Law
foreshadowed. Hence it is written (Col. 2:17) concerning the
ceremonial precepts that they were "a shadow of things to come, but
the body is of Christ"; in other words, the reality is found in Christ.
Wherefore the New Law is called the law of reality; whereas the Old
Law is called the law of shadow or of figure.
Now Christ fulfilled the precepts of the Old Law both in His works
and in His doctrine. In His works, because He was willing to be
circumcised and to fulfil the other legal observances, which were
binding for the time being; according to Gal. 4:4: "Made under the
Law." In His doctrine He fulfilled the precepts of the Law in three
ways. First, by explaining the true sense of the Law. This is clear in
the case of murder and adultery, the prohibition of which the Scribes
and Pharisees thought to refer only to the exterior act: wherefore
Our Lord fulfilled the Law by showing that the prohibition extended
also to the interior acts of sins. Secondly, Our Lord fulfilled the
precepts of the Law by prescribing the safest way of complying with
the statutes of the Old Law. Thus the Old Law forbade perjury: and
this is more safely avoided, by abstaining altogether from swearing,
save in cases of urgency. Thirdly, Our Lord fulfilled the precepts of
the Law, by adding some counsels of perfection: this is clearly seen
in Mt. 19:21, where Our Lord said to the man who affirmed that he
had kept all the precepts of the Old Law: "One thing is wanting to
thee: If thou wilt be perfect, go, sell whatsoever thou hast," etc..

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.107, C.3.

Reply to Objection 1: The New Law does not void observance of the
Old Law except in the point of ceremonial precepts, as stated above
(Question 103, Articles 3,4). Now the latter were figurative of
something to come. Wherefore from the very fact that the ceremonial
precepts were fulfilled when those things were accomplished which
they foreshadowed, it follows that they are no longer to be observed:
for it they were to be observed, this would mean that something is
still to be accomplished and is not yet fulfilled. Thus the promise of a
future gift holds no longer when it has been fulfilled by the
presentation of the gift. In this way the legal ceremonies are
abolished by being fulfilled.
Reply to Objection 2: As Augustine says (Contra Faust. xix, 26),
those precepts of Our Lord are not contrary to the precepts of the
Old Law. For what Our Lord commanded about a man not putting
away his wife, is not contrary to what the Law prescribed. "For the
Law did not say: 'Let him that wills, put his wife away': the contrary
of which would be not to put her away. On the contrary, the Law was
unwilling that a man should put away his wife, since it prescribed a
delay, so that excessive eagerness for divorce might cease through
being weakened during the writing of the bill. Hence Our Lord, in
order to impress the fact that a wife ought not easily to be put away,
allowed no exception save in the case of fornication." The same
applies to the prohibition about swearing, as stated above. The same
is also clear with respect to the prohibition of retaliation. For the Law
fixed a limit to revenge, by forbidding men to seek vengeance
unreasonably: whereas Our Lord deprived them of vengeance more
completely by commanding them to abstain from it altogether. With
regard to the hatred of one's enemies, He dispelled the false
interpretation of the Pharisees, by admonishing us to hate, not the
person, but his sin. As to discriminating between various foods,
which was a ceremonial matter, Our Lord did not forbid this to be
observed: but He showed that no foods are naturally unclean, but
only in token of something else, as stated above (Question 102,
Article 6, ad 1).
Reply to Objection 3: It was forbidden by the Law to touch a leper;
because by doing so, man incurred a certain uncleanness of
irregularity, as also by touching the dead, as stated above (Question
102, Article 5, ad 4). But Our Lord, Who healed the leper, could not
contract an uncleanness. By those things which He did on the
sabbath, He did not break the sabbath in reality, as the Master
Himself shows in the Gospel: both because He worked miracles by