THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.48, C.2.

principle.
Reply to Objection 2: From the beginning of His conception Christ
merited our eternal salvation; but on our side there were some
obstacles, whereby we were hindered from securing the effect of His
preceding merits: consequently, in order to remove such
hindrances, "it was necessary for Christ to suffer," as stated above
(Question 46, Article 3).
Reply to Objection 3: Christ's Passion has a special effect, which His
preceding merits did not possess, not on account of greater charity,
but because of the nature of the work, which was suitable for such
an effect, as is clear from the arguments brought forward above all
the fittingness of Christ's Passion (Question 46, Articles, 3,4).

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.48, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether Christ's Passion brought about our

salvation by way of atonement?
Objection 1: It would seem that Christ's Passion did not bring about
our salvation by way of atonement. For it seems that to make the
atonement devolves on him who commits the sin; as is clear in the
other parts of penance, because he who has done the wrong must
grieve over it and confess it. But Christ never sinned, according to 1
Pt. 2:22: "Who did no sin." Therefore He made no atonement by His
personal suffering.
Objection 2: Further, no atonement is made to another by committing
a graver offense. But in Christ's Passion the gravest of all offenses
was perpetrated, because those who slew Him sinned most
grievously, as stated above (Question 47, Article 6). Consequently it
seems that atonement could not be made to God by Christ's
Passion.
Objection 3: Further, atonement implies equality with the trespass,
since it is an act of justice. But Christ's Passion does not appear
equal to all the sins of the human race, because Christ did not suffer
in His Godhead, but in His flesh, according to 1 Pt. 4:1: "Christ
therefore having suffered in the flesh." Now the soul, which is the
subject of sin, is of greater account than the flesh. Therefore Christ
did not atone for our sins by His Passion.
On the contrary, It is written (Ps. 68:5) in Christ's person: "Then did I
pay that which I took not away." But he has not paid who has not
fully atoned. Therefore it appears that Christ by His suffering has
fully atoned for our sins.
I answer that, He properly atones for an offense who offers
something which the offended one loves equally, or even more than
he detested the offense. But by suffering out of love and obedience,
Christ gave more to God than was required to compensate for the
offense of the whole human race. First of all, because of the
exceeding charity from which He suffered; secondly, on account of
the dignity of His life which He laid down in atonement, for it was the
life of one who was God and man; thirdly, on account of the extent of
the Passion, and the greatness of the grief endured, as stated above
(Question 46, Article 6). And therefore Christ's Passion was not only