No to a sterile pessimism

84. The joy of the Gospel is such that it cannot be taken away from us by anyone or anything (cf.
Jn 16:22). The evils of our world – and those of the Church – must not be excuses for diminishing
our commitment and our fervour. Let us look upon them as challenges which can help us to grow.
With the eyes of faith, we can see the light which the Holy Spirit always radiates in the midst of
darkness, never forgetting that “where sin increased, grace has abounded all the more” (Rom
5:20). Our faith is challenged to discern how wine can come from water and how wheat can grow
in the midst of weeds. Fifty years after the Second Vatican Council, we are distressed by the
troubles of our age and far from naive optimism; yet the fact that we are more realistic must not
mean that we are any less trusting in the Spirit or less generous. In this sense, we can once again
listen to the words of Blessed John XXIII on the memorable day of 11 October 1962: “At times we
have to listen, much to our regret, to the voices of people who, though burning with zeal, lack a
sense of discretion and measure. In this modern age they can see nothing but prevarication and
ruin … We feel that we must disagree with those prophets of doom who are always forecasting
disaster, as though the end of the world were at hand. In our times, divine Providence is leading
us to a new order of human relations which, by human effort and even beyond all expectations,
are directed to the fulfilment of God’s superior and inscrutable designs, in which everything, even
human setbacks, leads to the greater good of the Church”.

85. One of the more serious temptations which stifles boldness and zeal is a defeatism which
turns us into querulous and disillusioned pessimists, “sourpusses”. Nobody can go off to battle
unless he is fully convinced of victory beforehand. If we start without confidence, we have already
lost half the battle and we bury our talents. While painfully aware of our own frailties, we have to
march on without giving in, keeping in mind what the Lord said to Saint Paul: “My grace is

sufficient for you, for my power is made perfect in weakness” (2 Cor 12:9). Christian triumph is
always a cross, yet a cross which is at the same time a victorious banner borne with aggressive
tenderness against the assaults of evil. The evil spirit of defeatism is brother to the temptation to
separate, before its time, the wheat from the weeds; it is the fruit of an anxious and self-centred
lack of trust.

86. In some places a spiritual “desertification” has evidently come about, as the result of attempts
by some societies to build without God or to eliminate their Christian roots. In those places “the
Christian world is becoming sterile, and it is depleting itself like an overexploited ground, which
transforms into a desert”. In other countries, violent opposition to Christianity forces Christians
to hide their faith in their own beloved homeland. This is another painful kind of desert. But family
and the workplace can also be a parched place where faith nonetheless has to be preserved and
communicated. Yet “it is starting from the experience of this desert, from this void, that we can
again discover the joy of believing, its vital importance for us men and women. In the desert we
rediscover the value of what is essential for living; thus in today’s world there are innumerable
signs, often expressed implicitly or negatively, of the thirst for God, for the ultimate meaning of life.
And in the desert people of faith are needed who, by the example of their own lives, point out the
way to the Promised Land and keep hope alive”. In these situations we are called to be living
sources of water from which others can drink. At times, this becomes a heavy cross, but it was
from the cross, from his pierced side, that our Lord gave himself to us as a source of living water.
Let us not allow ourselves to be robbed of hope!