## Homily 17 on Romans

Rom. X. 1
"Brethren, my heart's desire and prayer to God for them is, that they might
be saved."
He is now going again to rebuke them more vehemently than before.
Wherefore he again does away with every suspicion of hatred, and makes a great
effort beforehand to correct misapprehension. Do not then, he says, mind words
or accusations, but observe that it is not in any hostile spirit that I say this. For it
is not likely that the same person should desire their salvation, and not desire it
only, but even pray for it, and yet should also hate them, and feel aversion to
them. For here he calls his exceeding desire, and the prayer which he makes
([εὐδοκίαν]), "heart's desire." For it is not the being freed from punishment only,
but that they may also be saved, that he makes so great a point of, and prays for.
Nor is it from this only, but also from the sequel that he shows the goodwill that
he has towards them. For from what is open to him, as far as he can, he forces
his way, and is contentious to find out some shadow at least of an excuse for
them. And he has not the power, being overcome by the nature of the facts.
Ver. 2. "For I bear them record," says he, "that they have a zeal of God, but
not according to knowledge."
Ought not this then to be a ground for pardoning and not for accusing them?
For if it is not of man that they are separated, but through zeal, they deserved to
be pitied rather than punished. But observe how adroitly he favors them in the
word, and yet shows their unseasonable obstinacy.
Ver. 3. "For they being ignorant," he says, "of God's righteousness."
Again the word would lead to pardon. But the sequel to stronger accusation,
and such as does away with defence of any kind.
"And going about," he says, "to establish their own righteousness, have not

submitted themselves unto the righteousness of God."
And these things he says to show, that it was from a petulancy and love of
power that they erred, rather than from ignorance, and that not even this
righteousness from the deeds of the Law did they establish. [Matthew 21:38;
John 12:19, 42] For saying "going about to establish" is what one would do to
show this. And in plain words indeed he has not stated this (for he has not said,
that they fell short of both righteousnesses), but he has given a hint of it in a very
judicious manner, and with the wisdom so befitting him. For if they are still
"going about" to establish that, it is very plain that they have not yet established
it. If they have not submitted themselves to this, they have fallen short of this
also. But he calls it their "own righteousness," either because the Law was no
longer of force, or because it was one of trouble and toil. But this he calls God's
righteousness, that from faith, because it comes entirely from the grace from
above, and because men are justified in this case, not by labors, but by the gift of
God. But they that evermore resisted the Holy Ghost, and vexatiously tried to be
justified by the Law, came not over to the faith. But as they did not come over to
the faith, nor receive the righteousness thereupon ensuing, and were not able to
be justified by the Law either, they were thrown out of all resources.
Ver. 4. "For Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness to every one that
believes."
See the judgment of Paul. For as he had spoken of a righteousness, and a
righteousness, lest they of the Jews which believed should seem to have the one
but be excluded from the other, and to be accused of lawlessness (for even these
there was no less cause to fear about as being still newly come in), and lest Jews
should again expect to achieve it, and should say, Though we have not at present
fulfilled it, yet we certainly will fulfil it, see what ground he takes. He shows that
there is but one righteousness, and that has its full issue in this, and that he that
has taken to himself this, the one by faith, has fulfilled that also. But he that
rejects this, falls short as well of that also. For if Christ be "the end of the Law,"
he that has not Christ, even if he seem to have that righteousness, has it not. But