as a father whose legitimate son is afflicted with a gangrene, being compelled to
use the knife and cautery, is pained on both accounts, that he is diseased and that
he is compelled to use the knife to him. So that what ye consider a sign of hating
you was indeed a sign of excessive love. And if to have made you sorry was out
of love, much more my gladness at that sorrow.
4. Having made this defence of himself, (for he frequently defends himself,
without being ashamed; for if God does so, saying, "O My people, what have I
done unto you?" [Micah 6:3] much more might Paul,) having, I say, made this
defence of himself, and being now about to pass on to the plea for him who had
committed fornication, in order that they might not be distracted as at receiving
contradictory commands, nor take to cavilling because he it was who both then
was angry and was now commanding to forgive him, see how he provided for
this beforehand, both by what he has said and what he is going to say. For what
says he?

2 Corinthians 2:5
"But if any has caused sorrow, he has caused sorrow not to me."
Having first praised them as feeling joy and sorrow for the same things as
himself, he then strikes into the subject of this person, having said first, "my joy
is the joy of you all." But if my joy is the joy of you all, need is that you should
also now feel pleasure with me, as you then were pained with me: for both in
that you were made sorry, you made me glad; and now in that you rejoice, (if as I
suppose you shall feel pleasure,) ye will do the same. He said not, my sorrow is
the sorrow of you all; but having established this in the rest of what he said, he
has now put forward that only which he most desired, namely, the joy: saying,
my joy is the joy of you all. Then, he makes mention also of the former matter,
saying,
"But if any has caused sorrow he has caused sorrow not to me, but in part
(that I press not too heavily) to you all."
I know, he says, that you shared in my anger and indignation against him
that had committed fornication, and that what had taken place grieved in part all
of you. And therefore said I "in part," not as though you were less hurt than I,
but that I might not weigh down him that had committed fornication. He did not
then grieve me only but you also equally, even though to spare him I said, "in
part." Do you see how at once he moderated their anger, by declaring that they
shared also in his indignation.

2 Corinthians 2:6
"Sufficient to such a one is this punishment which was inflicted by the
many."
And he says not "to him that has committed fornication," but here again "to
such a one," as also in the former Epistle. Not however for the same reason; but
there out of shame, here out of mercy. Wherefore he no where subsequently so
much as mentions the crime; for it was time now to excuse.