FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.20, C.2.

goodness of the external action, in so far as it comes from reason's
ordination and apprehension, it is prior to the goodness of the act of
the will: but if we consider it in so far as it is in the execution of the
action done, it is subsequent to the goodness of the will, which is its
principle.
Reply to Objection 1: The exterior action is the object of the will,
inasmuch as it is proposed to the will by the reason, as good
apprehended and ordained by the reason: and thus it is prior to the
good in the act of the will. But inasmuch as it is found in the
execution of the action, it is an effect of the will, and is subsequent
to the will.
Reply to Objection 2: The end precedes in the order of intention, but
follows in the order of execution.
Reply to Objection 3: A form as received into matter, is subsequent
to matter in the order of generation, although it precedes it in the
order of nature: but inasmuch as it is in the active cause, it precedes
in every way. Now the will is compared to the exterior action, as its
efficient cause. Wherefore the goodness of the act of the will, as
existing in the active cause, is the form of the exterior action.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.20, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the whole goodness and malice of the

external action depends on the goodness of the will?
Objection 1: It would seem that the whole goodness and malice of
the external action depend on the goodness of the will. For it is
written (Mt. 7:18): "A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither
can an evil tree bring forth good fruit." But, according to the gloss,
the tree signifies the will, and fruit signifies works. Therefore, it is
impossible for the interior act of the will to be good, and the external
action evil, or vice versa.
Objection 2: Further, Augustine says (Retract. i, 9) that there is no
sin without the will. If therefore there is no sin in the will, there will
be none in the external action. And so the whole goodness or malice
of the external action depends on the will.
Objection 3: Further, the good and evil of which we are speaking
now are differences of the moral act. Now differences make an
essential division in a genus, according to the Philosopher (Metaph.
vii, 12). Since therefore an act is moral from being voluntary, it
seems that goodness and malice in an act are derived from the will
alone.
On the contrary, Augustine says (Contra Mendac. vii), that "there are
some actions which neither a good end nor a good will can make
good."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), we may consider a twofold
goodness or malice in the external action: one in respect of due
matter and circumstances; the other in respect of the order to the
end. And that which is in respect of the order to the end, depends
entirely on the will: while that which is in respect of due matter or
circumstances, depends on the reason: and on this goodness
depends the goodness of the will, in so far as the will tends towards
it.
Now it must be observed, as was noted above (Question 19, Article
6, ad 1), that for a thing to be evil, one single defect suffices,
whereas, for it to be good simply, it is not enough for it to be good in
one point only, it must be good in every respect. If therefore the will
be good, both from its proper object and from its end, if follows that