forgiveness, the other asked for delay, and not so much as this did he give him,
for "he cast him into prison."
"But when his fellow-servants saw it, they accused him to their lord." Not
even to men is this well-pleasing, much less to God. They therefore who did not
owe, partook of the grief.
What then says their lord? "O thou wicked servant, I forgave you all that
debt, because you desired me; should not thou also have had compassion, even
as I had pity on you?"
See again the lord's gentleness. He pleads with him, and excuses himself,
being on the point of revoking his gift; or rather, it was not he that revoked it, but
the one who had received it. Wherefore He says, "I forgave you all that debt,
because you desired me; should not thou also have had compassion on your
fellow-servant?" For even if the thing does seem to you hard; yet should you
have looked to the gain, which has been, which is to be. Even if the injunction be
galling, you ought to consider the reward; neither that he has grieved you, but
that you have provoked God, whom by mere prayer you have reconciled. But if
even so it be a galling thing to you to become friends with him who has grieved
you, to fall into hell is far more grievous; and if you had set this against that,
then you would have known that to forgive is a much lighter thing.
And whereas, when he owed ten thousand talents, he called him not
wicked, neither reproached him, but showed mercy on him; when he had become
harsh to his fellow-servant, then he says, "O thou wicked servant."
Let us hearken, the covetous, for even to us is the word spoken. Let us
hearken also, the merciless, and the cruel, for not to others are we cruel, but to
ourselves. When then you are minded to be revengeful, consider that against
yourself are you revengeful, not against another; that you are binding up your
own sins, not your neighbors. For as to you, whatsoever you may do to this man,
you do as a man and in the present life, but God not so, but more mightily will
He take vengeance on you, and with the vengeance hereafter.
"For He delivered him over till he should pay that which was due," that is,

for ever; for he will never repay. For since you are not become better by the
kindness shown you, it remains that by vengeance thou be corrected.
And yet, "The graces and the gifts are without repentance," but wickedness
has had such power as to set aside even this law. What then can be a more
grievous thing than to be revengeful, when it appears to overthrow such and so
great a gift of God.
And he did not merely "deliver" him, but "was angry." For when he
commanded him to be sold, his were not the words of wrath (therefore neither
did he do it), but a very great occasion for benevolence; but now the sentence is
of much indignation, and vengeance, and punishment.
What then means the parable? "So likewise shall my Father do also unto
you," He says, "if you from your hearts forgive not every one his brother their
trespasses."
He says not "your Father," but "my Father." For it is not meet for God to be
called the Father of such a one, who is so wicked and malicious.
5. Two things therefore does He here require, both to condemn ourselves
for our sins, and to forgive others; and the former for the sake of the latter, that
this may become more easy (for he who considers his own sins is more indulgent
to his fellow-servant); and not merely to forgive with the lips, but from the heart.
Let us not then thrust the sword into ourselves by being revengeful. For
what grief has he who has grieved you inflicted upon you, like you will work
unto yourself by keeping your anger in mind, and drawing upon yourself the
sentence from God to condemn you? For if indeed you are watchful, and keepest
yourself under control, the evil will come round upon his head, and it will be he
that will suffer harm; but if you should continue indignant, and displeased, then
yourself wilt undergo the harm not from him, but from yourself.
Say not then that he insulted you, and slandered you, and did unto you ills
beyond number; for the more you tell, so much the more do you declare him a
benefactor. For he has given you an opportunity to wash away your sins; so that
the greater the injuries he has done you, so much more is he become to you a