THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.46, C.7.

the singleness of His pain and sadness. In other sufferers the
interior sadness is mitigated, and even the exterior suffering, from
some consideration of reason, by some derivation or redundance
from the higher powers into the lower; but it was not so with the
suffering Christ, because "He permitted each one of His powers to
exercise its proper function," as Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii).
Fourthly, the magnitude of the pain of Christ's suffering can be
reckoned by this, that the pain and sorrow were accepted voluntarily,
to the end of men's deliverance from sin; and consequently He
embraced the amount of pain proportionate to the magnitude of the
fruit which resulted therefrom.
From all these causes weighed together, it follows that Christ's pain
was the very greatest.
Reply to Objection 1: This argument follows from only one of the
considerations adduced---namely, from the bodily injury, which is
the cause of sensitive pain; but the torment of the suffering Christ is
much more intensified from other causes, as above stated.
Reply to Objection 2: Moral virtue lessens interior sadness in one
way, and outward sensitive pain in quite another; for it lessens
interior sadness directly by fixing the mean, as being its proper
matter, within limits. But, as was laid down in the FS, Question 64,
Article 2, moral virtue fixes the mean in the passions, not according
to mathematical quantity, but according to quantity of proportion, so
that the passion shall not go beyond the rule of reason. And since
the Stoics held all sadness to be unprofitable, they accordingly
believed it to be altogether discordant with reason, and
consequently to be shunned altogether by a wise man. But in very
truth some sadness is praiseworthy, as Augustine proves (De Civ.
Dei xiv)---namely, when it flows from holy love, as, for instance,
when a man is saddened over his own or others' sins. Furthermore,
it is employed as a useful means of satisfying for sins, according to
the saying of the Apostle (2 Cor. 7:10): "The sorrow that is according
to God worketh penance, steadfast unto salvation." And so to atone
for the sins of all men, Christ accepted sadness, the greatest in
absolute quantity, yet not exceeding the rule of reason. But moral
virtue does not lessen outward sensitive pain, because such pain is
not subject to reason, but follows the nature of the body; yet it
lessens it indirectly by redundance of the higher powers into the
lower. But this did not happen in Christ's case, as stated above (cf.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.46, C.7.

Question 14, Article 1, ad 2; Question 45, Article 2).
Reply to Objection 3: The pain of a suffering, separated soul belongs
to the state of future condemnation, which exceeds every evil of this
life, just as the glory of the saints surpasses every good of the
present life. Accordingly, when we say that Christ's pain was the
greatest, we make no comparison between His and the pain of a
separated soul. But Adam's body could not suffer, except he sinned.
so that he would become mortal, and passible. And, though actually
suffering, it would have felt less pain than Christ's body, for the
reasons already stated. From all this it is clear that even if by
impassibility Adam had suffered in the state of innocence, his pain
would have been less than Christ's.
Reply to Objection 4: Christ grieved not only over the loss of His
own bodily life, but also over the sins of all others. And this grief in
Christ surpassed all grief of every contrite heart, both because it
flowed from a greater wisdom and charity, by which the pang of
contrition is intensified, and because He grieved at the one time for
all sins, according to Is. 53:4: "Surely He hath carried our sorrows."
But such was the dignity of Christ's life in the body, especially on
account of the Godhead united with it, that its loss, even for one
hour, would be a matter of greater grief than the loss of another
man's life for howsoever long a time. Hence the Philosopher says
(Ethic. iii) that the man of virtue loves his life all the more in
proportion as he knows it to be better; and yet he exposes it for
virtue's sake. And in like fashion Christ laid down His most beloved
life for the good of charity, according to Jer. 12:7: "I have given My
dear soul into the hands of her enemies."
Reply to Objection 5: The sufferer's innocence does lessen
numerically the pain of the suffering, since, when a guilty man
suffers, he grieves not merely on account of the penalty, but also
because of the crime. whereas the innocent man grieves only for the
penalty: yet this pain is more intensified by reason of his innocence,
in so far as he deems the hurt inflicted to be the more undeserved.
Hence it is that even others are more deserving of blame if they do
not compassionate him. according to Is. 57:1: "The just perisheth,
and no man layeth it to heart."
Reply to Objection 6: Christ willed to deliver the human race from
sins not merely by His power, but also according to justice. And