John 9:40
"Some of them that followed Him, say unto Him, Are we also blind?"
As in another place they said, "We were never servants to any man"; and,
"We be not born of fornication" [c. viii. 33, 41]; so now they gape on material
things alone, and are ashamed of this kind of blindness. Then to show that it was
better for them to be blind than seeing, He says,

John 9:41
"If you were blind, you should have no sin."
Since they deemed the calamity a matter to be ashamed of, He turns this
back upon their own head, telling them, that "this very thing would have
rendered your punishment more tolerable"; cutting away on every side their
human thoughts, and leading them to a notion high and marvelous.
"But now ye say, We see."
As He says in that other place, "Of whom you said that He was your God"
[John 8:54]; so too here, "Now ye say that you see, but you see not." He shows
that what they deemed a great matter for praise, brought punishment upon them.
He also comforted him who was blind from his birth, concerning his former
maimed state, and then speaks concerning their blindness. For He directs His
whole speech to this end, that they may not say, "We did not refuse to come to
you owing to our blindness, but we turn away and avoid you as a deceiver."
2. And not without a cause has the Evangelist mentioned, that they of the
Pharisees who were with Him heard these things, and said, "Are we blind also?"
but to remind you that these were the men who first withdrew from and then
stoned Him, for they were persons who followed Him superficially, and who
easily changed to the contrary opinion. How then does He prove that He is not a
deceiver, but a Shepherd? By laying down the distinguishing marks both of the
shepherd, and of him who is a deceiver and a spoiler, and from these affording
them opportunity of searching into the truth of the matter. And first He shows
who is a deceiver and a spoiler, calling him so from the Scriptures, and saying,

John 10:1
"Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that enters not by the door into the sheepfold,
but climbs up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber."
Observe the marks of a robber; first, that he does not enter openly;
secondly, not according to the Scriptures, for this is the, "not by the door." Here
also He referrs to those who had been before, and to those who should be after
Him, Antichrist and the false Christs, Judas and Theudas, and whatever others
there have been of the same kind. And with good cause He calls the Scriptures
"a door," for they bring us to God, and open to us the knowledge of God, they
make the sheep, they guard them, and suffer not the wolves to come in after
them. For Scripture, like some sure door, bars the passage against the heretics,
placing us in a state of safety as to all that we desire, and not allowing us to
wander; and if we undo it not, we shall not easily be conquered by our foes. By
it we can know all, both those who are, and those who are not, shepherds. But
what is "into the fold"? It refers to the sheep, and the care of them. For he that
uses not the Scriptures, but "climbs up some other way," that is, who cuts out for
himself another and an unusual way, "the same is a thief." Do you see from this
too that Christ agrees with the Father, in that He brings forward the Scriptures?
On which account also He said to the Jews, "Search the Scriptures" [John 5:39];
and brought forward Moses, and called him and all the Prophets witnesses, for
"all," says He, "who hear the Prophets shall come to Me"; and, "Had ye believed
Moses, you would have believed Me." But here He has put the same thing
metaphorically. And by saying, "climbs up some other way," He alluded to the
Scribes, because they taught for commandments the doctrines of men, and
transgressed the Law [Matthew 15:9]; with which He reproached them, and said,
"None of you does the Law." [John 7:19] Well did He say, "climbs up," not
"enters in," since to climb is the act of a thief intending to overleap a wall, and
who does all with danger. Have you seen how He has sketched the robber? Now