miracles, and by His most excellent teaching, He afterwards unveiled it in words
also.
For the present, however, by the manifestation of His miracles, and by the
very manner of His teaching, He unfolds it on occasion, gradually and quietly.
For His enacting such laws, and such corrections of laws, with authority, would
lead on the attentive and understanding hearer, little by little, unto the word of
His doctrine. For it is said, "they were astonished at Him, because He taught not
as their Scribes." [Matthew 7:28-29]
2. For beginning from those passions, which most belong to our whole race,
anger, I mean, and desire (for it is these chiefly that bear absolute sway within
us, and are more natural than the rest); He with great authority, even such as
became a legislator, both corrected them, and reduced them to order with all
strictness. For He said not that the adulterer merely is punished; but what He had
done with respect to the murderer, this He does here also, punishing even the
unchaste look: to teach you wherein lies what He had more than the scribes.
Accordingly, He says, "He that looks upon a woman to lust after her has already
committed adultery with her:" that is, he who makes it his business to be curious
about bright forms, and to hunt for elegant features, and to feast his soul with the
sight, and to fasten his eyes on fair countenances. For He came to set free from
all evil deeds not the body only, but the soul too before the body. Thus, because
in the heart we receive the grace of the Spirit, He cleanses it out first.
"And how," one may say, "is it possible to be freed from desire?" I answer,
first, if we were willing, even this might be deadened, and remain inactive.
In the next place, He does not here take away desire absolutely, but that
desire which springs up in men from sight. For he that is curious to behold fair
countenances, is himself chiefly the enkindler of the furnace of that passion, and
makes his own soul a captive, and soon proceeds also to the act.
Thus we see why He said not, "whosoever shall lust to commit adultery,"
but, "whosoever shall look to lust." And in the case of anger He laid down a
certain distinction, saying, "without a cause," and "for nought;" but here not so;

rather once for all He took away the desire. Yet surely both are naturally
implanted, and both are set in us for our profit; both anger, and desire: the one
that we may chastise the evil, and correct those who walk disorderly; the other
that we may have children, and that our race may be recruited by such
successions.
Why then did He not make a distinction here also? Nay, very great is the
distinction which, if you attend, you will see here also included. For He said not
simply, "whosoever shall desire," since it is possible for one to desire even when
sitting in the mountains; but, "Whosoever shall look to lust;" that is to say, he
who gathers in lust unto himself; he who, when nothing compels him, brings in
the wild beast upon his thoughts when they are calm. For this comes no longer of
nature, but of self-indulgence. This even the ancient Scripture corrects from the
first, saying, "Contemplate not beauty which is another's." [Sirach 9:8] And
then, lest any one should say, "what then, if I contemplate, and be not taken
captive," He punishes the look, lest confiding in this security you should some
time fall into sin. "What then," one may say, "if I should look, and desire indeed,
but do no evil?" Even so you are set among the adulterers. For the Lawgiver has
pronounced it, and you must not ask any more questions. For thus looking once,
twice, or thrice, you will perhaps have power to refrain; but if you are
continually doing this, and kindling the furnace, you will assuredly be taken; for
your station is not beyond that nature which is common to men. As we then, if
we see a child holding a knife, though we do not see him hurt, beat him, and
forbid his ever holding it; so God likewise takes away the unchaste look even
before the act, lest at any time you should fall in act also. For he who has once
kindled the flame, even when the woman whom he has beheld is absent, is
forming by himself continually images of shameful things, and from them often
goes on even to the deed. For this cause Christ takes away even that embrace
which is in the heart only.
What now can they say, who have those virgin inmates? Why, by the tenor
of this law they must be guilty of ten thousand adulteries, daily beholding them