in the Resurrection they saw the end, but not the beginning, and in the Ascension
they saw the beginning, but not the end: because in the former it had been
superfluous to have seen the beginning, the Lord Himself Who spoke these
things being present, and the sepulchre showing clearly that He is not there; but
in the latter, they needed to be informed of the sequel by word of others:
inasmuch then as their eyes do not suffice to show them the height above, nor to
inform them whether He is actually gone up into heaven, or only seemingly into
heaven, see then what follows. That it was Jesus Himself they knew from the
fact that He had been conversing with them (for had they seen only from a
distance, they could not have recognized Him by sight), but that He is taken up
into Heaven the Angels themselves inform them. Observe how it is ordered, that
not all is done by the Spirit, but the eyes also do their part. But why did "a cloud
receive Him?" This too was a sure sign that He went up to Heaven. Not fire, as
in the case of Elijah, nor fiery chariot, but "a cloud received Him;" which was a
symbol of Heaven, as the Prophet says; "Who makes the clouds His chariot"
[Psalm 104:3]; it is of the Father Himself that this is said. Therefore he says, "on
a cloud;" in the symbol, he would say, of the Divine power, for no other Power
is seen to appear on a cloud. For hear again what another Prophet says: "The
Lord sits upon a light cloud" [Isaiah 19:1]. For it was while they were listening
with great attention to what He was saying, and this in answer to a very
interesting question, and with their minds fully aroused and quite awake, that
this thing took place. Also on the mount [Sinai] the cloud was because of Him:
since Moses also entered into the darkness, but the cloud there was not because
of Moses. And He did not merely say, "I go," lest they should again grieve, but
He said, "I send the Spirit" [John 16:5-7]; and that He was going away into
heaven they saw with their eyes. O what a sight they were granted! "And while
they looked steadfastly," it is said, "toward heaven, as he went up, behold, two
men stood by them in white apparel; which also said, You men of Galilee, why
stand ye gazing up into heaven? This same Jesus, which is taken up from you
into heaven"— they used the expression "This" demonstratively, saying, "this

Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall thus"— demonstratively, "in
this way"— "come in like manner as you have seen Him going into heaven." (v.
10-11.) Again, the outward appearance is cheering ["in white apparel"]. They
were Angels, in the form of men. And they say, "You men of Galilee:" they
showed themselves to be trusted by the disciples, by saying, "You men of
Galilee." For this was the meaning: else, what needed they to be told of their
country, who knew it well enough? By their appearance also they attracted their
regard, and showed that they were from heaven. But wherefore does not Christ
Himself tell them these things, instead of the Angels? He had beforehand told
them all things; ["What if you shall see the Son of Man] going up where He was
before?" [John 6:62].
Moreover the Angels did not say, 'whom you have seen taken up,' but,
"going into heaven:" ascension is the word, not assumption; the expression
"taken up," belongs to the flesh. For the same reason they say, "He which is
taken up from you shall thus come," not, "shall be sent," but, "shall come. He
that ascended, the same is he also that descended" [Ephesians 4:10]. So again
the expression, "a cloud received Him:" for He Himself mounted upon the cloud.
Of the expressions, some are adapted to the conceptions of the disciples, some
agreeable with the Divine Majesty. Now, as they behold, their conceptions are
elevated: He has given them no slight hint of the nature of His second coming.
For this, "Shall thus come," means, with the body; which thing they desired to
hear; and, that he shall come again to judgment "thus" upon a cloud. "And,
behold, two men stood by them." Why is it said, "men?" Because they had
fashioned themselves completely as such, that the beholders might not be
overpowered. "Which also said:" their words moreover were calculated for
soothing: "Why stand ye gazing up into heaven?" They would not let them any
longer wait there for Him. Here again, these tell what is greater, and leave the
less unsaid. That "He will thus come," they say, and that "ye must look for Him
from heaven." For the rest, they called them off from that spectacle to their
saying, that they might not, because they could not see Him, imagine that He