THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.74, C.4.

is wheaten bread.
Reply to Objection 1: Barley bread serves to denote the hardness of
the Old Law; both on account of the hardness of the bread, and
because, as Augustine says (Question 83): "The flour within the
barley, wrapped up as it is within a most tenacious fibre, denotes
either the Law itself, which was given in such manner as to be
vested in bodily sacraments; or else it denotes the people
themselves, who were not yet despoiled of carnal desires, which
clung to their hearts like fibre." But this sacrament belongs to
Christ's "sweet yoke," and to the truth already manifested, and to a
spiritual people. Consequently barley bread would not be a suitable
matter for this sacrament.
Reply to Objection 2: A begetter begets a thing like to itself in
species. yet there is some unlikeness as to the accidents, owing
either to the matter, or to weakness within the generative power. And
therefore, if there be any cereals which can be grown from the seed
of the wheat (as wild wheat from wheat seed grown in bad ground),
the bread made from such grain can be the matter of this sacrament:
and this does not obtain either in barley, or in spelt, or even in maize,
which is of all grains the one most resembling the wheat grain. But
the resemblance as to shape in such seems to denote closeness of
species rather than identity; just as the resemblance in shape
between the dog and the wolf goes to show that they are allied but
not of the same species. Hence from such grains, which cannot in
any way be generated from wheat grain, bread cannot be made such
as to be the proper matter of this sacrament.
Reply to Objection 3: A moderate mixing does not alter the species,
because that little is as it were absorbed by the greater.
Consequently, then, if a small quantity of another grain be mixed
with a much greater quantity of wheat, bread may be made therefrom
so as to be the proper matter of this sacrament; but if the mixing be
notable, for instance, half and half; or nearly so, then such mixing
alters the species; consequently, bread made therefrom will not be
the proper matter of this sacrament.
Reply to Objection 4: Sometimes there is such corruption of the
bread that the species of bread is lost, as when the continuity of its
parts is destroyed, and the taste, color, and other accidents are
changed; hence the body of Christ may not be made from such
matter. But sometimes there is not such corruption as to alter the

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.74, C.4.

species, but merely disposition towards corruption, which a slight
change in the savor betrays, and from such bread the body of Christ
may be made: but he who does so, sins from irreverence towards the
sacrament. And because starch comes of corrupted wheat, it does
not seem as if the body of Christ could be made of the bread made
therefrom, although some hold the contrary.