another, gets renown, but he who injures himself, receives hurt: that so we may
bear the former courageously, but not the latter. And besides, the whole thing
there was Adam's own doing. Wherefore did you the woman's bidding? [Genesis
3:6] Wherefore when she counselled you contrary (to God), did you not repel
her? You were assuredly yourself the cause. Else, if the devil was the cause, at
this rate all that are tempted ought to perish: but if all do not perish, the cause (of
our destruction) rests with ourselves. "But," you will say, "all that are tempted
ought (at that rate) to succeed." No: for the cause is in ourselves. "At that rate it
ought to follow that (some) perish without the devil's having anything to do with
it." Yes: and in fact many do perish without the devil's being concerned in it: for
surely the devil does not bring about all (our evil doings); no, much comes also
from our own sluggishness by itself alone: and if he too is anywhere concerned
as a cause, it is from our offering the occasion. For say, why did the devil prevail
in Judas' case? When "Satan entered into him" [John 13:27], you will say. Yes,
but hear the cause: it was because "he was a thief, and bare what was put in the
bag." [John 12:6] It was he that himself gave the devil a wide room for entering
into him: so that it is not the devil who puts into us the beginning, it is we that
receive and invite him. "But," you will say, "if there were no devil, the evils
would not have become great." True, but then our punishment would admit of no
plea for mitigation: but as it is, beloved, our punishment is more mild, whereas if
we had wrought the evils of ourselves, the chastisements would be intolerable.
For say, if Adam, without any counsel, had committed the sin he did, who would
have snatched him out of the dangers? "But he would not have sinned," you will
say? What right have you to say this? For he who had so little solidity, that was
so inert and so ready for folly as to receive such advice as this, much more
would he without any counsel have become this (that he did become). What
devil incited the brethren of Joseph to envy? If then we be watchful brethren, the
devil becomes to us the cause even of renown. Thus, what was Job the worse for
his falling into such helplessness of distress? "Speak not of this instance," you
will say: "(Job was not the worse,) but the weak person is the worse." Yes, and

the weak person is the worse, even if there be no devil. "But in a greater
degree," you will say, "when there is the devil's power working along with him."
True, but he is the less punished, when he has sinned through the devil's working
with him; for the punishments are not the same for all sins. Let us not deceive
ourselves: the devil is not the cause of our taking harm, if we be watchful: rather
what he does, is to awake us out of our sleep; what he does, is to keep us on the
alert. Let us for a while examine these things: suppose there were no wild beasts,
no irregular states of the atmosphere; no sicknesses, no pains, no sorrows, nor
anything else of the kind: what would not man have become? A hog rather than a
man, revelling in gluttony and drunkenness, and troubled by none of those
things. But as it is, cares and anxieties are an exercise and discipline of
philosophy, a method for the best of training. For say, let a man be brought up in
a palace, having no pain, nor care, nor anxiety, and having neither cause for
anger nor failure, but whatever he sets his mind upon, that let him do, in that let
him succeed, and have all men obeying him: (see whether) such a man would
not become more irrational than any wild beast. But as it is, our reverses and our
afflictions are as it were a whetstone to sharpen us. For this reason the poor are
for the most part wiser than the rich, as being driven about and tost by many
waves. Thus a body also, being idle and without motion, is sickly and unsightly:
but that which is exercised, and suffers labor and hardships, is more comely and
healthy: and this we should find to hold also in the case of the soul. Iron also,
lying unused, is spoilt, but if worked it shines brightly; and in like manner a soul
which is kept in motion. Now these reverses are precisely what keeps the soul in
motion. Arts again perish, when the soul is not active: but it is active when it has
not everything plain before it: it is made active by adverse things. If there were
no adverse things, there would be nothing to stir it: thus, if everything existed
ready-made in beautiful sort, art would not have found wherein to exercise itself.
So, if all things were level to our understanding, the soul would not find wherein
to exert itself: if it had to be carried about everywhere, it would be an unsightly
object. See you not, that we exhort nurses not to make a practice of carrying