punishment. For the latter, although they laid claim to the dignity which did not
belong to them, nevertheless had an excellent opinion concerning it, and this
they evinced by the great eagerness with which they pursued it; but these men,
when the office has been better regulated, and has received so great a
development, have displayed an audacity which exceeds that of the others,
although manifested in a contrary way. For there is not an equal amount of
contempt involved in aiming at an honor which does not pertain to one, and in
despising such great advantages, but the latter exceeds the former as much as
scorn differs from admiration. What soul then is so sordid as to despise such
great advantages? None whatever, I should say, unless it were one subject to
some demoniacal impulse. For I return once more to the point from which I
started: not in the way of chastising only, but also in the way of benefiting, God
has bestowed a power on priests greater than that of our natural parents. The two
indeed differ as much as the present and the future life. For our natural parents
generate us unto this life only, but the others unto that which is to come. And the
former would not be able to avert death from their offspring, or to repel the
assaults of disease; but these others have often saved a sick soul, or one which
was on the point of perishing, procuring for some a milder chastisement, and
preventing others from falling altogether, not only by instruction and
admonition, but also by the assistance wrought through prayers. For not only at
the time of regeneration, but afterwards also, they have authority to forgive sins.
"Is any sick among you?" it is said, "let him call for the elders of the Church and
let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord. And the
prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord will raise him up: and if he have
committed sins they shall be forgiven him." [James 5:14-15] Again: our natural
parents, should their children come into conflict with any men of high rank and
great power in the world, are unable to profit them: but priests have reconciled,
not rulers and kings, but God Himself when His wrath has often been provoked
against them.
Well! After this will any one venture to condemn me for arrogance? For my

part, after what has been said, I imagine such religious fear will possess the souls
of the hearers that they will no longer condemn those who avoid the office for
arrogance and temerity, but rather those who voluntarily come forward and are
eager to obtain this dignity for themselves. For if they who have been entrusted
with the command of cities, should they chance to be wanting in discretion and
vigilance, have sometimes destroyed the cities and ruined themselves in
addition, how much power think you both in himself and from above must he
need, to avoid sinning, whose business it is to beautify the Bride of Christ?
7. No man loved Christ more than Paul: no man exhibited greater zeal, no
man was counted worthy of more grace: nevertheless, after all these great
advantages, he still has fears and tremblings concerning this government and
those who were governed by him. "I fear," he says, "lest by any means, as the
serpent beguiled Eve through his subtlety, so your minds should be corrupted
from the simplicity which is in Christ." [2 Corinthians 11:3] And again, "I was
with you in fear and in much trembling;" [1 Corinthians 2:3] and this was a man
who had been caught up to the third Heaven, and made partaker of the
unspeakable mysteries of God, [2 Corinthians 12:4] and had endured as many
deaths as he had lived days after he became a believer— a man, moreover, who
would not use the authority given him from Christ lest any of his converts should
be offended. If, then, he who went beyond the ordinances of God, and nowhere
sought his own advantage, but that of those whom he governed, was always so
full of fear when he considered the greatness of his government, what shall our
condition be who in many ways seek our own, who not only fail to go beyond
the commandments of Christ, but for the most part transgress them? "Who is
weak," he says, "and I am not weak? Who is offended and I burn not?"
[2 Corinthians 11:29] Such an one ought the priest to be, or, rather, not such
only: for these are small things, and as nothing compared with what I am about
to say. And what is this? "I could wish," he says, "that myself were accursed
from Christ for my brethren, my kinsmen according to the flesh." [Romans 9:3] If
any one can utter such a speech, if any one has the soul which attains to such a