and being struck with their loftiness of spirit, did not permit them to undertake
this long journey, but promised that if they should only receive their words in
writing, they would themselves depart and successfully importune the Emperor
to dismiss all anger (which, indeed, we are now expecting that he will). For
when sentence should have been given, they, on being admitted into court,
uttered words of the highest wisdom, and besought the Emperor by letters to
show mercy; and they reminded him of the Judgment, and said that they would
lay down their own heads, if his mercy was not granted. And the judges took
down these words in writing, and departed. This, more than the brightest crown,
will adorn our city. And what has here taken place, the Emperor will now hear;
yea, the great City will hear, and the whole world will hear, that the monks who
dwell at the city of Antioch, are men who have displayed an apostolic boldness;
and now when their letters are read at court, all men will admire their
magnanimity; all men will call our city blessed; and we shall shake off our evil
reputation; and it will be known every where, that what has happened was not
the work of the inhabitants of the city, but of strangers and corrupt-minded men;
and that this testimony of the monks will be a sufficient evidence of the
character of the city.
7. Therefore, beloved, let us not be distressed, but let us entertain
favourable hopes; for if their boldness toward men has been able to prevent such
a danger, then what will not their boldness toward God effect? These things also
let us tell the Greeks, when they dare to dispute with us respecting their
philosophers! From hence it is manifest that their stories of former days are
false, but that the things of old reported among us are true; that is, the things
concerning John, and Paul, and Peter, and all the rest. For inasmuch as these
monks have succeeded to the piety of those men, they have consequently
exhibited their boldness. Inasmuch as they were brought up in the same laws,
they have consequently imitated their virtues. So that we stand in no need of
writings for the purpose of showing the virtues, while the very facts cry aloud,
and the masters are shown forth by the scholars. We have no need of disputation

to display the trifling of the Greeks, and the little-mindedness of their
philosophers, while their deeds now loudly proclaim, as they did aforetime, that
all with them is a fable, a stage-play, a piece of acting.
8. And the same magnanimity was displayed by the priests too, as well as
the monks, and they shared among them the charge of our safety. One of them,
indeed, proceeded to court, esteeming all things as secondary to the love of you;
and being himself ready, if he could not persuade the Emperor, to lay down his
own life. And these, who remained here, have displayed the same virtues as the
monks themselves; and holding fast the judges with their own hands, they would
not let them enter into the court, before they gave a promise respecting the result
of the trial. And when they saw them making signs of refusal, they again exerted
themselves with much boldness; and as soon as they saw that they did consent,
embracing their feet and knees, and kissing their hands, they gave an exceeding
proof of either virtue, of liberty and meekness. For that theirs was not the
boldness of presumption, they plainly signified by their kissing the knees, and
embracing the feet of the judges. Again, in proof that this was not flattery, nor a
kind of fawning servility, nor the fruit of a slavish spirit, their former acts
attested their boldness. And these are not the only good results we have reaped
from the trial, but also an abundance of sobriety and meekness; and our city has
become all at once a monastery. Not thus would any one have adorned it, had he
erected golden statues in the forum, as it has now been adorned and
distinguished, in producing those beautiful images of virtue, and displaying its
true riches!
9. But it may be that the things which the Emperor has decreed are painful.
No! not even these are really burdensome, but have brought much advantage
with them. For what is there, I ask, which is oppressive in any of them? That the
Emperor has shut up the Orchestra, that he has forbidden the Hippodrome, that
he has closed and stopped up these fountains of iniquity. May they never again
be opened! From thence did the roots of wickedness shoot forth to the injury of
the city! From thence sprung those who blast its character; men who sell their