THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.88, C.2.

faith of God without effect?"
Wherefore others who maintained the possibility of sins returning,
said that God pardons the sins of a penitent who will afterwards sin
again, not according to His foreknowledge, but only according to His
present justice: since He foresees that He will punish such a man
eternally for his sins, and yet, by His grace, He makes him righteous
for the present. But this cannot stand: because if a cause be placed
absolutely, its effect is placed absolutely; so that if the remission of
sins were effected by grace and the sacraments of grace, not
absolutely but under some condition dependent on some future
event, it would follow that grace and the sacraments of grace are not
the sufficient causes of the remission of sins, which is erroneous, as
being derogatory to God's grace.
Consequently it is in no way possible for the stain of past sins and
the debt of punishment incurred thereby, to return, as caused by
those acts. Yet it may happen that a subsequent sinful act virtually
contains the debt of punishment due to the previous sin, in so far as
when a man sins a second time, for this very reason he seems to sin
more grievously than before, as stated in Rm. 2:5: "According to thy
hardness and impenitent heart, thou treasurest up to thyself wrath
against the day of wrath," from the mere fact, namely, that God's
goodness, which waits for us to repent, is despised. And so much
the more is God's goodness despised, if the first sin is committed a
second time after having been forgiven, as it is a greater favor for the
sin to be forgiven than for the sinner to be endured.
Accordingly the sin which follows repentance brings back, in a
sense, the debt of punishment due to the sins previously forgiven,
not as caused by those sins already forgiven but as caused by this
last sin being committed, on account of its being aggravated in view
of those previous sins. This means that those sins return, not
simply, but in a restricted sense, viz., in so far as they are virtually
contained in the subsequent sin.
Reply to Objection 1: This saying of Augustine seems to refer to the
return of sins as to the debt of eternal punishment considered in
itself, namely, that he who sins after doing penance incurs a debt of
eternal punishment, just as before, but not altogether for the same
"reason." Wherefore Augustine, after saying (Lib. Resp. Prosperi i
[Prosper, Responsiones ad Capitula Gallorum ii]) that "he does not
fall back into that which was forgiven, nor will he be condemned for

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.88, C.2.

original sin," adds: "Nevertheless, for these last sins he will be
condemned to the same death, which he deserved to suffer for the
former," because he incurs the punishment of eternal death which he
deserved for his previous sins.
Reply to Objection 2: By these words Bede means that the guilt
already forgiven enslaves man, not by the return of his former debt
of punishment, but by the repetition of his act.
Reply to Objection 3: The effect of a subsequent sin is that the
former "justices" are not remembered, in so far as they were
deserving of eternal life, but not in so far as they were a hindrance to
sin. Consequently if a man sins mortally after making restitution, he
does not become guilty as though he had not paid back what he
owed; and much less is penance previously done forgotten as to the
pardon of the guilt, since this is the work of God rather than of man.
Reply to Objection 4: Grace removes the stain and the debt of eternal
punishment simply; but it covers the past sinful acts, lest, on their
account, God deprive man of grace, and judge him deserving of
eternal punishment; and what grace has once done, endures for
ever.