these things and recounting them day by day, return our united thanks all of us to
God, and never cease to glorify Him, that so we may receive a large recompense
for our thankfulness of heart, through the grace and compassion of His only
begotten Son, with Whom to the Father, together with the Holy Ghost, be glory,
might, honor, now and ever, world without end. Amen.

Homily 39 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts XVII. 32-34, XVIII. 1
"And when they heard of the resurrection of the dead, some mocked: and
others said, We will hear you again of this matter. So Paul departed from among
them. Howbeit certain men clave unto him, and believed: among the which was
Dionysius the Areopagite and a woman named Damaris, and others with them.
After these things Paul departed from Athens, and came to Corinth."
What can be the reason that, having persuaded (some so far as to say) that
they would hear him again, and there being no dangers, Paul is so in haste to
leave Athens? Probably he knew that he should do them no great good;
moreover he was led by the Spirit to Corinth. (b) For the Athenians, although
fond of hearing strange things, nevertheless did not attend (to him); for this was
not their study, but only to be always having something to say; which was the
cause that made them hold off from him. But if this was their custom, how is it
that they accuse him, "he seems to be a setter forth of strange gods?" [Acts
17:18] Yes, but these were matters they did not at all know what to make of.
Howbeit, he did convert both Dionysius the Areopagite, and some others. For
those who were careful of (right) living, quickly received the word; but the
others not so. It seemed to Paul sufficient to have cast the seeds of the doctrines.
(a) To Corinth then, as I said, he was led by the Spirit, in which city he was to
abide. (c) "And having found a certain Jew named Aquila, of Pontus by birth,
lately come from Italy"— for the greater part of his life had been passed there—
"and Priscilla his wife, because that Claudius had commanded all the Jews to
depart from Rome." [Acts 18:2] For though it was in the reign of Nero that the
war against the Jews was consummated, yet from the time of Claudius and
thenceforward it was fanning up, at a distance indeed, so that, were it but so,
they might come to their senses, and from Rome they were now driven as

common pests. This is why it is so ordered by Providence that Paul was led there
as a prisoner, that he might not as a Jew be driven away, but as acting under
military custody might even be guarded there. (Having found these,) "he came to
them, and because he was of the same craft, he abode with them and wrought:
for by occupation they were tent-makers." [Acts 18:3] Lo, what a justification he
found for dwelling in the same house with them! For because here, of all places,
it was necessary that he should not receive, as he himself says, "That wherein
they glory, they may be found, even as we" [2 Corinthians 11:12], it is
providentially ordered that he there abides. "And he reasoned in the synagogue
every sabbath, and persuaded the Jews and the Greeks. And when Silas and
Timotheus had come from Macedonia, Paul was straitened in the word, testifying
to the Jews that Jesus is the Christ." (v. 4, 5.) "And when the Jews opposed and
blasphemed," i.e. they tried to bear him down ([ἐ] [πηρέαζον]), they set upon
him— What then does Paul? He separates from them, and in a very awful
manner: and though he does not now say, "It was need that the word should be
spoken unto you," yet he darkly intimates it to them:— "and when they opposed
themselves, and blasphemed, he shook his raiment, and said unto them, Your
blood be upon your own heads; I am clean: from henceforth I will go unto the
Gentiles." [Acts 18:6] "And he departed thence, and entered into a certain man's
house, named Justus, one that worshipped God, whose house joined hard to the
synagogue." See how having again said, "Henceforth— " for all that, he does not
neglect them; so that it was to rouse them that he said this, and thereupon came
to Justus, whose house was contiguous to the synagogue, so that even from this
they might have jealousy, from the very proximity. "And Crispus, the chief ruler
of the synagogue, believed on the Lord with all his house." This also was, of all
things, enough to bring them over. "And many of the Corinthians hearing
believed, and were baptized. Then spoke the Lord to Paul in the night by a
vision, Be not afraid, but speak, and hold not your peace: for I am with you, and
no man shall set on you to hurt you: for I have much people in this city." [Acts
18:8-10] See by how many reasons He persuades him, and how He puts last the