those others had said (to John), "Are you that Prophet?" while these say, "This is
that Prophet."
Ver. 15 . "When Jesus therefore perceived that they would come and take
Him by force to make Him a king, He departed again into a mountain."
Wonderful! How great is the tyranny of gluttony, how great the fickleness
of men's minds! No longer do they vindicate the Law, no longer do they care for
the violation of the Sabbath, no longer are they zealous for God; all such
considerations are thrown aside, when their bellies have been filled; He was a
prophet in their eyes, and they were about to choose Him for a king. But Christ
flees. "Wherefore?" To teach us to despise worldly dignities, and to show us that
He needed nothing on earth. For He who chose all things mean, both mother and
house and city and nurture and attire would not afterwards be made illustrious by
things on earth. The things which (He had) from heaven were glorious and great,
angels, a star, His Father loudly speaking, the Spirit testifying, and Prophets
proclaiming Him from afar; those on earth were all mean, that thus His power
might the more appear. He came also to teach us to despise the things of the
world, and not be amazed or astonished by the splendors of this life, but to laugh
them all to scorn, and to desire those which are to come. For he who admires
things which are here, will not admire those in the heavens. Wherefore also He
says to Pilate, "My Kingdom is not of this world" [John 18:36], that He may not
afterwards appear to have employed mere human terror or dominion for the
purpose of persuasion. Why then says the Prophet, "Behold, your King comes
unto you, meek, and sitting upon an ass"? [Zechariah 9:9] He spoke of that
Kingdom which is in the heavens, but not of this on earth; and on this account
Christ says, "I receive not honor from men." [John 5:41]
Learn we then, beloved, to despise and not to desire the honor which is
from men; for we have been honored with the greatest of honors, compared with
which that other is verily insult, ridicule, and mockery. And as the riches of this
world compared with the riches of that are poverty, as this life apart from that is
deadness, (for "let the dead bury their dead" [Matthew 8:28]) so this honor

compared with that is shame and ridicule. Let us then not pursue it. If they who
confer it are of less account than a shadow or a dream, the honor itself much
more so. "The glory of man is as the flower of the grass" [1 Peter 1:24]; and
what is meaner than the flower of the grass? Were this glory everlasting, in what
could it profit the soul? In nothing. Nay, it very greatly injures us by making us
slaves, slaves in worse condition than those bought with money, slaves who obey
not one master only, but two, three, ten thousand, all giving different commands.
How much better is it to be a free man than a slave, to be free from the slavery of
men, and subject only to the dominion of God? In a word, if you will desire
glory, desire it, but let it be the glory immortal, for that is exhibited on a more
glorious stage, and brings greater profit. For the men here bid you be at charges
to please them, but Christ, on the contrary, gives you an hundredfold for what
you give Him, and adds moreover eternal life. Which of the two then is better, to
be admired on earth, or in heaven? By man, or by God? To your loss, or to your
gain? To wear a crown for a single day, or for endless ages? Give to him that
needs, but give not to a dancer, lest you lose your money and destroy his soul.
For you are the cause of his (coming to) perdition through unseasonable
munificence. Since did those on the stage know that their employment would be
unprofitable, they would have long ago ceased to practice it; but when they
behold you applauding, crowding after them, spending and wasting your
substance upon them, even if they have no desire to follow (their profession),
they are kept to it by the desire of gain. If they knew that no one would praise
what they do, they would soon desist from their labors, by reason of their
unprofitableness; but when they see that the action is admired by many, the
praise of others becomes a bait to them. Let us then desist from this unprofitable
expense, let us learn upon whom and when we ought to spend. Let us not, I
implore you, provoke God in both ways, gathering whence we ought not, and
scattering where we ought not; for what anger does not your conduct deserve,
when you pass by the poor and givest to a harlot? Would not the paying the hire
of sin and the bestowing honor where it were meet to punish have been a charge