FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.112, C.5.

as He instituted the various conditions of things, that the universe
might be perfect. Hence after the Apostle had said (Eph. 4:7): "To
every one of us is given grace according to the measure of the
giving of Christ," having enumerated the various graces, he adds
(Eph. 4:12): "For the perfecting of the saints . . . for the edifying of
the body of Christ."
Reply to Objection 1: The Divine care may be looked at in two ways:
first, as regards the Divine act, which is simple and uniform; and
thus His care looks equally to all, since by one simple act He
administers great things and little. But, "secondly," it may be
considered in those things which come to be considered by the
Divine care; and thus, inequality is found, inasmuch as God by His
care provides greater gifts to some, and lesser gifts for others.
Reply to Objection 2: This objection is based on the first kind of
magnitude of grace; since grace cannot be greater by ordaining to a
greater good, but inasmuch as it more or less ordains to a greater or
less participation of the same good. For there may be diversity of
intensity and remissness, both in grace and in final glory as regards
the subjects' participation.
Reply to Objection 3: Natural life pertains to man's substance, and
hence cannot be more or less; but man partakes of the life of grace
accidentally, and hence man may possess it more or less.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.112, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether man can know that he has grace?

Objection 1: It would seem that man can know that he has grace. For
grace by its physical reality is in the soul. Now the soul has most
certain knowledge of those things that are in it by their physical
reality, as appears from Augustine (Gen. ad lit. xii, 31). Hence grace
may be known most certainly by one who has grace.
Objection 2: Further, as knowledge is a gift of God, so is grace. But
whoever receives knowledge from God, knows that he has
knowledge, according to Wis. 7:17: The Lord "hath given me the true
knowledge of the things that are." Hence, with equal reason,
whoever receives grace from God, knows that he has grace.
Objection 3: Further, light is more knowable than darkness, since,
according to the Apostle (Eph. 5:13), "all that is made manifest is
light," Now sin, which is spiritual darkness, may be known with
certainty by one that is in sin. Much more, therefore, may grace,
which is spiritual light, be known.
Objection 4: Further, the Apostle says (1 Cor. 2:12): "Now we have
received not the Spirit of this world, but the Spirit that is of God; that
we may know the things that are given us from God." Now grace is
God's first gift. Hence, the man who receives grace by the Holy
Spirit, by the same Holy Spirit knows the grace given to him.
Objection 5: Further, it was said by the Lord to Abraham (Gn. 22:12):
"Now I know that thou fearest God," i.e. "I have made thee know."
Now He is speaking there of chaste fear, which is not apart from
grace. Hence a man may know that he has grace.
On the contrary, It is written (Eccles. 9:1): "Man knoweth not whether
he be worthy of love or hatred." Now sanctifying grace maketh a man
worthy of God's love. Therefore no one can know whether he has
sanctifying grace.
I answer that, There are three ways of knowing a thing: first, by
revelation, and thus anyone may know that he has grace, for God by
a special privilege reveals this at times to some, in order that the joy
of safety may begin in them even in this life, and that they may carry
on toilsome works with greater trust and greater energy, and may