having quenched your love, which was a greater security to us than any wall,
whom have we left to fly to? Where else shall we have to look, when we have
provoked so benign a lord, so indulgent a father? So that while they seem to
have committed offenses of the most intolerable kind, they have on the other
hand suffered the most terrible evils; not daring to look any man in the face; nor
being able to look upon the sun with free eyes; shame everywhere weighing
down their eyelids, and compelling them to hide their heads! Deprived of their
confidence, they are now in a more miserable condition than any captives, and
undergo the utmost dishonour; and while thinking of the magnitude of their
evils, and the height of insolence to which they have rushed, they can scarce
draw breath; inasmuch as they have drawn on their own heads severer
reproaches from all the inhabitants of the world, than even from him who is seen
to have been insulted.
9. But yet, O Emperor, if you are willing, there is a remedy for the wound,
and a medicine for these evils, mighty as they are! Often, indeed, has it occurred
among private individuals, that great and insufferable offenses have become a
foundation for great affection. Thus also did it happen in the case of our human
race. For when God made man, and placed him in Paradise, and held him in
much honour; the devil could not bear this his great prosperity, and envied him,
and cast him out from that dignity which had been granted. But God was so far
from forsaking him, that He even opened Heaven to us instead of Paradise; and
in so doing, both showed His own lovingkindness, and punished the devil the
more severely. So do thou too now! The demons have lately used all their
efforts, that they may effectually rend from your favour that city which was
dearest of all to you. Knowing this then, demand what penalty you will, but let
us not become outcasts from your former love! Nay, though it is a strange thing,
I must say, display towards us now still greater kindness than ever; and again
write this city's name among the foremost in your love—if you are indeed
desirous of being revenged upon the demons who were the instigators of these
crimes! For if you pull down, and overturn, and raze the city, you will be doing

those very things which they have long been desiring. But if you dismiss your
anger, and again avow that you love it even as you did before, you have given
them a deadly blow. You have taken the most perfect revenge upon them by
showing, not only that nothing whatever has come for them of their evil designs;
but that all has proved the very opposite of what they wished. And you would be
just in acting thus, and in showing mercy to a city, which the demons envied on
account of your affection; for if you had not so exceedingly loved her, they
would not have envied her to such a degree! So that even if what I have asserted
is extraordinary, it is nevertheless, true, that what the city has suffered, has been
owing to you, and your love! What burning, what devastation, so bitter as those
words, which you uttered in your own defence?
10. You say now, that you have been insulted, and sustained wrongs such as
no Emperor ever yet did. But if you will, O most gracious, most wise, and most
religious Sovereign, this contempt will procure you a crown, more honourable
and splendid than the diadem you wear! For this diadem is a display of your
princely virtue, but it is also a token of the munificence of him who gave it; but
the crown woven from this your humanity will be entirely your own good work,
and that of your own love of wisdom; and all men will admire you less for the
sake of these precious stones, than they will applaud you for your superiority
over this wrath. Were your Statues thrown down? You have it in your power
again to set up others yet more splendid. For if you remit the offenses of those
who have done you injury, and take no revenge upon them, they will erect a
statue to you, not one in the forum of brass, nor of gold, nor inlaid with gems;
but one arrayed in that robe which is more precious than any material, that of
humanity and tender mercy! Every man will thus set you up in his own soul; and
you will have as many statues, as there are men who now inhabit, or shall
hereafter inhabit, the whole world! For not only we, but all those who come after
us, and their successors, will hear of these things, and will admire and love you,
just as if they themselves had experienced this kindness!
11. And to show that I do not speak this in a way of flattery, but that it will