FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.6.

Christ's blood. And thus they should be intent on the fulfilment of
their spiritual ministry.
Reply to Objection 1:: As already stated (Article 4), the purpose of
the Law was to induce men to have reverence for the divine worship:
and this in two ways; first, by excluding from the worship of God
whatever might be an object of contempt; secondly, by introducing
into the divine worship all that seemed to savor of reverence. And,
indeed, if this was observed in regard to the tabernacle and its
vessels, and in the animals to be sacrificed, much more was it to be
observed in the very ministers. Wherefore, in order to obviate
contempt for the ministers, it was prescribed that they should have
no bodily stain or defect: since men so deformed are wont to be
despised by others. For the same reason it was also commanded
that the choice of those who were to be destined to the service of
God was not to be made in a broadcast manner from any family, but
according to their descent from one particular stock, thus giving
them distinction and nobility.
In order that they might be revered, special ornate vestments were
appointed for their use, and a special form of consecration. This
indeed is the general reason of ornate garments. But the high-priest
in particular had eight vestments. First, he had a linen tunic.
Secondly, he had a purple tunic; round the bottom of which were
placed "little bells" and "pomegranates of violet, and purple, and
scarlet twice dyed." Thirdly, he had the ephod, which covered his
shoulders and his breast down to the girdle; and it was made of
gold, and violet and purple, and scarlet twice dyed and twisted linen:
and on his shoulders he bore two onyx stones, on which were
graven the names of the children of Israel. Fourthly, he had the
rational, made of the same material; it was square in shape, and was
worn on the breast, and was fastened to the ephod. On this rational
there were twelve precious stones set in four rows, on which also
were graven the names of the children of Israel, in token that the
priest bore the burden of the whole people, since he bore their
names on his shoulders; and that it was his duty ever to think of
their welfare, since he wore them on his breast, bearing them in his
heart, so to speak. And the Lord commanded the "Doctrine and
Truth" to be put in the rational: for certain matters regarding moral
and dogmatic truth were written on it. The Jews indeed pretend that
on the rational was placed a stone which changed color according to
the various things which were about to happen to the children of
Israel: and this they call the "Truth and Doctrine." Fifthly, he wore a

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.6.

belt or girdle made of the four colors mentioned above. Sixthly, there
was the tiara or mitre which was made of linen. Seventhly, there was
the golden plate which hung over his forehead; on it was inscribed
the Lord's name. Eighthly, there were "the linen breeches to cover
the flesh of their nakedness," when they went up to the sanctuary or
altar. Of these eight vestments the lesser priests had four, viz. the
linen tunic and breeches, the belt and the tiara.
According to some, the literal reason for these vestments was that
they denoted the disposition of the terrestrial globe; as though the
high-priest confessed himself to be the minister of the Creator of the
world, wherefore it is written (Wis. 18:24): "In the robe" of Aaron
"was the whole world" described. For the linen breeches signified
the earth out of which the flax grows. The surrounding belt signified
the ocean which surrounds the earth. The violet tunic denoted the air
by its color: its little bells betoken the thunder; the pomegranates,
the lightning. The ephod, by its many colors, signified the starry
heaven; the two onyx stones denoted the two hemispheres, or the
sun and moon. The twelve precious stones on the breast are the
twelve signs of the zodiac: and they are said to have been placed on
the rational because in heaven, are the types [rationes] of earthly
things, according to Job 38:33: "Dost thou know the order of heaven,
and canst thou set down the reason [rationem] thereof on the
earth?" The turban or tiara signified the empyrean: the golden plate
was a token of God, the governor of the universe.
The figurative reason is evident. Because bodily stains or defects
wherefrom the priests had to be immune, signify the various vices
and sins from which they should be free. Thus it is forbidden that he
should be blind, i.e. he ought not to be ignorant: he must not be
lame, i.e. vacillating and uncertain of purpose: that he must have "a
little, or a great, or a crooked nose," i.e. that he should not, from lack
of discretion, exceed in one direction or in another, or even exercise
some base occupation: for the nose signifies discretion, because it
discerns odors. It is forbidden that he should have "a broken foot" or
"hand," i.e. he should not lose the power of doing good works or of
advancing in virtue. He is rejected, too, if he have a swelling either in
front or behind: by which is signified too much love of earthly things:
if he be blear-eyed, i.e. if his mind is darkened by carnal affections:
for running of the eyes is caused by a flow of matter. He is also
rejected if he had "a pearl in his eye," i.e. if he presumes in his own
estimation that he is clothed in the white robe of righteousness.
Again, he is rejected "if he have a continued scab," i.e. lustfulness of