exact sense comes from Divine inspiration; while that which comes
from a natural cause is not called prophecy except in a relative
sense. Now we must observe that as God Who is the universal
efficient cause requires neither previous matter nor previous
disposition of matter in His corporeal effects, for He is able at the
same instant to bring into being matter and disposition and form, so
neither does He require a previous disposition in His spiritual
effects, but is able to produce both the spiritual effect and at the
same time the fitting disposition as requisite according to the order
of nature. More than this, He is able at the same time, by creation, to
produce the subject, so as to dispose a soul for prophecy and give it
the prophetic grace, at the very instant of its creation.
Reply to Objection 1: It matters not to prophecy by what
comparisons the thing prophesied is expressed; and so the Divine
operation makes no change in a prophet in this respect. Yet if there
be anything in him incompatible with prophecy, it is removed by the
Divine power.
Reply to Objection 2: The considerations of science proceed from a
natural cause, and nature cannot work without a previous
disposition in matter. This cannot be said of God Who is the cause of
prophecy.
Reply to Objection 3: A natural indisposition, if not removed, might
be an obstacle to prophetic revelation, for instance if a man were
altogether deprived of the natural senses. In the same way a man
might be hindered from the act of prophesying by some very strong
passion, whether of anger, or of concupiscence as in coition, or by
any other passion. But such a natural indisposition as this is
removed by the Divine power, which is the cause of prophecy.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.171, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether a good life is requisite for prophecy?

Objection 1: It would seem that a good life is requisite for prophecy.
For it is written (Wis. 7:27) that the wisdom of God "through nations
conveyeth herself into holy souls," and "maketh the friends of God,
and prophets." Now there can be no holiness without a good life and
sanctifying grace. Therefore prophecy cannot be without a good life
and sanctifying grace.
Objection 2: Further, secrets are not revealed save to a friend,
according to Jn. 15:15, "But I have called you friends, because all
things whatsoever I have heard of My Father, I have made known to
you." Now God reveals His secrets to the prophets (Amos 3:7).
Therefore it would seem that the prophets are the friends of God;
which is impossible without charity. Therefore seemingly prophecy
cannot be without charity; and charity is impossible without
sanctifying grace.
Objection 3: Further, it is written (Mt. 7:15): "Beware of false
prophets, who come to you in the clothing of sheep, but inwardly
they are ravening wolves." Now all who are without grace are likened
inwardly to a ravening wolf, and consequently all such are false
prophets. Therefore no man is a true prophet except he be good by
grace.
Objection 4: Further, the Philosopher says (De Somn. et Vigil. [De
Divinat. per Somn. i]) that "if interpretation of dreams is from God, it
is unfitting for it to be bestowed on any but the best." Now it is
evident that the gift of prophecy is from God. Therefore the gift of
prophecy is vouchsafed only to the best men.
On the contrary, To those who had said, "Lord, have we not
prophesied in Thy name?" this reply is made: "I never knew
you" (Mt. 7:22,23). Now "the Lord knoweth who are His" (2 Tim. 2:19).
Therefore prophecy can be in those who are not God's by grace.
I answer that, A good life may be considered from two points of view.
First, with regard to its inward root, which is sanctifying grace.
Secondly, with regard to the inward passions of the soul and the
outward actions. Now sanctifying grace is given chiefly in order that
man's soul may be united to God by charity. Wherefore Augustine