and you obeyed not:" and, "We have mourned, and you have not lamented;" that
is, "John followed the rugged and grave life, and you took no heed." And He
says not, "he this, I that," but the purpose of both being one, although their
modes of life were opposite, for this cause He speaks of their doings as common.
Yea, for even their coming by opposite ways arose out of a most exact
accordance, such as continued looking to one and the same end. What sort of
excuse then can you have after all this?
Wherefore He subjoined, "And wisdom is justified of her children;" that is,
though ye be not persuaded, yet with me after this ye cannot find fault. As the
prophet says touching the Father, "That You might be justified in Your sayings."
For God, though He should effect nothing more by His care over us, fulfills all
His part, so as to leave to them that will be shameless not so much as a shadow
of excuse for uncandid doubt.
And if the similitudes be mean, and of an ill sound, marvel not, for He was
discoursing with a view to the weakness of His hearers. Since Ezekiel too
mentions many similitudes like them, and unworthy of God's majesty. But this
too especially becomes His tender care.
And mark them, how in another respect also they are carried about into
contradictory opinions. For whereas they had said of John, "he has a devil,"
[Matthew 11:18] they stopped not at this, but said the very same again
concerning Him, taking as He did the opposite course; thus were they forever
carried about into conflicting opinions.
But Luke herewith sets down also another and a heavier charge against
them, saying, "For the publicans justified God, having received the baptism of
John."
6. Then He proceeds to upbraid the cities now that wisdom has been
justified; now that He has shown all to be fully performed. That is, having failed
to persuade them, He now does but lament over them; which is more than
terrifying. For He had exhibited both His teaching by His words, and His
wonder-working power by His signs. But forasmuch as they abode in their own

unbelief, He now does but upbraid.
For "then," it is said, "began Jesus to upbraid the cities, wherein most of
His mighty works were done, because they repented not; saying, Woe unto you,
Chorazin! Woe unto you, Bethsaida!" [Matthew 11:20-21]
Then, to show you that they are not such by nature, He states also the name
of the city out of which proceeded five apostles. For both Philip, and those two
pairs of the chief apostles, were from thence. [John 1:44]
"For if," says He, "the mighty works which were done in you had been done
in Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented in sackcloth and ashes. But I say
unto you, It shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon, at the day of judgment,
than for you. And thou, Capernaum, which art exalted unto heaven, shall be
brought down to hell, for if the mighty works which have been done in you had
been done in Sodom, it would have remained until this day. But I say unto you, It
shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom in the day of judgment, than for
you."
And He adds not Sodom with the others for nought, but to aggravate the
charge against them. Yea, for it is a very great proof of wickedness, when not
only of them that now are, but even of all those that ever were wicked, none are
found so bad as they.
Thus elsewhere also He makes a comparison, condemning them by the
Ninevites, and by the Queen of the south; there, however, it was by them that did
right, here, even by them that sinned; a thing far more grievous. With this law of
condemnation, Ezekiel too was acquainted: wherefore also he said to Jerusalem,
"You have justified your sisters in all your sins." Thus everywhere is He wont to
linger in the Old Testament, as in a favored place. And not even at this does He
stay His speech, but makes their fears yet more intense, by saying, that they
should suffer things more grievous than Sodomites and Tyrians, so as by every
means to gather them in, both by bewailing, and by alarming them.
7. To these same things let us also listen: since not for the unbelievers only,
but for us also, has He appointed a punishment more grievous than that of the