he first mentions what was common. For all these things were gendered of envy,
their slanderings, accusations, dissensions. For just like some evil root, envy
produced wrath, accusation, pride, and all those other evils, and by them was
increased further,

2 Corinthians 12:21
And "lest when I come again, my God should humble me among you."
And the word "again," too, is as smiting them. For he means, 'What
happened before is enough;' as he said also in the beginning [of the Epistle], "to
spare you, I came not as yet to Corinth." [Chap. 1:18, 23] Do you see how he
shows both indignation and tender affection? But what means, "will humble
me?" And yet this is glorious rather, to accuse, to take vengeance, to call to
account, to be seated in the place of judge; howbeit he calls it a humbling. So far
was he from being ashamed of that [cause of] humbling, because, "his bodily
presence was weak, and his speech of no account," that he wished to be even for
ever in that case, and deprecated the contrary. And he says this more clearly as
he proceeds; and he counts this to be especially humbling, to be involved in such
a necessity as the present, of punishing and taking vengeance. And wherefore
did he not say, 'lest when I come I shall be humbled,' but, "lest when I come my
God will humble me." 'Because had it not been for His sake, I should have paid
no attention nor been anxious. For it is not as possessing authority and for my
own pleasure, that I demand satisfaction, but because of His commandment.'
Now above, indeed, he expressed himself thus, "I shall be found;" here,
however, he relaxes and adopts milder and gentler language, saying,
"I shall mourn for many of them who have sinned." Not simply, "who have
sinned," but,
"Who have not repented." And he said not, 'all,' but "many;" nor made it
clear who these were either, thereby making the return unto repentance easy to
them; and to make it plain that a repentance is able to right transgressions, he
bewails those that repent not, those who are incurably diseased, those who
continue in their wounds. Observe then Apostolic virtue, in that, conscious of no
evil in himself, he laments over the evils of others and is humbled for other

men's transgressions. For this is the special mark of a teacher, so to sympathize
with the calamities of his disciples, and to mourn over the wounds of those who
are under him. Then he mentions also the specific sin.
"Of the lasciviousness and uncleanness which they committed." Now in
these words he alludes indeed to fornication; but if one carefully examine the
subject, every kind of sin can be called by this name. For although the fornicator
and adulterer is preeminently styled unclean, yet still the other sins also produce
uncleanness in the soul. And therefore it is that Christ also calls the Jews
unclean, not charging them with fornication only, but with wickedness of other
kinds as well. Wherefore also He says that they made the outside clean, and that
"not the things which enter in defile the man, but those which come out from
him;" [Matthew 15:11] and it is said in another place, "Every one that is proud in
heart is unclean before the Lord." [Proverbs 16:5. Septuagint]
3. For nothing is purer than virtue, nothing uncleaner than vice; for the one
is brighter than the sun, the other more stinking than mire. And to this they will
themselves bear witness, who are wallowing in that mire and living in that
darkness; at any rate, when one prepares them a little to see clearly. For as long
as they are by themselves, and inebriate with the passion, just as if living in
darkness they lie in unseemly wise to their much infamy, conscious even then
where they are, although not fully; but after they have seen any of those who live
in virtue reproving them or even showing himself, then they understand their
own wretchedness more clearly; and as if a sunbeam had darted upon them, they
cover up their own unseemliness and blush before those who know of their
doings, yea, though the one be a slave and the other free, though the one be a
king and the other a subject. Thus when Ahab saw Elijah, he was ashamed, even
when he had as yet said nothing; standing convicted by the mere sight of him;
and when his accuser was silent, he pronounced a judgment condemnatory of
himself; uttering the language of such as are caught, and saying, "You have found
me, O mine enemy!" [1 Kings 21:20] Thus Elijah himself conversed with that
tyrant then with great boldness. Thus Herod, unable to bear the shame of those