church-allowance." And what is that to you? For you will not be saved because I
give; nor if the Church bestow have you blotted out your own sins. For this
cause do you not give, because the Church ought to give to the needy? Because
the priests pray, will you never pray yourself? And because others fast, will you
be continually drunken? Do you not know that God enacted not almsgiving so
much for the sake of the poor as for the sake of the persons themselves who
bestow?
But do you suspect the priest? Why this thing itself, to begin with, is a
grievous sin. However, I will not examine the matter too nicely. Do thou it all in
your own person, and so shall you reap a double reward. Since in fact, what we
say in behalf of almsgiving, we say not, that you should offer to us, but that you
should yourself minister by your own hands. For if you bring your alms to me,
perhaps you may even be led captive by vain-glory, and oftentimes likewise you
shall go away offended through suspicion of something evil: but if you do all
things by yourselves, you shall both be rid of offenses and of unreasonable
suspicion, and greater is your reward. Not therefore to compel you to bring your
money hither, do I say these things; nor from indignation on account of the
priests being ill-reported of. For if one must be indignant and grieve, for you
should be our grief, who say this ill. Since to them who are spoken ill of falsely
and vainly the reward is greater, but to the speakers the condemnation and
punishment is heavier. I say not these things therefore in their behalf, but in
solicitude and care for you. For what marvel is it if some in our generation are
suspected, when in the case of those holy men who imitated the angels, who
possessed nothing of their own, I mean the Apostles, there was a murmuring in
the ministration to the widows [Acts 6:1] that the poor were overlooked? When
"not one said that anything of the things he possessed was his own, but they had
all things common?" [Acts 4:32]
Let us not then put forward these pretexts, nor account it an excuse that the
Church is wealthy. But when you see the greatness of her substance, bear in
mind also the crowds of poor who are on her list, the multitudes of her sick, her

occasions of endless expenses. Investigate, scrutinize, there is none to forbid,
nay, they are even ready to give you an account. But I wish to go much farther.
Namely, when we have given in our accounts and proved that our expenditure is
no less than our income, nay, sometimes more, I would gladly ask you this
further question: When we depart hence and shall hear Christ saying, "You saw
me hungry, and gave me no meat; naked, and you clothed me not;" what shall we
say? What apology shall we make? Shall we bring forward such and such a
person who disobeyed these commands? Or some of the priests who were
suspected? "Nay, what is this to you? For I accuse you," says He, "of those
things wherein you have yourself sinned. And the apology for these would be, to
have washed away your own offenses, not to point to others whose errors have
been the same as yours."
In fact, the Church through your meanness is compelled to have such
property as it has now. Since, if men did all things according to the laws, its
revenue should have been your good will, which were both a secure chest and an
inexhaustible treasury. But now when you lay up for yourselves treasures upon
the earth and shut up all things in your own stores, while the Church is
compelled to be at charges with bands of widows, choirs of virgins, sojournings
of strangers, distresses of foreigners, the misfortunes of prisoners, the necessities
of the sick and maimed, and other such like causes, what must be done? Turn
away from all these, and block up so many ports? Who then could endure the
shipwrecks that would ensue; the weepings, the lamentations, the wailings which
would reach us from every quarter?
Let us not then speak at random what comes into our mind. For now, as I
have just said, we are really prepared to render up our accounts to you. But even
if it were the reverse, and you had corrupt teachers plundering and grasping at
every thing, not even so were their wickedness an apology for you. For the
Lover of mankind and All-wise, the Only-Begotten Son of God, seeing all
things, and knowing the chance that in so great length of time and in so vast a
world there would be many corrupt priests; lest the carelessness of those under