Reply. It is impossible to mark any difference of parts of any duration antecedent to the
beginning of all creation, as the fifth objection supposed that we could do. For
nothingness has neither measure nor duration, and the eternity of God has no parts, no
before and no after. We cannot therefore refer the beginning of all creation to any
severally marked points in any pre-existing measure. There are no such points for
the beginning of creation to be referred to according to any relation of agreement or
divergence. Hence it is impossible to demand any reason in the mind of the agent why
he should have brought the creature into being in this particular marked instant of
duration rather than in that other instant preceding or following. God brought into being
creation and time simultaneously. There is no account to be taken therefore why
He produced the creature now, and not before, but only why the creature has not
always been. There is an analogy in the case of place: for particular bodies are
produced in a particular time and also in a particular place; and, because they have
about them a time and a place within which they are contained, there must be a reason
assignable why they are produced in this place and this time rather than in any other:
but in regard of the whole stellar universe (coelum), beyond which there is no place, and
along with which the universal place of all things is produced, no account is to be taken
why it is situated here and not there. In like manner in the production of the whole
creation, beyond which there is no time, and simultaneously with which time is
produced, no question is to be raised why it is now and not before, but only why it has
not always been, or why it has come to be after not being, or why it had any beginning.
Arg. 6. Means to the end have their necessity from the end, especially in voluntary
actions. So long then as the end is uniform, the means to the end must be uniform
or uniformly produced, unless they come to stand in some new relation to the end. Now
the end of creatures proceeding from the divine will is the divine goodness, which alone
can be the end in view of the divine will. Since then the divine goodness is uniform for
all eternity, alike in itself and in comparison with the divine will, it seems that creatures
must be uniformly brought into being by the divine will for all eternity. It cannot be said
that any new relation to the end supervenes upon them, so long as the position is clung
to that they had no being at all before a certain fixed time, at which they are supposed
to have begun to be.
Reply. Though the end of the divine will can be none other than the divine goodness,
still the divine will has not to work to bring this goodness into being, in the way that the
artist works to set up the product of his art, since the divine goodness is eternal and
unchangeable and incapable of addition. Nor does God work for His goodness as for an
end to be won for Himself, as a king works to win a city: for God is His own goodness.
He works for this end, only inasmuch as He produces an effect which is to share in the
end. In such a production of things for an end, the uniform attitude of end to agent is not
to be considered reason enough for an everlasting work. Rather we should consider the
bearing of the end on the effect produced to serve it. The one evinced necessity is that
of the production of the effect in the manner better calculated to serve the end for which
it is produced.