THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.2, C.10.

numerical unity, which is the principle of number. For the unity of a
Divine Person is an uncreated and self-subsisting unity, not received
into another by participation. Also, it is complete in itself, having in
itself whatever pertains to the nature of unity; and therefore it is not
compatible with the nature of a part, as in numerical unity, which is a
part of number, and which is shared in by the things numbered. And
hence in this respect the union of the Incarnation is higher than
numerical unity by reason of the unity of the Divine Person, and not
by reason of the human nature, which is not the unity of the Divine
Person, but is united to it.
Reply to Objection 2: This reason regards the things united, and not
the Person in Whom the union takes place.
Reply to Objection 3: The unity of the Divine Person is greater than
the unity of person and nature in us; and hence the union of the
Incarnation is greater than the union of soul and body in us.
And because what is urged in the argument "on the contrary" rests
upon what is untrue---namely, that the union of the Incarnation is
greater than the unity of the Divine Persons in Essence---we must
say to the authority of Augustine that the human nature is not more
in the Son of God than the Son of God in the Father, but much less.
But the man in some respects is more in the Son than the Son in the
Father---namely, inasmuch as the same suppositum is signified
when I say "man," meaning Christ, and when I say "Son of God";
whereas it is not the same suppositum of Father and Son.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.2, C.11.

### ARTICLE 10. Whether the union of the Incarnation took place

by grace?
Objection 1: It would seem that the union of the Incarnation did not
take place by grace. For grace is an accident, as was shown above
(FS, Question 110, Article 2). But the union of the human nature to
the Divine did not take place accidentally, as was shown above
(Article 6). Therefore it seems that the union of the Incarnation did
not take place by grace.
Objection 2: Further, the subject of grace is the soul. But it is written
(Col. 2:9): "In Christ dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead
corporeally." Therefore it seems that this union did not take place by
grace.
Objection 3: Further, every saint is united to God by grace. If,
therefore, the union of the Incarnation was by grace, it would seem
that Christ is said to be God no more than other holy men.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Praed. Sanct. xv): "By the same
grace every man is made a Christian, from the beginning of his faith,
as this man from His beginning was made Christ." But this man
became Christ by union with the Divine Nature. Therefore this union
was by grace.
I answer that, As was said above (FS, Question 110, Article 1), grace
is taken in two ways:--first, as the will of God gratuitously bestowing
something; secondly, as the free gift of God. Now human nature
stands in need of the gratuitous will of God in order to be lifted up to
God, since this is above its natural capability. Moreover, human
nature is lifted up to God in two ways: first, by operation, as the
saints know and love God; secondly, by personal being, and this
mode belongs exclusively to Christ, in Whom human nature is
assumed so as to be in the Person of the Son of God. But it is plain
that for the perfection of operation the power needs to be perfected
by a habit, whereas that a nature has being in its own suppositum
does not take place by means of a habit.
And hence we must say that if grace be understood as the will of
God gratuitously doing something or reputing anything as wellpleasing or acceptable to Him, the union of the Incarnation took