the same place, since between two given points in the various
surfaces of the place, there would be two straight lines
corresponding to the two bodies in that place.
Objection 3: Further, it would seem impossible that by a miracle a
body which is enclosed within another should not be in a place, for
then it would have a common and not a proper place, and this is
impossible. Yet this would follow if two bodies were in the same
place. Therefore this cannot be done by a miracle. The minor is
proved thus. Supposing two bodies to be in the same place, the one
being greater than the other as to every dimension, the lesser body
will be enclosed in the greater, and the place occupied by the greater
body will be its common place; while it will have no proper place,
because no given surface of the body will contain it, and this is
essential to place. Therefore it will not have a proper place.
Objection 4: Further, place corresponds in proportion to the thing
placed. Now it can never happen by a miracle that the same body is
at the same time in different places, except by some kind of
transformation, as in the Sacrament of the Altar. Therefore it can
nowise happen by a miracle that two bodies be together in the same
place.
On the contrary, The Blessed Virgin gave birth to her Son by a
miracle. Now in this hallowed birth it was necessary for two bodies
to be together in the same place, because the body of her child when
coming forth did not break through the enclosure of her virginal
purity. Therefore it is possible for two bodies to be miraculously
together in the same place.
Further, this may again be proved from the fact that our Lord went in
to His disciples, the doors being shut (Jn. 20:19, 26).
I answer that, As shown above (Article 2) the reason why two bodies
must needs be in two places is that distinction in matter requires
distinction in place. Wherefore we observe that when two bodies
merge into one, each loses its distinct being, and one indistinct
being accrues to the two combined, as in the case of mixtures.
Hence it is impossible for two bodies to remain two and yet be
together unless each retain its distinct being which it had hitherto, in
so much as each of them was a being undivided in itself and distinct
from others. Now this distinct being depends on the essential

principles of a thing as on its proximate causes, but on God as on
the first cause. And since the first cause can preserve a thing in
being, though the second causes be done away, as appears from the
first proposition of De Causis, therefore by God's power and by that
alone it is possible for an accident to be without substance as in the
Sacrament of the Altar. Likewise by the power of God, and by that
alone, it is possible for a body to retain its distinct being from that of
another body, although its matter be not distinct as to place from the
matter of the other body: and thus it is possible by a miracle for two
bodies to be together in the same place.
Reply to Objection 1: This argument is sophistical because it is
based on a false supposition, or begs the question. For it supposes
the existence, between two opposite superficies of a place, of a
dimension proper to the place, with which dimension a dimension of
the body put in occupation of the place would have to be identified:
because it would then follow that the dimensions of two bodies
occupying a place would become one dimension, if each of them
were identified with the dimension of the place. But this supposition
is false, because if it were true whenever a body acquires a new
place, it would follow that a change takes place in the dimensions of
the place or of thing placed: since it is impossible for two things to
become one anew, except one of them be changed. Whereas if, as is
the case in truth, no other dimensions belong to a place than those
of the thing occupying the place, it is clear that the argument proves
nothing, but begs the question, because according to this nothing
else has been said, but that the dimensions of a thing placed are the
same as the dimensions of the place; excepting that the dimensions
of the thing placed are contained within the bounds of the place, and
that the distance between the bounds of a place is commensurate
with the distance between the bounds of the thing placed, just as the
former would be distant by their own dimensions if they had them.
Thus that the dimensions of two bodies be the dimensions of one
place is nothing else than that two bodies be in the same place,
which is the chief question at issue.
Reply to Objection 2: Granted that by a miracle two bodies be
together in the same place, nothing follows either against common
principles, or against the definition of a line, or against any
conclusions of geometry. For, as stated above (Article 2), dimensive
quantity differs from all other accidents in that it has a special
reason of individuality and distinction, namely on account of the
placing of the parts, besides the reason of individuality and