John 8:45
"And because I tell you the truth, you believe Me not."
What kind of consequence is this? "Having no charge against Me, you
desire to kill Me. For because you are enemies of the truth, therefore ye
persecute Me. Since had this not been the reason, you would have named your
charge." Wherefore He added,

John 8:46
"Which of you convinces Me of sin?"
Then they said, "We be not born of fornication." Yet in fact many of them
were born of fornication, for they practiced unbefitting unions. Still He does not
convict them of this, but sets Himself to the other point. For when He has proved
them to be, not of God, but of the devil, by all these signs, (for to do murder is of
the devil, and to lie is of the devil, both which you do,) then He shows that to
love is the sign of being of God. "Why do ye not understand My speech?" Since
they were always doubting, saying, "What is it that he says, 'Whither I go ye
cannot come'?" therefore He tells them, "You do not understand My speech,"
"because you have not the word of God. And this comes to you, because that
your understanding is groveling, and because what is Mine is far too great for
you." But what if they could not understand? Not to be able here means not to be
willing; for "you have trained yourselves to be mean, to imagine nothing great."
Because they said that they persecuted Him as being themselves zealous for
God, on this account He everywhere strives to show that to persecute Him is the
act of those who hate God, but that, on the contrary, to love Him is the act of
those who know God.
"We have one Father, even God." On this ground they pride themselves, on
their honor not their righteous deeds. "Therefore your not believing is no proof
that I am an enemy to God, but your unbelief is a sign that you do not know God.
And the reason is, from your being willing to lie and to do the works of the devil.
But this is the effect of meanness of soul; (as the Apostle says, 'For whereas
there is among you envying and strife, are you not carnal?') [1 Corinthians 3:3]
And why is it that you cannot ? Because you will to do the lusts of your father,
you are eager, you are ambitious (to do them)." Do you see that "ye cannot"
express a want of will? For "this did not Abraham." "What are his works?
Gentleness, meekness, obedience. But ye set yourselves on the contrary part,

being hard and cruel."
But how came it into their thoughts to betake themselves to God? He had
shown them unworthy of Abraham; desiring therefore to escape this charge, they
mounted higher. For when He reproached them with murder, they said this,
making it, as it were, a kind of excuse for themselves that they were avenging
God. Therefore He shows that this very thing is the act of men opposing God.
And the, "I came forth," shows that He was from thence. He says, "I came
forth," alluding to His arrival among us. But since they would probably say to
Him, "Thou speaks certain things strange and new, " He tells them that He had
come from God. "And therefore with good reason ye hear them not, because you
are of the devil. For on what account would ye kill Me? What charge have ye to
bring against Me? If there be none, why do ye not believe Me?" Thus then
having proved them to be of the devil by their lying and their murder, He shows
them also to be alien from Abraham and from God, both because they hated One
who had done no wrong, and because they would not hear His word; and in
every way He proves that He was not opposed to God, and that it was not on this
account that they refused to believe, but because they were aliens from God. For
when One who had done no sin, who said that He came from God and was sent
of God, who spoke the truth, and so spoke it as to challenge all to the proof, after
this was not believed, it is clear that He was not believed because of their being
carnal. Since sins do use, yea they do use to debase a soul. Wherefore It says,
"Seeing you have become dull of hearing." [Hebrews 5:11] For when a man
cannot despise earthly things, how shall he ever be wise concerning heavenly
things?
4. Wherefore, I exhort you, use we every means that our life may be
righteous, that our minds may be cleansed, so that no filthiness be a hindrance to
us; kindle for yourselves the light of knowledge, and sow not among thorns. For
how shall one who knows not that covetousness is an evil, ever know the greater
good? How shall one who refrains not from these earthly things ever hold fast to
those heavenly? It is good to take by violence, not the things that perish, but the