into the land of Israel." [Matthew 2:19-20]
He no more says "fly," but "go." Do you see again after the temptation
refreshment? Then after the refreshment danger again? In that he was freed
indeed from his banishment, and came back again to his own country; and
beheld the murderer of the children brought to the slaughter; but when he has set
foot on his own country, he finds again a remnant of the former perils, the son of
the tyrant living, and being king.
But how did Archelaus reign over Judæa, when Pontius Pilate was
governor? Herod's death had recently taken place, and the kingdom had not yet
been divided into many parts; but as he had only just ended his life, the son for a
while kept possession of the kingdom "in the room of his father Herod;" his
brother also bearing this name, which is the reason why the evangelist added, "in
the room of his father Herod."
It may be said, however, "if he was afraid to settle in Judæa on account of
Archelaus, he had cause to fear Galilee also on account of Herod." I answer, By
his changing the place, the whole matter was thenceforward thrown into shade;
for the whole assault was upon "Bethlehem and the coasts thereof." Therefore
now that the slaughter had taken place, the youth Archelaus had no other
thought, but that the whole had come to an end, and that among the many, He
that was sought had been destroyed. And besides, his father having come to such
an end of his life before his eyes, he became for the future more cautious about
farther proceedings, and about urging on that course of iniquity.
Joseph therefore comes to Nazareth, partly to avoid the danger, partly also
delighting to abide in his native place. To give him the more courage, he receives
also an oracle from the angel touching this matter. Luke, however, does not say
that he came there by Divine warning, but that when they had fulfilled all the
purification, they returned to Nazareth. [Luke 2:39] What then may one say?
That Luke is giving an account of the time before the going down to Egypt,
when he says these things. For He would not have brought them down there
before the purification, in order that nothing should be done contrary to the law,

but he waited for her to be purified, and to go to Nazareth, and that then they
should go down to Egypt. Then, after their return, He bids them go to Nazareth.
But before this they were not warned of God to go there, but yearning after their
native place, they did so of their own accord. For since they had gone up for no
other cause but on account of the taxing, and had not so much as a place where
to stay, when they had fulfilled that for which they had come up, they went down
to Nazareth.
6. We see here the cause why the angel also, putting them at ease for the
future, restores them to their home. And not even this simply, but he adds to it a
prophecy, "That it might be fulfilled," says he, "which was spoken by the
prophets, He shall be called a Nazarene." [Matthew 2:23]
And what manner of prophet said this? Be not curious, nor overbusy. For
many of the prophetic writings have been lost; and this one may see from the
history of the Chronicles. For being negligent, and continually falling into
ungodliness, some they suffered to perish, others they themselves burnt up and
cut to pieces. The latter fact Jeremiah relates; [Jeremiah 36:23] the former, he
who composed the fourth book of Kings, saying, that after a long time the book
of Deuteronomy was hardly found, buried somewhere and lost. But if, when
there was no barbarian there, they so betrayed their books, much more when the
barbarians had overrun them. For as to the fact, that the prophet had foretold it,
the apostles themselves in many places call Him a Nazarene.
"Was not this then," one may say, "casting a shade over the prophecy
touching Bethlehem?" By no means: rather this very fact was sure greatly to stir
up men, and to awaken them to the search of what was said of Him. Thus, for
example, Nathanael too enters on the inquiry concerning Him, saying, "Can
there any good thing come out of Nazareth?" [John 1:46] For the place was of
little esteem; or rather not that place only, but also the whole district of Galilee.
Therefore the Pharisees said, "Search and look, for out of Galilee arises no
prophet." Nevertheless, He is not ashamed to be named even from thence,
signifying that He needs not ought of the things of men; and His disciples also