FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.108, C.2.

not meat and drink."
Reply to Objection 2: According to the Philosopher (Metaph. i, 2),
what is "free is cause of itself." Therefore he acts freely, who acts of
his own accord. Now man does of his own accord that which he
does from a habit that is suitable to his nature: since a habit inclines
one as a second nature. If, however, a habit be in opposition to
nature, man would not act according to his nature, but according to
some corruption affecting that nature. Since then the grace of the
Holy Ghost is like an interior habit bestowed on us and inclining us
to act aright, it makes us do freely those things that are becoming to
grace, and shun what is opposed to it.
Accordingly the New Law is called the law of liberty in two respects.
First, because it does not bind us to do or avoid certain things,
except such as are of themselves necessary or opposed to salvation,
and come under the prescription or prohibition of the law. Secondly,
because it also makes us comply freely with these precepts and
prohibitions, inasmuch as we do so through the promptings of
grace. It is for these two reasons that the New Law is called "the law
of perfect liberty" (James 1:25).
Reply to Objection 3: The New Law, by restraining the mind from
inordinate movements, must needs also restrain the hand from
inordinate acts, which ensue from inward movements.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.108, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the New Law made sufficient ordinations

about external acts?
Objection 1: It would seem that the New Law made insufficient
ordinations about external acts. Because faith that worketh through
charity seems chiefly to belong to the New Law, according to Gal.
5:6: "In Christ Jesus neither circumcision availeth anything, nor
uncircumcision: but faith that worketh through charity." But the New
Law declared explicitly certain points of faith which were not set
forth explicitly in the Old Law; for instance, belief in the Trinity.
Therefore it should also have added certain outward moral deeds,
which were not fixed in the Old Law.
Objection 2: Further, in the Old Law not only were sacraments
instituted, but also certain sacred things, as stated above (Question
101, Article 4; Question 102, Article 4). But in the New Law, although
certain sacraments are instituted by Our Lord; for instance,
pertaining either to the sanctification of a temple or of the vessels, or
to the celebration of some particular feast. Therefore the New Law
made insufficient ordinations about external matters.
Objection 3: Further, in the Old Law, just as there were certain
observances pertaining to God's ministers, so also were there
certain observances pertaining to the people: as was stated above
when we were treating of the ceremonial of the Old Law (Question
101, Article 4; Question 102, Article 6). Now in the New Law certain
observances seem to have been prescribed to the ministers of God;
as may be gathered from Mt. 10:9: "Do not possess gold, nor silver,
nor money in your purses," nor other things which are mentioned
here and Lk. 9,10. Therefore certain observances pertaining to the
faithful should also have been instituted in the New Law.
Objection 4: Further, in the Old Law, besides moral and ceremonial
precepts, there were certain judicial precepts. But in the New Law
there are no judicial precepts. Therefore the New Law made
insufficient ordinations about external works.
On the contrary, Our Lord said (Mt. 7:24): "Every one . . . that heareth
these My words, and doth them, shall be likened to a wise man that
built his house upon a rock." But a wise builder leaves out nothing
that is necessary to the building. Therefore Christ's words contain all