may occur in as many ways, as unlikeness may occur. For in one
way there is a deficient likeness, when the form is participated
according to the same specific nature, but not in the same measure
of perfection: such is the defective likeness in a subject that has
little whiteness in comparison with one that has much. In another
way the likeness is yet more defective, when it does not attain to the
same specific nature but only to the same generic nature: such is the
likeness of an orange-colored or yellowish object in comparison with
a white one. In another way, still more defective is the likeness when
it does not attain to the same generic nature, but only to a certain
analogy or proportion: such is the likeness of whiteness to man, in
that each is a being: and in this way every likeness received into a
creature is defective in comparison with the Divine essence. Now in
order that the sight know whiteness, it is necessary for it to receive
the likeness of whiteness according to its specific nature, although
not according to the same manner of being because the form has a
manner of being in the sense other from that which it has in the thing
outside the soul: for if the form of yellowness were received into the
eye, the eye would not be said to see whiteness. In like manner in
order that the intellect understand a quiddity, it is necessary for it to
receive its likeness according to the same specific nature, although
there may possibly not be the same manner of being on either side:
for the form which is in the intellect or sense is not the principle of
knowledge according to its manner of being on both sides, but
according to its common ratio with the external object. Hence it is
clear that by no likeness received in the created intellect can God be
understood, so that His essence be seen immediately. And for this
reason those who held the Divine essence to be seen in this way
alone, said that the essence itself will not be seen, but a certain
brightness, as it were a radiance thereof. Consequently neither does
this way suffice for the Divine vision that we seek.
Therefore we must take the other way, which also certain
philosophers held, namely Alexander and Averroes (De Anima iii.).
For since in every knowledge some form is required whereby the
object is known or seen, this form by which the intellect is perfected
so as to see separate substances is neither a quiddity abstracted by
the intellect from composite things, as the first opinion maintained,
nor an impression left on our intellect by the separate substance, as
the second opinion affirmed; but the separate substance itself united
to our intellect as its form, so as to be both that which is understood,
and that whereby it is understood. And whatever may be the case
with other separate substances, we must nevertheless allow this to