says to his son, "My child, I have offended the master, do thou be careful to
please him, that you be not as I": tell me, will he not have some forgiveness?
will he not bend and soften his master? But if, leaving so to speak, he shall say
such words as these, that he will not requite every one according to his deserts;
that all things are jumbled together indiscriminately, both good and bad; that
there is no thanks in this house; what do you think will be the master's mind
concerning him? will he not suffer a severer punishment for his own misdoings?
Justly so; for in the former case his feeling will plead for him, though it be but
weakly; but in this, nobody. If no other then, yet imitate at least that rich man in
hell, who said, "Father Abraham, send to my kinsmen, lest they come into this
place," since he could not go himself, so that they might not fall into the same
condemnation. Let us have done with such Satanical words.
What then, says he, when the Greeks put questions to us; would you not
that we should try to cure them? But by casting the Christian into perplexity,
under pretense of curing the Greek, you aim at establishing your Satanical
doctrine. For since, when communing with your soul alone of these things, you
persuade her not; you desire to bring forward others as witnesses. But if one
must reason with a Greek, the discussion should not begin with this; but whether
Christ be God, and the Son of God; whether those gods of theirs be demons. If
these points be established, all the others follow; but, before making good the
beginning, it is vain to dispute about the end; before learning the first elements,
it is superfluous and unprofitable to come to the conclusion. The Greek
disbelieves the Judgment, and he is in the same case with yourself, seeing that he
too has many who have treated these things in their philosophy; and albeit when
they so spoke they held the soul as separated from the body, still they set up a
seat of judgment. And the thing is so very clear, that no one scarcely is ignorant
of it, but both poets and all are agreed among themselves that there is both a
Tribunal and a Judgment. So that the Greek also disbelieves his own authorities;
and the Jew does not doubt about these things nor in a word does any man.
Why then deceive we ourselves? See, you say these things to me. What will

you say to God, "that fashioned our hearts one by one" [Psalm 33:15]; that
knows everything that is in the mind; "that is living and active, and sharper than
any two-edged sword"? [Hebrews 4:12] For tell me with truth; Do you not
condemn yourself? And how should wisdom so great, as that one who sins
should condemn himself, come by chance, for this is a work of mighty wisdom.
You condemn yourself. And will he who gives you such thoughts leave
everything to go on at hazard? The following rule then will hold universally and
strictly. Not one of those who live in virtue wholly disbelieves the doctrine of the
Judgment, even though he be Greek or heretic. None, save a few, of those who
live in great wickedness, receives the doctrine of the Resurrection. And this is
what the Psalmist says, "Your judgments are taken away from before his face."
[Psalm 10:5] Wherefore? Because "his ways are always profane"; for he says,
"Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we die."
Do you see that thus to speak is the mark of the grovelling? Of eating and
drinking come these sayings which are subversive of the Resurrection. For the
soul endures not, I say, it endures not the tribunal which the conscience supplies,
and so it is with it, as with a murderer, who firsts suggests to himself that he
shall not be detected, and so goes on to slay; for had his conscience been his
judge, he would not hastily have come to that daring wickedness. And still he
knows, and pretends not to know, lest he should be tortured by conscience and
fear, for, certainly, in that case, he would have been less resolute for the daring
deed. So too, assuredly, they who sin, and day by day wallow in the same
wickedness, are unwilling to know it, although their consciences pluck at them.
But let us give no heed to such persons, for there will be, there will
assuredly be, a Judgment and a Resurrection, and God will not leave so great
works without direction. Wherefore, I beseech you, let us leave off wickedness,
and lay fast hold on virtue, that we may receive the true doctrine in Christ Jesus
our Lord. And yet, which is easier to receive? The doctrine of the Resurrection,
or that of Fate? The latter is full of injustice, of absurdity, of cruelty, of
inhumanity; the other of righteousness, awarding according to desert; and still