Homily 83 on the Gospel of John
John 18:1
"When Jesus had spoken these words, He went forth with His disciples over the
brook Cedron, where was a garden, into the which He entered, and His
disciples."
1. An awful thing is death, and very full of terror, but not to those who have
learned the true wisdom which is above. For he that knows nothing certain
concerning things to come, but deems it to be a certain dissolution and end of
life, with reason shudders and is afraid, as though he were passing into nonexistence. But we who, by the grace of God, have learned the hidden and secret
things of His wisdom, and deem the action to be a departure to another place,
should have no reason to tremble, but rather to rejoice and be glad, that leaving
this perishable life we go to one far better and brighter, and which has no end.
Which Christ teaching by His actions, goes to His Passion, not by constraint and
necessity, but willingly. "These things," it says, "Jesus spoke, and departed
'beyond the brook Cedron, where was a garden, into the which He entered, and
His disciples.'"

John 18:2
"Judas also, which betrayed Him, knew the place; for Jesus ofttimes resorted
there with His disciples."
He journeys at midnight, and crosses a river, and hastes to come to a place
known to the traitor, lessening the labor to those who plotted against Him, and
freeing them from all trouble; and shows to the disciples that He came willingly
to the action, (a thing which was most of all sufficient to comfort them,) and
places Himself in the garden as in a prison.
"These things spoke Jesus unto them." "What do you say? Surely He was
speaking with the Father, surely He was praying. Why then do you not say that,
'having ceased from the prayer,' He came there?" Because it was not prayer, but
a speech made on account of the disciples. "And the disciples entered into the
garden." He had so freed them from fear that they no longer resisted, but entered
with Him into the garden. But how came Judas there, or whence had he gained
his information when he came? It is evident from this circumstance, that Jesus
generally passed the night out of doors. For had He been in the habit of spending
it at home, Judas would not have come to the desert, but to the house, expecting
there to find Him asleep. And lest, hearing of a "garden," you should think that
Jesus hid Himself, it adds, that "Judas knew the place"; and not simply so, but
that He "often resorted there with His disciples." For ofttimes He was with them
apart, conversing on necessary matters, and such as it was not permitted to
others to hear. And He did this especially in mountains and gardens, seeking a
place free from disturbance, that their attention might not be distracted from
listening.

John 18:3
"Judas then, having received a band of men and officers from the Chief Priests
and Pharisees, comes there with lanterns, and torches, and weapons."
And these men had often at other times sent to seize Him, but had not been
able; whence it is plain, that at this time He voluntarily surrendered Himself.
And how did they persuade the band? They were soldiers, who had made it their
practice to do anything for money.