of herald, worthy of a thousand good things— not of stones. And yet (far from
resenting) he did just the contrary. For this is the splendid victory. "And they
dragged him," [Acts 14:19] it says. These too they often drag: but be not thou
angry; on the contrary, preach thou the word with gentleness. Hath one insulted
you? Hold your peace, and bless if you can, and thou also hast preached the
word, hast given a lesson of gentleness, a lesson of meekness. I know that many
do not so smart under wounds, as they do under the blow which is inflicted by
words: as indeed the one wound the body receives the other the soul. But let us
not smart, or rather feeling the smart let us endure. Do you not see the pugilists,
how, with their heads sorely battered, they bite their teeth into their lips, and so
bear their smarts kindly? No need to grind the teeth, no need to bite (the lips).
Remember your Master, and by the remembrance you have at once applied the
remedy. Remember Paul: reflect that thou, the beaten hast conquered, and he the
beater, is defeated; and by this have you cured the whole. It is the turning of the
scale a moment and you have achieved the whole: be not hurried away, do not
even move, you have extinguished the whole (fire). Great eloquence of
persuasion there is in suffering anything for Christ: you preach not the word of
faith, but you preach the word of patience ([φιλοσοφίας]). But, you will say, the
more he sees my gentleness, the more he sets upon me. Is it for this then that you
are pained, that he increases your rewards the more? "But this is the way," you
say, "to make him unbearable." This is mere pretext of your own littleness of
mind: on the contrary, the other is the way to make him unbearable, namely, that
you avenge yourself. If God had known, that through forbearance of revenge, the
unjust became unbearable, He would not have done this Himself: on the
contrary, He would have said, Avenge yourself: but He knew, that other than this
is the more likely way to do good. Make not thou a law contrary to God: do as
He bids you. You are not kinder than He that made us. He has said, "Bear to be
wronged:" you say, "I requite wrong for wrong, that he may not become
unbearable." Have you then more care for him than God has? Such talk is mere
passion and ill temper, arrogance and setting up laws against God's laws. For

even if the man were hurt (by our forbearance), would it not be our duty to
obey? When God orders anything, let us not make a contrary law. "A submissive
answer," we read, turns away wrath [Proverbs 16:1]: not an answer of
opposition. If it profits you, it profits him also: but if it hurts you who art to set
him right, how much more will it hurt him? "Physician, heal yourself." Hath one
spoken ill of you? Commend him thou. Hath he reviled you? Praise him thou.
Hath he plotted against you? Do him a kindness. Requite him with the contrary
things, if at least thou at all carest for his salvation and wish not thou to revenge
your own suffering. And yet, you will say, though he has often met with longsuffering from me he has become worse. This is not your affair, but his. Will you
learn what wrongs God suffered? They threw down His altars, and slew His
prophets [1 Kings 19:10], yet He endured it all. Could He not have launched a
thunderbolt from above? Nay, when He had sent His prophets, and they killed
them, then He sent His Son [Matthew 21:37], when they wrought greater
impieties, then He sent them greater benefits. And thou too, if you see one
exasperated, then yield the more: since this madness has greater need of soothing
([παραμθίας]). The more grievous his abuse of you, the more meekness does he
need from you: and even as a gale when it blows strong, then it requires yielding
to, so also he who is in a passion. When the wild beast is most savage, then we
all flee: so also should we flee from him that is angry. Think not that this is an
honor to him: for is it an honor we show to the wild beast, and to madmen, when
we turn aside out of their way? By no means it is a dishonor and a scorn: or
rather not dishonor and scorn, but compassion and humanity. Do you see not
how the sailors, when the wind blows violently, take down their sails, that the
vessel may not sink? How, when the horses have run away with the driver, he
only leads them into the (open) plain, and does not pull against them that he may
not voluntarily exhaust his strength? This do thou also. Wrath is afire, it is a
quick flame needing fuel: do not supply food to the fire, and you have soon
extinguished the evil. Anger has no power of itself; there must be another to feed
it. For you there is no excuse. He is possessed with madness, and knows not