Reply to 3. As we said above, human thought at its terminus in a way approaches angelic
knowledge; not that it equals it, but bears a resemblance to it. So Dionysius says: "Souls, by
reducing multitude to unity, are rightly considered the equal of the angelic intelligences, as far as
this is proper and possible to souls.

Reply to 4. The knowledge of faith also belongs in a special way to understanding (intellectus).
For we do not possess the things of faith through the investigation of reason, but we hold them
by simply receiving understanding. But we are said not to understand them because the intellect

does not have a full knowledge of them. That indeed is promised to us as our reward.

### ARTICLE TWO

Should We Entirely Abandon the Imagination in Divine Science?

We proceed as follows to the second article:

lt seems that in divine science we must turn to images, for:

1. Divine science was never more appropriately taught than in Sacred Scripture. But treating of
the divine in Sacred Scripture we resort to images when divine things are described for us under
sensible figures. Therefore in divine science we must turn to images.

2. Again, we grasp divine things only by the intellect; and this is why, as we have said, we must
proceed intellectually when treating of them. But, as the Philosopher says, it is impossible to
understand without the imagination. Therefore in divine science we must resort to images.

3. Again, we know the divine especially through divine illumination. But as Dionysius says, "It
is impossible for the divine light to illumine us from above unless it be hidden within the
covering of many sacred veils." And he calls these sacred veils "images of sensible things." So
in divine science we must turn to images.

4. Again. when dealing with what is sensible we must make use of the imagination. But we
know divine things from sensible effects, according to the statement of the Epistle to the
Romans: "The invisible things of God... are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are
made." Therefore in divine science we must resort to images.

5. Again, in cognitive matters we are guided especially by the starting point of knowledge; for
instance in the sciences of nature we are guided by the senses, from which our knowledge
begins. Now in us intellectual knowledge begins in the imagination, since images are related to
our intellect as colors to sight, as the De Anima says. Therefore in divine science we must go to
the imagination.

6. Again, since the intellect does not use a bodily organ, an injury to such an organ hinders the
action of the intellect only insofar as it turns to the imagination. Now the intellect is hindered in
its consideration of divine things through an injury of a bodily organ, namely the brain.
Therefore in considering divine things the intellect resorts to the imagination.