due relations of the parent with the offspring that is nature's aim in
sexual intercourse, there can be no doubt that simple fornication by
its very nature is a mortal sin even though there were no written law.
Reply to Objection 1: It often happens that a man who does not avoid
a mortal sin, avoids a venial sin to which he has not so great an
incentive. Thus, too, Juda avoided a lie while he avoided not
fornication. Nevertheless that would have been a pernicious lie, for it
would have involved an injury if he had not kept his promise.
Reply to Objection 2: A sin is called deadly, not because it is
punished with temporal, but because it is punished with eternal
death. Hence also theft, which is a mortal sin, and many other sins
are sometimes not punished with temporal death by the law. The
same applies to fornication.
Reply to Objection 3: Just as not every movement of pride is a
mortal sin, so neither is every movement of lust, because the first
movements of lust and the like are venial sins, even sometimes
marriage intercourse. Nevertheless some acts of lust are mortal sins,
while some movements of pride are venial: since the words quoted
from Gregory are to be understood as comparing vices in their
genus and not in their particular acts.
Reply to Objection 4: A circumstance is the more effective in
aggravating a sin according as it comes nearer to the nature of sin.
Hence although fornication is less grave on account of the greatness
of its incentive, yet on account of the matter about which it is, it has
a greater gravity than immoderate eating, because it is about those
things which tighten the bond of human fellowship, as stated above.
Hence the argument does not prove.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether it was ever lawful to have a concubine?

Objection 1: It would seem that it has been sometimes lawful to have
a concubine. For just as the natural law requires a man to have but
one wife, so does it forbid him to have a concubine. Yet at times it
has been lawful to have several wives. Therefore it has also been
lawful to have a concubine.
Objection 2: Further, a woman cannot be at the same time a slave
and a wife; wherefore according to the Law (Dt. 21:11, seqq.) a
bondswoman gained her freedom by the very fact of being taken in
marriage. Now we read that certain men who were most beloved of
God, for instance Abraham and Jacob, had intercourse with their
bondswomen. Therefore these were not wives, and consequently it
was sometime lawful to have a concubine.
Objection 3: Further, a woman who is taken in marriage cannot be
cast out, and her son should have a share in the inheritance. Yet
Abraham sent Agar away, and her son was not his heir (Gn. 21:14).
Therefore she was not Abraham's wife.
On the contrary, Things opposed to the precepts of the decalogue
were never lawful. Now to have a concubine is against a precept of
the decalogue, namely, "Thou shalt not commit adultery." Therefore
it was never lawful.
Further, Ambrose says in his book on the patriarchs (De Abraham i,
4): "What is unlawful to a wife is unlawful to a husband." But it is
never lawful for a wife to put aside her own husband and have
intercourse with another man. Therefore it was never lawful for a
husband to have a concubine.
I answer that, Rabbi Moses says (Doc. Perp. iii, 49) that before the
time of the Law fornication was not a sin; and he proved his
assertion from the fact that Juda had intercourse with Thamar. But
this argument is not conclusive. For there is no need to excuse
Jacob's sons from mortal sin, since they were accused to their father
of a most wicked crime (Gn. 37:2), and consented kill Joseph and to
sell him. Wherefore we must say that since it is against the natural
law to have a concubine outside wedlock, as stated above (Article 3),
it was never lawful either in itself or by dispensation. For as we have