philosophers of the heathen who have been able to understand and
discern the invisible things of God by those things which are made, have
yet, as is said of them, "held down the truth in iniquity;" because they
philosophized without a Mediator, that is, without the man Christ, whom
they neither believed to be about to come at the word of the prophets, nor
to have come at that of the apostles. For, placed as they were in these
lowest things, they could not but seek some media through which they
might attain to those lofty things which they had understood; and so they
fell upon deceitful spirits, through whom it came to pass, that "they
changed the glory of the incorruptible God into an image made like to
corruptible man, and to birds, and four-footed beasts, and creeping
things." For in such forms also they set up or worshipped idols. Therefore
Christ is our knowledge, and the same Christ is also our wisdom. He
Himself implants in us faith concerning temporal things, He Himself
shows forth the truth concerning eternal things. Through Him we reach
on to Himself: we stretch through knowledge to wisdom; yet we do not
withdraw from one and the same Christ, "in whom are hidden all the
treasures of wisdom and of knowledge." But now we speak of knowledge,
and will hereafter speak of wisdom as much as He Himself shall grant.
And let us not so take these two things, as if it were not allowable to speak
either of the wisdom which is in human things, or of the knowledge which
is in divine. For after a laxer custom of speech, both can be called
wisdom, and both knowledge. Yet the apostle could not in any way have
written, "To one is given the word of wisdom, to another the word of
knowledge," except also these several things had been properly called by
the several names, of the distinction between which we are now treating.

### CHAP. 20.—WHAT HAS BEEN TREATED OF IN THIS BOOK. HOW WE HAVE REACHED BY STEPS TO A CERTAIN TRINITY, WHICH IS FOUND IN PRACTICAL KNOWLEDGE AND TRUE FAITH.

25. Now, therefore, let us see what this prolix discourse has effected, what
it has gathered, whereto it has reached. It belongs to all men to will to be
blessed; yet all men have not faith, whereby the heart is cleansed, and so
blessedness is reached. And thus it comes to pass, that by means of the
faith which not all men will, we have to reach on to the blessedness which
every one wills. All see in their own heart that they will to be blessed; and

so great is the agreement of human nature on this subject, that the man is
not deceived who conjectures this concerning another's mind, out of his
own: in short, we know ourselves that all will this. But many despair of
being immortal, although no otherwise can any one be that which all will,
that is, blessed. Yet they will also to be immortal if they could; but
through not believing that they can, they do not so live that they can.
Therefore faith is necessary, that we may attain blessedness in all the
good things of human nature, that is, of both soul and body. But that
same faith requires that this faith be limited in Christ, who rose in the
flesh from the dead, not to die any more; and that no one is freed from
the dominion of the devil, through the forgiveness of sins, save by Him;
and that in the abiding place of the devil, life must needs be at once
miserable and never-ending, which ought rather to be called death than
life. All which I have also argued, so far as space permitted, in this book,
while I have already said much on the subject in the fourth book of this
work as well; but in that place for one purpose, here for another,—
namely, there, that I might show why and how Christ was sent in the
fullness of time by the Father,2 on account of those who say that He who
sent and He who was sent cannot be equal in nature; but here, in order to
distinguish practical knowlege from contemplative wisdom.
26. For we wished to ascend, as it were, by steps, and to seek in the inner
man, both in knowledge and in wisdom, a sort of trinity of its own special
kind, such as we sought before in the outer man; in order that we may
come, with a mind more practised in these lower things, to the
contemplation of that Trinity which is God, according to our little
measure, if indeed, we can even do this, at least in a riddle and as through
a glass. If, then, any one have committed to memory the words of this
faith in their sounds alone, not knowing what they mean, as they
commonly who do not know Greek hold in memory Greek words, or
similarly Latin ones, or those of any other language of which they are
ignorant, has not he a sort of trinity in his mind? because, first, those
sounds of words are in his memory, even when he does not think
thereupon; and next, the mental vision (acies) of his act of recollection is
formed thence when he conceives of them; and next, the will of him who
remembers and thinks unites both. Yet we should by no means say that
the man in so doing busies himself with a trinity of the interior man, but