occasions he refers all to God. "Long time," he says, "abode they speaking boldly
in the Lord, which gave testimony unto the word of His grace." [Acts 14:3]
Think not this (expression, "Gave testimony,") has anything derogatory (to the
Lord's Divine Majesty): "Who witnessed," it is said, "before Pontius Pilate." [1
Timothy 6:13] Then the boldness— "and granted signs and wonders to be done
by their hands." Here he speaks it as concerning their own nation. "And the
multitude of the city," etc. (v. 4, 5.) Accordingly they did not wait for it, but saw
the intention of attacking them, and fled, on no occasion kindling their wrath, "to
the cities of Lycaonia, Lystra, and Derbe, and the adjacent region." [Acts 14:6]
They went away into the country, not into the cities only.— Observe both the
simplicity of the Gentiles, and the malignity of the Jews. By their actions they
showed that they were worthy to hear: they so honored them from the miracles
only. The one sort honored them as gods, the other persecuted them as pestilent
fellows: and (those) not only did not take offense at the preaching, but what say
they? "The gods, in the likeness of men, have come down to us;" but the Jews
were offended. "And they called Barnabas, Jupiter; and Paul, Mercurius." (v.
11, 12.) I suppose Barnabas was a man of dignified appearance also. Here was a
new sort of trial, from immoderate zeal, and no small one: but hence also is
shown the virtue of the Apostles, (and) how on all occasions they ascribe all to
God.
Let us imitate them: let us think nothing our own, seeing even faith itself is
not our own, but more God's (than ours). "For by grace are you saved through
faith; and this," says he, "not of ourselves; it is the gift of God." [Ephesians 2:8]
Then let us not think great things of ourselves, nor be puffed up, being as we are,
men, dust and ashes, smoke and shadow. For say, Why do you think great things
of yourself? Have you given alms, and lavished your substance? And what of
that? Think, what if God had chosen not to make you rich? Think of them that
are impoverished, or rather, think how many have given (not their substance
only, but) their bodies moreover, and after their numberless sacrifices, have felt
still that they were miserable creatures! You gave for yourself, Christ (not for

Himself, but) for you: you did but pay a debt, Christ owed you not.— See the
uncertainty of the future, and "be not high-minded, but fear" [Romans 11:20]; do
not lessen your virtue by boastfulness. Would you do something truly great?
Never let a surmise of your attainments as great enter your mind. But you are a
virgin? So were those in (the Gospel) virgins, but they got no benefit from their
virginity, because of their cruelty and inhumanity. [Matthew 25:12] Nothing like
humility: this is mother, and root, and nurse,and foundation, and bond of all
good things: without this we are abominable, and execrable, and polluted. For
say— let there be some man raising the dead, and healing the lame, and
cleansing the lepers, but with proud self-complacency: than this there can be
nothing more execrable, nothing more impious, nothing more detestable.
Account nothing to be of yourself. Have you utterance and grace of teaching?
Do not for this account yourself to have anything more than other men. For this
cause especially you ought to be humbled, because you have been vouchsafed
more abundant gifts. For he to whom more was forgiven, will love more [Luke
7:47]: if so, then ought thou to be humbled also, for that God having passed by
others, took notice of you. Fear thou because of this: for often this is a cause of
destruction to you, if you be not watchful. Why do you think great things of
yourself? Because you teach by words? But this is easy, to philosophize in
words: teach me by your life: that is the best teaching. Do you say that it is right
to be moderate, and do you make a long speech about this thing, and play the
orator, pouring forth your eloquence without a check? But "better than thou is
he" shall one say to you, "who teaches me this by his deeds"— for not so much
are those lessons wont to be fixed in the mind which consist in words, as those
which teach by things: since if you have not the deed, thou not only hast not
profited him by your words, but hast even hurt him the more— "better thou were
silent." Wherefore? "Because the thing you propose to me is impossible: for I
consider, that if you who hast so much to say about it, succeedest not in this,
much more am I excusable." For this cause the Prophet says, "But unto the
sinner said God. Why do you declare My statutes?" [Psalm 60:16] For this is a