they should afterwards be accused and punished by Him. "But what is, 'That they
might eat the Passover?' For He had done this on the first day of unleavened
bread." Either he calls the whole feast "the Passover," or means, that they were
then keeping the Passover, while He delivered it to His followers one day sooner,
reserving His own Sacrifice for the Preparation-day, when also of old the
Passover was celebrated. But they, though they had taken up arms, which was
unlawful, and were shedding blood, are scrupulous about the place, and bring
forth Pilate to them.

John 18:29
"And having gone out, he said, What accusation bring ye against this man?"
4. Do you see that he was free from fondness for rule and from malice? For
seeing Jesus bound, and led by so many persons, he did not think that they had
unquestionable proof of their accusation, but questions them, thinking it a
strange thing that they should take for themselves the judgment, and then
commit the punishment without any judgment to him. What then say they?

John 18:30
"If he were not a malefactor, we would not have delivered him up unto you."
O madness! For why do ye not mention His evil deeds, instead of
concealing them? Why do ye not prove the evil? Do you see that they
everywhere avoid a direct accusation, and that they can say nothing? That Annas
questioned Him about His doctrine, and having heard Him, sent Him to
Caiaphas; and he having in his turn questioned Him, and discovered, nothing,
sent Him to Pilate. Pilate says, "What accusation bring ye against this man?"
Nor here have they anything to say, but again employ certain conjectures. At
which Pilate being perplexed says,

John 18:31-32
"Take ye him and judge him according to your law. They therefore said, It is not
lawful for us to put any man to death." But this they said, "that the saying of the
Lord might be fulfilled, which He spoke, signifying by what death He should
die."
"And how did the expression, 'It is not lawful for us to put any man to
death,' declare this?" Either the Evangelist means that He was about to be slain
not by the Jews only, but by the Gentiles also, or that it was not lawful for them
to crucify. But if they say, "It is not lawful for us to put any man to death," they
say it with reference to that season. For that they did slay men, and that they
slew them in a different way, Stephen shows, being stoned. But they desired to
crucify Him, that they might make a display of the manner of His death. Pilate,
wishing to be freed from trouble, does not dismiss Him for a long trial, but,

John 18:33-34
"Having entered in, he asked Jesus, and said, Are you the King of the Jews?
Jesus answered him, Do you say this thing of yourself, or did others tell it you of
Me?"
Wherefore did Christ ask this? Because He desired to expose the evil
intentions of the Jews. Pilate had heard this saying from many, and, since the
accusers had nothing to say, in order that the enquiry might not be a long one, he
desires to bring forward that which was continually reported. But when he said
to them, "Judge him according to your law," wishing to show that His offense
was not a Jewish one, they replied, "It is not lawful for us." "He has not sinned
against our law, but the indictment is general." Pilate then, having perceived
this, says, as being (himself) likely to be endangered, "Are you the King of the
Jews?" Then Jesus, not from ignorance, but from a desire that the Jews should
be accused even by him, asked him, saying, "Did others tell it you?" On this
point then declaring himself, Pilate replied,