SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.118, C.4.

while the covetous man is of use to no one, not even to himself, as
stated in Ethic. iv, 6. Thirdly, because prodigality is easily cured. For
not only is the prodigal on the way to old age, which is opposed to
prodigality, but he is easily reduced to a state of want, since much
useless spending impoverishes him and makes him unable to
exceed in giving. Moreover, prodigality is easily turned into virtue on
account of its likeness thereto. On the other hand, the covetous man
is not easily cured, for the reason given above (Question 118, Article
5, ad 3).
Reply to Objection 1: The difference between the prodigal and the
covetous man is not that the former sins against himself and the
latter against another. For the prodigal sins against himself by
spending that which is his, and his means of support, and against
others by spending the wherewithal to help others. This applies
chiefly to the clergy, who are the dispensers of the Church's goods,
that belong to the poor whom they defraud by their prodigal
expenditure. In like manner the covetous man sins against others, by
being deficient in giving; and he sins against himself, through
deficiency in spending: wherefore it is written (Eccles. 6:2): "A man
to whom God hath given riches . . . yet doth not give him the power
to eat thereof." Nevertheless the prodigal man exceeds in this, that
he injures both himself and others yet so as to profit some; whereas
the covetous man profits neither others nor himself, since he does
not even use his own goods for his own profit.
Reply to Objection 2: In speaking of vices in general, we judge of
them according to their respective natures: thus, with regard to
prodigality we note that it consumes riches to excess, and with
regard to covetousness that it retains them to excess. That one
spend too much for the sake of intemperance points already to
several additional sins, wherefore the prodigal of this kind is worse,
as stated in Ethic. iv, 1. That an illiberal or covetous man refrain from
taking what belongs to others, although this appears in itself to call
for praise, yet on account of the motive for which he does so it calls
for blame, since he is unwilling to accept from others lest he be
forced to give to others.
Reply to Objection 3: All vices are opposed to prudence, even as all
virtues are directed by prudence: wherefore if a vice be opposed to
prudence alone, for this very reason it is deemed less grievous.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.118, C.4.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.119, C.1.

## QUESTION 120 — OF "EPIKEIA" OR EQUITY

Prologue
We must now consider "epikeia," under which head there are two
points of inquiry:
(1) Whether "epikeia" is a virtue?
(2) Whether it is a part of justice?

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.119, C.2.