belongs to the truth of human nature since whatever is in them is
derived from the parents. If then the surplus food be changed into
seed, that which belonged to the truth of human nature in the
embryos---and after these have received a rational soul, the
resurrection applies to them---must needs belong to the truth of
human nature in the child begotten of that seed. And thus, since the
same cannot rise again in two subjects, it will be impossible for
whatever belonged to the truth of human nature in both to rise again
in both of them.
On the contrary, Whatever belonged to the truth of human nature
was perfected by the rational soul. Now it is through being perfected
by the rational soul that the human body is directed to the
resurrection. Therefore whatever belonged to the truth of human
nature will rise again in each one.
Further, if anything belonging to the truth of human nature in a man
be taken from his body, this will not be the perfect body of a man.
Now all imperfection of a man will be removed at the resurrection,
especially in the elect, to whom it was promised (Lk. 21:18) that not a
hair of their head should perish. Therefore whatever belonged to the
truth of human nature in a man will rise again in him.
I answer that, "Everything is related to truth in the same way as to
being" (Metaph. ii), because a thing is true when it is as it appears to
him who actually knows it. For this reason Avicenna (Metaph. ii) says
that "the truth of anything is a property of the being immutably
attached thereto." Accordingly a thing is said to belong to the truth
of human nature, because it belongs properly to the being of human
nature, and this is what shares the form of human nature, just as true
gold is what has the true form of gold whence gold derives its proper
being. In order therefore to see what it is that belongs to the truth of
human nature, we must observe that there have been three opinions
on the question. For some have maintained that nothing begins
anew to belong to the truth of human nature and that whatever
belongs to the truth of human nature, all of it belonged to the truth of
human nature when this was created; and that this multiplies by
itself, so that it is possible for the seed whereof the child is begotten
to be detached therefrom by the begetter, and that again the
detached part multiplies in the child, so that he reaches perfect
quantity by growth, and so on, and that thus was the whole human
race multiplied. Wherefore according to this opinion, whatever is
produced by nourishment. although it seem to have the appearance

of flesh and blood, does not belong to the truth of human nature.
Others held that something new is added to the truth of human
nature by the natural transformation of the food into the human
body, if we consider the truth of human nature in the species to the
preservation of which the act of the generative power is directed: but
that if we consider the truth of human nature in the individual, to the
preservation and perfection of which the act of the nutritive power is
directed, that which is added by food belongs to the truth of the
human nature of the individual, not primarily but secondarily. For
they assert that the truth of human nature, first and foremost,
consists in the radical humor, that namely which is begotten of the
seed of which the human race was originally fashioned: and that
what is changed from food into true flesh and blood does not belong
principally to the truth of human nature in this particular individual,
but secondarily: and that nevertheless this can belong principally to
the truth of human nature in another individual who is begotten of
the seed of the former. For they assert that seed is the surplus from
food, either mingled with something belonging principally to the
truth of human nature in the begetter, according to some, or without
any such admixture, as others maintain. And thus the nutrimental
humor in one becomes the radical humor in another.
The third opinion is that something new begins to belong principally
to the truth of human nature even in this individual, because
distinction in the human body does not require that any signate
material part must needs remain throughout the whole lifetime; any
signate part one may take is indifferent to this, whereas it remains
always as regards what belongs to the species in it, albeit as regards
what is material therein it may ebb and flow. And thus the
nutrimental humor is not distinct from the radical on the part of its
principle (so that it be called radical when begotten of the seed, and
nutrimental when produced by the food), but rather on the part of the
term, so that it be called radical when it reaches the term of
generation by the act of the generative, or even nutritive power, but
nutrimental, when it has not yet reached this term, but is still on the
way to give nourishment.
These three opinions have been more fully exposed and examined in
the Second Book (Sent. ii, D, 30); wherefore there is no need for
repetition here, except in so far as the question at issue is
concerned. It must accordingly be observed that this question
requires different answers according to these opinions.