Matt. xix. 29; Luke xviii. 29, 30.

must fall into much contradiction and contrariety, as is the case with the Jews, who are involved
in absolute perplexity. For not only did not the nations in this life serve this Jacob; but even after
he had received the blessing, he himself going forth [from his home], served his uncle Laban the
Syrian for twenty years; and not only was he not made lord of his brother, but he did himself
bow down before his brother Esau, upon his return from Mesopotamia to his father, and offered
many gifts to him. Moreover, in what way did he inherit much corn and wine here, he who
emigrated to Egypt because of the famine which possessed the land in which he was dwelling, and
became subject to Pharaoh, who was then ruling over Egypt? The predicted blessing, therefore,
belongs unquestionably to the times of the kingdom, when the righteous shall bear rule upon their
rising from the dead; when also the creation, having been renovated and set free, shall fructify
with an abundance of all kinds of food, from the dew of heaven, and from the fertility of the earth:
as the elders who saw John, the disciple of the Lord, related that they had heard from him how the
Lord used to teach in regard to these times, and say: The days will come, in which vines shall grow,
each having ten thousand branches, and in each branch ten thousand twigs, and in each true twig
ten thousand shoots, and in each one of the shoots ten thousand clusters, and on every one of the
clusters ten thousand grapes, and every grape when pressed will give five and twenty metretes of
wine. And when any one of the saints shall lay hold of a cluster, another shall cry out, "I am a
better cluster, take me; bless the Lord through me." In like manner [the Lord declared] that a grain
of wheat would produce ten thousand ears, and that every ear should have ten thousand grains, and
every grain would yield ten pounds (quinque bilibres) of clear, pure, fine flour; and that all other
fruit-bearing trees, and seeds and grass, would produce in similar proportions (secundum
congruentiam iis consequentem); and that all animals feeding [only] on the productions of the earth,
should [in those days] become peaceful and harmonious among each other, and be in perfect
subjection to man.
4. And these things are borne witness to in writing by Papias, the hearer of John, and a companion
of Polycarp, in his fourth book; for there were five books compiled (!"#$%$&'()#&) by him.
And he says in addition, "Now these things are credible to believers." And he says that, "when the
traitor Judas did not give credit to them, and put the question, "How then can things about to bring
being of the twelfth century.

Or, following Arm. vers., "But if any one shall lay hold of an holy cluster."

[See pp. 151—154, this volume.]