#### Answers to objections

1. It may be said: Wisdom is not distinguished from science as opposed to it, but as related to

science by adding to it. For wisdom is, indeed, as the Philosopher says in VI Ethic., the head of
all the sciences, regulating all others inasmuch as it treats of highest principles: on this account it
is also called "the goddess of sciences" in I Metaph.; and much more is this true of that wisdom
which is not only about highest principles, but from highest principles. Moreover, the function of
wisdom is to order, and therefore this highest science, which orders and rules all others, is called
wisdom; just as in mechanical arts we call those men wise who direct others, as the architects:
but the name of "science" is also left to others that are inferior, and accordingly science is
distinguished from wisdom as a property from a definition (i.e., as properties flow necessarily
from an essence, so do the other sciences from wisdom).

2. It may be said: As has been previously declared, since causes are known through their effects,
the knowledge of an effect substitutes for the quidditative knowledge of the cause; this is
necessarily required in those sciences treating of things that cannot be known through
themselves: thus, for us to have a science of divine things, it is not necessary that we first have a
quidditative knowledge of God. Or, again, it can be said that what we know God is not, takes the
place, in divine science, of a cognition of what He is: for as one thing is distinguished from
others by what it is, so God is here known by,that which He is not.

3. It may be answered: In science the parts of a subject are not to be understood only as
subjective or integral parts; but the parts of a subject are all those things of which knowledge is
required in order to have cognition of the subject, since all things of this sort are not dealt with in
a co-science except inasmuch as they are related to the subject. Those also are called passive
potencies which can be proved in regard to anything, whether they are negations or relations to
other things. And many such things can be proved in regard to God, both from naturally known
principles and from principles of faith.

4. It may be answered: In any science whatever there are certain things that serve as principles,
and others as conclusions. Hence the reasoning process set forth in the sciences precedes the
assent given to a conclusion, but follows upon assent to principles, since it proceeds from them.
Now, it is true that the articles of faith are in this science rather principles aian conclusions, but
they must be defended against those opposing them, as the Philosopher (IV Metaph.) proves
against those denying first principles: for they may be made clearer of understanding by certain
similitudes, by inducing results of opposing naturally known principles, but they cannot be
proved by demonstrative reasoning.