grows up into a grievous accusation, that seeing one in error thou dost not
restore him. For if it was not right according to the law of the Jews [Exodus
23:4-5] to slight the beast of one's enemy; he who despises not the beast of
burden nor yet the soul of an enemy perishing, but that of a friend, what pardon
shall he obtain?
Yea, neither is it enough for our excuse that he has understanding: since we
too after our many and manifold exhortations have not been sufficient, nor
proved useful, unto ourselves. Bear this in mind then in regard to him also that is
in error; that it is natural he should receive the best counsel rather from you than
from himself.
And say not, "But what care I about these things?" Fear thou him who first
spoke this word; for the saying, "Am I my brother's keeper?" [Genesis 4:9] tends
to the same point as this. This is the mother of all our evils that we esteem the
concerns of our own body as foreign to us. What do you say? You care not for
your brother? Who then is to care for him? The unbeliever who rejoices over and
reproaches and insults him? Or the devil who urges him on and supplants him?
And whence comes this? "How do I know that I shall accomplish
anything," says he, "though I speak and advise what is right." But how is it clear
that you will do no good? Why, this again is extreme folly, while the end remains
in obscurity to incur the manifold blame of confessed indifference. And yet God
who foresees the future often speaks and does no good; yet does He not even so
give up; and that, knowing that He shall not even persuade men. Now if He who
knows beforehand that He shall win no advantage, ceases not from the work of
correction, what excuse will you have, who art completely ignorant of the future
and yet faintest and art benumbed? Yea, and many have succeeded by frequent
attempts: and when they most of all despaired, then did they most gain their
point. And though you should gain no advantage, you have done your own part.
Be not then inhuman, nor unmerciful, nor careless: for that these words
come of cruelty and indifference is plain from what follows: viz. What is the
reason that when one of the members of your body is in pain, you say not, "What

care I?" Yet whence is it plain, that if it be taken due care of, it is restored? And
yet you leave nothing undone, that even although thou profit not, you may not
have to blame yourself for the omission of any thing which ought to have been
done. Hereupon I ask, are we to take such care for the members of our body and
to neglect those of Christ? Nay, how can such things deserve pardon? For if I
make no impression upon you by saying, "Have a care of your own member;" in
order that you may become better were it only through fear, I put you in mind of
the body of Christ. But how can it be other than a matter of horror to see His
flesh putrefying, and neglect it? And if you had a slave or an ass afflicted with a
mortifying sore, you could not have the heart to neglect it: but do you see the
Body of Christ full of scurvy , and hurriest by? And thinkest not that such things
deserve innumerable thunder-bolts? For this cause all things are turned upside
down, because of this our inhumanity, because of our indifference. Wherefore
now, I beseech you, let this cruelty be cast out from among us.
6. Draw near to him whom I speak of, as dwelling with a virgin, and speak
some small praise of your brother, making it up from the other excellencies
which he has. And foment him with your commendations as it were with warm
water, and so mitigate the tumor of his wound. Speak of yourself also as
wretched; accuse the common race of mankind; point out that we are all in sins;
ask for pardon, saying, that you are undertaking things too great for you, but
love persuades you to dare all things. Then in giving your advice, do it not
imperiously, but in a brotherly way. And when by all these means you have
reduced the swelling and soothed the pain arising from the cutting reproof which
is in store for him, and when you have again and again deprecated and besought
him not to be angry: when you have bound him down with these things, then use
the knife; neither pressing the matter too close, nor yet undoing it; that he may
neither fly off on the one hand, nor on the other think little of it. For if you strike
not to the quick you have done no good, and if your blow be violent, you make
him start away.
Wherefore, even after all this, being on the very point of the reproof, mix