FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.112, C.2.

so likewise in the sacraments of the New Law, which are derived
from Christ, grace is instrumentally caused by the sacraments, and
principally by the power of the Holy Ghost working in the
sacraments, according to Jn. 3:5: "Unless a man be born again of
water and the Holy Ghost he cannot enter into the kingdom of God."
Reply to Objection 3: Angels cleanse, enlighten, and perfect angels
or men, by instruction, and not by justifying them through grace.
Hence Dionysius says (Coel. Hier. vii) that "this cleansing and
enlightenment and perfecting is nothing else than the assumption of
Divine knowledge."

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.112, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether any preparation and disposition for grace

is required on man's part?
Objection 1: It would seem that no preparation or disposition for
grace is required on man's part, since, as the Apostle says (Rm. 4:4),
"To him that worketh, the reward is not reckoned according to grace,
but according to debt." Now a man's preparation by free-will can only
be through some operation. Hence it would do away with the notion
of grace.
Objection 2: Further, whoever is going on sinning, is not preparing
himself to have grace. But to some who are going on sinning grace
is given, as is clear in the case of Paul, who received grace whilst he
was "breathing our threatenings and slaughter against the disciples
of the Lord" (Act 9:1). Hence no preparation for grace is required on
man's part.
Objection 3: Further, an agent of infinite power needs no disposition
in matter, since it does not even require matter, as appears in
creation, to which grace is compared, which is called "a new
creature" (Gal. 6:15). But only God, Who has infinite power, causes
grace, as stated above (Article 1). Hence no preparation is required
on man's part to obtain grace.
On the contrary, It is written (Amos 4:12): "Be prepared to meet thy
God, O Israel," and (1 Kgs. 7:3): "Prepare your hearts unto the Lord."
I answer that, As stated above (Question 111, Article 2), grace is
taken in two ways: first, as a habitual gift of God. Secondly, as a help
from God, Who moves the soul to good. Now taking grace in the first
sense, a certain preparation of grace is required for it, since a form
can only be in disposed matter. But if we speak of grace as it
signifies a help from God to move us to good, no preparation is
required on man's part, that, as it were, anticipates the Divine help,
but rather, every preparation in man must be by the help of God
moving the soul to good. And thus even the good movement of the
free-will, whereby anyone is prepared for receiving the gift of grace
is an act of the free-will moved by God. And thus man is said to
prepare himself, according to Prov. 16:1: "It is the part of man to
prepare the soul"; yet it is principally from God, Who moves the freewill. Hence it is said that man's will is prepared by God, and that