## Homily 1 on Titus

[Titus 1:1-4]
"Paul, a servant of God, and an Apostle of Jesus Christ, according to the
faith of God's elect, and the acknowledging of the truth which is after godliness;
In hope of eternal life, which God, that cannot lie, promised before the world
began; But has in due times manifested His word through preaching, which is
committed unto me according to the commandment of God our Saviour; To Titus,
my own son after the common faith; Grace, mercy, and peace, from God the
Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ our Saviour."
Titus was an approved one of the companions of Paul; otherwise, he would
not have committed to him the charge of that whole island, nor would he have
commanded him to supply what was deficient, as he says, "That you should set
in order the things that are wanting." [Titus 1:5] He would not have given him
jurisdiction over so many Bishops, if he had not placed great confidence in him.
They say that he also was a young man, because he calls him his son, though this
does not prove it. I think that there is mention made of him in the Acts. Perhaps
he was a Corinthian, unless there was some other of the same name. And he
summons Zenas, and orders Apollos to be sent to him, never Titus. [Titus 3:13]
For he also attests their superior virtue and courage in the presence of the
Emperor.
Some time seems to have since elapsed, and Paul, when he wrote this
Epistle, appears to have been at liberty. For he says nothing about his trials, but
dwells continually upon the grace of God, as being a sufficient encouragement to
believers to persevere in virtue. For to learn what they had deserved, and to what
state they had been transferred, and that by grace, and what had been vouchsafed
them, was no little encouragement. He takes aim also against the Jews, and if he
censures the whole nation, we need not wonder, for he does the same in the case

of the Galatians, saying, "O foolish Galatians." [Galatians 3:1] And this does not
proceed from a censorious temper, but from affection. For if it were done for his
own sake, one might fairly blame him; but if from the fervor of his zeal for the
Gospel, it was not done reproachfully. Christ too, on many occasions,
reproached the Scribes and Pharisees, not on his own account, but because they
were the ruin of all the rest.
And he writes a short Epistle, with good reason, and this is a proof of the
virtue of Titus, that he did not require many words, but a short remembrance.
But this Epistle seems to have been written before that to Timothy, for that he
wrote as near his end and in prison, but here, as free and at liberty. For his
saying, "I have determined to winter at Nicopolis" [Titus 3:12], is a proof that he
was not yet in bonds, as when he wrote to Timothy.
Ver. 1. "Paul, a servant of God, and an Apostle of Jesus Christ, according
to the faith of God's elect."
You observe how he uses these expressions indifferently, sometimes calling
himself the "servant of God," and sometimes the "servant of Christ," thus
making no difference between the Father and the Son.
"According to the faith of God's elect, and the acknowledging of the truth
which is after godliness. In hope of eternal life."
"According to the faith of God's elect." It is because you have believed, or
rather because you were entrusted? I think he meant, that he was entrusted with
God's elect, that is, not for any achievements of mine, nor from my toils and
labors, did I receive this dignity. It was wholly the effect of His goodness who
entrusted me. Yet that the grace may not seem without reason, (for still the whole
was not of Him, for why did He not entrust it to others?) he therefore adds, "And
the acknowledging of the truth that is after godliness." For it was for this
acknowledgment that I was entrusted, or rather it was of His grace that this too
was entrusted to me, for He was the author of this also. Whence Christ Himself
said, "You have not chosen Me, but I have chosen you." [John 15:16] And
elsewhere this same blessed one writes, "I shall know, even as also I am known."