not first been a good soldier, will never be a general, so it is with the Teacher;
wherefore he says elsewhere, "Lest when I have preached to others, I myself
should be a cast-away." [1 Corinthians 9:27] "Holding faith," he says, "and a
good conscience," that so you may preside over others. When we hear this, let us
not disdain the exhortations of our superiors, though we be Teachers. For if
Timothy, to whom all of us together are not worthy to be compared, receives
commands and is instructed, and that being himself in the Teacher's office, much
more should we. "Which some having put away, have made shipwreck
concerning the faith." And this follows naturally. For when the life is corrupt, it
engenders a doctrine congenial to it, and from this circumstance many are seen
to fall into a gulf of evil, and to turn aside into Heathenism. For that they may
not be tormented with the fear of futurity, they endeavor to persuade their souls,
that what we preach is false. And some turn aside from the faith, who seek out
everything by reasoning; for reasoning produces shipwreck, while faith is as a
safe ship.
They then who turn aside from the faith must suffer shipwreck; and this he
shows by an example.
Ver. 20. "Of whom are Hymenæus and Alexander."
And from them he would instruct us. You see how even from those times
there have been seducing Teachers, curious enquirers, and men holding off from
the faith, and searching out by their own reasonings. As the shipwrecked man is
naked and destitute of all things, so is he that falls away from the faith without
resource, he knows not where to stand or where to stay himself, nor has he the
advantage of a good life so as to gain anything from that quarter. For when the
head is disordered, what avails the rest of the body? And if faith without a good
life is unavailing, much more is the converse true. If God despises His own for
our sakes, much more ought we to despise our own for His sake. For so it is,
where any one falls away from the faith, he has no steadiness, he swims this way
and that, till at last he is lost in the deep.
"Whom I delivered to Satan, that they might be taught not to blaspheme!"

Thus it is blasphemy to search into divine things by our own reasonings. For
what have human reasonings in common with them? But how does Satan
instruct them not to blaspheme? Can he instruct others, who has not yet taught
himself, but is a blasphemer still? It is not that "he should instruct," but that they
should be instructed. It is not he that does it, though such is the result. As
elsewhere he says in the case of the fornicator: "To deliver such an one to Satan
for the destruction of the flesh." Not that he may save the body, but "that the
spirit may be saved." [1 Corinthians 5:5] Therefore it is spoken impersonally.
How then is this effected? As executioners, though themselves laden with
numberless crimes, are made the correctors of others; so it is here with the evil
spirit. But why did you not punish them yourself, as you did that Bar-Jesus, and
as Peter did Ananias, instead of delivering them to Satan? It was not that they
might be punished, but that they might be instructed. For that he had the power
appears from other passages, "What will you? Shall I come unto you with a rod?"
[1 Corinthians 4:21] And again, "Lest I should use sharpness, according to the
power which the Lord has given me to edification, and not to destruction." [2
Corinthians 13:10] Why did he then call upon Satan to punish them? That the
disgrace might be greater, as the severity and the punishment was more striking.
Or rather, they themselves chastised those who did not yet believe, but those
who turned aside, they delivered to Satan. Why then did Peter punish Ananias?
Because while he was tempting the Holy Ghost, he was still an unbeliever. That
the unbelieving therefore might learn that they could not escape, they themselves
inflicted punishment upon them; but those who had learned this, yet afterwards
turned aside, they delivered to Satan; showing that they were sustained not by
their own power, but by their care for them; and as many as were lifted up into
arrogance were delivered to him. For as kings with their own hands slay their
enemies, but deliver their subjects to executioners for punishment, so it is in this
case. And these acts were done to show the authority committed to the Apostles.
Nor was it a slight power, to be able thus to subject the devil to their commands.
For this shows that he served and obeyed them even against his will, and this