ourselves cry; but for ourselves the children; for the imitators of whose
simplicity the kingdom of heaven is reserved. For this image shows this, that
they who are like those children, lowly and simple, these above all men are able
to deliver the guilty by their prayers.
But the mystery itself, of how much mercy, of how much love to man it is
full, the initiated know.
Do thou then, when according to your power you are showing mercy to a
man, shut the doors, let the object of your mercy see it only; but if it be possible,
not even he. But if you set them open, you are profanely exposing your mystery.
Consider that the very person, whose praise you seek, even himself will
condemn you; and if he be a friend, will accuse you to himself; but if an enemy,
he will deride you unto others also. And you will undergo the opposite of what
you desire. For thou indeed desirest that he should call you the merciful man; but
he will not call you this, but the vainglorious, the man-pleaser, and other names
far more grievous than these.
But if you should hide it, he will call you all that is opposite to this; the
merciful, the kind. For God suffers it not to be hidden; but if you conceal it, the
other will make it known, and greater will be the admiration, and more abundant
the gain. So that even for this very object of being glorified, to make a display is
against us; for with respect to the thing unto which we most hasten and press, as
to this most especially is this thing against us. For so far from obtaining the
credit of being merciful, we obtain even the contrary, and besides this, great is
the loss we undergo.
For every motive then let us abstain from this, and set our love on God's
praise alone. For thus shall we both attain to honor here, and enjoy the eternal
blessings, by the grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom
be glory and might world without end. Amen.

## Homily 72 on Matthew

Matt. XXIII. 1-3.
" Then spoke Jesus to the multitudes and to His disciples, saying, The
Scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses' seat: all therefore whatsoever they bid
you do, that do; but do not after their works."
Then. When? When He had said these things, when He had stopped their
mouths; when He had brought them that they should no more dare to tempt Him;
when He had shown their state incurable.
And since He had made mention of "the Lord" and "my Lord," He recurs
again to the law. And yet the law said nothing of this kind, but, "The Lord your
God is one Lord." [Deuteronomy 6:4] But Scripture calls the whole Old
Testament the law.
But these things He says, showing by all things His full agreement with
Him that begot Him. For if He were opposed, He would have said the opposite
about the law; but now He commands so great reverence to be shown towards it,
that, even when they that teach it are depraved, He charges them to hold to it.
But here He is discoursing about their life and morals, since this was chiefly
the cause of their unbelief, their depraved life, and the love of glory. To amend
therefore His hearers; that which in the first place most contributes to salvation,
not to despise our teachers, neither to rise up against our priests, this does He
command with superabundant earnestness. But He does not only command it,
but also Himself does it. For though they were depraved, He does not depose
them from their dignity; to them rendering their condemnation heavier, and to
His disciples leaving no cloke for disobedience.
I mean, that lest any one should say, that because my teacher is bad,
therefore am I become more remiss, He takes away even this pretext. So much at
any rate did He establish their authority, although they were wicked men, as even