he said, "Fulfil your ministry," when he was a Bishop. For that he was a Bishop
appears by his saying to him, "Lay hands hastily on no man." [1 Timothy 5:22]
And again, "Which was given you with the laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery." [1 Timothy 4:14] Yet Presbyters would not have laid hands on a
Bishop. And again, in writing to Titus, he says, "For this cause I left you in
Crete, that you should appoint elders in every city, as I gave you charge. If any
man is blameless, the husband of one wife" [Titus 1:5-6]; which he says of the
Bishop. And after saying this, he adds immediately, "For the Bishop must be
blameless, as God's steward, not self willed." [Titus 1:7] So then, as I said, both
the Presbyters were of old called Bishops and Deacons of Christ, and the
Bishops Presbyters; and hence even now many Bishops write, "To my fellowPresbyter," and, "To my fellow-Deacon." But otherwise the specific name is
distinctly appropriated to each, the Bishop and the Presbyter. "To the fellowBishops," he says, and Deacons,
Ver. 2. "Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus
Christ."
How is it that though he nowhere else writes to the Clergy, not in Rome, nor
in Corinth, nor in Ephesus, nor anywhere, but in general, to "all the saints, the
believers, the beloved," yet here he writes to the Clergy? Because it was they that
sent, and bare fruit, and it was they that dispatched Epaphroditus to him.
Ver. 3. "I thank my God," he says, "upon all my remembrance of you."
He said in another of his writings, "Obey them that have the rule over you,
and submit to them: for they watch in behalf of your souls, as they that shall give
account; that they may do this with joy, and not with grief." [Hebrews 13:17] If
then the "grief" be due to the wickedness of the disciples, the doing it "with joy"
would be due to their advancement. As often as I remember you, I glorify God.
But this he does from his being conscious of many good things in them. I both
glorify, he says, and pray. I do not, because you have advanced unto virtue, cease
praying for you. But "I thank my God," he says, "upon all my remembrance of
you,"

Ver. 4. "Always in every prayer of mine for you all making request also with
joy."
"Always," not only while I am praying. "With joy." For it is possible to do
this with grief too, as when he says elsewhere, "For out of much affliction and
anguish of heart I wrote unto you with many tears." [2 Corinthians 2:4]
Ver. 5. "For your fellowship in furtherance of the Gospel from the first day
even until now."
Great is that he here witnesses of them, and very great, and what one might
have witnessed of Apostles and Evangelists. You did not, because you were
entrusted with one city, he says, care for that only, but you leave nothing undone
to be sharers of my labors, being everywhere at hand and working with me, and
taking part in my preaching. It is not once, or the second, or third time, but
always, from the time ye believed until now, you have assumed the readiness of
Apostles. Behold how those indeed that were in Rome turned away from him;
for hear him saying, "This you know, that all that are in Asia turned away from
me." [2 Timothy 1:15] And again, "Demas forsook me": and "at my first defence
no one took my part." [2 Timothy 4:10-16] But these, although absent, shared in
his tribulations, both sending men to him, and ministering to him according to
their ability, and leaving out nothing at all. And this ye do not now only, says he,
but always, in every way assisting me. So then it is a "fellowship in furtherance
of the Gospel." For when one preaches, and you wait on the preacher, you share
his crowns. Since even in the contests that are without, the crown is not only for
him that strives, but for the trainer, and the attendant, and all that help to prepare
the athlete. For they that strengthen him, and recover him, may fairly participate
in his victory. And in wars too, not only he that wins the prize of valor, but all
they too that attend him, may fairly claim a share in the trophies, and partake of
the glory, as having shared in his conflict by their attendance on him. For it
avails not a little to wait on saints, but very much. For it makes us sharers in the
rewards that are laid up for them. Thus; suppose some one has given up great
possessions for God, continually devotes himself to God, practices great virtue,