SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.1, C.6.

the sake of the common good: yet that, in a just war, a man be
armed, or strike another with his sword, and so forth, is reduced to
the object of fortitude, but indirectly.
Accordingly, just as a virtuous act is required for the fulfilment of a
precept, so is it necessary that the virtuous act should terminate in
its proper and direct object: but, on the other hand, the fulfilment of
the precept does not require that a virtuous act should terminate in
those things which have an accidental or secondary relation to the
proper and direct object of that virtue, except in certain places and at
certain times. We must, therefore, say that the direct object of faith is
that whereby man is made one of the Blessed, as stated above
(Question 1, Article 8): while the indirect and secondary object
comprises all things delivered by God to us in Holy Writ, for instance
that Abraham had two sons, that David was the son of Jesse, and so
forth.
Therefore, as regards the primary points or articles of faith, man is
bound to believe them, just as he is bound to have faith; but as to
other points of faith, man is not bound to believe them explicitly, but
only implicitly, or to be ready to believe them, in so far as he is
prepared to believe whatever is contained in the Divine Scriptures.
Then alone is he bound to believe such things explicitly, when it is
clear to him that they are contained in the doctrine of faith.
Reply to Objection 1: If we understand those things alone to be in a
man's power, which we can do without the help of grace, then we are
bound to do many things which we cannot do without the aid of
healing grace, such as to love God and our neighbor, and likewise to
believe the articles of faith. But with the help of grace we can do this,
for this help "to whomsoever it is given from above it is mercifully
given; and from whom it is withheld it is justly withheld, as a
punishment of a previous, or at least of original, sin," as Augustine
states (De Corr. et Grat. v, vi [Ep. cxc; De Praed. Sanct. viii.]).
Reply to Objection 2: Man is bound to love definitely those lovable
things which are properly and directly the objects of charity, namely,
God and our neighbor. The objection refers to those precepts of
charity which belong, as a consequence, to the objects of charity.
Reply to Objection 3: The virtue of obedience is seated, properly
speaking, in the will; hence promptness of the will subject to

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.1, C.6.

authority, suffices for the act of obedience, because it is the proper
and direct object of obedience. But this or that precept is accidental
or consequent to that proper and direct object.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.1, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether all are equally bound to have explicit