SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.57, C.7.

I answer that, A thing is said to be "general" in two ways. First, by
"predication": thus "animal" is general in relation to man and horse
and the like: and in this sense that which is general must needs be
essentially the same as the things in relation to which it is general,
for the reason that the genus belongs to the essence of the species,
and forms part of its definition. Secondly a thing is said to be general
"virtually"; thus a universal cause is general in relation to all its
effects, the sun, for instance, in relation to all bodies that are
illumined, or transmuted by its power; and in this sense there is no
need for that which is "general" to be essentially the same as those
things in relation to which it is general, since cause and effect are
not essentially the same. Now it is in the latter sense that, according
to what has been said (Article 5), legal justice is said to be a general
virtue, in as much, to wit, as it directs the acts of the other virtues to
its own end, and this is to move all the other virtues by its command;
for just as charity may be called a general virtue in so far as it directs
the acts of all the virtues to the Divine good, so too is legal justice, in
so far as it directs the acts of all the virtues to the common good.
Accordingly, just as charity which regards the Divine good as its
proper object, is a special virtue in respect of its essence, so too
legal justice is a special virtue in respect of its essence, in so far as
it regards the common good as its proper object. And thus it is in the
sovereign principally and by way of a mastercraft, while it is
secondarily and administratively in his subjects.
However the name of legal justice can be given to every virtue, in so
far as every virtue is directed to the common good by the aforesaid
legal justice, which though special essentially is nevertheless
virtually general. Speaking in this way, legal justice is essentially the
same as all virtue, but differs therefrom logically: and it is in this
sense that the Philosopher speaks.
Wherefore the Replies to the First and Second Objections are
manifest.
Reply to Objection 3: This argument again takes legal justice for the
virtue commanded by legal justice.
Reply to Objection 4: Every virtue strictly speaking directs its act to
that virtue's proper end: that it should happen to be directed to a
further end either always or sometimes, does not belong to that
virtue considered strictly, for it needs some higher virtue to direct it
to that end. Consequently there must be one supreme virtue

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.57, C.7.

essentially distinct from every other virtue, which directs all the
virtues to the common good; and this virtue is legal justice.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.57, C.8.