this also making it manifest, that the seizure was of His permission. He passed
over the miracles, and mentions the teaching, that He might not seem to boast.
When I taught, you laid no hold on me; when I held my peace, did ye come
against me? I was in the temple, and no one seized me, and now do ye come
upon me late and at midnight with swords and staves? What need was there of
these weapons against Him, who was with you always? By these things teaching
them, that unless He had voluntarily yielded, not even then would they have
succeeded. For neither could they (who were not able to hold Him when in their
hands, and who, when they had got Him in the midst of them, had not prevailed)
even then have succeeded, unless He had been willing.
After this, He solves also the difficulty why He willed it then. For, "this was
done," He says, "that the Scriptures of the prophets might be fulfilled."
[Matthew 26:56] See how even up to the last hour, and in the very act of being
betrayed, He did all things for their amendment, healing, prophesying,
threatening. "For," He says, "they shall perish by the sword." To show that He is
suffering voluntarily, He says, "I was daily with you teaching;" to manifest His
accordance with the Father, He adds, "That the Scriptures of the prophets might
be fulfilled."
But wherefore did they not lay hold on Him in the temple? Because they
would not have dared in the temple, on account of the people. Wherefore also He
went forth without, both by the place and by the time giving them security, and
even to the last hour taking away their excuse. For He who, in order that He
might obey the prophets, gave up even Himself, how did He teach things
contrary to them?
"Then all His disciples," it is said, "forsook Him, and fled." For when He
was seized, they remained; but when He had said these things to the multitudes,
they fled. For thenceforth they saw that escape was no longer possible, when He
was giving Himself up to them voluntarily, and saying, that this was done
according to the Scriptures.
And when these were fled, "they lead Him away to Caiaphas; but Peter

followed, and entered in to see what the end should be."
Great was the fervor of the disciple; neither did he fly when he saw them
flying, but stood his ground, and went in with Him. And if John did so too, yet
he was "known to the high priest." [John 18:15]
And why did they lead Him away there where they were all assembled?
That they might do all things with consent of the chief priests. For he was then
high priest, and all were waiting for Christ there, to such a degree did they spend
the whole night, and give up their sleep for this object. For neither did they then
eat the passover, but watched for this other purpose. For John, when he had said
that "it was early," added, "they entered into the judgment hall, lest they should
be defiled, but that they might eat the passover."
What must we say then? That they ate it on another day, and broke the law,
on account of their eager desire about this murder. For Christ would not have
transgressed as to the time of the passover, but they who were daring all things,
and trampling under foot a thousand laws. For since they were exceedingly
boiling with rage, and having often attempted to seize Him, had not been able;
having then taken Him unexpectedly, they chose even to pass by the passover,
for the sake of satiating their murderous lust.
Wherefore also they were all assembled together, and it was a council of
pestilent men, and they ask some questions, wishing to invest this plot with the
appearance of a court of justice. For "neither did their testimonies agree
together;" so feigned was the court of justice, and all things full of confusion and
disorder.
"But false witnesses came, and said, This fellow said, I will destroy this
temple, and in three days I will raise it." And indeed He had said, "In three
days," but He said not, "I will destroy," but, "Destroy," and not about that temple
but about His own body.
What then does the high priest? Willing to press Him to a defense, that by
that he might take Him, he says, "Hearest Thou not what these witness against
You? But He held His peace."