not only will you overthrow what has been spoken, and hide it: but you will also
bring about another capital result: you will stop sentence being given against
yourself. Does somebody speak evil of you? Say thou: "Had he known all, he
would not have spoken only thus much."— So you admire what has been said,
and are delighted with it? Aye, but you must follow it. For when we tell you all
these maxims of the heathen moralists, it is not because Scripture does not
contain hundreds of such sayings, but because these are of more force to put you
to the blush. As in fact Scripture itself is wont to use this appeal to our sense of
shame; for, instance, when it says, "Do ye even as the heathen." [Jeremiah 35:3]
And the prophet Jeremiah brought forward into public view the children of
Rechab, how they would not consent to violate the command of their father.—
Miriam and her company spoke evil of Moses, and he immediately begged them
off from their punishment; nay, would not so much as let it be known that his
cause was avenged. [Numbers 12] But not so we: on the contrary, this is what we
most desire; to have all men know that they have not passed unpunished. How
long shall we breathe of the earth?— One party cannot make a fight. Pluck the
madmen from both sides, you will exasperate them the more: but pluck from
right or from left, and you have quenched the passion. The striker, if he has to do
with one who will not put up with blows, is the more set on: but if with one who
yields, he is the sooner unnerved, and his blow is spent upon himself. For no
practised pugilist so unnerves the strength of his antagonist, as does a man who
being injuriously treated makes no return. For the other only goes off ashamed,
and condemned, first by his own conscience, and secondly by all the lookers on.
And there is a proverb too, which says, that "to honor another, is to honor one's
self": therefore also to abuse another is to abuse one's self. None, I repeat, will be
able to harm us, unless we harm ourselves; nor will any make me poor, unless I
make myself such. For come, let us look at it in this way. Suppose that I have a
beggarly soul, and let all lavish all their substance upon me, what of that? So
long as the soul is not changed, it is all in vain. Suppose I have a noble soul, and
let all men take from me my substance: what of that? So long as you do not

make the soul beggarly, no harm is done. Suppose my life be impure, and let all
men say just the contrary of me: what of that? For though they say it, yet they do
not judge thus of me in their heart. Again, suppose my life be pure, and let all
say of me just the reverse: and what of that? For in their own conscience they
will condemn themselves: since they are not persuaded of what they say. Just as
we ought not to admit the praise, so neither the criminations. And why say I
these things? None will ever be able to plot against us, nor lay us under any evil
charge, if we choose (that they shall not). For how now, I ask you? Let him drag
me into a court of justice, let him lay vexatious informations, let him, if you will,
have the very soul out of me: and what of that? For a little while, undeservedly
to suffer these things, what does it signify? "Well, but this," say you, "is of itself
an evil." Well, but of itself this is a good, to suffer undeservedly. What? Would
you have the suffering to be deserved? Let me mention again a piece of
philosophy, from one of the sages. A certain person, says the story, had been put
to death. And one of the sage's disciples said to him, "Woe is me, that he should
have suffered unjustly!" The other turned upon him, "Why, how now?" said he,
"would you have had him justly suffer?" (Socrates ap. Diog. Laert. and Xen.
Mem. Socr.) John also, was not he unjustly put to death? Which then do you
rather pity: them that justly suffer death, or [him? Do you not count them
miserable, while] him you even admire? Then what is a man injured, when from
death itself he has got great gain, not merely no hurt? If indeed the man had been
immortal, and this made him mortal, no doubt it would be a hurt: but if he be
mortal, and in the course of nature must expect death a little later, and his enemy
has but expedited his death, and glory with it, what is the harm? Let us but have
our soul in good order, and there will be no harm from without. But you are not
in a condition of glory? And what of that? That which is true of wealth, the same
holds for glory: if I be magnanimous ([μεγαλοπρεπής]), I shall need none; if
vainglorious, the more I get, the more I shall want. In this way shall I most
become illustrious, and obtain greater glory; namely, if I despise glory. Knowing
these things, let us be thankful to Him Who has freely given us such a life, and