rich or poor. For, tell me, are not things necessary bestowed on all equally, as the
capacity for virtue, the distribution of spiritual gifts? If you understood aright the
mercies of God, you would not complain of wanting worldly things, while you
enjoyed these best gifts equally with others; and knowing that equal distribution
you would not desire superiority in the rest. As if a servant enjoying from his
master's bounty food, clothing, and lodging, and all other necessaries equally
with his fellow-servants, should pride himself upon having longer nails, or more
hair upon his head; so it is for a Christian to be elated on account of those things,
which he enjoys only for a time. For this reason it is, that God withdraws those
things from us, to extinguish this madness, and transfer our affections from them
to heaven. But nevertheless we do not learn wisdom. As if a child possessing a
toy, should prefer it to things necessary, and his father, to lead him against his
will to what was better for him, should deprive him of his toy; so God takes
these things from us, that He may lead us to heaven. If you ask then why He
permits the wicked to be rich, it is because they are not high in His esteem. And
if the righteous too are rich, it is rather that He allows it to be, than that He
makes them so. Now these things we say superficially, as to men not knowing
the Scriptures. But our discourses would be unnecessary if you would believe
and take heed to the divine word, for that would teach you all things. And that
you may understand that neither riches, nor health, nor glory, are anything, I can
show you many, who, when they might gain wealth, do not seek wealth; when
they might enjoy health, mortify their bodies; when they might rise to glory,
make it their aim to be despised. But there is no good man, who ever studied to
be bad. Let us therefore desist from seeking things below, and let us seek
heavenly things; for so we shall be able to attain them, and we shall enjoy eternal
delights, by the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ. To Whom
with the Father and the Holy Ghost be glory, power, and honor, now, and ever,
and world without end. Amen.

## Homily 2 on First Timothy

1 Timothy 1:5-7
"Now the end of the commandment is charity out of a pure heart, and of a
good conscience, and of faith unfeigned: From which some having swerved have
turned aside unto vain jangling; Desiring to be teachers of the law;
understanding neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm."
Nothing is so injurious to mankind as to undervalue friendship ; and not to
cultivate it with the greatest care; as nothing, on the other hand, is so beneficial,
as to pursue it to the utmost of our power. This Christ has shown, where He says,
"If two of you shall agree on earth, as touching anything that they shall ask, it
shall be done for them of My Father" [Matthew 18:19]; and again, "Because
iniquity shall abound, love shall wax cold." [Matthew 24:12] It is this that has
been the occasion of all heresies. For men, because they loved not their brethren,
have envied those who were in high repute, and from envying, they have become
eager for power, and from a love of power have introduced heresies. On this
account Paul having said, "that you might charge some that they teach no other
doctrine," now shows that the manner in which this may be effected is by
charity. As therefore when he says, "Christ is the end of the Law" [Romans
10:4], that is, its fulfillment, and this is connected with the former, so this
commandment is implied in love. The end of medicine is health, but where there
is health, there is no need to make much ado; so where there is love, there is no
need of much commanding. But what sort of love does he speak of? That which
is sincere, which is not merely in words but which flows from the disposition,
from sentiment, and sympathy. "From a pure heart," he says, either with respect
to a right conversation, or sincere affection. For an impure life too produces
divisions. "For every one that does evil, hates the light." [John 3:20] There is
indeed a friendship even among the wicked. Robbers and murderers may love