SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.117, C.4.

where a gloss observes: "Lest they should regret what they had
given, and give but little."
Reply to Objection 1: Chrysostom and the Philosopher are speaking
of covetousness in the first sense: covetousness in the second
sense is called illiberality [aneleutheria] by the Philosopher.
Reply to Objection 2: It belongs properly to justice to appoint the
measure in the acquisition and keeping of riches from the point of
view of legal due, so that a man should neither take nor retain
another's property. But liberality appoints the measure of reason,
principally in the interior affections, and consequently in the exterior
taking and keeping of money, and in the spending of the same, in so
far as these proceed from the interior affection, looking at the matter
from the point of view not of the legal but of the moral debt, which
latter depends on the rule of reason.
Reply to Objection 3: Covetousness as opposed to justice has no
opposite vice: since it consists in having more than one ought
according to justice, the contrary of which is to have less than one
ought, and this is not a sin but a punishment. But covetousness as
opposed to liberality has the vice of prodigality opposed to it.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.117, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether covetousness is always a mortal sin?

Objection 1: It seems that covetousness is always a mortal sin. For
no one is worthy of death save for a mortal sin. But men are worthy
of death on account of covetousness. For the Apostle after saying
(Rm. 1:29): "Being filled with all iniquity . . . fornication,
covetousness," etc. adds (Rm. 1:32): "They who do such things are
worthy of death." Therefore covetousness is a mortal sin.
Objection 2: Further, the least degree of covetousness is to hold to
one's own inordinately. But this seemingly is a mortal sin: for Basil
says (Serm. super. Luc. xii, 18): "It is the hungry man's bread that
thou keepest back, the naked man's cloak that thou hoardest, the
needy man's money that thou possessest, hence thou despoilest as
many as thou mightest succor."
Now it is a mortal sin to do an injustice to another, since it is
contrary to the love of our neighbor. Much more therefore is all
covetousness a mortal sin.
Objection 3: Further, no one is struck with spiritual blindness save
through a mortal sin, for this deprives a man of the light of grace.
But, according to Chrysostom [Hom. xv in the Opus Imperfectum,
falsely ascribed to St. Chrysostom], "Lust for money brings
darkness on the soul." Therefore covetousness, which is lust for
money, is a mortal sin.
On the contrary, A gloss on 1 Cor. 3:12, "If any man build upon this
foundation," says (cf. St. Augustine, De Fide et Oper. xvi) that "he
builds wood, hay, stubble, who thinks in the things of the world, how
he may please the world," which pertains to the sin of covetousness.
Now he that builds wood, hay, stubble, sins not mortally but venially,
for it is said of him that "he shall be saved, yet so as by fire."
Therefore covetousness is some times a venial sin.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 3) covetousness is twofold. In
one way it is opposed to justice, and thus it is a mortal sin in respect
of its genus. For in this sense covetousness consists in the unjust
taking or retaining of another's property, and this belongs to theft or
robbery, which are mortal sins, as stated above (Question 66,
Articles 6,8). Yet venial sin may occur in this kind of covetousness