THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.16, C.12.

Reply to Objection 2: The Son of Man has on earth the power of
forgiving sins, not by virtue of the human nature, but by virtue of the
Divine Nature, in which Divine Nature resides the power of forgiving
sins authoritatively; whereas in the human nature it resides
instrumentally and ministerially. Hence Chrysostom expounding this
passage says [Hom. xxx in Matth; St. Thomas, Catena Aurea on Mk.
2:10]: "He said pointedly 'on earth to forgive sins,' in order to show
that by an indivisible union He united human nature to the power of
the Godhead, since although He was made Man, yet He remained the
Word of God."
Reply to Objection 3: When we say "this man," the demonstrative
pronoun "this" attracts "man" to the suppositum; and hence "Christ
as this Man, is God, is a truer proposition than Christ as Man is
God."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.16, C.13.

### ARTICLE 12. Whether this is true: "Christ as Man is a

hypostasis or person"?
Objection 1: It would seem that Christ as Man is a hypostasis or
person. For what belongs to every man belongs to Christ as Man,
since He is like other men according to Phil. 2:7: "Being made in the
likeness of men." But every man is a person. Therefore Christ as
Man is a person.
Objection 2: Further, Christ as Man is a substance of rational nature.
But He is not a universal substance: therefore He is an individual
substance. Now a person is nothing else than an individual
substance of rational nature; as Boethius says (De Duab. Nat.).
Therefore Christ as Man is a person.
Objection 3: Further, Christ as Man is a being of human nature, and a
suppositum and a hypostasis of the same nature. But every
hypostasis and suppositum and being of human nature is a person.
Therefore Christ as Man is a person.
On the contrary, Christ as Man is not an eternal person. Therefore if
Christ as Man is a person it would follow that in Christ there are two
persons---one temporal and the other eternal, which is erroneous, as
was said above (Question 2, Article 6; Question 4, Article 2).
I answer that, As was said (Articles 10,11), the term "Man" placed in
the reduplication may refer either to the suppositum or to the nature.
Hence when it is said: "Christ as Man is a person," if it is taken as
referring to the suppositum, it is clear that Christ as Man is a person,
since the suppositum of human nature is nothing else than the
Person of the Son of God. But if it be taken as referring to the nature,
it may be understood in two ways. First, we may so understand it as
if it belonged to human nature to be in a person, and in this way it is
true, for whatever subsists in human nature is a person. Secondly it
may be taken that in Christ a proper personality, caused by the
principles of the human nature, is due to the human nature; and in
this way Christ as Man is not a person, since the human nature does
not exist of itself apart from the Divine Nature, and yet the notion of
person requires this.
Reply to Objection 1: It belongs to every man to be a person,