glad, but the same which is made sorry by me?" [2 Corinthians 2:2] And so
when he is going to the full extent of punishment, then he shows his love. Thus
the Egyptian woman too, from her vehement love, as vehemently punished
Joseph: and she indeed did so for mischief, the love being unchaste; but God for
good, since the love was worthy of Him who loved. This is why He does not
refuse even to condescend to grosser words, and to speak the names of human
passions, and to call Himself jealous. For "I am a jealous God" [Exodus 20:5],
He says, that you may learn the intenseness of the love. Let us then love Him as
He would have us: for He sets great store thereby. And if we turn away, He
keeps inviting us, and if we will not be converted, He chastens us through His
affection, not through a wish to exact punishment of us. And see what He says in
Ezekiel to the city that was beloved, yet had despised Him. "I will bring your
lovers against you, and will deliver you into their hands, and they shall stone
you, and shall slay you, and My jealousy shall be taken away from you, and I
will rest, and I will not trouble Myself any more." [From Ezekiel 16:37-42] What
more than this could a vehement lover have said, when despised by his beloved,
and after all again ardently loving her? For God does everything that He may be
loved by us, and owing to this He spared not even His Son. But we are
unbending, and savage. Yet let us become gentle at last, and love God as we
ought to love Him, that we may with pleasure enjoy virtue. For if any that has a
beloved wife does not perceive any of the vexations that come day by day, He
that loves with this divine and pure love, only consider what great pleasure he
will have to enjoy! For this is, indeed it is, the kingdom of Heaven; this is
fruition of good things, and pleasure, and cheerfulness, and joy, and blessedness.
Or rather, say as many things as I may, I shall still be unable to give you any
such representation of it as should be, but the trial of it alone can give a
knowledge of this goodly thing. Wherefore also the Prophet says, "Delight
yourself in the Lord" [Psalm 37:4], and, "Taste and see that the Lord is
gracious." [Psalm 34:8] Let us then be persuaded, and indulge ourselves in His
love. For in this way we shall both see His Kingdom even from out of this life,

and shall be living the life of Angels, and while we abide on earth, we shall be in
as goodly a condition as they that dwell in heaven; and after our departing hence,
shall stand the brightest of beings by the judgment-seat of Christ, and shall enjoy
that glory unutterable, which may we all attain unto, by the grace and love
toward man of our Lord Jesus Christ. For to Him is the glory forever, Amen.

## Homily 24 on Romans

Rom. XIII. 11
"And that, knowing the time, that now it is high time to awake out of sleep."
Since he had given them what commands were fitting, he again thrusts
them on to the performance of good works, in consideration of what was
pressing upon them. For the time of judgment, he means, is at the doors. So too
he wrote to the Corinthians also, "The remaining time is short. " [1 Corinthians
7:29] And to the Hebrews again, "For yet a little while, and He that shall come
will come, and will not tarry." [Hebrews 10:37] But in those cases it was to cheer
those in trouble, and to solace the toils of their closely successive temptations,
that he said those things: but in the passage before us he does it to rouse those
that are asleep, this language being useful to us for both the purposes: and what
is that which he says, "Now it is high time to awake out of sleep?" It is, that near
is the Resurrection, near the awful Judgment, and the day that burns as a furnace,
near. Henceforward then we must be free from our listlessness; "for now is our
salvation nearer than when we believed." You see how he puts the Resurrection
now close by them. For as the time advances, he means, the season of our
present life is wasting away, and that of the life to come waxes nearer. If then
thou be prepared, and hast done all whatsoever He has commanded, the day is
salvation to you (3 manuscripts and Cat. [σωτηρία σοι]); but if the contrary, not
so. For the present however, it is not upon alarming grounds that he exhorts
them, but upon kindly ones, thus also to untie them from their fellow-feeling for
the things of this present world. Then since it was not unlikely, that in the
beginning of their early endeavors they would be most earnest, in that their
desire was then at its full vigor, but that as the time went on, the whole of their
earnestness would wither down to nothing; he says that they ought however to
be doing the reverse, not to get relaxed as time went on, but to be the more full