THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.60, C.7.

sacramental remedy is adjusted, since it touches the body through
the sensible element, and the soul through faith in the words. Hence
Augustine says (Tract. lxxx in Joan.) on Jn. 15:3, "Now you are clean
by reason of the word," etc.: "Whence hath water this so great virtue,
to touch the body and wash the heart, but by the word doing it, not
because it is spoken, but because it is believed?"
Thirdly, a sacrament may be considered on the part of the
sacramental signification. Now Augustine says (De Doctr. Christ. ii)
that "words are the principal signs used by men"; because words
can be formed in various ways for the purpose of signifying various
mental concepts, so that we are able to express our thoughts with
greater distinctness by means of words. And therefore in order to
insure the perfection of sacramental signification it was necessary to
determine the signification of the sensible things by means of
certain words. For water may signify both a cleansing by reason of
its humidity, and refreshment by reason of its being cool: but when
we say, "I baptize thee," it is clear that we use water in baptism in
order to signify a spiritual cleansing.
Reply to Objection 1: The sensible elements of the sacraments are
called words by way of a certain likeness, in so far as they partake of
a certain significative power, which resides principally in the very
words, as stated above. Consequently it is not a superfluous
repetition to add words to the visible element in the sacraments;
because one determines the other, as stated above.
Reply to Objection 2: Although words and other sensible things are
not in the same genus, considered in their natures, yet have they
something in common as to the thing signified by them: which is
more perfectly done in words than in other things. Wherefore in the
sacraments, words and things, like form and matter, combine in the
formation of one thing, in so far as the signification of things is
completed by means of words, as above stated. And under words
are comprised also sensible actions, such as cleansing and
anointing and such like: because they have a like signification with
the things.
Reply to Objection 3: As Augustine says (Contra Faust. xix), the
sacraments of things present should be different from sacraments of
things to come. Now the sacraments of the Old Law foretold the
coming of Christ. Consequently they did not signify Christ so clearly
as the sacraments of the New Law, which flow from Christ Himself,

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.60, C.7.

and have a certain likeness to Him, as stated above. Nevertheless in
the Old Law, certain words were used in things pertaining to the
worship of God, both by the priests, who were the ministers of those
sacraments, according to Num. 6:23,24: "Thus shall you bless the
children of Israel, and you shall say to them: The Lord bless thee,"
etc.; and by those who made use of those sacraments, according to
Dt. 26:3: "I profess this day before the Lord thy God," etc.