ready for slaughter. For since many have indeed contemned riches, and
pleasure, and glory, but death they despised not, but feared dangers; I," says He,
"will that my champion should wrestle even unto blood, and that the limits of his
course should reach unto slaughter; so that although one must undergo death,
death with reproach, the accursed death, and that upon evil surmise, we are to
bear all things nobly, and rather to rejoice in being suspected."
"And let him follow me." That is, it being possible for one to suffer, yet not
to follow Him, when one does not suffer for Him (for so robbers often suffer
grievously, and violaters of tombs, and sorcerers); to hinder your supposing that
the mere nature of your calamities is sufficient, He adds the occasion of these
calamities.
And what is it? In order that, so doing and suffering, you may follow Him;
that for Him you may undergo all things; that you may possess the other virtues
also. For this too is expressed by "Let him follow me;" so as to show forth not
fortitude only, such as is exercised in our calamities, but temperance also, and
moderation, and all self-restraint. This being properly "to follow," the giving
heed also to the other virtues, and for His sake suffering all.
For there are who follow the devil even to the endurance of all this, and for
his sake give up their own lives; but we for Christ, or rather for our own sakes:
they indeed to harm themselves both here and there; but we, that we may gain
both lives.
How then is it not extreme dullness, not to show forth even the same
fortitude with them that perish; and this, when we are to reap from it so many
crowns? Yet with us surely Christ Himself is present to be our help, but with
them no one.
Now He had indeed already spoken this very injunction, when He sent
them, saying, "Go not into the way of the Gentiles" (for, says He, "I send you as
sheep in the midst of wolves," and, "you shall be brought before kings and
governors") but now with more intensity and severity. For then He spoke of
death only, but here He has mentioned a cross also, and a continual cross. For

"let him take up," says He, "his cross;" that is, "let him carry it continually and
bear it." And this He is wont to do in everything; not in the first instance, nor
from the beginning, but quietly and gradually, bringing in the greater
commandments, that the hearers may not count it strange.
3. Then, because the saying seemed to be vehement, see how He softens it
by what follows, and sets down rewards surpassing our toils; and not rewards
only, but also the penalties of vice: nay, on these last He dwells more than on
those, since not so much His bestowing blessings, as His threat of severities, is
wont to bring ordinary men to their senses. See at least how He both begins here
from this, and ends in this.
"For whosoever will save his life shall lose it," says He, "but whosoever
shall lose his life for my sake, shall find it. For what is a man profited, if he
should gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? Or what shall a man give in
exchange for his soul?"
Now what He says is like this: "not as unsparing towards you, but rather as
exceedingly sparing you, I enjoin these things. For he who spares his child, ruins
it; but he who spares it not, preserves." To which effect also a certain wise man
said, "If you beat your son with a rod, he shall not die, but you shall deliver his
soul from death." [Proverbs 23:13-14] And again, "He that refreshes his son,
shall bind up his wounds." [Sirach 30:7]
This takes place in the camp also. For if the general, sparing the soldiers,
commands them to remain within the place always, he will destroy with them the
inhabitants too.
"In order then that this may not happen in your case also," says He, "ye
must be arrayed against continual death. For now too a grievous war is about to
be kindled. Sit not therefore within, but go forth and fight; and should you fall in
your post, then have you obtained life." For if in the visible wars he that in his
post meets slaughter, is both more distinguished than the rest, and more
invincible, and more formidable to the enemy; although we know that after death
the king, in behalf of whom he takes his station, is not able to raise him up again: