of the Spirit, then it puts away all our sins. Around this pool "lay a great
multitude of impotent folk, of blind, halt, withered, waiting for the moving of the
water"; but then infirmity was a hindrance to him who desired to be healed, now
each has power to approach, for now it is not an Angel that troubles, it is the
Lord of Angels who works all. The sick man cannot now say, "I have no man";
he cannot say, "While I am coming another steps down before me"; though the
whole world should come, the grace is not spent, the power is not exhausted, but
remains equally great as it was before. Just as the sun's beams give light every
day, yet are not exhausted, nor is their light made less by giving so abundant a
supply; so, and much more, the power of the Spirit is in no way lessened by the
numbers of those who enjoy it. And this miracle was done in order that men,
learning that it is possible by water to heal the diseases of the body, and being
exercised in this for a long time, might more easily believe that it can also heal
the diseases of the soul.
But why did Jesus, leaving the rest, come to one who was of thirty-eight
years standing? And why did He ask him, "Will you be made whole?" Not that
He might learn, that was needless; but that He might show the man's
perseverance, and that we might know that it was on this account that He left the
others and came to him. What then says he? "Yea Lord," he says, but "I have no
man when the water is troubled to put me into the pool, but while I am coming
another steps down before me."
It was that we might learn these circumstances that Jesus asked, "Will you
be made whole?" and said not, "Will you that I heal you?" (for as yet the man
had formed no exalted notions concerning Him,) but "Will you be made whole?"
Astonishing was the perseverance of the paralytic, he was of thirty and eight
years standing, and each year hoping to be freed from his disease, he continued
in attendance, and withdrew not. Had he not been very persevering, would not
the future, if not the past, have been sufficient to lead him from the spot?
Consider, I pray you, how watchful it was likely that the other sick men there
would be since the time when the water was troubled was uncertain. The lame

and halt indeed might observe it, but how did the blind see? Perhaps they learned
it from the clamor which arose.
2. Let us be ashamed then, beloved, let us be ashamed, and groan over our
excessive sloth. "Thirty and eight years" had that man been waiting without
obtaining what he desired, and withdrew not. And he had failed not through any
carelessness of his own, but through being oppressed and suffering violence
from others, and not even thus did he grow dull; while we if we have persisted
for ten days to pray for anything and have not obtained it, are too slothful
afterwards to employ the same zeal. And on men we wait for so long a time,
warring and enduring hardships and performing servile ministrations, and often
at last failing in our expectation, but on our Master, from whom we are sure to
obtain a recompense greater than our labors, (for, says the Apostle, "Hope makes
not ashamed" [Romans 5:5]) on Him we endure not to wait with becoming
diligence. What chastisement does this deserve! For even though we could
receive nothing from Him, ought we not to deem the very conversing with Him
continually the cause of ten thousand blessings? "But continual prayer is a
laborious thing." And what that belongs to virtue is not laborious? "In truth,"
says some one, "this very point is full of great difficulty, that pleasure is annexed
to vice, and labor to virtue." And many, I think, make this a question. What then
can be the reason? God gave us at the beginning a life free from care and exempt
from labor. We used not the gift aright, but were perverted by doing nothing, and
were banished from Paradise. On which account He made our life for the future
one of toil, assigning as it were His reasons for this to mankind, and saying, "I
allowed you at the beginning to lead a life of enjoyment, but you were rendered
worse by liberty, wherefore I commanded that henceforth labor and sweat be
laid upon you." And when even this labor did not restrain us, He next gave us a
law containing many commandments, imposing it on us like bits and curbs
placed upon an unruly horse to restrain his prancings, just as horse breakers do.
This is why life is laborious, because not to labor is wont to be our ruin. For our
nature cannot bear to be doing nothing, but easily turns aside to wickedness. Let