our benefactors. I say not for the present, let us do good to them that evil entreat
us, for I desire even this; but since you are too gross for this, at least avenge not
yourselves. What is our condition, a scene, and acting? Wherefore can it be that
you set yourselves directly against the acts enjoined? It is not for nought that all
else has been written and how many things He did at the very cross sufficient to
recall them to Him; but that you might imitate His goodness, that you might
emulate His lovingkindness. For indeed He cast them to the ground, and restored
the servant's ear, and discoursed with forbearance; and great miracles did He
show forth, when lifted up, turning aside the sunbeams, bursting the rocks,
raising the dead, frightening by dreams the wife of him that was judging Him, at
the very judgment showing forth all meekness (which was of power not less than
miracles to gain them over), forewarning them of countless things in the
judgment hall; on the very cross crying aloud, "Father, forgive them their sin."
And when buried, how many things did He show forth for their salvation? And
having risen again, did he not straightway call the Jews? Did He not give them
remission of sins? Did He not set before them countless blessings? What can be
more strange than this? They that crucified Him, and were breathing murder,
after they crucified Him, became sons of God.
What can be equal to this tenderness? On hearing these things let us hide
our faces, to think that we are so far removed from Him whom we are
commanded to imitate. Let us at least see how great the distance, that we may at
any rate condemn ourselves, for warring with these, in behalf of whom Christ
gave His life, and not being willing to be reconciled to them, whom that He
might reconcile He refused not even to be slain; unless this too be some expense,
and outlay of money, which you object in almsgiving.
4. Consider of how many things you are guilty; and so far from being
backward to forgive them that have injured you, you will even run unto them
that have grieved you, in order that you may have a ground for pardon, that you
may find a remedy for your own evil deeds.
The sons of the Greeks, who look for nothing great, have often shown self-

command toward these: and thou who art to depart hence with such hopes,
shrinkest, and art slow to act; and that which time effects, this you endure not to
do before the time for God's law, but willest this passion to be quenched without
reward, rather than for a reward? For neither, if this should have arisen from the
time, will you have any advantage, but rather great will be the punishment,
because, what time has effected, this the law of God persuaded you not to do.
But if you say that you burn with the memory of the insult; call to mind if
any good has been done you by him that has offended you, and how many ills
you have occasioned to others.
Hath he spoken ill of you, and disgraced you? Consider also that you have
spoken thus of others. How then will you obtain pardon, which you bestow not
on others? But have you spoken ill of no one? But you have heard men so
speaking, and allowed it. Neither is this guiltless.
Will you learn how good a thing it is not to remember injuries, and how this
more than anything pleases God? Them that exult over persons, justly chastised
by Himself, He punishes. And yet they are justly chastised; but you should not
rejoice over them. So the prophet having brought many accusations, added this
also, saying, "They felt nothing for the affliction of Joseph;" [Amos 6:6] and
again, "She that inhabites Enan, came not forth to lament for the place near her."
And yet both Joseph (that is, the tribes that were sprung from him), and the
neighbors of these others, were punished according to the purpose of God;
nevertheless, it is His will that we sympathize even with these. For if we, being
evil, when we are punishing a servant, if we should see one of his fellow slaves
laughing, we at the same time are provoked the more, and turn our anger against
him; much more will God punish them that exult over those whom He chastises.
But if upon them that are chastised by God it is not right to trample, but to grieve
with them, much more with them that have sinned against us. For this is love's
sign; love God prefers to all things. For as in the royal purple, those are precious
among the flowers and dyes, which make up this robing; so here too, these
virtues are the precious ones, which preserve love. But nothing maintains love so