the first man might derive only the origin of race, not also of guilt. For
there was born, not a nature corrupted by the contagion of transgression,
but the one only remedy of all such corruptions. There was born, I say, a
Man having nothing at all, and to have nothing at all, of sin; through
whom they were to be born again so as to be freed from sin, who could
not be born without sin. For although conjugal chastity makes a right use
of the carnal concupiscence which is in our members; yet it is liable to
motions not voluntary, by which it shows either that it could not have
existed at all in paradise before sin, or if it did, that it was not then such
as that sometimes it should resist the will. But now we feel it to be such,
that in opposition to the law of the mind, and even if there is no question
of begetting, it works in us the incitement of sexual intercourse; and if in
this men yield to it, then it is satisfied by an act of sin; if they do not, then
it is bridled by an act of refusal: which two things who could doubt to
have been alien from paradise before sin? For neither did the chastity
that then was do anything indecorous, nor did the pleasure that then was
suffer anything unquiet. It was necessary, therefore, that this carnal
concupiscence should be entirely absent, when the offspring of the Virgin
was conceived; in whom the author of death was to find nothing worthy
of death, and yet was to slay Him in order that he might be conquered by
the death of the Author of life: the conqueror of the first Adam, who held
fast the human race, conquered by the second Adam, and losing the
Christian race, freed out of the human race from human guilt, through
Him who was not in the guilt, although He was of the race; that that
deceiver might be conquered by that race which he had conquered by
guilt. And this was so done, in order that man may not be lifted up, but
"that he that glorieth should glory in the Lord." For he who was
conquered was only man; and he was therefore conquered, because he
lusted proudly to be a god. But He who conquered was both man and
God; and therefore He so conquered, being born of a virgin, because God
in humility did not, as He governs other saints, so govern that Man, but
bare Him . These so great gifts of God, and whatever else there
are, which it is too long for us now upon this subject both to inquire and
to discuss, could not exist unless the Word had been made flesh.

### CHAP. 19.—WHAT IN THE INCARNATE WORD BELONGS TO KNOWLEDGE, WHAT TO WISDOM.

24. And all these things which the Word made flesh did and bare for us in
time and place, belong, according to the distinction which we have
undertaken to demonstrate, to knowledge, not to wisdom. And as the
Word is without time and without place, it is co-eternal with the Father,
and in its wholeness everywhere; and if any one can, and as much as he
can, speak truly concerning this Word, then his discourse will pertain to
wisdom. And hence the Word made flesh, which is Christ Jesus, has the
treasures both of wisdom and of knowledge. For the apostle, writing to
the Colossians, says: "For I would that ye knew what great conflict I have
for you, and for them at Laodicea, and for as many as have not seen my
face in the flesh; that their hearts might be comforted, being knit together
in love, and unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding, to the
acknowledgment of the mystery of God, which is Christ Jesus: in whom
are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge." To what extent the
apostle knew all those treasures, how much of them he had penetrated,
and in them to how great things he had reached, who can know? Yet, for
my part, according to that which is written, "But the manifestation of the
Spirit is given to every man to profit withal; for to one is given by the
Spirit the word of wisdom, to another the word of knowledge by the same
Spirit;" if these two are in such way to be distinguished from each other,
that wisdom is to be assigned to divine things, knowledge to human, I
acknowledge both in Christ, and so with me do all His faithful ones. And
when I read, "The Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us," I
understand by the Word the true Son of God, I acknowledge in the flesh
the true Son of man, and both together joined into one Person of God and
man, by an ineffable copiousness of grace. And on account of this, the
apostle goes on to say, "And we beheld His glory, the glory as of the Onlybegotten of the Father, full of grace and truth." If we refer grace to
knowledge, and truth to wisdom, I think we shall not swerve from that
distinction between these two things which we have commended. For in
those things that have their origin in time, this is the highest grace, that
man is joined with God in unity of person; but in things eternal the
highest truth is rightly attributed to the Word of God. But that the same is
Himself the Only-begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth,—this
took place, in order that He Himself in things done for us in time should
be the same for whom we are cleansed by the same faith, that we may
contemplate Him steadfastly in things eternal. And those distinguished