chains are matters of shame and reproach. But when the cause is added before
us, and the mystery viewed aright, they will appear full of dignity, and matter for
boasting. For it was that death which saved the world, when it was perishing.
That death connected earth with heaven, that death destroyed the power of the
devil, and made men angels, and sons of God: that death raised our nature to the
kingly throne. Those chains were the conversion of many. "Be not" therefore
"ashamed," he says, "of the testimony of our Lord, nor of me His prisoner: but
be thou partaker of the afflictions of the Gospel"; that is, though you should
suffer the same things, be not thou ashamed. For that this is implied appears
from what he said above; "God has given us a spirit of power, and of love, and of
a sound mind"; and by what follows, "Be thou partaker of the sufferings of the
Gospel": not merely be not ashamed of them, but be not ashamed even to
experience them.
And he does not say, "Do not fear," but, the more to encourage him, "be not
ashamed," as if there were no further danger, if he could overcome the shame.
For shame is only then oppressive, when one is overcome by it. Be not therefore
ashamed, if I, who raised the dead, who wrought miracles, who traversed the
world, am now a prisoner. For I am imprisoned, not as a malefactor, but for the
sake of Him who was crucified. If my Lord was not ashamed of the Cross,
neither am I of chains. And with great propriety, when he exhorts him not to be
ashamed, he reminds him of the Cross. If you are not ashamed of the Cross, he
means, neither be thou of chains; if our Lord and Master endured the Cross,
much more should we chains. For he who is ashamed of what He endured, is
ashamed of Him that was crucified. Now it is not on my own account that I bear
these chains; therefore do not give way to human feelings, but bear your part in
these sufferings. "Be partaker of the afflictions of the Gospel." He says not this,
as if the Gospel could suffer injury, but to excite his disciple to suffer for it.
"According to the power of God; Who has saved us, and called us with a
holy calling, not according to our works, but according to His own purpose and
grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus before the world began."

More especially because it was a hard thing to say, "Be partakers of
afflictions," he again consoles him. Reckon that you sustain these things, not by
your own power, but by the power of God. For it is your part to choose and to be
zealous, but God's to alleviate sufferings and bid them cease. He then shows him
the proofs of His power. Consider how you were saved, how you were called. As
he elsewhere says, "According to His power that works in us." [Ephesians 3:20]
So much was it a greater exercise of power to persuade the world to believe, than
to make the Heavens. But how was he "called with a holy calling"? This means,
He made them saints, who were sinners and enemies. "And this not of ourselves,
it was the gift of God." If then He is mighty in calling us, and good, in that He
has done it of grace and not of debt, we ought not to fear. For He Who, when we
should have perished, saved us, though enemies, by grace, will He not much
more cooperate with us, when He sees us working? "Not according to our own
works," he says, "but according to his own purpose and grace," that is, no one
compelling, no one counseling Him, but of His own purpose, from the impulse
of His own goodness, He saved us; for this is the meaning of "according to His
own purpose." "Which was given us before the world began." That is, it was
determined without beginning that these things should be done in Christ Jesus.
This is no light consideration, that from the first He willed it. It was not an afterthought. How then is not the Son eternal? For He also willed it from the
beginning.
Ver. 10. "But is now made manifest by the appearing of our Saviour Jesus
Christ, Who has abolished death, and has brought life and immortality to light
by the Gospel."
You see the power, you see the gift bestowed not by works, but through the
Gospel. These are objects of hope: for both were wrought in His Body. And how
will they be wrought in ours? "By the Gospel."
Ver. 11. "Whereunto I am appointed a preacher and an Apostle, and a
teacher of the Gentiles."
Why does he so constantly repeat this, and call himself a teacher of the