more disturb and terrify me; and I the more consider that which I see to be a
monster. For did I see a beast speaking with the voice of a man, I should not for
that reason say it was a man, but even for that very reason a beast more
monstrous than a beast. Whence then can I learn that you have the soul of a man,
when you kick like the ass, when you bear malice like the camel, when you bite
like the bear, when you devour like the wolf, when you steal like the fox, when
you are wily as the serpent, when you are shameless as the dog? Whence can I
learn that you have the soul of a man? Will ye that I show you a dead soul and a
living? Let us turn the discourse back to those men of old; and, if you will, let us
set before us the rich man [in the story] of Lazarus, and we shall know what is
death in a soul; for he had a dead soul, and it is plain from what he did. For, of
the works of the soul he did not one, but ate and drank and lived in pleasure
only. Such are even now the unmerciful and cruel, for these too have a dead soul
as he had. For all its warmth that flows out of the love of our neighbor has been
spent, and it is deader than a lifeless body. But the poor man was not such, but
standing on the very summit of heavenly wisdom shone out; and though
wrestling with continual hunger, and not even supplied with the food that was
necessary, neither so spoke he anything of blasphemy against God, but endured
all nobly. Now this is no trifling work of the soul; but a very high proof that it is
well-strung and healthful. And when there are not these qualities, it is plainly
because the soul is dead that they have perished. Or, tell me, shall we not
pronounce that soul dead which the Devil falls upon, striking, biting, spurning it,
yet has it no sense of any of these things, but lies deadened nor grieves when
being robbed of its wealth; but he even leaps upon it, yet it remains unmoved,
like a body when the soul is departed, nor even feels it? For when the fear of
God is not present with strictness, such must the soul needs be, and then the dead
more miserable. For the soul is not dissolved into corruption and ashes and dust,
but into things of fouler odor than these, into drunkenness and anger and
covetousness, into improper loves and unseasonable desires. But if you would
know more exactly how foul an odor it has, give me a soul that is pure, and then

you will see clearly how foul the odor of this filthy and impure one. For at
present you will not be able to perceive it. For so long as we are in contact
habitually with a foul odor, we are not sensible of it. But when we are fed with
spiritual words, then shall we be cognizant of that evil. And yet to many this
seems of no importance. And I say nothing as yet of hell; but let us, if you will,
examine what is present, and how worthy of derision is he, not that practises, but
that utters filthiness; how first he loads himself with contumely; just as one that
sputters any filth from the mouth, so he defiles himself. For if the stream is so
impure, think what must be the fountain of this filth! "for out of the abundance
of the heart the mouth speaks." [Matthew 12:34] Yet not for this alone do I
grieve, but because that to some this does not even seem to be reckoned among
improper things. Hence the evils are all made worse, when we both sin, and do
not think we even do amiss.
4. Will you then learn how great an evil is filthy talking? See how the
hearers blush at your indecency. For what is viler than a filthy talker? What more
infamous? For such thrust themselves into the rank of buffoons and of
prostituted women, yea rather these have more shame than you. How can you
teach a wife to be modest when by such language you are training her to proceed
unto lasciviousness? Better vent rottenness from the mouth than a filthy word.
Now if your mouth have an ill-odor, you partake not even of the common meats;
when then you had so foul a stink in your soul, tell me, do you dare to partake of
mysteries? Did any one take a dirty vessel and set it upon the table, you would
have beaten him with clubs and driven him out: yet God at His own table, (for
His table our mouth is when filled with thanksgiving,) when you pour out words
more disgusting than any unclean vessel, tell me, do you think that you provoke
not? And how is this possible? For nothing does so exasperate the holy and pure
as do such words; nothing makes men so impudent and shameless as to say and
listen to such; nothing does so unstring the sinews of modesty as the flame
which these kindle. God has set perfumes in your mouth, but you store up words
of fouler odor than a corpse, and destroyest the soul itself and makest it