Reply to Objection 1: The first cause of the sacraments is the Divine
power which works in them the welfare of the soul; but the second or
instrumental causes are material operations deriving their efficacy
from the Divine institution, and thus consent is the cause in
matrimony.
Reply to Objection 2: Matrimony is not the consent itself, but the
union of persons directed to one purpose, as stated above (Question
44, Article 1), and this union is the effect of the consent. Moreover,
the consent, properly speaking, signifies not the union of Christ with
the Church, but His will whereby His union with the Church was
brought about.
Reply to Objection 3: Just as marriage is one on the part of the
object to which the union is directed, whereas it is more than one on
the part of the persons united, so too the consent is one on the part
of the thing consented to, namely the aforesaid union, whereas it is
more than one on the part of the persons consenting. Nor is the
direct object of consent a husband but union with a husband on the
part of the wife, even as it is union with a wife on the part of the
husband.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the consent needs to be expressed in

words?
Objection 1: It would seem that there is no need for the consent to be
expressed in words. For a man is brought under another's power by
a vow just as he is by matrimony. Now a vow is binding in God's
sight, even though it be not expressed in words. Therefore consent
also makes a marriage binding even without being expressed in
words.
Objection 2: Further, there can be marriage between persons who
are unable to express their mutual consent in words, through being
dumb or of different languages. Therefore expression of the consent
by words is not required for matrimony.
Objection 3: Further, if that which is essential to a sacrament be
omitted for any reason whatever, there is no sacrament. Now there is
a case of marriage without the expression of words if the maid is
silent through bashfulness when her parents give her away to the
bridegroom. Therefore the expression of words is not essential to
matrimony.
On the contrary, Matrimony is a sacrament. Now a sensible sign is
required in every sacrament. Therefore it is also required in
matrimony, and consequently there must needs be at least words by
which the consent is made perceptible to the senses.
Further, in matrimony there is a contract between husband and wife.
Now in every contract there must be expression of the words by
which men bind themselves mutually to one another. Therefore in
matrimony also the consent must be expressed in words.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), the marriage union is
effected in the same way as the bond in material contracts. And
since material contracts are not feasible unless the contracting
parties express their will to one another in words, it follows that the
consent which makes a marriage must also be expressed in words,
so that the expression of words is to marriage what the outward
washing is to Baptism.
Reply to Objection 1: In a vow there is not a sacramental but only a