THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.3, C.2.

addition"; just as in the union of man with God, nothing is added to
God by the grace of adoption, but what is Divine is united to man;
hence, not God but man is perfected.
Reply to Objection 2: A Divine Person is said to be incommunicable
inasmuch as It cannot be predicated of several supposita, but
nothing prevents several things being predicated of the Person.
Hence it is not contrary to the nature of person to be communicated
so as to subsist in several natures, for even in a created person
several natures may concur accidentally, as in the person of one
man we find quantity and quality. But this is proper to a Divine
Person, on account of its infinity, that there should be a concourse
of natures in it, not accidentally, but in subsistence.
Reply to Objection 3: As was said above (Question 2, Article 1), the
human nature constitutes a Divine Person, not simply, but
forasmuch as the Person is denominated from such a nature. For
human nature does not make the Son of Man to be simply, since He
was from eternity, but only to be man. It is by the Divine Nature that a
Divine Person is constituted simply. Hence the Divine Person is not
said to assume the Divine Nature, but to assume the human nature.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.3, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether it is befitting to the Divine Nature to

assume?
Objection 1: It would seem that it is not befitting to the Divine Nature
to assume. Because, as was said above (Article 1), to assume is to
take to oneself. But the Divine Nature did not take to Itself human
nature, for the union did not take place in the nature, as was said
above (Question 2, Articles 1,3). Hence it is not befitting to the Divine
Nature to assume human nature.
Objection 2: Further, the Divine Nature is common to the three
Persons. If, therefore, it is befitting to the Divine Nature to assume, it
consequently is befitting to the three Persons; and thus the Father
assumed human nature even as the Son, which is erroneous.
Objection 3: Further, to assume is to act. But to act befits a person,
not a nature, which is rather taken to be the principle by which the
agent acts. Therefore to assume is not befitting to the nature.
On the contrary, Augustine (Fulgentius) says (De Fide ad Petrum ii):
"That nature which remains eternally begotten of the Father" (i.e.
which is received from the Father by eternal generation) "took our
nature free of sin from His Mother."
I answer that, As was said above (Article 1), in the word assumption
two things are signified---to wit, the principle and the term of the
action. Now to be the principle of the assumption belongs to the
Divine Nature in itself, because the assumption took place by Its
power; but to be the term of the assumption does not belong to the
Divine Nature in itself, but by reason of the Person in Whom It is
considered to be. Hence a Person is primarily and more properly
said to assume, but it may be said secondarily that the Nature
assumed a nature to Its Person. And after the same manner the
Nature is also said to be incarnate, not that it is changed to flesh, but
that it assumed the nature of flesh. Hence Damascene says (De Fide
Orth. iii, 6): "Following the blessed Athanasius and Cyril we say that
the Nature of God is incarnate."
Reply to Objection 1: "Oneself" is reciprocal, and points to the same
suppositum. But the Divine Nature is not a distinct suppositum from
the Person of the Word. Hence, inasmuch as the Divine Nature took