latter's cause which is the consent, although not on the part of the
act as frigidity does. Yet the Master treats of it together with frigidity,
because both are defects of nature (Sent. iv, D, 34).
Reply to Objection 3: A passing impediment which hinders the cause
of marriage, namely the consent, voids marriage altogether. But an
impediment that hinders the act must needs be perpetual in order to
void the marriage.
Reply to Objection 4: This impediment is reducible to error, since in
either case there is lack of consent on the part of the reason.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether marriage is annulled by the husband

committing incest with his wife's sister?
Objection 1: It would seem that marriage is not annulled by the
husband committing incest with his wife's sister. For the wife should
not be punished for her husband's sin. Yet she would be punished if
the marriage were annulled. Therefore, etc.
Objection 2: Further, it is a greater sin to know one's own relative,
than to know the relative of one's wife. But the former sin is not an
impediment to marriage. Therefore neither is the second.
Objection 3: Further, if this is inflicted as a punishment of the sin, it
would seem, if the incestuous husband marry even after his wife's
death, that they ought to be separated: which is not true.
Objection 4: Further, this impediment is not mentioned among those
enumerated above (Question 50). Therefore it does not void the
marriage contract.
On the contrary, By knowing his wife's sister he contracts affinity,
with his wife. But affinity voids the marriage contract. Therefore the
aforesaid incest does also.
Further, by whatsoever a man sinneth, by the same also is he
punished. Now such a man sins against marriage. Therefore he
ought to be punished by being deprived of marriage.
I answer that, If a man has connection with the sister or other relative
of his wife before contracting marriage, even after his betrothal, the
marriage should be broken off on account of the resultant affinity. If,
however, the connection take place after the marriage has been
contracted and consummated, the marriage must not be altogether
dissolved: but the husband loses his right to marital intercourse, nor
can he demand it without sin. And yet he must grant it if asked,
because the wife should not be punished for her husband's sin. But
after the death of his wife he ought to remain without any hope of
marriage, unless he receive a dispensation on account of his frailty,
through fear of unlawful intercourse. If, however, he marry without a
dispensation, he sins by contravening the law of the Church, but his
marriage is not for this reason to be annulled. This suffices for the

Replies to the Objections, for incest is accounted an impediment to
marriage not so much for its being a sin as on account of the affinity
which it causes. For this reason it is not mentioned with the other
impediments, but is included in the impediment of affinity.