should be brighter than any luminary; his life should be unspotted, so that all
should look up to him, and make his life the model of their own. But in
employing this exhortation, he had no common object in view. For he too was
about to appoint Bishops, (which also he exhorts Titus to do in his Epistle to
him,) and as it was probable that many would desire that office, therefore he
urges these admonitions. "Vigilant," he says, that is, circumspect, having a
thousand eyes about him, quicksighted, not having the eyes of his mind dimmed.
For many things occur which permit not a man to see clearly, to see things as
they are. For care and troubles, and a load of business on all sides press upon
him. He must therefore be vigilant, not only over his own concerns, but over
those of others. He must be well awake, he must be fervent in spirit, and, as it
were, breathe fire; he must labor and attend upon his duty by day and by night,
even more than a general upon his army; he must be careful and concerned for
all. "Sober, of good behavior, given to hospitality." Because these qualities are
possessed by most of those who are under their rule, (for in these respects they
ought to be equal to those who rule over them,) he, to show what is peculiar to
the Bishops, adds, "apt to teach." For this is not required of him that is ruled, but
is most essential to him who has this rule committed to him.
"Not given to wine": here he does not so much mean intemperate, as
insolent and impudent. "No striker": this too does not mean a striker with the
hands. What means then "no striker"? Because there are some who unseasonably
smite the consciences of their brethren, it seems to be said with reference to
them. "Not greedy of filthy lucre, but patient: not a brawler, not covetous; one
that rules well his own house, having his children in subjection with all gravity."
If then "he who is married cares for the things of the world" [1 Corinthians
7:33], and a Bishop ought not to care for the things of the world, why does he
say the husband of one wife? Some indeed think that he says this with reference
to one who remains free from a wife. But if otherwise, he that has a wife may be
as though he had none. [1 Corinthians 7:29] For that liberty was then properly
granted, as suited to the nature of the circumstances then existing. And it is very

possible, if a man will, so to regulate his conduct. For as riches make it difficult
to enter into the kingdom of Heaven, yet rich men have often entered in, so it is
with marriage. But why does he say, speaking of a Bishop, that he should be "not
given to wine, hospitable," when he should name greater things? Why said he
not that he should be an Angel, not subject to human passions? Where are those
great qualities of which Christ speaks, which even those under their rule ought to
possess? To be crucified to the world, to be always ready to lay down their lives,
as Christ said. "The good Shepherd gives his life for the sheep" [John 10:11]; and
again, "He that takes not his cross and follows after me, is not worthy of me."
[Matthew 10:38] But "not given to wine," he says; a good prospect indeed, if
such are the things of which a Bishop is to be admonished! Why has he not said
that he ought to be already raised above the world? But do you demand less of
the Bishop, than even of those in the world? For to these he says, "Mortify your
members which are upon the earth" [Colossians 3:5], and "He that is dead, is
freed from sin." [Romans 6:7] "They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh";
and Christ again says, "Whosoever forsakes not all that he has, he is not worthy
of Me." [Luke 15:33] Why are not these things required by Paul? Plainly because
few could be found of such a character, and there was need of many Bishops,
that one might preside in every city.
But because the Churches were to be exposed to attacks, he requires not
that superior and highly exalted virtue, but a moderate degree of it; for to be
sober, of good behavior, and temperate, were qualities common to many.
"Having his children in subjection with all gravity." This is necessary, that an
example might be exhibited in his own house. For who would believe that he
who had not his own son in subjection, would keep a stranger under command?
"One that rules well his own house." Even those who are without say this, that
he who is a good manager of a house will be a good statesman. For the Church
is, as it were, a small household, and as in a house there are children and wife
and domestics, and the man has rule over them all; just so in the Church there
are women, children, servants. And if he that presides in the Church has partners