even apart from trials, the teacher has much labor, watching, toiling in the word,
teaching, complaints, accusations, imputations, envyings. Is this a little matter, to
bear ten thousand tongues, when one might have but one's own anxieties? Alas!
What shall I do? For I am in a strait between two things. I long to urge you on
and encourage you to the alliance and succor of the saints of God; but I fear lest
some one should suspect another thing, that I say this not for your sakes, but for
theirs. But know that it is not for their sakes I say these things, but for your own.
And if you are willing to attend, I convince you by my very words; the gain is
not equal to you and to them. For you, if you give, will give those things from
which, willing or unwilling, you must soon after part, and give place to others;
but what you receive is great and far more abundant. Or, are you not so disposed,
that in giving you will receive? For if you are not so disposed, I do not even wish
you to give. So far am I from making a speech for them! Except one have first so
disposed himself, as receiving rather than giving, as gaining ten thousand fold,
as benefited rather than a benefactor, let him not give. If as one granting a favor
to the receiver, let him not give. For this is not so much my care, that the saints
may be supported. For even if you give not, another will give. So that what I
want is this, that you may have a relief from your own sins. But he that gives not
so will have no relief. For it is not giving that is doing alms, but the doing it with
readiness; the rejoicing, the feeling grateful to him that receives. For, "not
grudgingly," says he, "or of necessity; for God loves a cheerful giver." [2
Corinthians 9:7] Except then one so give, let him not give: for that is loss, not
alms. If then ye know that you will gain, not they, know that your gain becomes
greater. For as for them the body is fed, but your soul is approved; for them, not
one of their sins is forgiven when they receive, but for you, the more part of your
offenses is removed. Let us then share with them in their great prizes. When men
adopt kings they do not think they give more than they receive. Adopt thou
Christ, and you shall have great security. Will you also share with Paul? Why do
I say Paul when it is Christ that receives?
But that you may know that all is for your sakes that I say and do, and not

of care for the comfort of others, if there is any of the rulers of the church that
lives in abundance and wants nothing, though he be a saint, give not, but prefer
to him one that is in want, though he be not so admirable. And wherefore?
Because Christ too so wills, as when He says, "If you make a supper or a dinner,
call not your friends, neither your kinsmen, but the maimed, the lame, the blind,
that cannot recompense you." [Luke 14:12] For it is not indiscriminately that one
should pay such attentions, but to the hungry, but to the thirsty, but to those who
need clothing, but to strangers, but to those who from riches have been reduced
to poverty. For He said not simply, "I was fed," but "I was an hungered," for,
"You saw me an hungered," He says, "and fed me." [Matthew 25:35] Twofold is
the claim, both that he is a saint and that he is hungry. For if he that is simply
hungry ought to be fed, much more when he is a saint too that is hungry. If then
he is a saint, but not in need, give not; for this were no gain. For neither did
Christ enjoin it; or rather, neither is he a saint that is in abundance and receives.
Do you see that it is not for filthy lucre that these things have been said to you,
but for your profit? Feed the hungry, that you may not feed the fire of hell. He,
eating of what is yours, sanctifies also what remains. [Luke 11:41] Think how
the widow maintained Elias; and she did not more feed than she was fed: she did
not more give than receive. This now also takes place in a much greater thing.
For it is not a "barrel of meal," nor "a cruse of oil" [1 Kings 17:14], but what?
"An hundred fold, and eternal life" [Matthew 19:21-29], is the recompense for
such— the mercy of God you become, the spiritual food; a pure leaven. She was
a widow, famine was pressing, and none of these things hindered her. Children
too she had, and not even so was she withheld. [1 Kings 17:12] This woman has
become equal to her that cast in the two mites. She said not to herself, "What
shall I receive from this man? He stands in need of me. If he had any power he
had not hungered, he had broken the drought, he had not been subject to like
sufferings. Perchance he too offends God." None of these things did she think of.
Do you see how great a good it is to do well with simplicity, and not to be over
curious about the person benefited? If she had chosen to be curious she would