FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.77, C.3.

Reply to Objection 4: He that has knowledge in a universal, is
hindered, on account of a passion, from reasoning about that
universal, so as to draw the conclusion: but he reasons about
another universal proposition suggested by the inclination of the
passion, and draws his conclusion accordingly. Hence the
Philosopher says (Ethic. vii, 3) that the syllogism of an incontinent
man has four propositions, two particular and two universal, of
which one is of the reason, e.g. No fornication is lawful, and the
other, of passion, e.g. Pleasure is to be pursued. Hence passion
fetters the reason, and hinders it from arguing and concluding under
the first proposition; so that while the passions lasts, the reason
argues and concludes under the second.
Reply to Objection 5: Even as a drunken man sometimes gives
utterance to words of deep signification, of which, however, he is
incompetent to judge, his drunkenness hindering him; so that a man
who is in a state of passion, may indeed say in words that he ought
not to do so and so, yet his inner thought is that he must do it, as
stated in Ethic. vii, 3.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.77, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether a sin committed through passion, should

be called a sin of weakness?
Objection 1: It would seem that a sin committed through passion
should not be called a sin of weakness. For a passion is a vehement
movement of the sensitive appetite, as stated above (Article 1). Now
vehemence of movements is evidence of strength rather than of
weakness. Therefore a sin committed through passion, should not
be called a sin of weakness.
Objection 2: Further, weakness in man regards that which is most
fragile in him. Now this is the flesh; whence it is written (Ps. 77:39):
"He remembered that they are flesh." Therefore sins of weakness
should be those which result from bodily defects, rather than those
which are due to a passion.
Objection 3: Further, man does not seem to be weak in respect of
things which are subject to his will. Now it is subject to man's will,
whether he do or do not the things to which his passions incline him,
according to Gn. 4:7: "Thy appetite shall be under thee, and thou
shalt have dominion over it." Therefore sin committed through
passion is not a sin of weakness.
On the contrary, Cicero (De Quaest. Tusc. iv) calls the passions
diseases of the soul. Now weakness is another name for disease.
Therefore a sin that arises from passion should be called a sin of
weakness.
I answer that, The cause of sin is on the part of the soul, in which,
chiefly, sin resides. Now weakness may be applied to the soul by
way of likeness to weakness of the body. Accordingly, man's body is
said to be weak, when it is disabled or hindered in the execution of
its proper action, through some disorder of the body's parts, so that
the humors and members of the human body cease to be subject to
its governing and motive power. Hence a member is said to be weak,
when it cannot do the work of a healthy member, the eye, for
instance, when it cannot see clearly, as the Philosopher states (De
Hist. Animal. x, 1). Therefore weakness of the soul is when the soul
is hindered from fulfilling its proper action on account of a disorder
in its parts. Now as the parts of the body are said to be out of order,
when they fail to comply with the order of nature, so too the parts of