of some persons towards eternal salvation, existing in the divine
mind. The execution, however, of this order is in a passive way in the
predestined, but actively in God. The execution of predestination is
the calling and magnification; according to the Apostle (Rm. 8:30):
"Whom He predestined, them He also called and whom He called,
them He also magnified."
Reply to Objection 1: Actions passing out to external matter imply of
themselves passion---for example, the actions of warming and
cutting; but not so actions remaining in the agent, as understanding
and willing, as said above (Question 14, Article 2; Question 18,
Article 3, ad 1). Predestination is an action of this latter class.
Wherefore, it does not put anything in the predestined. But its
execution, which passes out to external things, has an effect in
them.
Reply to Objection 2: Destination sometimes denotes a real mission
of someone to a given end; thus, destination can only be said of
someone actually existing. It is taken, however, in another sense for
a mission which a person conceives in the mind; and in this manner
we are said to destine a thing which we firmly propose in our mind.
In this latter way it is said that Eleazar "determined not to do any
unlawful things for the love of life" (2 Macc. 6:20). Thus destination
can be of a thing which does not exist. Predestination, however, by
reason of the antecedent nature it implies, can be attributed to a
thing which does not actually exist; in whatsoever way destination is
accepted.
Reply to Objection 3: Preparation is twofold: of the patient in respect
to passion and this is in the thing prepared; and of the agent to
action, and this is in the agent. Such a preparation is predestination,
and as an agent by intellect is said to prepare itself to act,
accordingly as it preconceives the idea of what is to be done. Thus,
God from all eternity prepared by predestination, conceiving the idea
of the order of some towards salvation.
Reply to Objection 4: Grace does not come into the definition of
predestination, as something belonging to its essence, but inasmuch
as predestination implies a relation to grace, as of cause to effect,
and of act to its object. Whence it does not follow that predestination
is anything temporal.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether God reprobates any man?

Objection 1: It seems that God reprobates no man. For nobody
reprobates what he loves. But God loves every man, according to
(Wis. 11:25): "Thou lovest all things that are, and Thou hatest none
of the things Thou hast made." Therefore God reprobates no man.
Objection 2: Further, if God reprobates any man, it would be
necessary for reprobation to have the same relation to the
reprobates as predestination has to the predestined. But
predestination is the cause of the salvation of the predestined.
Therefore reprobation will likewise be the cause of the loss of the
reprobate. But this false. For it is said (Osee 13:9): "Destruction is
thy own, O Israel; Thy help is only in Me." God does not, then,
reprobate any man.
Objection 3: Further, to no one ought anything be imputed which he
cannot avoid. But if God reprobates anyone, that one must perish.
For it is said (Eccles. 7:14): "Consider the works of God, that no man
can correct whom He hath despised." Therefore it could not be
imputed to any man, were he to perish. But this is false. Therefore
God does not reprobate anyone.
On the contrary, It is said (Malachi 1:2,3): "I have loved Jacob, but
have hated Esau."
I answer that, God does reprobate some. For it was said above
(Article 1) that predestination is a part of providence. To providence,
however, it belongs to permit certain defects in those things which
are subject to providence, as was said above (Question 22, Article 2).
Thus, as men are ordained to eternal life through the providence of
God, it likewise is part of that providence to permit some to fall away
from that end; this is called reprobation. Thus, as predestination is a
part of providence, in regard to those ordained to eternal salvation,
so reprobation is a part of providence in regard to those who turn
aside from that end. Hence reprobation implies not only
foreknowledge, but also something more, as does providence, as
was said above (Question 22, Article 1). Therefore, as predestination
includes the will to confer grace and glory; so also reprobation
includes the will to permit a person to fall into sin, and to impose the
punishment of damnation on account of that sin.