If any one should enquire, "And in what was the baptism of the disciples
better than that of John?" we will reply, "in nothing"; both were alike without
the gift of the Spirit, both parties alike had one reason for baptizing, and that
was, to lead the baptized to Christ. For in order that they might not be always
running about to bring together those that should believe, as in Simon's case his
brother did, and Philip to Nathanael, they instituted baptism, in order by it to
bring all men to them easily, and to prepare a way for the faith which was to be.
But that the baptisms had no superiority one over the other, is shown by what
follows. What is that?

John 3:25
"There arose a question (between some) of John's disciples and the Jews about
purifying."
For the disciples of John being ever jealously disposed towards Christ's
disciples and Christ Himself, when they saw them baptizing, began to reason
with those who were baptized, as though their baptism was in a manner superior
to that of Christ's disciples; and taking one of the baptized, they tried to persuade
him of this; but persuaded him not. Hear how the Evangelist has given us to
understand that it was they who attacked him, not he who set on foot the
question. He does not say, that "a certain Jew questioned with them," but that,
"there arose a questioning from the disciples of John with a certain Jew,
concerning purification."
2. And observe, I pray you, the Evangelist's inoffensiveness. He does not
speak in the way of invective, but as far as he is able softens the charge, merely
saying, that "a question arose"; whereas the sequel (which he has also set down
in an inoffensive manner) makes it plain that what was said was said from
jealousy.

John 3:26
"They came unto John, and said unto him, Rabbi, He that was with you beyond
Jordan, to whom you bore witness, behold the same baptizes, and all men come
to Him."
That is, "He whom you baptized"; for this they imply when they say, "to
whom you bore witness," as though they had said, "He whom you pointed out as
illustrious, and make remarkable, dares to do the same as thou." Yet they do not
say, "He whom you baptized" baptizes; (for then they would have been obliged
to make mention of the Voice that came down from heaven, and of the descent of
the Spirit;) but what say they? "He that was with you beyond Jordan, to whom
you bore witness"; that is, "He who held the rank of a disciple, who was nothing
more than we, this man has separated himself, and baptizes." For they thought to
make him jealous, not only by this, but by asserting that their own reputation
was now diminishing. "All," say they, "come to Him." Whence it is evident, that
they did not get the better of the Jew with whom they disputed; but they spoke
these words because they were imperfect in disposition, and were not yet clear
from a feeling of rivalry. What then does John? He did not rebuke them severely,
fearing lest they should separate themselves again from him, and work some
other mischief. What are his words?