Reply to Objection 1: Although the priest, as a man, may sometimes
have knowledge of the penitent's sin, yet he does not know it as a
vicar of Christ (even as a judge sometimes knows a thing, as a man,
of which he is ignorant, as a judge), and in this respect it is made
known to him by confession. or we may reply that although the
external act may be in the open, yet the internal act, which is the
cause of the external act, is hidden; so that it needs to be revealed
by confession.
Reply to Objection 2: Confession presupposes charity, which gives
us life, as stated in the text (Sent. iv, D, 17). Now it is in contrition
that charity is given; while servile fear, which is void of hope, is
previous to charity: yet he that has charity is moved more by hope
than by fear. Hence hope rather than fear is set down as the cause of
confession.
Reply to Objection 3: In every confession sin is laid bare to the
priest, and closed to others by the seal of confession.
Reply to Objection 4: It is not necessary that every definition should
include everything connected with the thing defined: and for this
reason we find some definitions or descriptions that indicate one
cause, and some that indicate another.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether confession is an act of virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that confession is not an act of virtue. For
every act of virtue belongs to the natural law, since "we are naturally
capable of virtue," as the Philosopher says (Ethic. ii, 1). But
confession does not belong to the natural law. Therefore it is not an
act of virtue.
Objection 2: Further, an act of virtue is more befitting one who is
innocent than one who has sinned. But the confession of a sin,
which is the confession of which we are speaking now, cannot be
befitting an innocent man. Therefore it is not an act of virtue.
Objection 3: Further, the grace which is in the sacraments differs
somewhat from the grace which is in the virtues and gifts. But
confession is part of a sacrament. Therefore it is not an act of virtue.
On the contrary, The precepts of the law are about acts of virtue. But
confession comes under a precept. Therefore it is an act of virtue.
Further, we do not merit except by acts of virtue. But confession is
meritorious, for "it opens the gate of heaven," as the Master says
(Sent. iv, D, 17). Therefore it seems that it is an act of virtue.
I answer that, As stated above (FS, Question 18, Articles 6,7; SS,
Question 80; SS, Question 85, Article 3; SS, Question 109, Article 3),
for an act to belong to a virtue it suffices that it be of such a nature
as to imply some condition belonging to virtue. Now, although
confession does not include everything that is required for virtue,
yet its very name implies the manifestation of that which a man has
on his conscience: for thus his lips and heart agree. For if a man
professes with his lips what he does not hold in his heart, it is not a
confession but a fiction. Now to express in words what one has in
one's thoughts is a condition of virtue; and, consequently,
confession is a good thing generically, and is an act of virtue: yet it
can be done badly, if it be devoid of other due circumstances.
Reply to Objection 1: Natural reason, in a general way, inclines a
man to make confession in the proper way, to confess as he ought,
what he ought, and when he ought, and in this way confession
belongs to the natural law. But it belongs to the Divine law to