they are written by means of fifteen), the last letter being joined to the first. And thus they write
some of these letters according to their natural sequence, just as we do, but others in a reverse
direction, from the right hand towards the left, thus tracing the letters backwards. The name Christ,
too, ought to be capable of being reckoned up in harmony with the Æons of their Pleroma, inasmuch
as, according to their statements, He was produced for the establishment and rectification of their
Pleroma. The Father, too, in the same way, ought, both by means of letters and numerical value,
to contain the number of those Æons who were produced by Him; Bythus, in like manner, and not
less Monogenes; but pre-eminently the name which is above all others, by which God is called,
and which in the Hebrew tongue is expressed by Baruch, [a word] which also contains two and
a half letters. From this fact, therefore, that the more important names, both in the Hebrew and
Greek languages, do not conform to their system, either as respects the number of letters or the
reckoning brought out of them, the forced character of their calculations respecting the rest becomes
clearly manifest.
3. For, choosing out of the law whatever things agree with the number adopted in their system,
they thus violently strive to obtain proofs of its validity. But if it was really the purpose of their
Mother, or the Saviour, to set forth, by means of the Demiurge, types of those things which are in
the Pleroma, they should have taken care that the types were found in things more exactly
correspondent and more holy; and, above all, in the case of the Ark of the Covenant, on account
of which the whole tabernacle of witness was formed. Now it was constructed thus: its length
was two cubits and a half, its breadth one cubit and a half, its height one cubit and a half; but such
a number of cubits in no respect corresponds with their system, yet by it the type ought to have
been, beyond everything else, clearly set forth. The mercy-seat also does in like manner not at
all harmonize with their expositions. Moreover, the table of shew-bread was two cubits in length,
while its height was a cubit and a half. These stood before the holy of holies, and yet in them not
a single number is of such an amount as contains an indication of the Tetrad, or the Ogdoad, or of
the rest of their Pleroma. What of the candlestick, too, which had seven branches and seven
lamps? while, if these had been made according to the type, it ought to have had eight branches
and a like number of lamps, after the type of the primary Ogdoad, which shines pre-eminently
explanation of the clause, to which we can only refer the curious reader.
as being different in form from what it is when accompanied by a vowel at the beginning or in the middle of a word.