directs: after that, if he is yet stubborn, the Church no longer hoping
for his conversion, looks to the salvation of others, by
excommunicating him and separating him from the Church, and
furthermore delivers him to the secular tribunal to be exterminated
thereby from the world by death. For Jerome commenting on Gal.
5:9, "A little leaven," says: "Cut off the decayed flesh, expel the
mangy sheep from the fold, lest the whole house, the whole paste,
the whole body, the whole flock, burn, perish, rot, die. Arius was but
one spark in Alexandria, but as that spark was not at once put out,
the whole earth was laid waste by its flame."
Reply to Objection 1: This very modesty demands that the heretic
should be admonished a first and second time: and if he be unwilling
to retract, he must be reckoned as already "subverted," as we may
gather from the words of the Apostle quoted above.
Reply to Objection 2: The profit that ensues from heresy is beside
the intention of heretics, for it consists in the constancy of the
faithful being put to the test, and "makes us shake off our
sluggishness, and search the Scriptures more carefully," as
Augustine states (De Gen. cont. Manich. i, 1). What they really intend
is the corruption of the faith, which is to inflict very great harm
indeed. Consequently we should consider what they directly intend,
and expel them, rather than what is beside their intention, and so,
tolerate them.
Reply to Objection 3: According to Decret. (xxiv, qu. iii, can.
Notandum), "to be excommunicated is not to be uprooted." A man is
excommunicated, as the Apostle says (1 Cor. 5:5) that his "spirit may
be saved in the day of Our Lord." Yet if heretics be altogether
uprooted by death, this is not contrary to Our Lord's command,
which is to be understood as referring to the case when the cockle
cannot be plucked up without plucking up the wheat, as we
explained above (Question 10, Article 8, ad 1), when treating of
unbelievers in general.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.10, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the Church should receive those who

return from heresy?
Objection 1: It would seem that the Church ought in all cases to
receive those who return from heresy. For it is written (Jer. 3:1) in
the person of the Lord: "Thou hast prostituted thyself to many
lovers; nevertheless return to Me saith the Lord." Now the sentence
of the Church is God's sentence, according to Dt. 1:17: "You shall
hear the little as well as the great: neither shall you respect any
man's person, because it is the judgment of God." Therefore even
those who are guilty of the prostitution of unbelief which is spiritual
prostitution, should be received all the same.
Objection 2: Further, Our Lord commanded Peter (Mt. 18:22) to
forgive his offending brother "not" only "till seven times, but till
seventy times seven times," which Jerome expounds as meaning
that "a man should be forgiven, as often as he has sinned."
Therefore he ought to be received by the Church as often as he has
sinned by falling back into heresy.
Objection 3: Further, heresy is a kind of unbelief. Now other
unbelievers who wish to be converted are received by the Church.
Therefore heretics also should be received.
On the contrary, The Decretal Ad abolendam (De Haereticis, cap. ix)
says that "those who are found to have relapsed into the error which
they had already abjured, must be left to the secular tribunal."
Therefore they should not be received by the Church.
I answer that, In obedience to Our Lord's institution, the Church
extends her charity to all, not only to friends, but also to foes who
persecute her, according to Mt. 5:44: "Love your enemies; do good
to them that hate you." Now it is part of charity that we should both
wish and work our neighbor's good. Again, good is twofold: one is
spiritual, namely the health of the soul, which good is chiefly the
object of charity, since it is this chiefly that we should wish for one
another. Consequently, from this point of view, heretics who return
after falling no matter how often, are admitted by the Church to
Penance whereby the way of salvation is opened to them.
The other good is that which charity considers secondarily, viz.