as says the Psalmist, "You are the same, and Your years shall not fail." [Psalm
102:27] Let us then glorify Him as we have received from our fathers, let us
glorify Him both by our faith and by our works; for sound doctrines avail us
nothing to salvation, if our life is corrupt. Let us then order it according to what
is well-pleasing to God, setting ourselves far from all filthiness, unrighteousness,
and covetousness, as strangers and foreigners and aliens to the things here on
earth. If any have much wealth and possessions, let him so use them as one who
is a sojourner, and who, whether he will or not, shall shortly pass from them. If
one be injured by another, let him not be angry forever, nay rather not even for a
time. For the Apostle has not allowed us more than a single day for the venting
of anger.
"Let not," says he, "the sun go down upon your wrath" [Ephesians 4:26];
and with reason; for it is matter for contentment that even in so short a time
nothing unpleasant take place; but if night also overtake us, what has happened
becomes more grievous, because the fire of our wrath is increased ten thousand
times by memory, and we at our leisure enquire into it more bitterly. Before
therefore we obtain this pernicious leisure and kindle a hotter fire, he bids us
arrest beforehand and quench the mischief. For the passion of wrath is fierce,
fiercer than any flame; and so we need much haste to prevent the flame, and not
allow it to blaze up high, for so this disease becomes a cause of many evils. It
has overturned whole houses, it has dissolved old companionships, and has
worked tragedies not to be remedied in a short moment of time. "For," says one,
"the sway of his fury shall be his destruction." [Sirach 1:22] Let us not then leave
such a wild beast unbridled, but put upon him a muzzle in all ways strong, the
fear of the judgment to come. Whenever a friend grieves you, or one of your
own family exasperates you, think of the sins you have committed against God,
and that by kindness towards him you make that judgment more lenient to
yourself, ("Forgive," says He, "and you shall be forgiven") [Luke 6:37], and
your passion shall quickly skulk away.
And besides, consider this, whether there has been a time when thou were

being carried away into ferocity, and controlled yourself, and another time when
you have been dragged along by the passion. Compare the two seasons, and you
shall gain thence great improvement. For tell me, when did you praise yourself?
Was it when you were worsted, or when you had the mastery? Do we not in the
first case vehemently blame ourselves, and feel ashamed. even when none
reproves us, and do not many feelings of repentance come over us, both for what
we have said and done; but when we gain the mastery, then are we not proud,
and exult as conquerors? For victory in the case of anger is, not the requiting evil
with the like, (that is utter defeat,) but the bearing meekly to be ill treated and ill
spoken of. To get the better is not to inflict but to suffer evil. Therefore when
angry do not say, "certainly I will retaliate," "certainly I will be revenged"; do
not persist in saying to those who exhort you to gain a victory, "I will not endure
that the man mock me, and escape clear." He will never mock you, except when
you avenge yourself; or if he even should mock you he will do so as a fool. Seek
not when you conquer honor from fools, but consider that sufficient which
comes from men of understanding. Nay, why do I set before you a small and
mean body of spectators, when I make it up of men? Look up straight to God:
He will praise you, and the man who is approved by Him must not seek honor
from mortals. Mortal honor often arises from flattery or hatred of others, and
brings no profit; but the decision of God is free from this inequality, and brings
great advantage to the man whom He approves. This praise then let us follow
after.
Will you learn what an evil is anger? Stand by while others are quarreling in
the forum. In yourself you cannot easily see the disgrace of the thing, because
your reason is darkened and drunken; but when you are clear from the passion,
and while your judgment is sound, view your own case in others. Observe, I pray
you, the crowds collecting round, and the angry men like maniacs acting
shamefully in the midst. For when the passion boils up within the breast, and
becomes excited and savage, the mouth breathes fire, the eyes emit fire, all the
face becomes swollen, the hands are extended disorderly, the feet dance