widowhood through fear of God. Let us then all, both men and women, stretch
forth our hands to them, that we may never undergo the sorrows of widow-hood;
or if we should have to undergo them, let us lay up a great store of kindness for
ourselves. Not small is the power of the widow's tears, it is able to open heaven
itself. Let us not then trample on them, nor make their calamity worse, but assist
them by every means. If so we do, we shall put around ourselves much safety,
both in the present life, and in that which is to come. For not here alone, but
there also will they be our defenders, cutting away most of our sins by reason of
our beneficence towards them, and causing us to stand boldly before the
judgment-seat of Christ. Which may it come to pass that we all obtain, through
the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for
ever and ever. Amen.

Homily 71 on the Gospel of John
John 13:1
"And He took His garments, and having sat down again, said unto them, Know
ye what I have done to you?" And what follows.
1. A grievous thing, beloved, a grievous thing it is to come to the depths of
wickedness; for then the soul becomes hard to be restored. Wherefore we should
use every exertion not to be taken at all; since it is easier not to fall in, than
having fallen to recover one's self. Observe, for instance, when Judas had thrown
himself into sin, how great assistance he enjoyed, yet not even so was he raised.
Christ said to him, "One of you is a devil" [John 6:71]; He said, "Not all believe"
[John 6:65]; He said, "I speak not of all," and, "I know whom I have chosen"
[John 13:18]; and not one of these sayings does he feel. Now when He had
washed their feet, and taken His garments, and sat down, He said, "Know ye
what I have done unto you?" He no longer addresses Himself to Peter only, but
to them all.

John 13:13
"You call Me Lord and Master, and you say well, for so I am."
"You call Me." He takes to Him their judgment, and then that the words
may not be thought to be words of their kindness, He adds, "for so I am." By
introducing a saying of theirs, He makes it not offensive, and by confirming it
Himself when introduced from them, unsuspected. "For so I am," He says. Do
you see how when He converses with the disciples, He speaks revealing more
what belongs unto Himself? As He says, "Call no man master on earth, for One
is your guide" [Matthew 23:8-9], so also, "And call no man father upon earth."
But the "one" and "one" is spoken not of the Father only, but of Himself also.
For had He spoken excluding Himself, how says He, "That ye may become the
children of the light"? And again, if He called the Father only, "Master," how
says He, "For so I am"; and again, "For one is your Guide, even Christ"? [John
12:26]

John 13:14-15
"If I then," He says, "your Lord and Master have washed your feet, you ought
also to wash one another's feet. For I have given you an example, that you
should do as I have done to you."
And yet it is not the same thing, for He is Lord and Master, but you are
fellow-servants one of another. What means then the "as"? "With the same zeal."
For on this account He takes instances from greater actions that we may, if so be,
perform the less. Thus schoolmasters write the letters for children very
beautifully, that they may come to imitate them though but in an inferior manner.
Where now are they who spit on their fellow-servants? Where now they who
demand honors? Christ washed the feet of the traitor, the sacrilegious, the thief,
and that close to the time of the betrayal, and incurable as he was, made him a
partaker of His table; and are you highminded, and do you draw up your
eyebrows? "Let us then wash one another's feet," says some one, "then we must
wash those of our domestics." And what great thing if we do wash even those of
our domestics? In our case "slave" and "free" is a difference of words; but there
an actual reality. For by nature He was Lord and we servants, yet even this He
refused not at this time to do. But now it is matter for contentment if we do not
treat free men as bondmen, as slaves bought with money. And what shall we say
in that day, if after receiving proofs of such forbearance, we ourselves do not
imitate them at all, but take the contrary part, being in diametrical opposition,
lifted up, and not discharging the debt? For God has made us debtors one to
another, having first so done Himself, and has made us debtors of a less amount.
For He was our Lord, but we do it, if we do it at all, to our fellow-servants, a
thing which He Himself implied by saying, "If I then your Lord and Master— so
also do ye." It would indeed naturally have followed to say, "How much more
should ye servants," but He left this to the conscience of the hearers.
2. But why has He done this "now"? They were for the future to enjoy,