THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.58, C.3.

Reply to Objection 1: The Son of God is called the Father's "right
hand" by appropriation, just as He is called the "Power" of the Father
(1 Cor. 1:24). But "right hand of the Father," in its three meanings
given above, is something common to the three Persons.
Reply to Objection 2: Christ as man is exalted to Divine honor; and
this is signified in the aforesaid sitting; nevertheless such honor
belongs to Him as God, not through any assumption, but through His
origin from eternity.
Reply to Objection 3: In no way can it be said that the Father is
seated at the right hand of the Son or of the Holy Ghost; because the
Son and the Holy Ghost derive their origin from the Father, and not
conversely. The Holy Ghost, however, can be said properly to sit at
the right hand of the Father or of the Son, in the aforesaid sense,
although by a kind of appropriation it is attributed to the Son, to
whom equality is appropriated; thus Augustine says (De Doctr.
Christ. i) that "in the Father there is unity, in the Son equality, in the
Holy Ghost the connection of unity with equality."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.58, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether it belongs to Christ as man to sit at the

right hand of the Father?
Objection 1: It would seem that it does not belong to Christ as man
to sit at the right hand of the Father, because, as Damascene says
(De Fide Orth. iv): "What we call the Father's right hand is the glory
and honor of the Godhead." But the glory and honor of the Godhead
do not belong to Christ as man. Consequently, it seems that Christ
as man does not sit at the right hand of the Father.
Objection 2: Further, to sit on the ruler's right hand seems to exclude
subjection, because one so sitting seems in a measure to be
reigning with him. But Christ as man is "subject unto" the Father, as
is said in 1 Cor. 15:28. Therefore it seems that Christ as man does
not sit at the Father's right hand.
Objection 3: Further, on Rm. 8:34: "Who is at the right hand of God,"
the gloss adds: "that is, equal to the Father in that honor, whereby
God is the Father: or, on the right hand of the Father, that is, in the
mightier gifts of God." And on Heb. 1:3: "sitteth on the right hand of
the majesty on high," the gloss adds, "that is, in equality with the
Father over all things, both in place and dignity." But equality with
God does not belong to Christ as man; for in this respect Christ
Himself says (Jn. 14:28): "The Father is greater than I."
Consequently, it appears unseemly for Christ as man to sit on the
Father's right hand.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Symb. ii): "By the expression
'right hand' understand the power which this Man, chosen of God,
received, that He might come as judge, who before had come to be
judged."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 2), by the expression "right
hand" is understood either the glory of His Godhead, or His eternal
beatitude, or His judicial and royal power. Now this preposition "at"
signifies a kind of approach to the right hand; thus denoting
something in common, and yet with a distinction, as already
observed (De Symb. ii). And this can be in three ways: first of all, by
something common in nature, and a distinction in person; and thus
Christ as the Son of God, sits at the right hand of the Father,
because He has the same Nature as the Father: hence these things