John 14:30
"Hereafter I will not talk with you." Wherefore? "For the ruler of this world
comes, and has nothing in Me."
By "ruler of this world," He means the devil, calling wicked men also by
the same name. For he rules not heaven and earth, since he would have been
subverted, and cast down all things, but he rules over those who give themselves
up to him. Wherefore He calls him, "the ruler of the darkness of this world," in
this place again calling evil deeds, "darkness." "What then, does the devil slay
You?" By no means; "he has nothing in Me." "How then do they kill You?"
Because I will it, and,

John 14:31
"'That the world may know that I love the Father.'"
"For being not subject," He says, "to death, nor a debtor to it, I endure it
through My love to the Father." This He says, that He may again rouse their
souls, and that they may learn that not unwillingly but willingly He goes to this
thing, and that He does it despising the devil. It was not enough for Him to have
said, "Yet a little while I am with you" [John 7:33], but He continually handles
this painful subject, (with good reason,) until He should make it acceptable to
them, by weaving along with it pleasant things. Wherefore at one time He says,
"I go, and I come again"; and, "That where I there ye may be also"; and, "You
cannot follow Me now, but afterwards you shall follow Me"; and, "I go to the
Father"; and, "The Father is greater than I"; and, "Before it come to pass, I have
told you"; and, "I do not suffer these things from constraint, but from love for the
Father." So that they might consider, that the action could not be destructive nor
hurtful, if at least He who greatly loved Him, and was greatly loved by Him, so
willed. On this account, while intermingling these pleasant words, He
continually uttered the painful ones also, practicing their minds. For both the,
"remains with you" [John 16:7], and, "My departure is expedient for you," were
expressions of One giving comfort. For this reason He spoke by anticipation ten
thousand sayings concerning the Spirit, the, "Is in you," and, "The world cannot
receive," and, "He shall bring all things to your remembrance," and, "Spirit of
truth," and, "Holy Spirit," and, "Comforter," and that "It is expedient for you," in
order that they might not despond, as though there would be none to stand before
and help them. "It is expedient," He says, showing that It would make them
spiritual.
5. This at least, we see, was what took place. For they who now trembled
and feared, after they had received the Spirit sprang into the midst of dangers,
and stripped themselves for the contest against steel, and fire, and wild beasts,

and seas, and every kind of punishment; and they, the unlettered and ignorant,
discoursed so boldly as to astonish their hearers. For the Spirit made them men
of iron instead of men of clay, gave them wings, and allowed them to be cast
down by nothing human. For such is that grace; if it find despondency, it
disperses it; if evil desires, it consumes them; if cowardice, it casts it out, and
does not allow one who has partaken of it to be afterwards mere man, but as it
were removing him to heaven itself, causes him to image to himself all that is
there. [Acts 4:32, and 2:46] On this account no one said that any of the things
that he possessed was his own, but they continued in prayer, in praise, and in
singleness of heart. For this the Holy Spirit most requires, for "the fruit of the
Spirit is joy, peace— faith, meek ness." [Galatians 5:22-23] "And yet spiritual
persons often grieve," says some one. But that sorrow is sweeter than joy. Cain
was sorrowful, but with the sorrow of the world; Paul was sorrowful, but with
godly sorrow. Everything that is spiritual brings the greatest gain, just as
everything that is worldly the utmost loss. Let us then draw to us the invincible
aid of the Spirit, by keeping the commandments, and then we shall be nothing
inferior to the Angels. For neither are they therefore of this character, because
they are incorporeal, for were this the case, no incorporeal being would have
become wicked, but the will is in every case the cause of all. Wherefore among
incorporeal beings some have been found worse than men or things irrational,
and among those having bodies some better than the incorporeal. All just men,
for instance, whatever were their righteous deeds, did them while dwelling on
earth, and having bodies. For they dwelt on earth as those who were pilgrims and
strangers; but in heaven, as citizens. Then say not thou either, "I am clothed with
flesh, I cannot get the mastery, nor undertake the toils which are for the sake of
virtue." Do not accuse the Creator. For if the wearing the flesh make virtue
impossible, then the fault is not ours. But that it does not make it impossible, the
band of saints has shown. A nature of flesh did not prevent Paul from becoming
what he was, nor Peter from receiving the keys of heaven; and Enoch also,
having worn flesh, was translated, and not found. So also Elias was caught up