comes forth from the furnace, and sends forth the same brilliancy with things
newly formed. As therefore any one who takes and recasts a golden statue which
has been tarnished by time, smoke, dust, rust, restores it to us thoroughly
cleansed and glistening: so too this nature of ours, rusted with the rust of sin, and
having gathered much smoke from our faults, and having lost its beauty, which
He had from the beginning bestowed upon it from himself, God has taken and
cast anew, and throwing it into the waters as into a mould, and instead of fire
sending forth the grace of the Spirit, then brings us forth with much brightness,
renewed, and made afresh, to rival the beams of the sun, having crushed the old
man, and having fashioned a new man, more brilliant than the former.
4. And speaking darkly of this crushing, and this mystic cleansing, the
prophet of old said, "You shall dash them in pieces like a potter's vessel." For
that the word is in reference to the faithful, what goes before sufficiently shows
us, "For you are my Son," he says, "today have I begotten you, ask of me and I
will give the heathen for three inheritance, the utmost parts of the earth for your
possession." Do you see how he has made mention of the church of the Gentiles,
and has spoken of the kingdom of Christ extended on all sides? Then he says
again, "You shall rule them with a rod of iron;" not grievous, but strong: "you
shall break them in pieces like a potter's vessel." Behold then, the laver is more
mystically brought forward. For he does not say earthen vessels: but vessels of
the potter. But, give heed: For earthen vessels when crushed would not admit of
refashioning, on account of the hardness which was gained by them from the
fire. But the fact is that the vessels of the potter are not earthen, but of clay;
wherefore, also, when they have been distorted, they can easily, by the skill of
the artificer, be brought again to a second shape. When, therefore, God speaks of
an irremediable calamity, he does not say vessels of the potter, but an earthen
vessel; when, for instance, he wished to teach the prophet and the Jews that he
delivered up the city to an irremediable calamity, he bade him take an earthen
wine-vessel, and crush it before all the people, and say, "Thus shall this city be
destroyed, be broken in pieces." [Jeremiah 19:11] But when he wishes to hold

out good hopes to them, he brings the prophet to a pottery, and does not show
him an earthen vessel, but shows him a vessel of clay, which was in the hands of
the potter, falling to the ground: and brings him to it saying, "If this potter has
taken up and remodelled his vessel which has fallen, shall I not much rather be
able to restore you when you have fallen?" [Jeremiah 18:6] It is possible
therefore for God not only to restore those who are made of clay, through the
laver of regeneration, but to bring back again to their original state, on their
careful repentance, those who have received the power of the Spirit, and have
lapsed. But this is not the time for you to hear words about repentance, rather
may the time never come for you to fall into the need of these remedies, but may
you always remain in preservation of the beauty and the brightness which you
are now about to receive, unsullied. In order, then, that you may ever remain
thus, come and let us discourse to you a little about your manner of life. For in
the wrestling schools falls of the athletes are devoid of danger. For the wrestling
is with friends, and they practice all their exercises on the persons of their
teachers. But when the time of the contest has come, when the lists are open,
when the spectators are seated above, when the president has arrived, it
necessarily follows that the combatants, if they become careless, fall and retire in
great disgrace, or if they are in earnest, win the crowns and the prizes. So then,
in your case these thirty days are like some wrestling school, both for exercise
and practice: let us learn from thence already to get the better of that evil demon.
For it is to contend with him that we have to strip ourselves, with him after
baptism are we to box and fight. Let us learn from thence already his grip, on
what side he is aggressive, on what side he can easily threaten us, in order that,
when the contest comes on, we may not feel strange, nor become confused, as
seeing new forms of wrestling; but having already practiced them among
ourselves, and having learned all his methods, may engage in these forms of
wrestling against him with courage. In all ways, therefore, is he accustomed to
threaten us, but especially by means of the tongue, and the mouth. For there is no
organ so convenient for him for our deception and our destruction as an