but let us rather call them happy on this account. For tell me, what thanks are
due unto you, when after having received your portion from your father, you go
on not in any calling, but lavishing away the whole of it at random? Do you not
know that we shall not all have to render the same account, but those who have
enjoyed greater licence here a more exact one; those who were afflicted with
labor, or poverty, or any thing else of this kind, one not so severe? And this is
plain from Lazarus and the rich man. For as thou, for neglecting the right use of
the leisure, art justly accused; so the poor man, who having full employment has
spent his remnant of time upon right objects, great will be the crowns which he
shall receive. But do you urge that a soldier's duties should at least excuse you;
and do you charge them with your want of leisure? The excuse cannot be
founded in reason. For Cornelius was a centurion, yet in no way did the soldier's
belt impair his strict rule of life. But you, when you are keeping holiday with
dancers and players, and making entire waste of your life upon the stage, never
thinkest of excusing yourself from such engagements by the necessity of military
service or the fear of rulers: but when it is the Church to which we call you, then
occur these endless impediments.
And what will you say in the day, when you see the flame, and the rivers of
fire, and the chains never to be broken; and shall hear the gnashing of teeth?
Who shall stand up for you in that day, when you shall see him that has labored
with his own hand and has lived uprightly, enjoying all glory; but yourself, who
art now in soft raiment and redolent of perfumes, in incurable woe? What good
will your wealth and superfluity do you? And the artisan— what harm will his
poverty do him?
Therefore that we may not suffer then, let us fear what is said now, and let
all our time be spent in employment on things which are really indispensable.
For so, having propitiated God in regard of our past sins, and adding good deeds
for the future, we shall be able to attain unto the kingdom of heaven: through the
favor and loving-kindness, etc., etc.

## Homily 6 on First Corinthians

1 Corinthians 2:1-2
And I, brethren, when I came to you, came not with excellency of speech or
of wisdom, declaring unto you the testimony of God. For I determined not to
know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ, and Him crucified.
Nothing was ever more prepared for combat than the spirit of Paul; or
rather, I should say, not his spirit, (for he was not himself the inventor of these
things,) but, nothing was ever equal to the grace working within him, which
overcomes all things. For sufficient indeed is what had been said before to cast
down the pride of the boasters about wisdom; nay, even a part of it had been
enough. But to enhance the splendor of the victory, he contends anew for the
points which he had been affirming; trampling upon the prostrate foe. Look at it
in this way. He had brought forward the prophecy which says, "I will destroy the
wisdom of the wise." He had shown the wisdom of God, in that by means of
what seemed to be foolishness, He destroyed the philosophy of the Gentiles; he
had shown that the "foolishness of God is wiser than men;" he had shown that
not only did He teach by untaught persons, but also chose untaught persons to
learn of Him. Now he shows that both the thing itself which was preached, and
the manner of preaching it, were enough to stagger people; and yet did not
stagger them. As thus: "not only," says he, "are the disciples uneducated, but I
myself also, who am the preacher."
Therefore he says, "And I, brethren," (again he uses the word "brethren," to
smooth down the harshness of the utterance,) "came not with excellency of
speech, declaring unto you the testimony of God." "What then? Tell me, had you
chosen to come 'with excellency,' would you have been able?" "I, indeed, had I
chosen, should not have been able; but Christ, if He had chosen, was able. But