the children of the prophets and of the covenant:" i.e. heirs. Then why do you
stand affected towards that which is your own, as if it were another's? True, you
have done deeds worthy of condemnation; still you may yet obtain pardon.
Having said this, with reason he is now able to say, "Unto you God sent his Son
Jesus to bless you." He says not, To save you, but what is greater; that the
crucified Jesus blessed His crucifiers.
Let us then also imitate Him. Let us cast out that spirit of murder and
enmity. It is not enough not to retaliate (for even in the Old Dispensation this
was exemplified); but let us do all as we would for bosom-friends, as we would
for ourselves so for those who have injured us. We are followers of Him, we are
His disciples, who after being crucified, sets everything in action in behalf of his
murderers, and sends out His Apostles to this end. And yet we have often
suffered justly; but those acted not only unjustly, but impiously; for He was their
Benefactor, He had done no evil, and they crucified Him. And for what reason?
For the sake of their reputation. But He Himself made them objects of reverence.
"The scribes and the pharisees sit in Moses' seat; all therefore whatsoever they
bid you observe, that do ye, but after their works do ye not." [Matthew 23:2]
And again in another place, "Go your way, show yourself to the priest."
[Matthew 8:4] Besides, when He might have destroyed them, He saves them. Let
us then imitate Him, and let no one be an enemy, no one a foe, except to the
devil.
Not a little does the habit of not swearing contribute to this end: I mean to
the not giving way to wrath: and by not giving way to wrath, we shall not have
an enemy either. Lop off the oaths of a man, and you have clipt the wings of his
anger, you have smothered all his passion. Swearing, it is said, is as the wind to
wrath. Lower the sails; no need of sails, when there is no wind. If then we do not
clamor, and do not swear, we have cut the sinews of passion. And if you doubt
this, just put it to experiment. Impose it as a law upon the passionate man that he
shall never swear, and you will have no necessity of preaching moderation to
him. So the whole business is finished. For even though you do not forswear

yourselves [yet], by swearing at all, do you not know in what absurd
consequences you involve yourselves— binding yourselves to an absolute
necessity and as with a cord, and putting yourselves to all manner of shifts, as
men studying how to rescue their soul from an evil which there is no escaping,
or, failing of that, obliged [by that self-imposed necessity] to spend your life
thenceforth in vexation, in quarrels, and to curse your wrath? But all is in vain,
and to no purpose. Threaten, be peremptory ([διόρισαι]), do all, whatever it be,
without swearing; [so]: it is in your power to reverse ([ἀ] [ναλὕσαι]) both what
you have said and what you have done if you have the mind. Thus on the present
day I must needs speak more gently to you. For since you have heard me, and
the greater part of the reformation is achieved by you, now then let us see for
what purpose the taking of oaths was introduced, and why allowed to be. In
relating to you their first origin, and when they were conceived, and how, and by
whom we shall give you this account in requital for your obedience. For it is fit
that he who has made his practice right, should be taught the philosophy of the
matter, but he who is not yet doing the right, is not worthy to be told the history.
They made many covenants in Abraham's time, and slew victims, and
offered sacrifices, and as yet oaths were not. Whence then did they come in?
When evil increased, when all was confusion, upside down, when men had
turned aside to idolatry: then it was, then, when men appeared no longer worthy
to be believed, that they called God as witness, as if thereby giving an adequate
surety for what they said. Such in fact is the Oath: it is a security where men's
principles cannot be trusted. So that in the indictment of the swearer the first
charge is this—that he is not to be trusted without a surety, and a great surety
too: for such is the exceeding faithlessness, that they ask not man as surety, but
will needs have God! Secondly, the same charge lies against him who receives
the oath: that, in a question of compact, he must drag in God for warranty, and
refuse to be satisfied unless he get Him. O the excessive stupidity, the insolence
of such conduct! Thou, a worm, earth and dust, and ashes, and vapor, to drag in
your Lord as the surety, and to compel the other to drag Him in likewise! Tell