Matt. ix. 17.

### Chapter XXXIV.—Proof against the Marcionites, that the prophets referred in all their
predictions to our Christ.
1. Now I shall simply say, in opposition to all the heretics, and principally against the followers
of Marcion, and against those who are like to these, in maintaining that the prophets were from
another God [than He who is announced in the Gospel], read with earnest care that Gospel which
has been conveyed to us by the apostles, and read with earnest care the prophets, and you will find
that the whole conduct, and all the doctrine, and all the sufferings of our Lord, were predicted
through them. But if a thought of this kind should then suggest itself to you, to say, What then did
the Lord bring to us by His advent?—know ye that He brought all [possible] novelty, by bringing
Himself who had been announced. For this very thing was proclaimed beforehand, that a novelty
should come to renew and quicken mankind. For the advent of the King is previously announced
by those servants who are sent [before Him], in order to the preparation and equipment of those
men who are to entertain their Lord. But when the King has actually come, and those who are His
subjects have been filled with that joy which was proclaimed beforehand, and have attained to that
liberty which He bestows, and share in the sight of Him, and have listened to His words, and have
enjoyed the gifts which He confers, the question will not then be asked by any that are possessed
of sense what new thing the King has brought beyond [that proclaimed by] those who announced
His coming. For He has brought Himself, and has bestowed on men those good things which were
announced beforehand, which things the angels desired to look into.
2. But the servants would then have been proved false, and not sent by the Lord, if Christ on
His advent, by being found exactly such as He was previously announced, had not fulfilled their
words. Wherefore He said, "Think not that I have come to destroy the law or the prophets; I came
not to destroy, but to fulfil. For verily I say unto you, Until heaven and earth pass away, one jot or
one tittle shall not pass from the law and the prophets till all come to pass." For by His advent
He Himself fulfilled all things, and does still fulfil in the Church the new covenant foretold by the
law, onwards to the consummation [of all things]. To this effect also Paul, His apostle, says in the
Epistle to the Romans, "But now, without the law, has the righteousness of God been manifested,
being witnessed by the law and the prophets; for the just shall live by faith." But this fact, that
the just shall live by faith, had been previously announced by the prophets.

Rom. i. 17.

3. But whence could the prophets have had power to predict the advent of the King, and to
preach beforehand that liberty which was bestowed by Him, and previously to announce all things
which were done by Christ, His words, His works, and His sufferings, and to predict the new
covenant, if they had received prophetical inspiration from another God [than He who is revealed
in the Gospel], they being ignorant, as ye allege, of the ineffable Father, of His kingdom, and His
dispensations, which the Son of God fulfilled when He came upon earth in these last times? Neither
are ye in a position to say that these things came to pass by a certain kind of chance, as if they were
spoken by the prophets in regard to some other person, while like events happened to the Lord. For
all the prophets prophesied these same things, but they never came to pass in the case of any one
of the ancients. For if these things had happened to any man among them of old time, those [prophets]
who lived subsequently would certainly not have prophesied that these events should come to pass
in the last times. Moreover, there is in fact none among the fathers, nor the prophets, nor the ancient
kings, in whose case any one of these things properly and specifically took place. For all indeed
prophesied as to the sufferings of Christ, but they themselves were far from enduring sufferings
similar to what was predicted. And the points connected with the passion of the Lord, which were
foretold, were realized in no other case. For neither did it happen at the death of any man among
the ancients that the sun set at mid-day, nor was the veil of the temple rent, nor did the earth quake,
nor were the rocks rent, nor did the dead rise up, nor was any one of these men [of old] raised up
on the third day, nor received into heaven, nor at his assumption were the heavens opened, nor did
the nations believe in the name of any other; nor did any from among them, having been dead and
rising again, lay open the new covenant of liberty. Therefore the prophets spake not of any one else
but of the Lord, in whom all these aforesaid tokens concurred.
4. If any one, however, advocating the cause of the Jews, do maintain that this new covenant
consisted in the rearing of that temple which was built under Zerubbabel after the emigration to
Babylon, and in the departure of the people from thence after the lapse of seventy years, let him
know that the temple constructed of stones was indeed then rebuilt (for as yet that law was observed
which had been made upon tables of stone), yet no new covenant was given, but they used the
Mosaic law until the coming of the Lord; but from the Lord's advent, the new covenant which
brings back peace, and the law which gives life, has gone forth over the whole earth, as the prophets
said: "For out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem; and He shall
rebuke many people; and they shall break down their swords into ploughshares, and their spears
into pruning-hooks, and they shall no longer learn to fight." If therefore another law and word,
going forth from Jerusalem, brought in such a [reign of] peace among the Gentiles which received
it (the word), and convinced, through them, many a nation of its folly, then [only] it appears that
the prophets spake of some other person. But if the law of liberty, that is, the word of God, preached
by the apostles (who went forth from Jerusalem) throughout all the earth, caused such a change in
the state of things, that these [nations] did form the swords and war-lances into ploughshares, and