## CHAPTER VII--That Evil is not a Nature or Essence

is a good point in a man. Cowardice is an inordinate care of one's own safety, a thing
that one is bound to have some care of.

CHAPTERS VIII, IX--Arguments against the aforsesaid Conclusion, with Answers to the
same
ARG. 1. Evil is a specific difference in certain kinds of things, namely, in moral habits
and acts: for as every virtue in its species is a good habit, so the contrary vice in its
species is an evil habit; and similarly of acts. Evil therefore is something that gives
species to certain things: it is therefore an essence, and natural to some things.
Reply. The reason why good and evil are reckoned specific differences in moral
matters, is because moral matters depend on the will: for a thing enters into the sphere
of morality inasmuch as it is voluntary. But the object of the will is the end in view and
good: hence moral actions are specified by the end for which they are done, as physical
actions are from the form of their active principle. Since then good and evil are
designated according to due bearing on the end, or the lack of such due bearing, good
and evil must be the first differentias marking species in moral matters. But the measure
of morality is reason. Therefore things must be called morally good or evil according as
they bear on the end which reason determines. Whatever therefore in moral matters
derives its species from an end, which is according to reason, is said to be good in its
species: while what derives its species from an end contrary to reason, is said to be evil
in its species. But that end, though inconsistent with the end which reason assigns, is
nevertheless some sort of good, as being pleasurable according to sense, or the like:
hence such ends are good in some animals, and even in man when they are moderated
by reason; and what is evil for one may very well be good for another. And therefore
evil, inasmuch as it is a specific differentia in the genus of moral matters, does not
involve anything that is essentially evil, but something that is in itself good, but evil to
man inasmuch as it sets aside the order of reason, which is man's good.
Arg. 4. All that acts is something. But evil acts inasmuch as it is evil: for it understands
good and spoils it. Evil therefore, inasmuch as it is evil, is some thing.
Reply. A privation, as such, is no principle of action. Hence it is well said that evil does
not fight against good except in the power of good: but in itself it is impotent and weak
and originative of no action. Evil is said however to spoil good also formally in itself, as
blindness is said to spoil sight, or whiteness to colour a wall.
Arg. 5. Where there is found more and less, there must be an order of things, for
negations and privations are not susceptible of more and less. But we find among evils
one worse than another. Therefore evil must be some thing.
Reply. Conditions that imply privation are intensified or relaxed as are inequality and
unlikeness: for a thing is more unequal according as it is further removed from
inequality, and more unlike according as it is more removed from likeness: hence a
thing is more evil according as it is a greater privation of good, or at a greater distance
from good.