miracle then is one, the raising of Lazarus; but the predictions are two; made
evident, the one here, the other in the world to come. Consider now, how they
are all proved by one another. For if a man disbelieve the resurrection of
Lazarus, from the prophecy uttered about the Church let him learn to believe the
miracle. For the word spoken so many years before, came to pass then, and
received accomplishment: for "the gates of Hades prevailed not against the
Church." You see that He who spoke truth in the prophecy, it is clear that he also
wrought the miracle: and He who both wrought the miracle and brings to
accomplishment the words which He spoke, it is clear that He speaks the truth
also in the predictions of things yet to come, when He says, "He who despises
things present shall receive an hundred-fold, and shall inherit everlasting life."
For the things which have been already done and spoken, He has given as the
surest pledges of those which shall hereafter come to pass.
Of all these things then, and the like to these, collecting them together out
of the Gospels, let us tell them, and so stop their mouths. But if any one say,
Why then was not error completely extinguished? This may be our answer: You
yourselves are to blame, who rebel against your own salvation. For God has so
ordered this matter ([ᾠκονόμησεν],) that not even a remnant of the old impiety
need be left.
20. Now, briefly to recount what has been said: What is the natural course
of things? That the weak should be overcome by the strong, or the contrary?
Those who speak things easy, or things of the harsher sort? Those who attract
men with dangers, or with security? innovators, or those who strengthen custom?
Those who lead into a rough, or into a smooth way? Those who withdraw men
from the institutions of their fathers, or those who lay down no strange laws?
Those who promise all their good things after our departure from this world, or
those who flatter in the present life? The few to overcome the many, or the many
the few?
But you, too, says one, gave promises pertaining to this life. What then
have we promised in this life? The forgiveness of sins and the laver of

regeneration. Now in the first place, baptism itself has its chief part in things to
come; and Paul exclaims, saying, [Colossians 3:4] "For you died, and your life is
hid with Christ in God: when your life shall be manifested, then shall you also
with Him be manifested in glory." But if in this life also it has advantages, as
indeed it has, this also is more than all a matter of great wonder, that they had
power to persuade men who had done innumerable evil deeds, yea such as no
one else had done, that they should wash themselves clean of all, and they
should give account of none of their offenses. So that on this very account it
were most of all meet to wonder that they persuaded Barbarians to embrace such
a faith as this, and to have good hopes concerning things to come; and having
thrown off the former burden of their sins, to apply themselves with the greatest
zeal for the time to come to those toils which virtue requires, and not to gape
after any object of sense, but rising to a height above all bodily things, to receive
gifts purely spiritual: yea, that the Persian, the Sarmatian, the Moor, and the
Indian should be acquainted with the purification of the soul, and the power of
God, and His unspeakable mercy to men, and the severe discipline of faith, and
the visitation of the Holy Spirit, and the resurrection of bodies, and the doctrines
of life eternal. For in all these things, and in whatever is more than these, the
fishermen, initiating by Baptism various races of Barbarians, persuaded them
([φιλοσοφεῖν]) to live on high principles.
Of all these things then, having observed them accurately, let us speak unto
the Gentiles, and again, let us show them the evidence of our lives: that by both
means we ourselves may be saved and they drawn over by our means unto the
glory of God. For unto Him be the glory for ever. Amen.