thousand things about Christ unworthy of His glory, yet this at any rate they will
not dare to say, that He is not God at all. Wherefore then does He praise him that
said, that beside the Father, there is no other God?
Not excepting Himself from being God; away with the thought; but since it
was not yet time to disclose His Godhead, He suffers him to remain in the
former doctrine, and praises him for knowing well the ancient principles, so as to
make him fit for the doctrine of the New Testament, which He is bringing in its
season.
And besides, the saying, "There is one God, and there is none other but
He," both in the Old Testament and everywhere, is spoken not to the rejection of
the Son, but to make the distinction from idols. So that when praising this man
also, who had thus spoken, He praises him in this mind.
Then since He had answered, He asks also in turn, "What think ye of Christ,
whose Son is He? They say unto Him, The Son of David."
See after how many miracles, after how many signs, after how many
questions, after how great a display of His unanimity with the Father, as well in
words, as in deeds; after having praised this man that said, that there is one God,
He asks the question, that they may not be able to say, that He did miracles
indeed, yet was an adversary to the law, and a foe to God.
Therefore, after so many things, He asks these questions, secretly leading
them on to confess Him also to be God. And the disciples He asked first what
the others say, and then themselves; but these not so; for surely they would have
said a deceiver, and a wicked one, as speaking all things without fear. So for this
cause He inquires for the opinion of these men themselves.
For since He was now about to go on to His passion, He sees forth the
prophecy that plainly proclaims Him to be Lord; and not as having come to do
this without occasion, nor as having made this His aim, but from a reasonable
cause.
For having asked them first, since they answered not the truth concerning
Him (for they said He was a mere man), to overthrow their mistaken opinion, He

thus introduces David proclaiming His Godhead. For they indeed supposed that
He was a mere man, wherefore also they said, "the Son of David;" but He to
correct this brings in the prophet witnessing to His being Lord, and the
genuineness of His Sonship, and His equality in honor with His Father.
And not even at this does He stop, but in order to move them to fear, He
adds what follows also, saying, "Till I make Your enemies Your footstool;" that at
least in this way He might gain them over.
And that they may not say, that it was in flattery he so called Him, and that
this was a human judgment, see what He says, "How then does David in spirit
call Him Lord?" See how submissively He introduces the sentence and judgment
concerning Himself. First, He had said, "What do you think? Whose Son is He?"
so by a question to bring them to an answer. Then since they said, "the Son of
David," He said not, "And yet David says these things," but again in this order of
a question, "How then does David in spirit call Him Lord?" in order that the
sayings might not give offense to them. Wherefore neither did He say, What
think ye of me, but of Christ. For this reason the apostles also reasoned
submissively, saying, "Let us speak freely of the Patriarch David, that he is both
dead and buried." [Acts 2:29]
And He Himself too in like manner for this cause introduces the doctrine in
the way of question and inference, saying, "How then does David in spirit call
Him Lord, saying, The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit on my right hand, until I
make Your foes Your footstool;" [Matthew 22:44] and again, "If David then call
Him Lord, how is He then his Son," [Matthew 22:45] not taking away the fact
that He is his Son, away with the thought; for He would not then have reproved
Peter for this, but to correct their secret thoughts. So that when He says, "How is
He his Son?" He means this, not so as you say. For they said, that He is Son only,
and not also Lord. And this after the testimony, and then submissively, "If David
then call Him Lord, how is He his Son?"
But, nevertheless, even when they had heard these things, they answered
nothing, for neither did they wish to learn any of the things that were needful.