the more mighty he then saw him become. And therefore, as you know, when he
had gone through all, and had thoroughly tried his metal, because he made no
way, he ran to his old weapon, the woman, and assumes a mask of concern, and
makes a tragical picture of his calamities in most pitiable tone, and feigns that
for removal of his evil he is introducing that deadly counsel. But neither so did
he prevail; nay, for his bait was perceived by that wondrous man, who with
much wisdom stopped the mouth of the woman speaking at his instigation.
Just so we likewise must act: though it be a brother, a tried friend, a wife,
whom you will of those nearest to us, whom he has entered into, and so utters
something not convenient, we must not receive the counsel for the person of him
who so speaks, but for the deadly counsel turn away from the speaker. Since in
fact now also he does many such things, and puts before him a mask of
sympathy, and while he seems to be friendly, he is instilling his pernicious
words, more grievous than poisons. Thus, as to flatter for evil is his part, so to
chastise for our good, is God's.
7. Let us not then be deceived, neither let us by every mean seek after the
life of ease. For "whom the Lord loves," it is said, "He chastens." [Hebrews 12:6]
Wherefore when we enjoy prosperity, living in wickedness, then most of all
should we grieve. For we ought ever to be afraid while we sin, but especially
when we suffer no ill. For when God exacts our penalties little by little, he
makes our payment for these things easy to us; but when he is long-suffering for
each of our negligences, He is storing us up, if we continue in such things, unto a
great punishment. Since, if for the well-doers affliction be a necessary thing,
much more for them that sin.
See for instance how much long-suffering Pharaoh met with, and afterwards
underwent for all most extreme punishment: in how many things
Nebuchadnezzar offended, yet at the end expiated all; and the rich man, because
he had suffered no great ill here, for this very cause chiefly became miserable,
for that having lived in luxury in the present life, he departed to pay the penalty
of all these things there, where he could not obtain anything at all to soothe his

calamity.
Yet for all this some are so cold and senseless, as to be always seeking only
the things that are here, and uttering those absurd sayings, "Let me enjoy all
things present for a time, and then I will consider about things out of sight: I will
gratify my belly, I will be a slave to pleasures, I will make full use of the present
life; give me today, and take tomorrow." Oh excess of folly! Why, wherein do
they who talk so differ from goats and swine? For if the prophet [Jeremiah 5:8]
permits not them to be accounted men, that "neigh after their neighbors wife,"
who shall blame us for esteeming these to be goats and swine, and more
insensible than asses, by whom those things are held uncertain, which are more
evident than what we see? Why, if you believe nothing else, attend to the devils
in their scourging, to them who had our hurt for their object in all their practice,
both in word and deed. For you will not, I am sure, contradict this, that they do
all to increase our security, and to do away with the fear of hell, and to breed
disbelief of the tribunals in that world. Nevertheless, they that are so minded, by
cryings and wailings do oftentimes proclaim the torments that are there. Whence
is it then that they so speak, and utter things contrary to their own will? From no
other cause, but because they are under the pressure of stronger compulsion. For
they would have not been minded of their own accord to confess either that they
are tormented by dead men, or that they at all suffer anything dreadful.
Wherefore now have I said this? Because evil demons confess hell, who
would fain have hell disbelieved; but you who enjoyest honor so great, and hast
been a partaker in unutterable mysteries, dost not so much as imitate them, but
art become more hardened even than they.
8. "But who," one will say, "has come from those in hell, and has declared
these things?" Why, who has arrived here from heaven, and told us that there is a
God who created all things? And whence is it clear that we have a soul? For
plainly, if you are to believe the things only that are in sight, both God and
angels, and mind and soul, will be matter of doubting to you, and in this way you
will find all the doctrines of the truth gone.