although an angel understands himself by his own essence, still he
cannot understand all other things by his own essence; for he knows
things other than himself by their likenesses. Now the human
intellect is only a potentiality in the genus of intelligible beings, just
as primary matter is a potentiality as regards sensible beings; and
hence it is called "possible". Therefore in its essence the human
mind is potentially understanding. Hence it has in itself the power to
understand, but not to be understood, except as it is made actual.
For even the Platonists asserted than an order of intelligible beings
existed above the order of intellects, forasmuch as the intellect
understands only by participation of the intelligible; for they said
that the participator is below what it participates. If, therefore, the
human intellect, as the Platonists held, became actual by
participating separate intelligible forms, it would understand itself by
such participation of incorporeal beings. But as in this life our
intellect has material and sensible things for its proper natural
object, as stated above (Question 84, Article 7), it understands itself
according as it is made actual by the species abstracted from
sensible things, through the light of the active intellect, which not
only actuates the intelligible things themselves, but also, by their
instrumentality, actuates the passive intellect. Therefore the intellect
knows itself not by its essence, but by its act. This happens in two
ways: In the first place, singularly, as when Socrates or Plato
perceives that he has an intellectual soul because he perceives that
he understands. In the second place, universally, as when we
consider the nature of the human mind from knowledge of the
intellectual act. It is true, however, that the judgment and force of
this knowledge, whereby we know the nature of the soul, comes to
us according to the derivation of our intellectual light from the Divine
Truth which contains the types of all things as above stated
(Question 84, Article 5). Hence Augustine says (De Trin. ix, 6): "We
gaze on the inviolable truth whence we can as perfectly as possible
define, not what each man's mind is, but what it ought to be in the
light of the eternal types." There is, however, a difference between
these two kinds of knowledge, and it consists in this, that the mere
presence of the mind suffices for the first; the mind itself being the
principle of action whereby it perceives itself, and hence it is said to
know itself by its own presence. But as regards the second kind of
knowledge, the mere presence of the mind does not suffice, and
there is further required a careful and subtle inquiry. Hence many are
ignorant of the soul's nature, and many have erred about it. So
Augustine says (De Trin. x, 9), concerning such mental inquiry: "Let
the mind strive not to see itself as if it were absent, but to discern