from this destructive passion. Grievest thou that he is in good esteem? Then why
do you swell that esteem by envying? Wishest thou to punish him? Why then do
you show that you are pained? Why punish yourself before him, whom you
would not have well esteemed? Thereafter double will be his pleasure, and your
punishment; not only because you prove him to be great; but because you beget
in him yet another pleasure, by punishing yourself; and again, at what you are
pained, he is pleased, while you envy. See how we deal ourselves heavy blows
without perceiving it! He is an enemy. And yet, why an enemy? What wrong has
he done? Still, however, by this we make our enemy the more illustrious, and
thereby punish ourselves the more. And herein again we punish ourselves, if we
have discovered that he knows it. For perhaps he is not pleased, but we thinking
him to be so, are again pained on that account. Cease then your envying. Why do
you inflict wounds upon yourself?
Think we of these things, beloved; of those two crowns for them that envy
not; of those praises from men, of those from God; of the evils that come of
envying; and so shall we be able to quell the brute, and to be in good esteem
before God, and to obtain the same things with those who are of good esteem.
For perhaps we shall obtain them, and if we obtain them not, it will be for our
advantage; still, even so, we shall be able, if we have lived to the glory of God,
to obtain the good things promised to them that love Him, through the grace and
love toward man of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom, etc.

## Homily 12 on Colossians

[Colossians 4:12, 13]
"Epaphras, who is one of you, a servant of Christ Jesus, salutes you, always
striving for you in his prayers, that you may stand perfect and fully assured in all
the will of God. For I bear him witness, that he has much zeal for you, and for
them in Laodicea, and for them in Hierapolis."
In the commencement of this Epistle also, he commended this man for his
love; for even to praise is a sign of love; thus in the beginning he said, "Who also
declared unto us your love in the Spirit." [Colossians 1:8] To pray for one is also
a sign of love, and causes love again. He commends him moreover in order to
open a door to his teachings, for reverendness in the teacher is the disciples'
advantage; and so again is his saying, "one of you," in order that they might
pride themselves upon the man, as producing such men. And he says, "always
striving for you in prayers." He said not simply "praying," but "striving,"
trembling and fearing. "For I bear him witness," he says, "that he has much zeal
for you." A trustworthy witness. "That he has," he says, "much zeal for you," that
is, that he loves you exceedingly; and burns with passionate affection for you.
"And them in Laodicea, and them in Hierapolis." He commends him to those
also. But whence were they to know this? They would assuredly have heard;
however, they would also learn it when the Epistle was read. For he said, "Cause
that it be read also in the church of the Laodiceans." "That ye may stand
perfect," he says. At once he both accuses them, and without offensiveness gives
them advice and counsel. For it is possible both to be perfect, and withal not to
stand, as if one were to know all, and still be wavering; it is possible also not to
be perfect, and yet to stand, as if one were to know a part, and stand [not ]
firmly. But this man prays for both: "That ye may stand perfect," he says. See
how again he has reminded them of what he said about the Angels, and about