those desires are curbed by reason, especially if we presuppose the
corruption of our natures. Now it is in the power of the free-will to
curb this appetite and keep it in order. Consequently there is no
need for all sins to be due to the instigation of the devil. But those
sins which are due thereto man perpetrates "through being deceived
by the same blandishments as were our first parents," as Isidore
says (De Summo Bono ii).
Thus the answer to the first objection is clear.
Reply to Objection 2: When man commits sin without being thereto
instigated by the devil, he nevertheless becomes a child of the devil
thereby, in so far as he imitates him who was the first to sin.
Reply to Objection 3: Man can of his own accord fall into sin: but he
cannot advance in merit without the Divine assistance, which is
borne to man by the ministry of the angels. For this reason the
angels take part in all our good works: whereas all our sins are not
due to the demons' instigation. Nevertheless there is no kind of sin
which is not sometimes due to the demons' suggestion.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether demons can lead men astray by means

of real miracles?
Objection 1: It would seem that the demons cannot lead men astray
by means of real miracles. For the activity of the demons will show
itself especially in the works of Antichrist. But as the Apostle says (2
Thess. 2:9), his "coming is according to the working of Satan, in all
power, and signs, and lying wonders." Much more therefore at other
times do the demons perform lying wonders.
Objection 2: Further, true miracles are wrought by some corporeal
change. But demons are unable to change the nature of a body; for
Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xviii, 18): "I cannot believe that the
human body can receive the limbs of a beast by means of a demon's
art or power." Therefore the demons cannot work real miracles.
Objection 3: Further, an argument is useless which may prove both
ways. If therefore real miracles can be wrought by demons, to
persuade one of what is false, they will be useless to confirm the
teaching of the faith. This is unfitting; for it is written (Mk. 16:20):
"The Lord working withal, and confirming the word with signs that
followed."
On the contrary, Augustine says (Question 83; Lib. xxi, Sent. sent 4):
"Often by means of the magic art miracles are wrought like those
which are wrought by the servants of God."
I answer that, As is clear from what has been said above (Question
110, Article 4), if we take a miracle in the strict sense, the demons
cannot work miracles, nor can any creature, but God alone: since in
the strict sense a miracle is something done outside the order of the
entire created nature, under which order every power of a creature is
contained. But sometimes miracle may be taken in a wide sense, for
whatever exceeds the human power and experience. And thus
demons can work miracles, that is, things which rouse man's
astonishment, by reason of their being beyond his power and
outside his sphere of knowledge. For even a man by doing what is
beyond the power and knowledge of another, leads him to marvel at
what he has done, so that in a way he seems to that man to have
worked a miracle.