34. It is not surprising that these new opinions endanger the two philosophical sciences which by their
very nature are closely connected with the doctrine of faith, that is, theodicy and ethics; they hold
that the function of these two sciences is not to prove with certitude anything about God or any other
transcendental being, but rather to show that the truths which faith teaches about a personal God and
about His precepts, are perfectly consistent with the necessities of life and are therefore to be
accepted by all, in order to avoid despair and to attain eternal salvation. All these opinions and
affirmations are openly contrary to the documents of Our Predecessors Leo XIII and Pius X, and
cannot be reconciled with the decrees of the Vatican Council. It would indeed be unnecessary to
deplore these aberrations from the truth, if all, even in the field of philosophy, directed their attention
with the proper reverence to the Teaching Authority of the Church, which by divine institution has the
mission not only to guard and interpret the deposit of divinely revealed truth, but also to keep watch
over the philosophical sciences themselves, in order that Catholic dogmas may suffer no harm
because of erroneous opinions.

35. It remains for Us now to speak about those questions which, although they pertain to the positive
sciences, are nevertheless more or less connected with the truths of the Christian faith. In fact, not a
few insistently demand that the Catholic religion take these sciences into account as much as possible.
This certainly would be praiseworthy in the case of clearly proved facts; but caution must be used
when there is rather question of hypotheses, having some sort of scientific foundation, in which the
doctrine contained in Sacred Scripture or in Tradition is involved. If such conjectural opinions are
directly or indirectly opposed to the doctrine revealed by God, then the demand that they be
recognized can in no way be admitted.

36. For these reasons the Teaching Authority of the Church does not forbid that, in conformity with
the present state of human sciences and sacred theology, research and discussions, on the part of
men experienced in both fields, take place with regard to the doctrine of evolution, in as far as it
inquires into the origin of the human body as coming from pre-existent and living matter - for the
Catholic faith obliges us to hold that souls are immediately created by God. However, this must be
done in such a way that the reasons for both opinions, that is, those favorable and those unfavorable
to evolution, be weighed and judged with the necessary seriousness, moderation and measure, and
provided that all are prepared to submit to the judgment of the Church, to whom Christ has given the
mission of interpreting authentically the Sacred Scriptures and of defending the dogmas of faith.
Some however, rashly transgress this liberty of discussion, when they act as if the origin of the human
body from pre-existing and living matter were already completely certain and proved by the facts
which have been discovered up to now and by reasoning on those facts, and as if there were nothing
in the sources of divine revelation which demands the greatest moderation and caution in this
question.