of raiment, and those moth-eaten? The stomach has its appointed bound, and any
thing given beyond this, will of necessity destroy the whole man. Where then is
the use of your herds, and flocks, and cutting up of flesh? We require but one
roof to shelter us. Where then is the use of your vast ground-plots, and costly
buildings? Do you strip the poor, that vultures and jackdaws may have where to
dwell? And what a hell do not these things deserve? Many are frequently raising
edifices that glisten with pillars and costly marbles, in places which they never
so much as saw. What scheme is there indeed that they have not adopted? Yet
neither themselves reap the benefit, nor any one else. The desolateness does not
allow them to get away there; and yet not even thus do they desist. You see that
these things are not done for profit's-sake, but in all these cases folly, and
absurdity, and vainglory, is the motive. And this, I beseech you to avoid, that we
may be enabled to avoid also every other evil, and may obtain those good things
which are promised to them that love Him, in our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom
to the Father, together with the Holy Ghost, be glory, strength, honor forever.
Amen.

## Homily 3 on Ephesians

Chapter I. Verses 15-20
"For this cause I also, having heard of the faith in the Lord Jesus, which is
among you, and which you show toward all the saints, cease not to give thanks
for you, making mention of you in my prayers; that the God of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Father of glory, may give unto you a spirit of wisdom and revelation
in the knowledge of Him: having the eyes of your heart enlightened; that you
may know what is the hope of His calling, what the riches of the glory of His
inheritance in the saints, and what the exceeding greatness of His power to usward who believe, according to that working of the strength of His might, which
He wrought in Christ, when He raised Him from the dead."
Never was anything equal to the yearnings of the Apostle, never anything
like the sympathy and the affectionateness of the blessed Paul, who made his
every prayer in behalf of whole cities and peoples, and writes the same to all, "I
thank my God for you, making mention of you in my prayers." Think how many
he had in his mind, whom it were a labor so much as to remember; how many he
made mention of in his prayers, giving thanks to God for them all as though he
himself had received the greatest blessing.
"Wherefore," he says, i.e., because of what is to come, because of the good
things that are laid up in store for them who rightly believe and live. And it is
meet then to give thanks to God both for all the things which mankind have
received at His hands, both heretofore and hereafter; and meet to give Him
thanks also for the faith of them that believe.
"Having heard," says he, "of the faith in the Lord Jesus which is among
you, and which you show toward all the saints."
He on all occasions knits together and combines faith and love, a glorious
pair; nor does he mention the saints of that country only, but all.