SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.17, C.3.

virtue of hope. Consequently hope, like faith, is voided in heaven,
and neither of them can be in the blessed.
Reply to Objection 1: Although Christ was a comprehensor and
therefore blessed as to the enjoyment of God, nevertheless He was,
at the same time, a wayfarer, as regards the passibility of nature, to
which He was still subject. Hence it was possible for Him to hope for
the glory of impassibility and immortality, yet not so as to the virtue
of hope, the principal object of which is not the glory of the body but
the enjoyment of God.
Reply to Objection 2: The happiness of the saints is called eternal
life, because through enjoying God they become partakers, as it
were, of God's eternity which surpasses all time: so that the
continuation of happiness does not differ in respect of present, past
and future. Hence the blessed do not hope for the continuation of
their happiness (for as regards this there is no future), but are in
actual possession thereof.
Reply to Objection 3: So long as the virtue of hope lasts, it is by the
same hope that one hopes for one's own happiness, and for that of
others. But when hope is voided in the blessed, whereby they hoped
for their own happiness, they hope for the happiness of others
indeed, yet not by the virtue of hope, but rather by the love of
charity. Even so, he that has Divine charity, by that same charity
loves his neighbor, without having the virtue of charity, but by some
other love.
Reply to Objection 4: Since hope is a theological virtue having God
for its object, its principal object is the glory of the soul, which
consists in the enjoyment of God, and not the glory of the body.
Moreover, although the glory of the body is something arduous in
comparison with human nature, yet it is not so for one who has the
glory of the soul; both because the glory of the body is a very small
thing as compared with the glory of the soul, and because one who
has the glory of the soul has already the sufficient cause of the glory
of the body.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.17, C.3.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.17, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether hope is in the damned?

Objection 1: It would seem that there is hope in the damned. For the
devil is damned and prince of the damned, according to Mt. 25:41:
"Depart . . . you cursed, into everlasting fire, which was prepared for
the devil and his angels." But the devil has hope, according to Job
40:28, "Behold his hope shall fail him." Therefore it seems that the
damned have hope.
Objection 2: Further, just as faith is either living or dead, so is hope.
But lifeless faith can be in the devils and the damned, according to
James 2:19: "The devils . . . believe and tremble." Therefore it seems
that lifeless hope also can be in the damned.
Objection 3: Further, after death there accrues to man no merit or
demerit that he had not before, according to Eccles. 11:3, "If the tree
fall to the south, or to the north, in what place soever it shall fall,
there shall it be." Now many who are damned, in this life hoped and
never despaired. Therefore they will hope in the future life also.
On the contrary, Hope causes joy, according to Rm. 12:12,
"Rejoicing in hope." Now the damned have no joy, but sorrow and
grief, according to Is. 65:14, "My servants shall praise for joyfulness
of heart, and you shall cry for sorrow of heart, and shall howl for
grief of spirit." Therefore no hope is in the damned.
I answer that, Just as it is a condition of happiness that the will
should find rest therein, so is it a condition of punishment, that what
is inflicted in punishment, should go against the will. Now that which
is not known can neither be restful nor repugnant to the will:
wherefore Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. xi, 17) that the angels could
not be perfectly happy in their first state before their confirmation, or
unhappy before their fall, since they had no foreknowledge of what
would happen to them. For perfect and true happiness requires that
one should be certain of being happy for ever, else the will would not
rest.
In like manner, since the everlastingness of damnation is a
necessary condition of the punishment of the damned, it would not
be truly penal unless it went against the will; and this would be
impossible if they were ignorant of the everlastingness of their