at the beginning, that if any one be harmed and injured he certainly suffers this at
his own hands, not at the hands of others even if there be countless multitudes
injuring and insulting him: so that if he does not suffer this at his own hands, not
all the creatures who inhabit the whole earth and sea if they combined to attack
him would be able to hurt one who is vigilant and sober in the Lord. Let us then,
I beseech you, be sober and vigilant at all times, and let us endure all painful
things bravely that we may obtain those everlasting and pure blessings in Christ
Jesus our Lord, to whom be glory and power, now and ever throughout all ages.
Amen.

Two Exhortations to Theodore After
His Fall
Letter 1
"Oh! That my head were water, and my eyes a fountain of tears!"
[Jeremiah 9:1] it is seasonable for me to utter these words now, yea much more
than for the prophet in his time. For although I am not about to mourn over many
cities, or whole nations, yet shall I mourn over a soul which is of equal value
with many such nations, yea even more precious. For if one man who does the
will of God is better than ten thousand transgressors, then you were formerly
better than ten thousand Jews. Wherefore no one would now blame me if I were
to compose more lamentations than those which are contained in the prophet,
and to utter complaints yet more vehement. For it is not the overthrow of a city
which I mourn, nor the captivity of wicked men, but the desolation of a sacred
soul, the destruction and effacement of a Christ-bearing temple. For would not
any one who knew in the days of its glory that well-ordered mind of yours which
the devil has now set on fire, groan, imitating the lamentation of the prophet;
when he hears that barbarian hands have defiled the holy of holies, and have set
fire to all things and burned them up, the cherubim, the ark, the mercy seat, the
tables of stone, the golden pot? For this calamity is bitterer, yea bitterer than that,
in proportion as the pledges deposited in your soul were far more precious than
those. This temple is holier than that; for it glistened not with gold and silver, but
with the grace of the Spirit, and in place of the ark and the cherubim, it had
Christ, and His Father, and the Paraclete seated within. But now all is changed,
and the temple is desolate, and bare of its former beauty and comeliness,
unadorned with its divine and unspeakable adornments, destitute of all security

and protection; it has neither door nor bolt, and is laid open to all manner of
soul-destroying and shameful thoughts; and if the thought of arrogance or
fornication, or avarice, or any more accursed than these, wish to enter in there is
no one to hinder them; whereas formerly, even as the Heaven is inaccessible to
all these, so also was the purity of your soul. Now perhaps I shall seem to say
what is incredible to some who now witness your desolation and overthrow; for
on this account I wail and mourn, and shall not cease doing so, until I see you
again established in your former lustre. For although this seems to be impossible
to men, yet to God all things are possible. For it is He "who raises the poor from
the earth, and lifts up the beggar from the dunghill, to set him with the princes,
even with the princes of his people." It is He "who makes the barren woman to
dwell at home, a mother rejoicing over her children." Do not then despair of the
most perfect change. For if the devil had such great power as to cast you down
from that pinnacle and height of virtue into the extremity of evil doing, much
more will God be able to draw you up again to your former confidence; and not
only indeed to make you what you were before, but even much happier. Only be
not downcast, nor fling away good hopes, nor fall into the condition of the
ungodly. For it is not the multitude of sins which is wont to plunge men into
despair, but impiety of soul. Therefore Solomon did not make the unqualified
statement " every one who has entered into the den of the wicked, despises;" but
only "he who is ungodly." For it is such persons only who are affected in this
way when they have entered the den of the wicked. And this it is which does not
suffer them to look up, and re-ascend to the position from which they fell. For
this accursed thought pressing down like some yoke upon the neck of the soul,
and so forcing it to stoop, hinders it from looking up to the Master. Now it is the
part of a brave and excellent man to break this yoke in pieces, to shake off the
tormentor fastened upon him; and to utter the words of the prophet, "As the eyes
of a maiden look unto the hands of her mistress, even so our eyes look unto the
Lord our God until He have mercy upon us. Have pity upon us, O Lord, have pity
upon us, for we have been utterly filled with contempt." Truly divine are these