131. Differences between persons and communities can sometimes prove uncomfortable, but the
Holy Spirit, who is the source of that diversity, can bring forth something good from all things and
turn it into an attractive means of evangelization. Diversity must always be reconciled by the help
of the Holy Spirit; he alone can raise up diversity, plurality and multiplicity while at the same time
bringing about unity. When we, for our part, aspire to diversity, we become self-enclosed,
exclusive and divisive; similarly, whenever we attempt to create unity on the basis of our human
calculations, we end up imposing a monolithic uniformity. This is not helpful for the Church’s
mission.

Culture, thought and education

132. Proclaiming the Gospel message to different cultures also involves proclaiming it to
professional, scientific and academic circles. This means an encounter between faith, reason and
the sciences with a view to developing new approaches and arguments on the issue of credibility,
a creative apologetics which would encourage greater openness to the Gospel on the part of
all. When certain categories of reason and the sciences are taken up into the proclamation of the
message, these categories then become tools of evangelization; water is changed into wine.
Whatever is taken up is not just redeemed, but becomes an instrument of the Spirit for
enlightening and renewing the world.

133. It is not enough that evangelizers be concerned to reach each person, or that the Gospel be
proclaimed to the cultures as a whole. A theology – and not simply a pastoral theology – which is
in dialogue with other sciences and human experiences is most important for our discernment on
how best to bring the Gospel message to different cultural contexts and groups. The Church,
in her commitment to evangelization, appreciates and encourages the charism of theologians and
their scholarly efforts to advance dialogue with the world of cultures and sciences. I call on
theologians to carry out this service as part of the Church’s saving mission. In doing so, however,
they must always remember that the Church and theology exist to evangelize, and not be content
with a desk-bound theology.

134. Universities are outstanding environments for articulating and developing this evangelizing

commitment in an interdisciplinary and integrated way. Catholic schools, which always strive to
join their work of education with the explicit proclamation of the Gospel, are a most valuable
resource for the evangelization of culture, even in those countries and cities where hostile
situations challenge us to greater creativity in our search for suitable methods.

### II. The homily

135. Let us now look at preaching within the liturgy, which calls for serious consideration by
pastors. I will dwell in particular, and even somewhat meticulously, on the homily and its
preparation, since so many concerns have been expressed about this important ministry, and we
cannot simply ignore them. The homily is the touchstone for judging a pastor’s closeness and
ability to communicate to his people. We know that the faithful attach great importance to it, and
that both they and their ordained ministers suffer because of homilies: the laity from having to
listen to them and the clergy from having to preach them! It is sad that this is the case. The homily
can actually be an intense and happy experience of the Spirit, a consoling encounter with God’s
word, a constant source of renewal and growth.