does not comprise all things in itself, since it is an essence
restricted to a genus and species. This is proper to the Divine
essence, which is infinite, simply and perfectly to comprise all things
in Itself. Therefore God alone knows all things by His essence. But
an angel cannot know all things by his essence; and his intellect
must be perfected by some species in order to know things.
Reply to Objection 1: When it is said that the angel knows things
according to his own nature, the words "according to" do not
determine the medium of such knowledge, since the medium is the
similitude of the thing known; but they denote the knowing power,
which belongs to the angel of his own nature.
Reply to Objection 2: As the sense in act is the sensible in act, as
stated in De Anima ii, text. 53, not so that the sensitive power is the
sensible object's likeness contained in the sense, but because one
thing is made from both as from act and potentiality: so likewise the
intellect in act is said to be the thing understood in act, not that the
substance of the intellect is itself the similitude by which it
understands, but because that similitude is its form. Now, it is
precisely the same thing to say "in things which are without matter,
the intellect is the same thing as the object understood," as to say
that "the intellect in act is the thing understood in act"; for a thing is
actually understood, precisely because it is immaterial.
Reply to Objection 3: The things which are beneath the angel, and
those which are above him, are in a measure in his substance, not
indeed perfectly, nor according to their own proper formality--because the angel's essence, as being finite, is distinguished by its
own formality from other things---but according to some common
formality. Yet all things are perfectly and according to their own
formality in God's essence, as in the first and universal operative
power, from which proceeds whatever is proper or common to
anything. Therefore God has a proper knowledge of all things by His
own essence: and this the angel has not, but only a common
knowledge.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the angels understand by species drawn

from things?
Objection 1: It would seem that the angels understand by species
drawn from things. For everything understood is apprehended by
some likeness within him who understands it. But the likeness of the
thing existing in another is there either by way of an exemplar, so
that the likeness is the cause of the thing; or else by way of an
image, so that it is caused by such thing. All knowledge, then, of the
person understanding must either be the cause of the object
understood, or else caused by it. Now the angel's knowledge is not
the cause of existing things; that belongs to the Divine knowledge
alone. Therefore it is necessary for the species, by which the angelic
mind understands, to be derived from things.
Objection 2: Further, the angelic light is stronger than the light of the
active intellect of the soul. But the light of the active intellect
abstracts intelligible species from phantasms. Therefore the light of
the angelic mind can also abstract species from sensible things. So
there is nothing to hinder us from saying that the angel understands
through species drawn from things.
Objection 3: Further, the species in the intellect are indifferent to
what is present or distant, except in so far as they are taken from
sensible objects. Therefore, if the angel does not understand by
species drawn from things, his knowledge would be indifferent as to
things present and distant; and so he would be moved locally to no
purpose.
On the contrary, Dionysius says (Div. Nom. vii) that the "angels do
not gather their Divine knowledge from things divisible or sensible."
I answer that, The species whereby the angels understand are not
drawn from things, but are connatural to them. For we must observe
that there is a similarity between the distinction and order of spiritual
substances and the distinction and order of corporeal substances.
The highest bodies have in their nature a potentiality which is fully
perfected by the form; whereas in the lower bodies the potentiality of
matter is not entirely perfected by the form, but receives from some
agent, now one form, now another. In like fashion also the lower
intellectual substances ---that is to say, human souls---have a power