things, as wood or brass, which are caused not by the action of art,
but by the action of nature. So also nature itself causes natural
things as regards their form, but presupposes matter. If therefore
God did only act from something presupposed, it would follow that
the thing presupposed would not be caused by Him. Now it has been
shown above (Question 44, Articles 1,2), that nothing can be, unless
it is from God, Who is the universal cause of all being. Hence it is
necessary to say that God brings things into being from nothing.
Reply to Objection 1: Ancient philosophers, as is said above
(Question 44, Article 2), considered only the emanation of particular
effects from particular causes, which necessarily presuppose
something in their action; whence came their common opinion that
"nothing is made from nothing." But this has no place in the first
emanation from the universal principle of things.
Reply to Objection 2: Creation is not change, except according to a
mode of understanding. For change means that the same something
should be different now from what it was previously. Sometimes,
indeed, the same actual thing is different now from what it was
before, as in motion according to quantity, quality and place; but
sometimes it is the same being only in potentiality, as in substantial
change, the subject of which is matter. But in creation, by which the
whole substance of a thing is produced, the same thing can be taken
as different now and before only according to our way of
understanding, so that a thing is understood as first not existing at
all, and afterwards as existing. But as action and passion coincide as
to the substance of motion, and differ only according to diverse
relations (Phys. iii, text 20,21), it must follow that when motion is
withdrawn, only diverse relations remain in the Creator and in the
creature. But because the mode of signification follows the mode of
understanding as was said above (Question 13, Article 1), creation is
signified by mode of change; and on this account it is said that to
create is to make something from nothing. And yet "to make" and "to
be made" are more suitable expressions here than "to change" and
"to be changed," because "to make" and "to be made" import a
relation of cause to the effect, and of effect to the cause, and imply
change only as a consequence.
Reply to Objection 3: In things which are made without movement, to
become and to be already made are simultaneous, whether such
making is the term of movement, as illumination (for a thing is being
illuminated and is illuminated at the same time) or whether it is not

the term of movement, as the word is being made in the mind and is
made at the same time. In these things what is being made, is; but
when we speak of its being made, we mean that it is from another,
and was not previously. Hence since creation is without movement,
a thing is being created and is already created at the same time.
Reply to Objection 4: This objection proceeds from a false
imagination, as if there were an infinite medium between nothing and
being; which is plainly false. This false imagination comes from
creation being taken to signify a change existing between two forms.