FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.31, C.5.

speaking, when accompanied by bodily transmutation. It is not thus
in the intellectual appetite, but according to simple movement: for
thus it is also in God and the angels. Hence the Philosopher says
(Ethic. vii, 14) that "God rejoices by one simple act": and Dionysius
says at the end of De Coel. Hier., that "the angels are not susceptible
to our passible delight, but rejoice together with God with the
gladness of incorruption."
Reply to Objection 3: In us there is delight, not only in common with
dumb animals, but also in common with angels. Wherefore
Dionysius says (De Coel. Hier.) that "holy men often take part in the
angelic delights." Accordingly we have delight, not only in the
sensitive appetite, which we have in common with dumb animals,
but also in the intellectual appetite, which we have in common with
the angels.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.31, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether bodily and sensible pleasures are greater

than spiritual and intellectual pleasures?
Objection 1: It would seem that bodily and sensible pleasures are
greater than spiritual and intelligible pleasures. For all men seek
some pleasure, according to the Philosopher (Ethic. x, 2,4). But more
seek sensible pleasures, than intelligible spiritual pleasures.
Therefore bodily pleasures are greater.
Objection 2: Further, the greatness of a cause is known by its effect.
But bodily pleasures have greater effects; since "they alter the state
of the body, and in some they cause madness" (Ethic. vii, 3).
Therefore bodily pleasures are greater.
Objection 3: Further, bodily pleasures need to be tempered and
checked, by reason of their vehemence: whereas there is no need to
check spiritual pleasures. Therefore bodily pleasures are greater.
On the contrary, It is written (Ps. 118:103): "How sweet are Thy
words to my palate; more than honey to my mouth!" And the
Philosopher says (Ethic. x, 7) that "the greatest pleasure is derived
from the operation of wisdom."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), pleasure arises from union
with a suitable object perceived or known. Now, in the operations of
the soul, especially of the sensitive and intellectual soul, it must be
noted that, since they do not pass into outward matter, they are acts
or perfections of the agent, e.g. to understand, to feel, to will and the
like: because actions which pass into outward matter, are actions
and perfections rather of the matter transformed; for "movement is
the act produced by the mover in the thing moved" (Phys. iii, 3).
Accordingly the aforesaid actions of the sensitive and intellectual
soul, are themselves a certain good of the agent, and are known by
sense and intellect. Wherefore from them also does pleasure arise,
and not only from their objects.
If therefore we compare intellectual pleasures with sensible
pleasures, according as we delight in the very actions, for instance
in sensitive and in intellectual knowledge; without doubt intellectual
pleasures are much greater than sensible pleasures. For man takes
much more delight in knowing something, by understanding it, than