countenance was as the sun. When I said "such is His greatness and power" and
added "be merciful to me O Lord," (for I do not rest satisfied with the expression
but am perplexed, having no other framed for the purpose) I wish you to
understand, that I learned this lesson from Holy Scripture. The evangelist then
wished to describe His splendour and he says "He shone." How did He shine?
Tell me. Exceedingly. And how do you express this? He shone "as the sun." As
the sun do you say? Yea. Wherefore? Because I know not any other luminary
more brilliant. And He was white do you say as snow? Wherefore as snow?
Because I know not any other substance which is whiter. For that He did not
really shine thus is proved by what follows: the disciples fell to the ground. If he
had shone as the sun the disciples would not have fallen; for they saw the sun
every day, and did not fall: but inasmuch as he shone more brilliantly than the
sun or snow, they, being unable to bear the splendour, fell to the earth.
11. Tell me then, O evangelist, did He shine more brightly than the sun, and
yet do you say, "as the sun?" Yea: wishing to make that light known to you, I
know not any other greater luminary, I have no other comparison which holds a
royal place among luminaries. I have said these things that you may not rest
contentedly in the poverty of the language used: I have pointed out to you the
fall of the disciples: they fell to the earth, and were stupified and overwhelmed
with slumber. "Arise" He said, and lifted them up, and yet they were oppressed.
For they could not endure the excessive brightness of that shining, but heavy
sleep took possession of their eyes: so far did the light which was manifested
exceed the light of the sun. Yet the evangelist said "as the sun," because that
luminary is familiar to us and surpasses all the rest.
But as I was saying, He who was thus great and powerful desired an harlot.
I speak of our human nature under that name. If a man indeed desire an harlot he
is condemned, and does God desire one? Yea verily. Again a man desires an
harlot that he may become a fornicator: but God that He may convert the harlot
into a virgin: so that the desire of the man is the destruction of her who is
desired: but the desire of God is salvation to her who is desired. And why did He

who is so great and powerful desire an harlot? That He might become the
husband thereof. How does He act? He does not send to her any of His servants,
He sends not angel, archangel, Cherubim, or Seraphim; but He himself draws
near Who loves her. Again when you hear of love, deem it not sensuous. Cull out
the thoughts which are contained in the words, even as an excellent bee settles
on the flowers, and takes the honey comb, but leaves the herbs God desired an
harlot, and how does He act? He does not conduct her on high; for He would not
bring an harlot into Heaven, but He Himself comes down. Since she could not
ascend on high, He descends to earth. He comes to the harlot, and is not
ashamed: He comes to her secret dwelling place. He beholds her in her
drunkenness. And how does He come? Not in the bare essence of His original
nature, but He becomes that which the harlot was, not in intention but in reality
does He become this, in order that she may not be scared when she sees Him,
that she may not rush away, and escape. He comes to the harlot, and becomes
man. And how does He become this? He is conceived in the womb, he increases
little by little and follows like me the course of human growth. Who is it who
does this? The Deity as manifested, not the Godhead; the form of the servant not
that of the Master; the flesh which belongs to me, not the essential nature which
belongs to Him: He increases little by little, and has intercourse with mankind.
Although He finds the harlot, human nature, full of sores, brutalised, and
oppressed by devils, how does He act? He draws near to her. She sees Him and
flees away. He calls the wise men saying Why are you afraid? I am not a judge,
but a physician. "I came not to judge the world but to save the world."
[John 12:47] Straightway He calls the wise men. Oh! new and strange event. The
immediate first-fruits of His coming are wise men. He who upholds the world
lies in a manger, and He who cares for all things is a nursling in swaddling
bands. The temple is founded and the God dwells therein. And wise men come
and straightway worship Him: the publican comes and is turned into an
evangelist: the harlot comes and is turned into a maiden: the Canaanitish woman
comes and partakes of his lovingkindness. This is the mark of one who loves, to