were greater than the labors, he both exhorts to greater efforts, and yet will not
let them be elated, as being still outdone by the crowns given in requital. And in
another passage he says, "For our light affliction, which is but for a moment,
works a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory" [2 Corinthians 4:17]: it
being the deeper sort of persons he was then speaking to. Here, however, he does
not allow that the afflictions were light; but still he mingles comfort with them
by the compensation which good things to come afford, in the words, "For I
reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared,"
and he does not say, with the rest ([ἄ] [νεσιν]) that is to come, but what is much
greater, "with the glory which is to come." For it does not follow, that where rest
is there is glory; but that where glory is there is rest, does follow: then as he had
said that it is to come, he shows that it already is. For he does not say, that which
is to be, but "which shall be revealed in us," as if already existing but
unrevealed. As also in another place he said in clearer words, "Our life is hid
with Christ in God." Be then of a good heart about it. For already has it been
prepared, and awaits your labors. But if it vexes you that it is yet to come, rather
let this very thing rejoice you. For it is owing to its being great and unutterable,
and transcending our present condition, that it is stored up there. And so he has
not put barely "the sufferings of this present time," but he speaks so as to show
that it is not in quality only, but in quantity also, that the other life has the
advantage. For these sufferings, whatever they are, are attached to our present
life; but the blessings to come reach themselves out over ages without end. And
since he had no way of giving a particular description of these, or of putting
them before us in language, he gives them a name from what seems to be
specially an object of desire with us, "glory." For the summit of blessings and the
sum of them, this seems to be. And to urge the hearer on in another way also, he
gives a loftiness to his discourse by the mention of the creation, gaining two
points by what he is next saying, the contempt of things present, and the desire
of things to come, and a third beside these, or rather the first, is the showing how
the human race is cared for on God's part and in what honor He holds our nature.

And besides this, all the doctrines of the philosophers, which they had framed
for themselves about this world, as a sort of cobweb or child's mound, he throws
down with this one doctrine. But that these things may stand in a clearer light, let
us hear the Apostle's own language.
Ver. 19, 20. "For the earnest expectation of the creation waits," he says,
"for the revelation of the sons of God. For the creation was made subject to
vanity, not willingly, but by reason of him who has subjected the same in hope."
And the meaning is something of this kind. The creation itself is in the
midst of its pangs, waiting for and expecting these good things whereof we have
just now spoken. For "earnest expectation" ([ἀ] [ποκαραδοκία], looking out)
implies expecting intensely. And so his discourse becomes more emphatic, and
he personifies this whole world as the prophets also do, when they introduce the
floods clapping their hands, and little hills leaping, and mountains skipping, not
that we are to fancy them alive, or ascribe any reasoning power to them, but that
we may learn the greatness of the blessings, so great as to reach even to things
without sense also. The very same thing they do many times also in the case of
afflicting things, since they bring in the vine lamenting, and the wine too, and the
mountains, and the boardings of the Temple howling, and in this case too it is
that we may understand the extremity of the evils. It is then in imitation of these
that the Apostle makes a living person of the creature here, and says that it
groans and travails: not that he heard any groan conveyed from the earth and
heaven to him, but that he might show the exceeding greatness of the good
things to come; and the desire of freedom from the ills which now pervaded
them. "For the creature was made subject to vanity, not willingly, but by reason
of him who has subjected the same." What is the meaning of, "the creation was
made subject to vanity?" Why that it became corruptible. For what cause, and on
what account? On account of you, O man. For since you have taken a body
mortal and liable to suffering, the earth too has received a curse, and brought
forth thorns and thistles. But that the heaven, when it is waxen old along with the
earth, is to change afterwards to a better portion ([λἥξιν] v. p. 384) hear from the