renunciation, and covenant. And we do this, not because our discourse about the
Devil is sweet to us, but because the doctrine about him is full of security for
you. For he is an enemy and a foe, and it is a great security to know clearly, the
tactics of your enemies. We have said lately, that he does not overcome by force,
nor by tyranny, nor through compulsion, nor through violence. Since were this
so, he would have destroyed all men. And in testimony of this we brought
forward the swine, against which the Demons were unable to venture anything,
before the permission of the Master. The herds and flocks of Job. For not even
did the Devil venture to destroy these, until he received power from above. We
learned therefore this one thing first, that he does not overcome us by force, or
by compulsion; next after that, we added that even when he overcomes by
deceitfulness, not thus does he get the better of all men, Then again we brought
that athlete Job, himself into the midst, against whom he set countless schemes
going, and not even thus got the better of him, but withdrew defeated. One
question still remains. What then is this matter? That if he does not overcome
says one, by force, yet by deceitfulness. And on this account it were better that
he should be destroyed. For if Job got the better of him, yet Adam was deceived
and overthrown. Now if once for all he had been removed from the world, Adam
would never have been overthrown. But now he remains, and is defeated indeed
by one, but gets the better of many. Ten overcame him, but he himself
overcomes and wrestles down ten thousand and if God took him away from the
world, these ten thousand would not have perished. What then shall we say to
this? That first of all they who overcame are more valuable far than they who are
defeated, even if the latter be more, and the former less. "For better is one," says
he "that does the will of God than ten thousand transgressors." And next, that if
the antagonist were taken away he who overcomes is thereby injured. For if you
lettest the adversary remain, the more slothful are injured, not on account of the
more diligent, but by their own slothfulness; whereas if you takest away the
antagonist, the more diligent are betrayed on account of the slothful, and neither
exhibit their own power, nor win crowns.

2. Perhaps ye have not yet understood what has been said. Therefore it is
necessary that I should say it again more clearly. Let there be one antagonist. But
let there be also two athletes about to wrestle against him, and of these two
athletes let one be consumed with gluttony, unprepared, void of strength,
nerveless; but the other diligent, of good habit, passing his time in the wrestling
school, in many gymnastic exercises, and exhibiting all the practice which bears
upon the contest. If then you take away the antagonist, which of these two have
you injured? The slothful, pray, and unprepared, or the earnest one who has
toiled so much? It is quite clear that it is the earnest one: For the one indeed is
wronged by the slothful, after the antagonist has been taken away. But the
slothful, while he remains, is no longer injured on account of the earnest. For he
has fallen, owing to his own slothfulness.
I will state another solution of this question, in order that you may learn,
that the Devil does not injure, but their own slothfulness everywhere overthrows
those who do not take heed. Let the Devil be allowed to be exceeding wicked,
not by nature, but by choice and conviction. For that the Devil is not by nature
wicked, learn from his very names. For the Devil, the slanderer that is, is called
so from slandering; for he slandered man to God saying "Does Job reverence
you for nought? But put out your hand, and touch what he has, see if he will not
blaspheme you to your face." He slandered God again to man saying "Fire fell
from heaven and burnt up the sheep." For he was anxious to persuade him, that
this warfare was stirred up from above, out of the heavens, and he set the servant
at variance with the master, and the master with his servant; rather he did not set
them at variance, but attempted to indeed, but was not able, in order that
whenever you may set another servant at variance with his master, Adam with
God, and believing the Devil's slander, you may learn that he gained strength,
not owing to his own power but from that man's slothfulness and carelessness.
He is called the Devil therefore on that account. But to slander, and to refrain
from slander is not natural, but an action which takes place and which ceases to
take place, occurring and ceasing to occur. Now such things do not reach the