count over the tombs of your ancestors; acquaint yourself accurately with past
events; and you shall see that the wrong-doer has made you stronger. For his
own passion he has aggravated, his covetousness I mean; but yours, he has
alleviated, taking away the food of the wild beast. And besides all this, he has set
you free from cares, agony, envy, informers, trouble, worry, perpetual fear; and
the foul mass of evils he has heaped upon his own head.
"What then," says one, "if I have to struggle with hunger?" You endure this
with Paul, who says, [1 Corinthians 4:10] "Even unto this present hour we both
hunger, and thirst, and are naked." But he did it, you will say, "for God's sake:"
do it also for God's sake. For when you abstain from avenging, you do so for
God's sake.
"But he that wronged me, takes his pleasure with the wealthy." Nay, rather
with the devil. But be you crowned with Paul.
Therefore fear not hunger, for [Proverbs 10:3] "the Lord will not kill with
hunger the souls of the righteous." And again, another says, [Psalm 55:23] "Cast
upon the Lord your care, and He will nourish you." For if the sparrows of the
field are nourished by Him, how shall He not nourish you? Now let us not be of
little faith nor of little soul, O my beloved! For He who has promised the
kingdom of heaven and such great blessings, how shall He not give things
present? Let us not covet superfluous things, but let us keep to a sufficiency, and
we shall always be rich. Let shelter be what we seek and food, and we shall
obtain all things; both these, and such as are far greater.
But if you are still grieving and bowing down, I should like to show you the
soul of the wrongdoer after his victory, how it has become ashes. For truly sin is
that kind of thing: while one commits it, it affords a certain pleasure; but when it
is finished, then the trifling pleasure is gone, one knows not how, and in its place
comes dejection. And this is our feeling when we do hurt to any: afterwards, at
any rate, we condemn ourselves. So also when we over-reach we have pleasure;
but afterwards we are stung by conscience. Do you see in any one's possession
some poor man's home? Weep not for him that is spoiled, but for the spoiler: for

he has not inflicted, but sustained an evil. For he robbed the other of things
present; but himself he cast out of the blessings which cannot be uttered. For if
he who gives not to the poor shall go away into hell; what shall he suffer who
takes the goods of the poor?
"Yet," says one, "where is the gain, if I suffer ill?" Indeed, the gain is great.
For not of the punishment of him that has done you harm does God frame a
compensation for you: since that would be no great thing. For what great good is
it, if I suffer ill and he suffer ill? And yet I know of many, who consider this the
greatest comfort, and who think they have got all back again, when they see
those who had insulted them undergoing punishment. But God does not limit His
recompense to this.
Would you then desire to know in earnest how great are the blessings which
await you? He opens for you the whole heaven; He makes you a fellow-citizen
with the Saints; He fits you to bear a part in their choir: from sins He absolves;
with righteousness He crowns. For if such as forgive offenders shall obtain
forgiveness, those who not only forgive but who also give largely to boot, what
blessing shall they not inherit?
Therefore, bear it not with a poor spirit, but even pray for him that injured
you. It is for yourself that you do this. Has he taken your money? Well: he took
your sins too: which was the case with Naaman and Gehazi. How much wealth
would you not give to have your iniquities forgiven you? This, believe me, is the
case now. For if you endure nobly and curse not, you have bound on you a
glorious crown. It is not my word, but you have heard Christ speaking, "Pray for
those that despitefully use you." And consider the reward how great! "That ye
may be like your Father which is in the heavens." So then you have been
deprived of nothing, yea, you have been a gainer: you have received no wrongs,
rather you have been crowned; in that you have become better disciplined in
soul; are made like to God; are set free from the care of money; are made
possessor of the kingdom of heaven.
All these things therefore taking into account, let us restrain ourselves in