Fourthly, this opinion is untrue, because it is hardly possible for
anyone in this world to understand all material things: and thus no
one, or very few, could reach to perfect felicity; which is against
what the Philosopher says (Ethic. i, 9), that happiness is a "kind of
common good, communicable to all capable of virtue." Further, it is
unreasonable that only the few of any species attain to the end of the
species.
Fifthly, the Philosopher expressly says (Ethic. i, 10), that happiness
is "an operation according to perfect virtue"; and after enumerating
many virtues in the tenth book, he concludes (Ethic. i, 7) that
ultimate happiness consisting in the knowledge of the highest things
intelligible is attained through the virtue of wisdom, which in the
sixth chapter he had named as the chief of speculative sciences.
Hence Aristotle clearly places the ultimate felicity of man in the
knowledge of separate substances, obtainable by speculative
science; and not by being united to the active intellect as some
imagined.
Sixthly, as was shown above (Question 79, Article 4), the active
intellect is not a separate substance; but a faculty of the soul,
extending itself actively to the same objects to which the passive
intellect extends receptively; because, as is stated (De Anima iii, 5),
the passive intellect is "all things potentially," and the active intellect
is "all things in act." Therefore both intellects, according to the
present state of life, extend to material things only, which are made
actually intelligible by the active intellect, and are received in the
passive intellect. Hence in the present state of life we cannot
understand separate immaterial substances in themselves, either by
the passive or by the active intellect.
Reply to Objection 1: Augustine may be taken to mean that the
knowledge of incorporeal things in the mind can be gained by the
mind itself. This is so true that philosophers also say that the
knowledge concerning the soul is a principle for the knowledge of
separate substances. For by knowing itself, it attains to some
knowledge of incorporeal substances, such as is within its compass;
not that the knowledge of itself gives it a perfect and absolute
knowledge of them.
Reply to Objection 2: The likeness of nature is not a sufficient cause
of knowledge; otherwise what Empedocles said would be true ---that

the soul needs to have the nature of all in order to know all. But
knowledge requires that the likeness of the thing known be in the
knower, as a kind of form thereof. Now our passive intellect, in the
present state of life, is such that it can be informed with similitudes
abstracted from phantasms: and therefore it knows material things
rather than immaterial substances.
Reply to Objection 3: There must needs be some proportion between
the object and the faculty of knowledge; such as of the active to the
passive, and of perfection to the perfectible. Hence that sensible
objects of great power are not grasped by the senses, is due not
merely to the fact that they corrupt the organ, but also to their being
improportionate to the sensitive power. And thus it is that immaterial
substances are improportionate to our intellect, in our present state
of life, so that it cannot understand them.
Reply to Objection 4: This argument of the Commentator fails in
several ways. First, because if separate substances are not
understood by us, it does not follow that they are not understood by
any intellect; for they are understood by themselves, and by one
another.
Secondly, to be understood by us is not the end of separate
substances: while only that is vain and purposeless, which fails to
attain its end. It does not follow, therefore, that immaterial
substances are purposeless, even if they are not understood by us
at all.
Reply to Objection 5: Sense knows bodies, whether superior or
inferior, in the same way, that is, by the sensible acting on the organ.
But we do not understand material and immaterial substances in the
same way. The former we understand by a process of abstraction,
which is impossible in the case of the latter, for there are no
phantasms of what is immaterial.