are deprived of all excuse. For in my judgment, if ten thousand were to entreat
and urge, a man should pay them no attention, but should first of all search his
own heart, and examine the whole matter carefully before yielding to their
importunities. Now no one would venture to undertake the building of a house
were he not an architect, nor will any one attempt the cure of sick bodies who is
not a skilled physician; but even though many urge him, will beg off, and will
not be ashamed to own his ignorance; and shall he who is going to have the care
of so many souls entrusted to him, not examine himself beforehand? will he
accept this ministry even though he be the most inexperienced of men, because
this one commands him, or that man constrains him, or for fear of offending a
third? And if so, how will he escape casting himself together with them into
manifest misery. Had he continued as he was, it were possible for him to be
saved, but now he involves others in his own destruction. For whence can he
hope for salvation? Whence to obtain pardon? Who will then successfully
intercede for us? They who are now perhaps urging us and forcibly dragging us
on? But who will save these same at such a moment? For even they too will
stand in need in their turn of intercession, that they may escape the fire. Now,
that I say not these things to frighten you, but as representing the matter as in
truth it is, hear what the holy Apostle Paul says to Timothy his disciple, his own
and beloved son, "Lay hands suddenly on no man, neither be partaker of other
men's sins." [1 Timothy 5:22] Do you not see from what great blame, yea and
vengeance, we, so far as in us lies, have delivered those who were ready to put
us forward for this office.
2. For as it is not enough for those who are chosen to say in excuse for
themselves, "I did not summon myself to this office, nor could I avoid what I did
not see beforehand;" so neither will it be a sufficient plea for those who ordain
them to say that they did not know him who was ordained. The charge against
them becomes greater on account of their ignorance of him whom they brought
forward, and what seems to excuse them only serves to accuse them the more.
For how absurd a thing, is it not? That they who want to buy a slave, show him

to the physician, and require sureties for the sale, and information about him
from their neighbours, and after all this do not yet venture on his purchase
without asking for some time for a trial of him; while they who are going to
admit any one to so great an office as this, give their testimonial and their
sanction loosely and carelessly, without further investigation, just because some
one wishes it, or to court the favor, or to avoid the displeasure of some one else.
Who shall then successfully intercede for us in that day, when they who ought to
defend us stand themselves in need of defenders? He who is going to ordain,
therefore, ought to make diligent inquiry, and much more he who is to be
ordained. For though they who ordain him share his punishment, for any sins
which he may commit in his office, yet so far from escaping vengeance he will
even pay a greater penalty than they— save only if they who chose him acted
from some worldly motive contrary to what seemed justifiable to themselves.
For if they should be detected so doing, and knowing a man to be unworthy have
brought him forward on some pretext or other, the amount of their punishment
shall be equivalent to his, nay perhaps the punishment shall be even greater for
them who appointed the unfit man. For he who gives authority to any one who is
minded to destroy the Church, would be certainly to blame for the outrages
which that person commits. But if he is guilty of no such thing, and says that he
has been misled by the opinions of others, even then he shall not altogether
remain unpunished, but his punishment shall be a little lighter than his who has
been ordained. What then? It is possible that they who elect may come to the
election deceived by a false report. But he who is elected could not say, "I am
ignorant of myself," as others were of him. As one who will receive therefore a
sorer punishment than they who put him forward, so should he make his scrutiny
of himself more careful than that which they make of him; and if they in
ignorance drag him on, he ought to come forward and instruct them carefully
about any matters whereby he may stop their being misled; and so having shown
himself unworthy of trial may escape the burden of so high an office.
For what is the reason why, in the arts of war, and merchandize, and