John 6:68-69
"To whom shall we go? You have the words of eternal life. And we believe and
are sure that You are the Christ, the Son of the living God."
Do you see that it was not the words that caused offense, but the
heedlessness, and sloth, and wrong-mindedness of the hearers? For even had He
not spoken, they would have been offended, and would not have ceased to be
ever anxious about bodily food, ever nailed to earth. Besides, the disciples heard
at the same time with the others, yet they declared an opinion contrary to theirs,
saying, "To whom shall we go?" An expression indicating much affection, for it
shows that their Teacher was more precious to them than anything, than father or
mother, or any possessions, and that if they withdrew from Him, they had not
then whither to flee. Then lest it should seem that he had said, "to whom shall we
go?" because there were none that would receive them, he straightway added,
"You have the words of eternal life." For the Jews listened carnally, and with
human reasonings, but the disciples spiritually, and committing all to faith.
Wherefore Christ said, "The words which I have spoken unto you are spirit"; that
is, "do not suppose that the teaching of My words is subject to the rule of
material consequences, or to the necessity of created things. Things spiritual are
not of this nature, nor endure to submit to the laws of earth." This also Paul
declares, saying, "Say not in your heart, Who shall ascend into heaven? (that is,
to bring Christ down;) or, Who shall descend into the deep? (that is, to bring up
Christ again from the dead.") [Romans 10:6-7]
"You have the words of eternal life." These men already admitted the
Resurrection, and all the apportionment which shall be there. And observe the
brotherly and affectionate man, how he makes answer for all the band. For he
said not, "I know," but, "We know." Or rather, observe how he goes to the very
words of his Teacher, not speaking as did the Jews. They said, "This is the son of
Joseph"; but he said, "You are the Christ, the Son of the living God"; and "You

have the words of eternal life"; having perhaps heard Him say, "He that believes
in Me has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day." For he showed
that he retained all that had been said, by recalling the very words. What then did
Christ? He neither praised nor expressed admiration of Peter, though He had
elsewhere done so; but what says He?

John 6:70
"Have not I chosen you twelve, and one of you is a devil?"
For since Peter said, "We believe," Jesus excepts Judas from the band. In the
other place Peter made no mention of the disciples; but when Christ said, "Whom
say ye that I am?" he replied, "You are the Christ, the Son of the living God"
[Matthew 16:15]; but here, since he said, "We believe," Christ with reason admits
not Judas into that band. And this He did afar off, and long before the time, to
check the wickedness of the traitor, knowing that He should avail nothing, yet
doing His own part.
4. And remark His wisdom. He made not the traitor manifest, yet allowed
him not to be hidden; that on the one hand he might not lose all shame, and
become more contentious; and on the other, that he might not, thinking to be
unperceived, work his wicked deed without fear. Therefore by degrees He brings
plainer reproofs against him. First, He numbered him too among the others,
when He said, "There are some of you that believe not," (for that He counted the
traitor the Evangelist has declared, saying, "For He knew from the beginning
who they were that believed not, and who should betray Him;") but when he yet
remained such, He brought against him a more severe rebuke, "One of you is a
devil," yet made the fear common to them all, wishing to conceal him. And here
it is worth while to enquire, why the disciples at this time said nothing, but
afterwards were afraid and doubted, looking one upon another, and asking,
"Lord, is it I?" [Matthew 26:22], when Peter beckoned to John to find out the
traitor, by enquiring of their Teacher which was he. What is the reason? Peter
had not yet heard, "Get behind me, Satan," wherefore he had no fear at all; but
when he had been rebuked, and though he spoke through strong affection,
instead of being approved of, had even been called "Satan," he afterwards with
reason feared when he heard, "One of you shall betray Me." Besides, He says not
even now, "One of you shall betray Me," but, "One of you is a devil"; wherefore