belong to all men. Consequently he held that one man does not
cause another to have a knowledge distinct from that which he has
himself; but that he communicates the identical knowledge which he
has himself, by moving him to order rightly the phantasms in his
soul, so that they be rightly disposed for intelligible apprehension.
This opinion is true so far as knowledge is the same in disciple and
master, if we consider the identity of the thing known: for the same
objective truth is known by both of them. But so far as he maintains
that all men have but one passive intellect, and the same intelligible
species, differing only as to various phantasms, his opinion is false,
as stated above (Question 76, Article 2).
Besides this, there is the opinion of the Platonists, who held that our
souls are possessed of knowledge from the very beginning, through
the participation of separate forms, as stated above (Question 84,
Articles 3,4); but that the soul is hindered, through its union with the
body, from the free consideration of those things which it knows.
According to this, the disciple does not acquire fresh knowledge
from his master, but is roused by him to consider what he knows; so
that to learn would be nothing else than to remember. In the same
way they held that natural agents only dispose (matter) to receive
forms, which matter acquires by a participation of separate
substances. But against this we have proved above (Question 79,
Article 2; Question 84, Article 3) that the passive intellect of the
human soul is in pure potentiality to intelligible (species), as
Aristotle says (De Anima iii, 4).
We must therefore decide the question differently, by saying that the
teacher causes knowledge in the learner, by reducing him from
potentiality to act, as the Philosopher says (Phys. viii, 4). In order to
make this clear, we must observe that of effects proceeding from an
exterior principle, some proceed from the exterior principle alone; as
the form of a house is caused to be in matter by art alone: whereas
other effects proceed sometimes from an exterior principle,
sometimes from an interior principle: thus health is caused in a sick
man, sometimes by an exterior principle, namely by the medical art,
sometimes by an interior principle as when a man is healed by the
force of nature. In these latter effects two things must be noticed.
First, that art in its work imitates nature for just as nature heals a
man by alteration, digestion, rejection of the matter that caused the
sickness, so does art. Secondly, we must remark that the exterior
principle, art, acts, not as principal agent, but as helping the
principal agent, but as helping the principal agent, which is the

interior principle, by strengthening it, and by furnishing it with
instruments and assistance, of which the interior principle makes
use in producing the effect. Thus the physician strengthens nature,
and employs food and medicine, of which nature makes use for the
intended end.
Now knowledge is acquired in man, both from an interior principle,
as is clear in one who procures knowledge by his own research; and
from an exterior principle, as is clear in one who learns (by
instruction). For in every man there is a certain principle of
knowledge, namely the light of the active intellect, through which
certain universal principles of all the sciences are naturally
understood as soon as proposed to the intellect. Now when anyone
applies these universal principles to certain particular things, the
memory or experience of which he acquires through the senses;
then by his own research advancing from the known to the unknown,
he obtains knowledge of what he knew not before. Wherefore anyone
who teaches, leads the disciple from things known by the latter, to
the knowledge of things previously unknown to him; according to
what the Philosopher says (Poster. i, 1): "All teaching and all
learning proceed from previous knowledge."
Now the master leads the disciple from things known to knowledge
of the unknown, in a twofold manner. Firstly, by proposing to him
certain helps or means of instruction, which his intellect can use for
the acquisition of science: for instance, he may put before him
certain less universal propositions, of which nevertheless the
disciple is able to judge from previous knowledge: or he may
propose to him some sensible examples, either by way of likeness or
of opposition, or something of the sort, from which the intellect of
the learner is led to the knowledge of truth previously unknown.
Secondly, by strengthening the intellect of the learner; not, indeed,
by some active power as of a higher nature, as explained above
(Question 106, Article 1; Question 111, Article 1) of the angelic
enlightenment, because all human intellects are of one grade in the
natural order; but inasmuch as he proposes to the disciple the order
of principles to conclusions, by reason of his not having sufficient
collating power to be able to draw the conclusions from the
principles. Hence the Philosopher says (Poster. i, 2) that "a
demonstration is a syllogism that causes knowledge." In this way a
demonstrator causes his hearer to know.
Reply to Objection 1: As stated above, the teacher only brings