in time, and to save the bare body, before the fire in its progress reaches them.
And now our calamity has become an enigma; a flight without enemies; an
expulsion of inhabitants without a battle; a captivity without capture! We have
not seen the fire of barbarians, nor beheld the face of enemies: and yet we
experience the sufferings of captives. All men now hear of our calamities; for
receiving our exiles, they learn from them the stroke which has fallen upon our
city.
5. Yet I am not ashamed, nor blush at this. Let all men learn the sufferings
of the city, that, sympathizing with their mother, they may lift up their united
voice to God from the whole earth; and with one consent entreat the King of
heaven for their universal nurse and parent. Lately our city was shaken; but now
the very souls of the inhabitants totter! Then the foundations of the houses
shook, but now the very foundations of every heart quiver; and we all see death
daily before our eyes! We live in constant terror, and endure the penalty of Cain;
a more pitiable one than that of those who were the former inmates of the prison;
undergoing as we now do a new and strange kind of siege, far more terrible than
the ordinary kind. For they who suffer this from enemies, are only shut up within
the walls; but even the forum has become impassable to us, and every one is pent
up within the walls of his own house! And as it is not safe for those who are
beseiged to go beyond the walls, while the enemy without is encamped around;
so neither, to many of those who inhabit this city, is it safe to go out of doors, or
to appear openly; on account of those who are everywhere hunting for the
innocent as well as the guilty; and seizing them even in the midst of the forum,
and dragging them to the court of justice, without ceremony, and just as chance
directs. For this reason, free-men sit in doors shackled up with their domestics;
anxiously and minutely enquiring of those to whom they may safely put the
question, "Who has been seized today; who carried off; or punished? How was
it? And in what manner?" They live a life more wretched than any kind of death;
being compelled daily to mourn the calamities of others; while they tremble for
their own safety, and are in no better case than the dead; inasmuch as they are

already dead with fear.
6. But if any one who is devoid of this fear and anguish, chooses to enter
the forum, he is presently driven back to his own dwelling, by the cheerless
spectacle; finding hardly perchance one or two people, and those hanging their
heads and creeping about with downcast looks, where but a few days before the
multitude swept along more incessantly than the streams of rivers. Yet all these
have now been driven away from us! And, as when many trees in a thick wood
of oak are cut down in all directions, the spectacle becomes a melancholy one,
even like that of a head with many patches of baldness; even so the city itself, its
inhabitants being diminished and but few appearing here and there, is now
become dreary, and sheds a heavy mist of sorrow over those who witness it. And
not the ground only, but the very nature of the air, and even the circle of the sun's
beams, seem now to me to look mournful, and to shine more dimly; not that the
elements change their nature, but that our eyes being confused by the cloud of
sadness, are unable to receive the light of the rays clearly, or with the same
relish. This is what the prophet of old bewailed, when he said, "The sun shall go
down at noon, and the day shall be darkened." [Amos 8:9] And this he said, not
as though the Day Star should be eclipsed, or the day should disappear, but
because those who are in sorrow, are not able to perceive the light even of noon
day on account of the darkness of their anguish; which indeed has been the case
now. And wherever any one looks abroad, whether upon the ground or upon the
walls; whether upon the columns of the city, or upon his neighbours, he seems to
see night and deep gloom; so full is all of melancholy! There is a silence big
with horror, and loneliness everywhere; and that dear hum of the multitude is
stifled; and even as though all had gone beneath the earth, so speechlessness has
now taken possession of the city; and all men seem like stones, and being
oppressed by the calamity like a gag on their tongues; they maintain the
profoundest silence, yea, such a silence as if enemies had come on them, and had
consumed them all at once by fire and sword!
7. Now is it a fit season to say, "Call for the mourning women, that they