FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.93, C.6.

inward principle of action on the man that is subject to him, so God
imprints on the whole of nature the principles of its proper actions.
And so, in this way, God is said to command the whole of nature,
according to Ps. 148:6: "He hath made a decree, and it shall not pass
away." And thus all actions and movements of the whole of nature
are subject to the eternal law. Consequently irrational creatures are
subject to the eternal law, through being moved by Divine
providence; but not, as rational creatures are, through
understanding the Divine commandment.
Reply to Objection 1: The impression of an inward active principle is
to natural things, what the promulgation of law is to men: because
law, by being promulgated, imprints on man a directive principle of
human actions, as stated above.
Reply to Objection 2: Irrational creatures neither partake of nor are
obedient to human reason: whereas they do partake of the Divine
Reason by obeying it; because the power of Divine Reason extends
over more things than human reason does. And as the members of
the human body are moved at the command of reason, and yet do
not partake of reason, since they have no apprehension subordinate
to reason; so too irrational creatures are moved by God, without, on
that account, being rational.
Reply to Objection 3: Although the defects which occur in natural
things are outside the order of particular causes, they are not
outside the order of universal causes, especially of the First Cause, i.
e. God, from Whose providence nothing can escape, as stated in the
FP, Question 22, Article 2. And since the eternal law is the type of
Divine providence, as stated above (Article 1), hence the defects of
natural things are subject to the eternal law.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.93, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether all human affairs are subject to the

eternal law?
Objection 1: It would seem that not all human affairs are subject to
the eternal law. For the Apostle says (Gal. 5:18): "If you are led by the
spirit you are not under the law." But the righteous who are the sons
of God by adoption, are led by the spirit of God, according to Rm.
8:14: "Whosoever are led by the spirit of God, they are the sons of
God." Therefore not all men are under the eternal law.
Objection 2: Further, the Apostle says (Rm. 8:7): "The prudence of
the flesh is an enemy to God: for it is not subject to the law of God."
But many are those in whom the prudence of the flesh dominates.
Therefore all men are not subject to the eternal law which is the law
of God.
Objection 3: Further, Augustine says (De Lib. Arb. i, 6) that "the
eternal law is that by which the wicked deserve misery, the good, a
life of blessedness." But those who are already blessed, and those
who are already lost, are not in the state of merit. Therefore they are
not under the eternal law.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xix, 12): "Nothing
evades the laws of the most high Creator and Governor, for by Him
the peace of the universe is administered."
I answer that, There are two ways in which a thing is subject to the
eternal law, as explained above (Article 5): first, by partaking of the
eternal law by way of knowledge; secondly, by way of action and
passion, i.e. by partaking of the eternal law by way of an inward
motive principle: and in this second way, irrational creatures are
subject to the eternal law, as stated above (Article 5). But since the
rational nature, together with that which it has in common with all
creatures, has something proper to itself inasmuch as it is rational,
consequently it is subject to the eternal law in both ways; because
while each rational creature has some knowledge of the eternal law,
as stated above (Article 2), it also has a natural inclination to that
which is in harmony with the eternal law; for "we are naturally
adapted to the recipients of virtue" (Ethic. ii, 1).
Both ways, however, are imperfect, and to a certain extent