thus free from all suspicion, he makes his appearance at Rome. "Then Paul," etc.
[Acts 26:1-3] And he said not, Why is this? Once for all I have appealed to
Cæsar: I have been tried many times: when will there be an end of this? But
what did he? Again he is ready to render an account, and that, before the man
who was the best informed on the subject; and with much boldness, seeing they
were not his judges to condemn him: but still, though they were not his judges,
since that declaration was in force, Unto Cæsar shall you go, he renders an
account and gives full answers, "touching all the things," and not merely on one
and another here and there. They accuse me of sedition, accuse me of heresy,
accuse me that I have profaned the temple: "touching all these things I answer
for myself:" now that these are not things in accordance with my ways, my
accusers themselves are witnesses: "my manner of life from my youth," etc. [Acts
26:4] which is what he says on a former occasion "Being a zealot." [Acts 22:3]
And when the whole people was present, then he challenges their testimony: not
before the tribunal, but before Lysias, and again here, when more were present:
whereas in that hearing there needed not much vindication of himself, since
Lysias' letter exculpated him. "Know all the Jews," he says, "which knew me
from the beginning." And he does not say what kind of life his was, but leaves it
to their own conscience, and lays the whole stress on his sect, as he would not
have chosen that sect, if he had been a man of evil disposition and bad character
([πονηρὸς καὶ μοχθηρός]). "But, for this hope" (manuscripts and Edd.
[αἱρέσεως]) he says, "I stand and am judged." (v. 6, 7.) This hope is honored
among themselves also, because of this they pray, because of this they worship,
that unto this they may attain: this same do I show forth. Why then, it is acting
like madmen, to be doing all things for the sake of attaining to this, and yet to
persecute him who believes in the same. "I indeed thought with myself," that is, I
determined, "to do many things contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth."
[Acts 26:9] I was not one of Christ's disciples: among those who fought against
Him, was I. Whence also he is a witness who has a right to be believed, because
he, a man who was doing numberless things, makes war on the believers,

persuading them to blaspheme, stirring up all against them, cities, rulers, and by
himself doing all this of his own accord, was thus suddenly changed. Then again
the witnesses, those who were with him: next he shows what just cause he had to
be persuaded, both from the light, and from the prophets, and from the results,
and from the things which have now taken place. See accordingly, how both
from the prophets, and from these particulars, he confirms the proof to them. For
that he may not seem to be broaching some novelty, although he had great things
to say, yet he again takes refuge with the prophets, and puts this as a question for
discussion. Now this had a stronger claim upon belief, as having actually come
to pass: but since he alone saw (Christ), he again fetches proof of it from the
prophets. And see how he does not discourse alike in the court of justice, and in
the assembly (of his own people); there indeed he says, "ye slew Him:" but here
no such thing, that he might not kindle their anger more: but he shows the same
thing, by saying, "Whether the Christ was to suffer." He so frees them from
accusations: for the prophets, he says, say this. Therefore receive ye also the rest.
Since he has mentioned the vision, he then without fear goes on to speak also of
the good wrought by it. "To turn them from darkness to light, and from the power
of Satan unto God. For to this end have I appeared unto you" [Acts 26:16-18],
not to punish, but to make you an Apostle. He shows the evils which possess
unbelievers, "Satan, darkness;" the good things belonging to believers, light,
God, "the inheritance of the saints. Whereupon, O king Agrippa," etc. (v. 19, 20.)
He not only exhorts them to repent, but also to show forth a life worthy of
admiration. And see how everywhere the Gentiles are admitted into connection
with the people (Israel): for those who were present were of the Gentiles.
"Testifying," he says, "both to great and small," [Acts 26:22] that is, both to
distinguished and undistinguished. This is also for the soldiers. Observe: having
left the post of defendant, he took up that of teacher— and therefore also it is
that Festus says to him, "You are beside yourself"— but then, that he may not
seem to be himself the teacher, he brings in the prophets, and Moses: "Whether
the Christ was to suffer, whether He as the first to rise from the dead should