THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.2, C.6.

and in the Godhead and manhood, is perfect God and perfect man."
Reply to Objection 3: There are two principles of corporeal life: one
the effective principle, and in this way the Word of God is the
principle of all life; the other, the formal principle of life, for since "in
living things to be is to live," as the Philosopher says (De Anima ii,
37), just as everything is formally by its form, so likewise the body
lives by the soul: in this way a body could not live by the Word,
Which cannot be the form of a body.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.2, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether the human nature was united to the Word

of God accidentally?
Objection 1: It would seem that the human nature was united to the
Word of God accidentally. For the Apostle says (Phil. 2:7) of the Son
of God, that He was "in habit found as a man." But habit is
accidentally associated with that to which it pertains, whether habit
be taken for one of the ten predicaments or as a species of quality.
Therefore human nature is accidentally united to the Son of God.
Objection 2: Further, whatever comes to a thing that is complete in
being comes to it accidentally, for an accident is said to be what can
come or go without the subject being corrupted. But human nature
came to Christ in time, Who had perfect being from eternity.
Therefore it came to Him accidentally.
Objection 3: Further, whatever does not pertain to the nature or the
essence of a thing is its accident, for whatever is, is either a
substance or an accident. But human nature does not pertain to the
Divine Essence or Nature of the Son of God, for the union did not
take place in the nature, as was said above (Article 1). Hence the
human nature must have accrued accidentally to the Son of God.
Objection 4: Further, an instrument accrues accidentally. But the
human nature was the instrument of the Godhead in Christ, for
Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii, 15), that "the flesh of Christ is the
instrument of the Godhead." Therefore it seems that the human
nature was united to the Son of God accidentally.
On the contrary, Whatever is predicated accidentally, predicates, not
substance, but quantity, or quality, or some other mode of being. If
therefore the human nature accrues accidentally, when we say Christ
is man, we do not predicate substance, but quality or quantity, or
some other mode of being, which is contrary to the Decretal of Pope
Alexander III, who says (Conc. Later. iii): "Since Christ is perfect God
and perfect man, what foolhardiness have some to dare to affirm that
Christ as man is not a substance?"
I answer that, In evidence of this question we must know that two
heresies have arisen with regard to the mystery of the union of the
two natures in Christ. The first confused the natures, as Eutyches