the essential, so also in case of repentance this is the essential herb, yea, it may
be everything. For hear what the Divine Scripture says, "Give alms, and all
things shall be clean." [Luke 11:41] And again, "By almsgiving and acts of
faithfulness sins are purged away." [Proverbs 16:6] And, "Water will quench a
flaming fire, and alms will do away with great sins." [Sirach 3:30]
Next not being angry with any one, not bearing malice; the forgiving all
their trespasses. For, it is said, "Man retains wrath against man, and yet seeks
healing from the Lord." [Sirach 28:3] "Forgive that you may be forgiven." [Mark
11:25]
Also, the converting our brethren from their wandering. For, it is said, "Go,
and convert your brethren, that your sins may be forgiven you." And from one's
being in close relations with the priests, "and if," it is said, "a man has
committed sins it shall be forgiven him." [James 5:15] To stand forward in
defense of those who are wronged. Not to retain anger: to bear all things meekly.
9. Now then, before you learned that it is possible to have our sins washed
away by means of repentance, were ye not in an agony, because there is no
second laver, and were ye not in despair of yourselves? But now that we have
learned by what means repentance and remission is brought to a successful issue,
and that we shall be able entirely to escape, if we be willing to use it aright, what
forgiveness can we possibly obtain, if we do not even enter on the thought of our
sins? Since if this were done, all would be accomplished.
For as he who enters the door, is within; so he who reckons up his own evils
will also certainly come to get them cured. But should he say, I am a sinner,
without reckoning them up specifically, and saying, This and this sin have I
committed, he will never leave off, confessing indeed continually, but never
caring in earnest for amendment. For should he have laid down a beginning, all
the rest will unquestionably follow too, if only in one point he have shown a
beginning: for in every case the beginning and the preliminaries are difficult.
This then let us lay as a foundation, and all will be smooth and easy.
Let us begin therefore, I entreat you, one with making his prayers intense:

another with continual weeping: another with downcast countenance. For not
even is this, which is so small, unprofitable: for "I saw" (it is said) "that he was
grieved and went downcast, and I healed his ways." [Isaiah 57:17-18]
But let us all humble our own souls by almsgiving and forgiving our
neighbors their trespasses, by not remembering injuries, nor avenging ourselves.
If we continually reflect on our sins, no external circumstances can make us
elated: neither riches, nor power, nor authority, nor honor; nay, even should we
sit in the imperial chariot itself, we shall sigh bitterly: Since even the blessed
David was a King, and yet he said, "Every night I will wash my bed," [&c.]
[Psalm 6:6]: and he was not at all hurt by the purple robe and the diadem: he was
not puffed up; for he knew himself to be a man, and inasmuch as his heart had
been made contrite, he went mourning.
10. For what are all things human? Ashes and dust, and as it were spray
before the wind; a smoke and a shadow, and a leaf driven here and there; and a
flower; a dream, and a tale, and a fable, wind and air vainly puffed out and
wasting away; a feather that has no stay, a stream flowing by, or if there be
anything of more nothingness than these.
For, tell me, what do you esteem great? What dignity do you think to be
great? Is it that of the Consul? For the many think no greater dignity than that.
He who is not Consul is not a whit inferior to him who is in so great splendor,
who is so greatly admired. Both one and the other are of the same dignity; both
of them alike, after a little while, are no more.
When was he made [Consul]? For how long a time? Tell me: for two days?
Nay, this takes place even in dreams. But that is [only] a dream, you say. And
what is this? For (tell me) what is by day, is it [therefore] not a dream? Why do
we not rather call these things a dream? For as dreams when the day comes on
are proved to be nothing: so these things also, when the night comes on, are
proved to be nothing. For night and day have received each an equal portion of
time, and have equally divided all duration. Therefore as in the day a person
rejoices not in what happened at night, so neither in the night is it possible for