receives under conditions of immateriality and immobility, the
species of material and mobile bodies: for the received is in the
receiver according to the mode of the receiver. We must conclude,
therefore, that through the intellect the soul knows bodies by a
knowledge which is immaterial, universal, and necessary.
Reply to Objection 1: These words of Augustine are to be
understood as referring to the medium of intellectual knowledge, and
not to its object. For the intellect knows bodies by understanding
them, not indeed through bodies, nor through material and corporeal
species; but through immaterial and intelligible species, which can
be in the soul by their own essence.
Reply to Objection 2: As Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xxii, 29), it is
not correct to say that as the sense knows only bodies so the
intellect knows only spiritual things; for it follows that God and the
angels would not know corporeal things. The reason of this diversity
is that the lower power does not extend to those things that belong
to the higher power; whereas the higher power operates in a more
excellent manner those things which belong to the lower power.
Reply to Objection 3: Every movement presupposes something
immovable: for when a change of quality occurs, the substance
remains unmoved; and when there is a change of substantial form,
matter remains unmoved. Moreover the various conditions of
mutable things are themselves immovable; for instance, though
Socrates be not always sitting, yet it is an immovable truth that
whenever he does sit he remains in one place. For this reason there
is nothing to hinder our having an immovable science of movable
things.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the soul understands corporeal things

through its essence?
Objection 1: It would seem that the soul understands corporeal
things through its essence. For Augustine says (De Trin. x, 5) that
the soul "collects and lays hold of the images of bodies which are
formed in the soul and of the soul: for in forming them it gives them
something of its own substance." But the soul understands bodies
by images of bodies. Therefore the soul knows bodies through its
essence, which it employs for the formation of such images, and
from which it forms them.
Objection 2: Further, the Philosopher says (De Anima iii, 8) that "the
soul, after a fashion, is everything." Since, therefore, like is known
by like, it seems that the soul knows corporeal things through itself.
Objection 3: Further, the soul is superior to corporeal creatures. Now
lower things are in higher things in a more eminent way than in
themselves, as Dionysius says (Coel. Hier. xii). Therefore all
corporeal creatures exist in a more excellent way in the soul than in
themselves. Therefore the soul can know corporeal creatures
through its essence.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Trin. ix, 3) that "the mind
gathers knowledge of corporeal things through the bodily senses."
But the soul itself cannot be known through the bodily senses.
Therefore it does not know corporeal things through itself.
I answer that, The ancient philosophers held that the soul knows
bodies through its essence. For it was universally admitted that "like
is known by like." But they thought that the form of the thing known
is in the knower in the same mode as in the thing known. The
Platonists however were of a contrary opinion. For Plato, having
observed that the intellectual soul has an immaterial nature, and an
immaterial mode of knowledge, held that the forms of things known
subsist immaterially. While the earlier natural philosophers,
observing that things known are corporeal and material, held that
things known must exist materially even in the soul that knows them.
And therefore, in order to ascribe to the soul a knowledge of all
things, they held that it has the same nature in common with all. And
because the nature of a result is determined by its principles, they