Reply to Objection 5: Satisfaction depends on the punishment
appointed, which should be enjoined for sins; hence it can come to
an end, so that there be no further need of satisfaction. But that
punishment is proportionate to sin chiefly on the part of its
adherence to a creature whence it derives its finiteness. On the other
hand, the sorrow of contrition corresponds to sin on the part of the
aversion, whence it derives a certain infinity; wherefore contrition
ought to continue always; nor is it unreasonable if that which
precedes remains, when that which follows is taken away.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether it is expedient to grieve for sin

continually?
Objection 1: It would seem that it is not expedient to grieve for sin
continually. For it is sometimes expedient to rejoice, as is evident
from Phil. 4:4, where the gloss on the words, "Rejoice in the Lord
always," says that "it is necessary to rejoice." Now it is not possible
to rejoice and grieve at the same time. Therefore it is not expedient
to grieve for sin continually.
Objection 2: Further, that which, in itself, is an evil and a thing to be
avoided should not be taken upon oneself, except in so far as it is
necessary as a remedy against something, as in the case of burning
or cutting a wound. Now sorrow is in itself an evil; wherefore it is
written (Ecclus. 30:24): "Drive away sadness far from thee," and the
reason is given (Ecclus. 30:25): "For sadness hath killed many, and
there is no profit in it." Moreover the Philosopher says the same
(Ethic. vii, 13,14; x, 5). Therefore one should not grieve for sin any
longer than suffices for the sin to be blotted out. Now sin is already
blotted out after the first sorrow of contrition. Therefore it is not
expedient to grieve any longer.
Objection 3: Further, Bernard says (Serm. xi in Cant.): "Sorrow is a
good thing, if it is not continual; for honey should be mingled with
wormwood." Therefore it seems that it is inexpedient to grieve
continually.
On the contrary, Augustine [De vera et falsa Poenitentia] says: "The
penitent should always grieve, and rejoice in his grief."
Further, it is expedient always to continue, as far as it is possible,
those acts in which beatitude consists. Now such is sorrow for sin,
as is shown by the words of Mt. 5:5, "Blessed are they that mourn."
Therefore it is expedient for sorrow to be as continual as possible.
I answer that, We find this condition in the acts of the virtues, that in
them excess and defect are not possible, as is proved in Ethic. ii, 6,7.
Wherefore, since contrition, so far as it is a kind of displeasure
seated in the rational appetite, is an act of the virtue of penance,
there can never be excess in it, either as to its intensity, or as to its
duration, except in so far as the act of one virtue hinders the act of