He was of full age many suspected this, much more, if while quite young He had
wrought miracles, would they have hurried Him sooner and before the proper
time to the Cross, in the venom of their malice; and the very facts of the
Dispensation would have been discredited.
"How then," asks some one, "came it into the mind of His mother to
imagine anything great of Him?" He was now beginning to reveal Himself, and
was plainly discovered by the witness of John, and by what He had said to His
disciples. And before all this, the Conception itself and all its attending
circumstances had inspired her with a very great opinion of the Child; "for," said
Luke, "she heard all the sayings concerning the Child, and kept them in her
heart." "Why then," says one, "did not she speak this before?" Because, as I said,
it was now at last that He was beginning to manifest Himself. Before this time
He lived as one of the many, and therefore His mother had not confidence to say
any such thing to Him; but when she heard that John had come on His account,
and that he had borne such witness to Him as he did, and that He had disciples,
after that she took confidence, and called Him, and said, when they wanted wine,
"They have no wine." For she desired both to do them a favor, and through her
Son to render herself more conspicuous; perhaps too she had some human
feelings, like His brethren, when they said, "Show yourself to the world" [John
17:4], desiring to gain credit from His miracles. Therefore He answered
somewhat vehemently, saying,

John 2:4
"Woman, what have I to do with you? My hour is not yet come."
To prove that He greatly respected His mother, hear Luke relate how He
was "subject to" His parents [Luke 2:51], and our own Evangelist declare how
He had forethought for her at the very season of the Crucifixion. For where
parents cause no impediment or hindrance in things belonging to God, it is our
bounden duty to give way to them, and there is great danger in not doing so; but
when they require anything unseasonably, and cause hindrance in any spiritual
matter, it is unsafe to obey. And therefore He answered thus in this place, and
again elsewhere, "Who is My mother, and who are My brethren?" [Matthew
12:48], because they did not yet think rightly of Him; and she, because she had
borne Him, claimed, according to the custom of other mothers, to direct Him in
all things, when she ought to have reverenced and worshipped Him. This then
was the reason why He answered as He did on that occasion. For consider what a
thing it was, that when all the people high and low were standing round Him,
when the multitude was intent on hearing Him, and His doctrine had begun to be
set forth, she should come into the midst and take Him away from the work of
exhortation, and converse with Him apart, and not even endure to come within,
but draw Him outside merely to herself. This is why He said, "Who is My mother
and My brethren?" Not to insult her who had borne Him, (away with the
thought!) but to procure her the greatest benefit, and not to let her think meanly
of Him. For if He cared for others, and used every means to implant in them a
becoming opinion of Himself, much more would He do so in the case of His
mother. And since it was probable that if these words had been addressed to her
by her Son, she would not readily have chosen even then to be convinced, but
would in all cases have claimed the superiority as being His mother, therefore He
replied as He did to them who spoke to Him; otherwise He could not have led up
her thoughts from His present lowliness to His future exaltation, had she