endurable; but as it was, he not only set himself before the whole world, but also
accused all men. On this account he fell behind in the running. And just as a
ship, after having run through innumerable surges, and having escaped many
storms, then in the very mouth of the harbour having been dashed against some
rock, loses the whole treasure which is stowed away in her— so truly did this
Pharisee, after having undergone the labours of the fasting, and of all the rest of
his virtue, since he did not master his tongue, in the very harbour underwent
shipwreck of his cargo. For the going home from prayer, whence he ought to
have derived gain, having rather been so greatly damaged, is nothing else than
undergoing shipwreck in harbour.
2. Knowing therefore these things, beloved even if we should have mounted
to the very pinnacle of virtue, let us consider ourselves last of all; having learned
that pride is able to cast down even from the heavens themselves him who takes
not heed, and humbleness of mind to bear up on high from the very abyss of sins
him who knows how to be sober. For this it was that placed the publican before
the Pharisee; whereas that, pride I mean and an overweening spirit, surpassed
even an incorporeal power, that of the devil; while humbleness of mind and the
acknowledgment of his own sins committed brought the robber into Paradise
before the Apostles. Now if the confidence which they who confess their own
sins effect for themselves is so great, they who are conscious to themselves of
many good qualities, yet humble their own souls, how great crowns will they not
win. For when sinfulness be put together with humbleness of mind it runs with
such ease as to pass and out-strip righteousness combined with pride. If therefore
thou have put it to with righteousness, whither will it not reach? Through how
many heavens will it not pass? By the throne of God itself surely it will stay its
course; in the midst of the angels, with much confidence. On the other hand if
pride, having been yoked with righteousness, by the excess and weight of its
own wickedness had strength enough to drag down its confidence; if it be put
together with sinfulness, into how deep a hell will it not be able to precipitate
him who has it? These things I say, not in order that we should be careless of

righteousness, but that we should avoid pride; not that we should sin, but that we
should be sober-minded. For humbleness of mind is the foundation of the love of
wisdom which pertains to us. Even if you should have built a superstructure of
things innumerable; even if almsgiving, even if prayers, even if fastings, even if
all virtue; unless this have first been laid as a foundation, all will be built upon it
to no purpose and in vain; and it will fall down easily, like that building which
had been placed on the sand. For there is no one, no one of our good deeds,
which does not need this; there is no one which separate from this will be able to
stand. But even if you should mention temperance, even if virginity, even if
despising of money, even if anything whatever, all are unclean and accursed and
loathsome, humbleness of mind being absent. Everywhere therefore let us take
her with us, in words, in deeds, in thoughts, and with this let us build these
(graces).
3. But the things belonging to humbleness of mind have been sufficiently
spoken of; not for the value of the virtue; for no one will be able to celebrate it in
accordance with its value; but for the intelligence of your love. For well do I
know that even from the few things that have been said you will embrace it with
much zeal. But since it is also necessary to make clear and manifest the apostolic
saying which has been today read; seeming as it does to many to afford a pretext
for indolence; so that some may not, providing for themselves hence a certain
frigid defence, neglect their own salvation— to this let us direct our discourse.
What then is this saying? "Whether in pretence," it says, "or in sincerity, Christ
is preached." [Philippians 1:18] This many wrest absolutely and just as happens,
without reading what precedes and what comes after it; but having cut it off from
the sequence of the remaining members, to the destruction of their own soul they
put it forward to the more indolent. For attempting to seduce them from the
sound faith; then seeing them afraid and trembling; on the ground of its not
being without danger to do this, and desiring to relieve their fears, they bring
forward this apostolic declaration, saying, Paul conceded this, by saying,
"Whether in pretence or in sincerity, let Christ be proclaimed." But these things