Now they know this through a twofold medium, namely, by innate
ideas, or by the forms of things existing in the Word. For by
beholding the Word, they know not merely the being of things as
existing in the Word, but the being as possessed by the things
themselves; as God by contemplating Himself sees that being which
things have in their own nature. It, therefore, it be called evening
knowledge, in so far as when the angels behold the Word, they know
the being which things have in their proper nature, then the morning
and the evening knowledge are essentially one and the same, and
only differ as to the things known. If it be called evening knowledge,
in so far as through innate ideas they know the being which things
have in their own natures, then the morning and the evening
knowledge differ. Thus Augustine seems to understand it when he
assigns one as inferior to the other.
Reply to Objection 1: The six days, as Augustine understands them,
are taken as the six classes of things known by the angels; so that
the day's unit is taken according to the unit of the thing understood;
which, nevertheless, can be apprehended by various ways of
knowing it.
Reply to Objection 2: There can be two operations of the same
faculty at the one time, one of which is referred to the other; as is
evident when the will at the same time wills the end and the means to
the end; and the intellect at the same instant perceives principles
and conclusions through those principles, when it has already
acquired knowledge. As Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. iv, 24), the
evening knowledge is referred to the morning knowledge in the
angels; hence there is nothing to hinder both from being at the same
time in the angels.
Reply to Objection 3: On the coming of what is perfect, the opposite
imperfect is done away: just as faith, which is of the things that are
not seen, is made void when vision succeeds. But the imperfection
of the evening knowledge is not opposed to the perfection of the
morning knowledge. For that a thing be known in itself, is not
opposite to its being known in its cause. Nor, again, is there any
inconsistency in knowing a thing through two mediums, one of
which is more perfect and the other less perfect; just as we can have
a demonstrative and a probable medium for reaching the same
conclusion. In like manner a thing can be known by the angel
through the uncreated Word, and through an innate idea.

## QUESTION 59 — THE WILL OF THE ANGELS

Prologue
In the next place we must treat of things concerning the will of the
angels. In the first place we shall treat of the will itself; secondly, of
its movement, which is love. Under the first heading there are four
points of inquiry:
(1) Whether there is will in the angels?
(2) Whether the will of the angel is his nature, or his intellect?
(3) Is there free-will in the angels?
(4) Is there an irascible and a concupiscible appetite in them?