Reply to Objection 2: Order considered as a sacrament which
imprints a character is specially directed to the sacrament of the
Eucharist, in which Christ Himself is contained, because by a
character we are made like to Christ Himself [TP, Question 63, Article
3]. Hence although at his promotion a bishop receives a spiritual
power in respect of certain sacraments, this power nevertheless has
not the nature of a character. For this reason the episcopate is not
an Order, in the sense in which an Order is a sacrament.
Reply to Objection 3: The episcopal power is one not only of
jurisdiction but also of Order, as stated above, taking Order in the
sense in which it is generally understood.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether in the Church there can be anyone above

the bishops?
Objection 1: It would seem that there cannot be anyone in the
Church higher than the bishops. For all the bishops are the
successors of the apostles. Now the power so given to one of the
apostles, namely Peter (Mt. 16:19), was given to all the apostles (Jn.
20:23). Therefore all bishops are equal, and one is not above
another.
Objection 2: Further, the rite of the Church ought to be more
conformed to the Jewish rite than to that of the Gentiles. Now the
distinction of the episcopal dignity and the appointment of one over
another, were introduced by the Gentiles. as stated in the text (Sent.
iv, D, 24); and there was no such thing in the Old Law. Therefore
neither in the Church should one bishop be above another.
Objection 3: Further, a higher power cannot be conferred by a lower,
nor equal by equal, because "without all contradiction that which is
less is blessed by the greater "; hence a priest does not consecrate a
bishop or a priest, but a bishop consecrates a priest. But a bishop
can consecrate any bishop, since even the bishop of Ostia
consecrates the Pope. Therefore the episcopal dignity is equal in all
matters, and consequently one bishop should not be subject to
another, as stated in the text (Sent. iv, D, 24).
On the contrary, We read in the council of Constantinople: "In
accordance with the Scriptures and the statutes and definitions of
the canons, we venerate the most holy bishop of ancient Rome the
first and greatest of bishops, and after him the bishop of
Constantinople." Therefore one bishop is above another.
Further, the blessed Cyril, bishop of Alexandria, says: "That we may
remain members of our apostolic head, the throne of the Roman
Pontiffs, of whom it is our duty to seek what we are to believe and
what we are to hold, venerating him, beseeching him above others;
for his it is to reprove, to correct, to appoint, to loose, and to bind in
place of Him Who set up that very throne, and Who gave the fulness
of His own to no other, but to him alone, to whom by divine right all
bow the head, and the primates of the world are obedient as to our
Lord Jesus Christ Himself." Therefore bishops are subject to