1 Corinthians 5:3-5
3. "For I verily being absent in body, but present in spirit."
Mark his energy. He suffers them not even to wait for his presence, nor to
receive him first and then pass the sentence of binding: but as if on the point of
expelling some contagion before that it have spread itself into the rest of the
body, he hastens to restrain it. And therefore he subjoins the clause, "I have
judged already, as though I were present." These things moreover he said, not
only to urge them unto the declaration of their sentence and to give them no
opportunity of contriving something else, but also to frighten them, as one who
knew what was to be done and determined there. For this is the meaning of being
"present in spirit:" as Elisha was present with Gehazi, and said, Went not my
heart with you? [2 Kings 5:26] Wonderful! How great is the power of the gift, in
that it makes all to be together and as one; and qualifies them to know the things
which are far off. "I have judged already as though I were present."
He permits them not to have any other device. "Now I have uttered my
decision as if I were present: let there be no delays and puttings off: for nothing
else must be done."
Then lest he should be thought too authoritative and his speech sound rather
self-willed, mark how he makes them also partners in the sentence. For having
said, "I have judged," he adds, concerning him that has so wrought this thing, in
the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, you being gathered together, and my spirit,
with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, to deliver such an one unto Satan.
Now what means, "In the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ?" "According to
God;" "not possessed with any human prejudice."
Some, however, read thus, "Him that has so wrought this thing in the name
of our Lord Jesus Christ," and putting a stop there or a break, then subjoin what
follows, saying, "When you are gathered together and my spirit to deliver such

an one unto Satan:" and they assert that the sense of this reading is as follows,
"Him that has done this thing in the Name of Christ," says St. Paul, "deliver ye
unto Satan;" that is, "him that has done insult unto the Name of Christ, him that,
after he had become a believer and was called after that appellation, has dared
to do such things, deliver ye unto Satan." But to me the former exposition
([ἐκδοσις] . It seems to mean "enunciation.") appears the truer.
What then is this? "When you are gathered together in the Name of the
Lord." That is; His Name, in whose behalf you have met, collecting you
together.
"And my spirit." Again he sets himself at their head in order that when they
should pass sentence, they might no otherwise cut off the offender than as if he
were present; and that no one might dare to judge him pardonable, knowing that
Paul would be aware of the proceedings.
4. Then making it yet more awful, he says, "with the power of our Lord
Jesus Christ;" that is, either that Christ is able to give you such grace as that you
should have power to deliver him to the devil; or that He is Himself together
with you passing that sentence against him.
And he said not, "Give up" such an one to Satan, but "deliver;" opening
unto him the doors of repentance, and delivering up such an one as it were to a
schoolmaster. And again it is, "such an one:" he no where can endure to make
mention of his name.
"For the destruction of the flesh." As was done in the case of the blessed
Job, but not upon the same ground. For in that case it was for brighter crowns,
but here for loosing of sins; that he might scourge him with a grievous sore or
some other disease. True it is that elsewhere he says, "Of the Lord are we judged,
[1 Corinthians 11:32] when we suffer these things." But here, desirous of
making them feel it more severely, he "delivers up unto Satan." And so this too
which God had determined ensued, that the man's flesh was chastised. For
because inordinate eating and carnal luxuriousness are the parents of desires, it is
the flesh which he chastises.