SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.88, C.2.

nor is anything hidden from Him. Now to call God to witness is
named "jurare" [to swear] because it is established as though it were
a principle of law [jure] that what a man asserts under the invocation
of God as His witness should be accepted as true. Now sometimes
God is called to witness when we assert present or past events, and
this is termed a "declaratory oath"; while sometimes God is called to
witness in confirmation of something future, and this is termed a
"promissory oath." But oaths are not employed in order to
substantiate necessary matters, and such as come under the
investigation of reason; for it would seem absurd in a scientific
discussion to wish to prove one's point by an oath.
Reply to Objection 1: It is one thing to employ a Divine witness
already given, as when one adduces the authority of Holy Scripture;
and another to implore God to bear witness, as in an oath.
Reply to Objection 2: A man is said to pay his oaths to God because
he performs what he swears to do, or because, from the very fact
that he calls upon God to witness, he recognizes Him as possessing
universal knowledge and unerring truth.
Reply to Objection 3: A person is called to give witness, in order that
he may make known the truth about what is alleged. Now there are
two ways in which God makes known whether the alleged facts are
true or not. In one way He reveals the truth simply, either by inward
inspiration, or by unveiling the facts, namely, by making public what
was hitherto secret: in another way by punishing the lying witness,
and then He is at once judge and witness, since by punishing the liar
He makes known his lie. Hence oaths are of two kinds: one is a
simple contestation of God, as when a man says "God is my
witness," or, "I speak before God," or, "By God," which has the same
meaning, as Augustine states; the other is by cursing, and consists
in a man binding himself or something of his to punishment if what
is alleged be not true.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.88, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether it is lawful to swear?

Objection 1: It would seem that it is not lawful to swear. Nothing
forbidden in the Divine Law is lawful. Now swearing is forbidden (Mt.
5:34), "But I say to you not to swear at all"; and (James 5:12), "Above
all things, my brethren, swear not." Therefore swearing is unlawful.
Objection 2: Further, whatever comes from an evil seems to be
unlawful, because according to Mt. 7:18, "neither can an evil tree
bring forth good fruit." Now swearing comes from an evil, for it is
written (Mt. 5:37): "But let your speech be: Yea, yea: No, no. And that
which is over and above these is of evil." Therefore swearing is
apparently unlawful.
Objection 3: Further, to seek a sign of Divine Providence is to tempt
God, and this is altogether unlawful, according to Dt. 6:16, "Thou
shalt not tempt the Lord thy God." Now he that swears seems to
seek a sign of Divine Providence, since he asks God to bear witness,
and this must be by some evident effect. Therefore it seems that
swearing is altogether unlawful.
On the contrary, It is written (Dt. 6:13): "Thou shalt fear the Lord thy
God . . . and shalt swear by His name."
I answer that, Nothing prevents a thing being good in itself, and yet
becoming a source of evil to one who makes use thereof
unbecomingly: thus to receive the Eucharist is good, and yet he that
receives it "unworthily, eateth and drinketh judgment to himself" (1
Cor. 11:29). Accordingly in answer to the question in point it must be
stated that an oath is in itself lawful and commendable. This is
proved from its origin and from its end. From its origin, because
swearing owes its introduction to the faith whereby man believes
that God possesses unerring truth and universal knowledge and
foresight of all things: and from its end, since oaths are employed in
order to justify men, and to put an end to controversy (Heb. 6:16).
Yet an oath becomes a source of evil to him that makes evil use of it,
that is who employs it without necessity and due caution. For if a
man calls God as witness, for some trifling reason, it would
seemingly prove him to have but little reverence for God, since he
would not treat even a good man in this manner. Moreover, he is in