118. The Bishops of Oceania asked that the Church “develop an understanding and a
presentation of the truth of Christ working from the traditions and cultures of the region” and invited
“all missionaries to work in harmony with indigenous Christians so as to ensure that the faith and
the life of the Church be expressed in legitimate forms appropriate for each culture”. We
cannot demand that peoples of every continent, in expressing their Christian faith, imitate modes
of expression which European nations developed at a particular moment of their history, because
the faith cannot be constricted to the limits of understanding and expression of any one
culture. It is an indisputable fact that no single culture can exhaust the mystery of our
redemption in Christ.

We are all missionary disciples

119. In all the baptized, from first to last, the sanctifying power of the Spirit is at work, impelling us
to evangelization. The people of God is holy thanks to this anointing, which makes it infallible in
credendo. This means that it does not err in faith, even though it may not find words to explain that
faith. The Spirit guides it in truth and leads it to salvation. As part of his mysterious love for
humanity, God furnishes the totality of the faithful with an instinct of faith – sensus fidei – which
helps them to discern what is truly of God. The presence of the Spirit gives Christians a certain
connaturality with divine realities, and a wisdom which enables them to grasp those realities
intuitively, even when they lack the wherewithal to give them precise expression.

120. In virtue of their baptism, all the members of the People of God have become missionary
disciples (cf. Mt 28:19). All the baptized, whatever their position in the Church or their level of
instruction in the faith, are agents of evangelization, and it would be insufficient to envisage a plan
of evangelization to be carried out by professionals while the rest of the faithful would simply be
passive recipients. The new evangelization calls for personal involvement on the part of each of
the baptized. Every Christian is challenged, here and now, to be actively engaged in

evangelization; indeed, anyone who has truly experienced God’s saving love does not need much
time or lengthy training to go out and proclaim that love. Every Christian is a missionary to the
extent that he or she has encountered the love of God in Christ Jesus: we no longer say that we
are “disciples” and “missionaries”, but rather that we are always “missionary disciples”. If we are
not convinced, let us look at those first disciples, who, immediately after encountering the gaze of
Jesus, went forth to proclaim him joyfully: “We have found the Messiah!” (Jn 1:41). The Samaritan
woman became a missionary immediately after speaking with Jesus and many Samaritans come
to believe in him “because of the woman’s testimony” (Jn 4:39). So too, Saint Paul, after his
encounter with Jesus Christ, “immediately proclaimed Jesus” (Acts 9:20; cf. 22:6-21). So what are
we waiting for?