ministry in connection with this sacrament of the Eucharist. If in the
former way, then it is the Order of priests; hence when they are
ordained, they receive the chalice with wine, and the paten with the
bread, because they are receiving the power to consecrate the body
and blood of Christ. The co-operation of the ministers is directed
either to the sacrament itself, or to the recipients. If the former, this
happens in three ways. For in the first place, there is the ministry
whereby the minister co-operates with the priest in the sacrament
itself, by dispensing, but not by consecrating, for this is done by the
priest alone; and this belongs to the deacon. Hence in the text (Sent.
iv, D, 24) it is said that it belongs to the deacon to minister to the
priests in whatever is done in Christ's sacraments, wherefore he
dispenses Christ's blood. Secondly, there is the ministry directed to
the disposal of the sacramental matter in the sacred vessels of the
sacrament. and this belongs to subdeacons. Wherefore it is stated in
the text (Sent. iv, D, 24) that they carry the vessels of our Lord's body
and blood, and place the oblation on the altar; hence, when they are
ordained, they receive the chalice, empty however, from the bishop's
hands. Thirdly, there is the ministry directed to the proffering of the
sacramental matter, and this belongs to the acolyte. For he, as stated
in the text (Sent. iv, D, 24), prepares the cruet with wine and water;
wherefore he receives an empty cruet. The ministry directed to the
preparation of the recipients can be exercised only over the unclean,
since those who are clean are already apt for receiving the
sacraments. Now the unclean are of three kinds, according to
Dionysius (Eccl. Hier. iii). For some are absolute unbelievers and
unwilling to believe; and these must be altogether debarred from
beholding Divine things and from the assembly of the faithful; this
belongs to the doorkeepers. Some, however, are willing to believe,
but are not as yet instructed, namely catechumens, and to the
instruction of such persons the Order of readers is directed, who are
therefore entrusted with the reading of the first rudiments of the
doctrine of faith, namely the Old Testament. But some are believers
and instructed, yet lie under an impediment through the power of the
devil, namely those who are possessed: and to this ministry the
order of exorcists is directed. Thus the reason and number of the
degrees of Orders is made clear.
Reply to Objection 1: Dionysius is speaking of the orders not as
sacraments, but as directed to hierarchical actions. Wherefore he
distinguishes three Orders corresponding to those actions. The first
of these Orders, namely the bishop, has all three actions; the
second, namely the priest, has two; while the third has one, namely