so both good things and bad, the longer they abide in us, the more powerful they
become.
And in all other things too, any one may see that this comes to pass. For so
a plant but lately set in the ground is easily pulled up; but no more so when
rooted for a long time; it then requires great strength in the lever. And a building
newly put together is easily thrown down by those who push against it; but once
well fixed, it gives great trouble to those who attempt to pull it down. And a wild
beast that has made his accustomed haunt in certain places for a long time is
with difficulty driven away.
Those therefore who are not yet possessed by the passion in question, I
exhort not to be taken captive. For it is more easy to guard against falling into it,
than having fallen to get away.
9. But unto those who are seized by it and broken down, if they will
consent to put themselves into the hands of the Word of healing, I promise large
hope of salvation, by the Grace of God. For if they will consider those who have
suffered and fallen into that distemper and have recovered, they will have good
hopes respecting the removal of the disease. Who then ever fell into this disease,
and was easily rid of it? That well-known Zacchæus. For who could be more
fond of money than a publican? But all at once he became a man of strict life,
([Φιλόσοφος]) and put out all that blaze. Matthew in like manner: for he too was
a publican, living in continual rapine. But he likewise all at once stripped
himself of the mischief, and quenched his thirst, and followed after spiritual
gain. Considering therefore these, and the like to them, despair not even thou.
For if you will, quickly you shall be able to recover. And if you please,
according to the rule of physicians, we will prescribe accurately what you should
do.
It is necessary then, before all other things, to be right in this, that we never
despond, nor despair of our salvation. Next, we must look not only upon the
examples of those who have done well, but also upon the sufferings of those who
have persisted in sin. For as we have considered Zacchæus, and Matthew, even

so ought we also to take account of Judas, and Gehazi, and Ahar, [perhaps
Achan, Josh. vii.] and Ahab, and Ananias, and Sapphira, in order that by the one,
we may cast out all despair, and by the other cut off all indolence; and that the
soul become not reckless of the remedies suggested. And let us teach them of
themselves to say what the Jews said on that day, approaching unto Peter, [Acts
2:37, cf. 16:30] "What must we do to be saved?" And let them hear what they
must do.
10. What then must we do? We must know how worthless the things in
question are, and that wealth is a run-away slave, and heartless, and
encompasses its possessors with ills innumerable. And such words, like charms,
let us sound in their ears continually. And as physicians soothe their patients
when they ask for cold water, by saying that they will give it, making excuses
about the spring, and the vessel, and the fit time, and many more such, (for
should they refuse at once, they make them wild with phrensy,) so let us also act
towards the lovers of money. When they say we desire to be rich, let us not say
immediately that wealth is an evil thing; but let us assent, and say that we also
desire it; but in due time; yea, true wealth; yea, that which has undying pleasure:
yea, that which is gathered for yourself, and not for others, and those often our
enemies. And let us produce the lessons of true wisdom, and say, we forbid not
riches, but ill-gotten riches. For it is lawful to be rich, but without covetousness,
without rapine and violence, and an ill report from all men. With these
arguments let us first smooth them down, and not as yet discourse of hell. For
the sick man endures not yet such sayings. Wherefore let us go to this world for
all our arguments upon these matters; and say, Why is it your choice to be rich
through covetousness? That the gold and the silver may be laid up for others, but
for you, curses and accusations innumerable? That he whom you have defrauded
may be stung by want of the very necessaries of life, and bewail himself, and
draw down upon you the censure of thousands; and may go at fall of evening
about the market place, encountering every one in the alleys, and in utter
perplexity, and not knowing what to trust to even for that one night? For how is