but in the first place I exhort him to know Christ; but if the believer, who has
both learned Him and heard Him, must needs crave the same forbearance with
the Gentile, what is the use, what the gain (of his Christianity?)— But the habit
is strong, and you cannot detach yourself from it? Well then, since the tyranny of
habit is so great, transfer it into another channel. And how is this to be done?
You will ask. What I have said often, I say also now; let there be many monitors
([λογισταὶ]), let there be many examiners and censors ([ἐ] [ξετασταὶ],
[δοκιμασταί]). Say, if you chance to put on your mantle inside out, you allow
your servant to correct your mistake, and are ashamed to learn of him, although
there is much to be ashamed of in this; and here when you are getting hurt to
your soul, are you ashamed to be taught better by another? You suffer your
menial to put your dress in order, and to fasten your shoes, and will you not
endure him that would put your soul in order? Let even your menial, your child,
your wife, your friend, your kinsman, your neighbor, be your teachers on this
point. For as when a wild beast is hunted down from all sides, it is impossible for
it to escape; so he that has so many to watch him, so many to reprove him, who
is liable to be struck at from all sides, cannot help being on his guard. The first
day he will find it hard to put up with, and the second, and the third; but after
that it will come easier, and, the fourth passed, there will not even be anything to
do. Make the experiment, if you doubt me; take it into consideration, I beseech
you. It is not a trifling matter to be wrong in, nor yet to come right in; on both
sides it is great for evil and for good. May the good be effected, through the
grace and loving-mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, to Whom with the Father and
the Holy Ghost be glory, power, and honor, now and ever, world without end.
Amen.

Homily 11 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts IV. 23
"And being let go, they went to their own company, and reported all that the
chief priests and elders had said unto them."
Not for their own glory did they tell the tale— how should such be their
motive?— but what they displayed was the proofs therein exhibited of the grace
of Christ. All that their adversaries had said, this they told; their own part, it is
likely, they omitted: this made the hearers all the more courageous. What then?
These again flee to the true Succor, to the Alliance invincible, and again, "with
one accord. And when they heard that," it is said, "with one accord they lifted up
their voice to God, and said:" [Acts 4:24] and with great earnestness, for it is no
prayer made at random. Observe with what exquisite propriety their prayers are
framed: thus, when they besought to be shown who was meet for the
Apostleship, they said, "You, Lord, which know the heart of all men, show:"
[Acts 1:24] for it was a subject for Prescience there: but here, where the thing
needed was that the mouths of their adversaries should be stopped, they speak of
lordship; wherefore they begin thus: Lord, "([Δέσποτα]) the God that made
heaven and earth, and the sea, and all that in them is: Who, by the Holy Ghost
through the mouth of Your servant, David our father, said, Why did the heathen
rage, and the people imagine vain things? The kings of the earth stood up, and
the rulers were gathered together against the Lord, and against His Christ."
[Acts 4:24-26] It is to sue God, as one may say upon His own covenants, that
they thus produce this prophecy: and at the same time to comfort themselves
with the thought, that in vain are all the imaginations of their foes. This then is
what they say: Bring those words into accomplishment, and show that they
"imagine vain things.— For of a truth," they proceed, "there were gathered
together in this city, against Your holy Child Jesus, ([Παἵδα]) Whom You have