two anew. And well does he on all occasions employ the word "create," and does
not say "change," in order to point out the power of what was done, and that
even though the creation be invisible, yet it is no less a creation than that is, and
that we ought not henceforward start away from this, as from natural things.
"That He might in Himself of the two."
That is, by Himself. He gave not this charge to another, but Himself, by
Himself, melted both the one and the other, and produced a glorious one, and
one greater than the first creation; and that one, first, was Himself. For this is the
meaning of "in Himself." He Himself first gave the type and example. Laying
hold on the one hand of the Jew, and on the other of the Gentile, and Himself
being in the midst, He blended them together, made all the estrangement which
existed between them to disappear, and fashioned them anew from above by fire
and by water; no longer with water and earth, but with water and fire. He
became a Jew by circumcision, He became accursed, He became a Gentile
without the law, and was over both Gentiles and Jews.
"One new man," says he, "so making peace."
Peace for them both towards God, and towards each other. For so long as
they continued still Jews and Gentiles, they could not have been reconciled. And
had they not been delivered each from his own peculiar condition, they would
not have arrived at another and a higher one. For the Jew is then united to the
Gentile when he becomes a believer. It is like persons being in a house, with two
chambers below, and one large and grand one above: they would not be able to
see each other, till they had got above.
"Making peace," more especially towards God; for this the context shows,
for what says he?
Ver. 16. "And might reconcile them both in one body unto God through the
Cross."
He says, not merely "might reconcile," ([καταλλάξῃ]) but "might reconcile
thoroughly" ([ἀ] [ποκαταλλάξῃ] ) indicating that heretofore human nature had
been easily reconciled, as, e.g., in the case of the saints and before the time of

the Law.
"In one body," says he, and that His own, "unto God." How is this effected?
By Himself, he means, suffering the due penalty.
"Through the cross having slain the enmity thereby."
Nothing can be more decisive, nothing more expressive than these words.
His death, says the Apostle, has "slain" the enmity. He has "wounded" and
"killed" it, not by giving charge to another, nor by what He wrought only, but
also by what He suffered. He does not say "having dissolved," he does say
"having cancelled," but what is stronger than all, "having slain," so that it never
should rise again. How then is it that it does rise again? From our exceeding
depravity. For as long as we abide in the body of Christ, as long as we are united,
it rises not again, but lies dead; or rather that former enmity never rises again at
all. But if we breed another, it is no longer because of Him, who has destroyed
and put to death the former one. It is thou, forsooth, that travailest with a fresh
one. "For the mind of the flesh," says he, "is enmity against God;" [Romans 8:6]
if we are in nothing carnally-minded, there will be no fresh enmity produced, but
that "peace" shall remain.
Moral. Think then, how vast an evil is it, when God has employed so many
methods to reconcile us, and has effected it, that we should again fall back into
enmity! This enmity no fresh Baptism, but hell itself awaits; no fresh remission,
but searching trial. The mind of the flesh is luxury and indolence, the "mind of
the flesh" is covetousness and all kinds of sin. Why is it said the mind of the
flesh? While yet the flesh could do nothing without the soul. He does not say this
to the disparagement of the flesh, any more than when he says the "natural
man," [1 Corinthians 2:14] he uses that expression to the disparagement of the
soul, for neither body nor soul in itself, if it receive not the impulse which is far
above, is able to achieve any thing great or noble. Hence he calls those acts
which the soul performs of herself, "natural; [ψυχικά] " and those which the
body performs of itself "carnal." Not because these are natural, but because,
inasmuch as they receive not that direction from heaven, they perish. So the eyes