common with them, for all have sinned,) but righteousness also, and
sanctification, and sonship, and the gift of the Spirit far more glorious and more
abundant. By this grace we have become the beloved of God, no longer as
servants, but as sons and friends. Wherefore he says, "grace for grace." Since
even the things of the law were of grace, and the very fact of man being created
from nothing, (for we did not receive this as a recompense for past good deeds,
how could we, when we even were not? But from God who is ever the first to
bestow His benefits,) and not only that we were created from nothing, but that
when created, we straightway learned what we must and what we must not do,
and that we received this law in our very nature, and that our Creator entrusted to
us the impartial rule of conscience, these I say, are proofs of the greatest grace
and unspeakable lovingkindness. And the recovery of this law after it had
become corrupt, by means of the written (Law), this too was the work of grace.
For what might have been expected to follow was, that they who falsified the
law once given should suffer correction and punishments; but what actually took
place was not this, but, on the contrary, an amending of our nature, and pardon,
not of debt, but given through mercy and grace. For to show that it was of grace
and mercy, hear what David says; "The Lord executes righteousness and
judgment for all that are oppressed; He made known His ways unto Moses, His
acts unto the children of Israel" [Psalm 103:6-7]: and again; "Good and upright
is the Lord, therefore will He give laws to them that are in the way." [Psalm 25:8]
3. Therefore that men received the law was of pity, mercies, and grace; and
for this reason he says, "Grace for grace." But striving yet more fervently to
(express) the greatness of the gifts, he goes on to say,
Ver. 17 . "The law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus
Christ."
Do you see how gently, by a single word and little by little, both John the
Baptist and John the Disciple lead up their hearers to the highest knowledge,
having first exercised them in humbler things? The former having compared to
himself Him who is incomparably superior to all, thus afterwards shows His

superiority, by saying, "has become before me," and then adding the words, "was
before me": while the latter has done much more than he, though too little for the
worthiness of the Only-Begotten, for he makes the comparison, not with John,
but with one reverenced by the Jews more than John, with Moses. "For the law,"
says he, "was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ."
Observe his wisdom. He makes enquiry not concerning the person, but the
things; for these being proved, it was probable that even the senseless would of
necessity receive from them a much higher judgment and notion respecting
Christ. For when facts bear witness, which cannot be suspected of doing so
either from favor to any, or from malice, they afford a means of judging which
cannot be doubted even by the senseless; for they remain to open view just as
their actors may have arranged them, and therefore their evidence is the least
liable to suspicion of any. And see how he makes the comparison easy even to
the weaker sort; for he does not prove the superiority by argument, but points out
the difference by the bare words, opposing "grace and truth" to "law," and
"came" to "was given." Between each of these there is a great difference; for
one, "was given," belongs to something ministered, when one has received from
another, and given to whom he was commanded to give; but the other, "grace
and truth came," befits a king forgiving all offenses, with authority, and himself
furnishing the gift. Wherefore He said, "Your sins be forgiven you" [Matthew
9:2]; and again, "But that you may know that the Son of Man has power on earth
to forgive sins (He says to the sick of the palsy), Arise, take up your bed, and go
unto your house." [Matthew 5:6]
Seest thou how "grace" comes by Him? Look also to "truth." His "grace"
the instance just mentioned, and what happened in the case of the thief, and the
gift of Baptism, and the grace of the Spirit given by Him declare, and many
other things. But His "truth" we shall more clearly know, if we understand the
types. For the types like patterns anticipated and sketched beforehand the
dispensations which should be accomplished under the new covenant, and Christ
came and fulfilled them. Let us now consider the types in few words, for we