the Divine power which will work our resurrection in likeness to the
resurrection of Christ. Now God's power works by means of His will
which is nearest to the effect; hence it is not necessary that our
resurrection should follow straightway after He has wrought the
resurrection of Christ, but that it should happen at the time which
God's will has decreed.
Reply to Objection 2: God's power is not tied to any particular
second causes, but that He can produce their effects either
immediately or by means of other causes: thus He might work the
generation of lower bodies even though there were no movement of
the heaven: and yet according to the order which He has established
in things, the movement of the heaven is the cause of the generation
of the lower bodies. In like manner according to the order appointed
to human things by Divine providence, Christ's resurrection is the
cause of ours: and yet He could have appointed another order, and
then our resurrection would have had another cause ordained by
God.
Reply to Objection 3: This argument holds when all the things of one
species have the same order to the first cause of the effect to be
produced in the whole of that species. But it is not so in the case in
point, because Christ's humanity is nearer to His Godhead, Whose
power is the first cause of the resurrection, than is the humanity of
others. Hence Christ's Godhead caused His resurrection
immediately, but it causes the resurrection of others by means of
Christ-man rising again.
Reply to Objection 4: The resurrection of all men will bear some
resemblance to Christ's resurrection, as regards that which pertains
to the life of nature, in respect of which all were conformed to Christ.
Hence all will rise again to immortal life; but in the saints who were
conformed to Christ by grace, there will be conformity as to things
pertaining to glory.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the sound of the trumpet will be the

cause of our resurrection?
Objection 1: It would seem that the sound of the trumpet will not be
the cause of our resurrection. For the Damascene says (De Fide
Orth. iv): "Thou must believe that the resurrection will take place by
God's will, power, and nod." Therefore since these are a sufficient
cause of our resurrection, we ought not to assign the sound of the
trumpet as a cause thereof.
Objection 2: Further, it is useless to make sounds to one who cannot
hear. But the dead will not have hearing. Therefore it is unfitting to
make a sound to arouse them.
Objection 3: Further, if any sound is the cause of the resurrection,
this will only be by a power given by God to the sound: wherefore a
gloss on Ps. 67:34, "He will give to His voice the voice of power,"
says: "to arouse our bodies." Now from the moment that a power is
given to a thing, though it be given miraculously, the act that ensues
is natural, as instanced in the man born blind who, after being
restored to sight, saw naturally. Therefore if a sound be the cause of
resurrection, the resurrection would be natural: which is false.
On the contrary, It is written (1 Thess. 4:15): "The Lord Himself will
come down from heaven . . . with the trumpet of God; and the dead
who are in Christ shall rise."
Further, it is written (Jn. 5:28) that they "who are in the graves shall
hear the voice of the Son of God . . . and (Jn. 5:25) they that hear
shall live." Now this voice is called the trumpet, as stated in the text
(Sent. iv, D, 43). Therefore, etc.
I answer that, Cause and effect must needs in some way be united
together, since mover and moved, maker and made, are
simultaneous (Phys. vii, 2). Now Christ rising again is the univocal
cause of our resurrection: wherefore at the resurrection of bodies, it
behooves Christ to work the resurrection at the giving of some
common bodily sign. According to some this sign will be literally
Christ's voice commanding the resurrection, even as He commanded
the sea and the storm ceased (Mt. 8:26). Others say that this sign will
be nothing else than the manifest appearance of the Son of God in