FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.101, C.3.

soul by an interior worship; the body by an outward worship: hence
it is written (Ps. 83:3): "My heart and my flesh have rejoiced in the
living God." And as the body is ordained to God through the soul, so
the outward worship is ordained to the internal worship. Now interior
worship consists in the soul being united to God by the intellect and
affections. Wherefore according to the various ways in which the
intellect and affections of the man who worships God are rightly
united to God, his external actions are applied in various ways to the
Divine worship.
For in the state of future bliss, the human intellect will gaze on the
Divine Truth in Itself. Wherefore the external worship will not consist
in anything figurative, but solely in the praise of God, proceeding
from the inward knowledge and affection, according to Is. 51:3: "Joy
and gladness shall be found therein, thanksgiving and the voice of
praise."
But in the present state of life, we are unable to gaze on the Divine
Truth in Itself, and we need the ray of Divine light to shine upon us
under the form of certain sensible figures, as Dionysius states (Coel.
Hier. i); in various ways, however, according to the various states of
human knowledge. For under the Old Law, neither was the Divine
Truth manifest in Itself, nor was the way leading to that manifestation
as yet opened out, as the Apostle declares (Heb. 9:8). Hence the
external worship of the Old Law needed to be figurative not only of
the future truth to be manifested in our heavenly country, but also of
Christ, Who is the way leading to that heavenly manifestation. But
under the New Law this way is already revealed: and therefore it
needs no longer to be foreshadowed as something future, but to be
brought to our minds as something past or present: and the truth of
the glory to come, which is not yet revealed, alone needs to be
foreshadowed. This is what the Apostle says (Heb. 11:1): "The Law
has a shadow of the good things to come, not the very image of the
things": for a shadow is less than an image; so that the image
belongs to the New Law, but the shadow to the Old.
Reply to Objection 1. The things of God are not to be revealed to
man except in proportion to his capacity: else he would be in danger
of downfall, were he to despise what he cannot grasp. Hence it was
more beneficial that the Divine mysteries should be revealed to
uncultured people under a veil of figures, that thus they might know
them at least implicitly by using those figures to the honor of God.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.101, C.3.

Reply to Objection 2. Just as human reason fails to grasp poetical
expressions on account of their being lacking in truth, so does it fail
to grasp Divine things perfectly, on account of the sublimity of the
truth they contain: and therefore in both cases there is need of signs
by means of sensible figures.
Reply to Objection 3. Augustine is speaking there of internal
worship; to which, however, external worship should be ordained, as
stated above.
The same answer applies to the Fourth Objection: because men were
taught by Him to practice more perfectly the spiritual worship of
God.