branches of learning: the things which he knows are contained in his
memory, but nothing thereof is in the sight of his mind except that of
which he is conceiving; while all the rest are stored up in a kind of secret
knowledge, which is called memory. The trinity, then, which we were
setting forth, was constituted in this way: first, we placed in the memory
the object by which the perception of the percipient was formed; next, the
conformation, or as it were the image which is impressed thereby; lastly,
love or will as that which combines the two. When the mind, then,
beholds itself in conception, it understands and cognizes itself; it begets,
therefore, this its own understanding and cognition. For an incorporeal
thing is understood when it is beheld, and is cognized when understood.
Yet certainly the mind does not so beget this knowledge of itself, when it
beholds itself as understood by conception, as though it had before been
unknown to itself; but it was known to itself, in the way in which things
are known which are contained in the memory, but of which one is not
thinking; since we say that a man knows letters even when he is thinking
of something else, and not of letters. And these two, the begetter and the
begotten, are coupled together by love, as by a third, which is nothing else
than will, seeking or holding fast the enjoyment of something. We held,
therefore, that a trinity of the mind is to be intimated also by these three
terms, memory, intelligence, will.
9. But since the mind, as we said near the end of the same tenth book,
always remembers itself, and always understands and loves itself,
although it does not always think of itself as distinguished from those
things which are not itself; we must inquire in what way understanding
(intellectus) belongs to conception, while the notion (notitia) of each
thing that is in the mind, even when one is not thinking of it, is said to
belong only to the memory. For if this is so, then the mind had not these
three things: viz. the remembrance, the understanding, and the love of
itself; but it only remembered itself, and afterwards, when it began to
think of itself, then it understood and loved itself.

### CHAP. 7.—THE THING IS MADE PLAIN BY AN EXAMPLE, IN WHAT WAY THE MATTER IS HANDLED IN ORDER TO HELP THE READER.

Wherefore let us consider more carefully that example which we have
adduced, wherein it was shown that not knowing a thing is different from

not thinking  of it; and that it may so happen that a man
knows something of which he is not thinking, when he is thinking of
something else, not of that. When any one, then, who is skilled in two or
more branches of knowledge is thinking of one of them, though he is not
thinking of the other or others, yet he knows them. But can we rightly say,
This musician certainly knows music, but he does not now understand it,
because he is not thinking of it; but he does now understand geometry,
for of that he is now thinking? Such an assertion, as far as appears, is
absurd. What, again, if we were to say, This musician certainly knows
music, but he does not now love it, while he is not now thinking of it; but
he does now love geometry, because of that he is now thinking;—is not
this similarly absurd? But we say quite correctly, This person whom you
perceive disputing about geometry is also a perfect musician, for he both
remembers music, and understands, and loves it; but although he both
knows and loves it, he is not now thinking of it, since he is thinking of
geometry, of which he is disputing. And hence we are warned that we
have a kind of knowledge of certain things stored up in the recesses of the
mind, and that this, when it is thought of, as it were, steps forth in public,
and is placed as if openly in the sight of the mind; for then the mind itself
finds that it both remembers, and understands, and loves itself, even
although it was not thinking of itself, when it was thinking of something
else. But in the case of that of which we have not thought for a long time,
and cannot think of it unless reminded; that, if the phrase is allowable, in
some wonderful way I know not how, we do not know that we know. In
short, it is rightly said by him who reminds, to him whom he reminds,
You know this, but you do not know that you know it; I will remind you,
and you will find that you know what you had thought you did not know.
Books, too, lead to the same results, viz. those that are written upon
subjects which the reader under the guidance of reason finds to be true;
not those subjects which he believes to be true on the faith of the
narrator, as in the case of history; but those which he himself also finds to
be true, either of himself, or in that truth itself which is the light of the
mind. But he who cannot contemplate these things, even when reminded,
is too deeply buried in the darkness of ignorance, through great blindness
of heart and too wonderfully needs divine help, to be able to attain to true
wisdom.