1 Corinthians 4:14
3. Then since he saw that the blow could not well be borne, he speedily
heals it; saying, "I write not these things to shame you, but to admonish you as
my beloved children." "For not as abashing you," says he, "do I speak these
things." The very thing which by his words he had done, this he says he had not
done: rather he allows that he had done it, not however with an evil and spiteful
mind. Why, this mode of soothing is the very best, if we should say what we
have to say and add the apology from our motive. For not to speak was
impossible, since they would have remained uncorrected: on the other hand,
after he had spoken, to leave the wound untended, were hard. Wherefore along
with his severity he apologizes: for this so far from destroying the effect of the
knife, rather makes it sink deeper in, while it moderates the full pain of the
wound. Since when a man is told that not in reproach but in love are these things
said, he the more readily receives correction.
However, even here also is great severity, and a strong appeal to their sense
of shame, ([ἐντροπή]) in that he said not, "As a master" nor yet "as an apostle,"
nor yet "as having you for my disciples;" (which had well suited his claims on
them;) but, "as my beloved children I admonish you." And not simply, children;
but, "longed after." "Forgive me," says he. "If anything disagreeable has been
said, it all proceeds of love." And he said not, "I rebuke," but "I admonish."
Now, who would not bear with a father in grief, and in the act of giving good
advice? Wherefore he did not say this before, but after he had given the blow.
"What then?" some might say; "Do not other teachers spare us?" "I say not
so, but, they carry not their forbearance so far." This however he spoke not out
at once, but by their professions and titles gave indication of it; "Tutor" and
"Father" being the terms which he employs.

1 Corinthians 4:15
4. "For though," says he, "you have ten thousand tutors in Christ, yet have
ye not many fathers." He is not here setting forth his dignity, but the exceeding
greatness of his love. Thus neither did he wound the other teachers: since he
adds the clause, "in Christ:" but rather soothed them, designating not as parasites
but as tutors those among them who were zealous and patient of labor: and also
manifested his own anxious care of them. On this account he said not, "Yet not
many masters," but, "not many fathers." So little was it his object to set down
any name of dignity, or to argue that of him they had received the greater
benefit: but granting to the others the great pains they had taken for the
Corinthians, (for that is the force of the word Tutor,) the superiority in love he
reserves for his own portion: for that again is the force of the word Father.
And he says not merely, No one loves you so much; a statement which
admitted not of being called in question; but he also brings forward a real fact.
What then is this? "For in Christ Jesus I begot you through the Gospel. In Christ
Jesus." Not unto myself do I impute this. Again, he strikes at those who gave
their own names to their teaching. For "ye," says he, "are the seal of mine
Apostleship." And again, "I planted:" and in this place, "I begot." He said not, "I
preached the word," but, "I begot;" using the words of natural relationship. ([τοῖς
τῆς φύσεως ὀνόμασι]) For his one care at the moment was, to show forth the
love which he had for them. "For they indeed received you from me, and led you
on; but that you are believers at all came to pass through me." Thus, because he
had said, "as children;" lest you should suppose that the expression was flattery
he produces also the matter of fact.