not from motives of conscience, so much as from vainglory, and a wish to have
disciples, from jealousy of the blessed Paul, and a spirit of opposition to him.
This is meant by "teaching another doctrine."
Ver. 4. "Neither give heed to fables and endless genealogies."
By "fables" he does not mean the law; far from it; but inventions and
forgeries and counterfeit doctrines. For, it seems, the Jews wasted their whole
discourse on these unprofitable points. They numbered up their fathers and
grandfathers, that they might have the reputation of historical knowledge and
research. "That you might charge some," he says, "that they teach no other
doctrine, neither give heed to fables and endless genealogies." Why does he call
them "endless"? It is because they had no end, or none of any use, or none easy
for us to apprehend. Mark how he disapproves of questioning. For where faith
exists, there is no need of question. Where there is no room for curiosity,
questions are superfluous. Questioning is the subversion of faith. For he that
seeks has not yet found. He who questions cannot believe. Therefore it is his
advice that we should not be occupied with questions, since if we question, it is
not faith; for faith sets reasoning at rest. But why then does Christ say, "Seek and
you shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you" [Matthew 7:7]; and,
"Search the Scriptures, for in them you think you have eternal life"? [John 5:39]
The seeking there is meant of prayer and vehement desire, and He bids "search
the Scriptures," not to introduce the labors of questioning, but to end them, that
we may ascertain and settle their true meaning, not that we may be ever
questioning, but that we may have done with it. And he justly said, "Charge
some that they teach no other doctrine, neither give heed to fables, and endless
genealogies, which minister questions rather than the dispensation of God in
faith." Justly has he said, "the dispensation of God." For great are the blessings
which God is willing to dispense; but the greatness of them is not conceived by
reasoning. This must then be the work of faith, which is the best medicine of our
souls. This questioning therefore is opposed to the dispensation of God. For what
is dispensed by faith? To receive His mercies and become better men; to doubt

and dispute of nothing; but to repose in confidence. For what "ministers
questions" displaces faith and that which faith has wrought and built. Christ has
said that we must be saved by faith; this these teachers questioned and even
denied. For since the announcement was present, but the issue of it future, faith
was required. But they bring preoccupied by legal observances threw
impediments in the way of faith. He seems also here to glance at the Greeks,
where he speaks of "fables and genealogies," for they enumerated their Gods.
Moral. Let us not then give heed to questions. For we were called Faithful,
that we might unhesitatingly believe what is delivered to us, and entertain no
doubt. For if the things asserted were human, we ought to examine them; but
since they are of God, they are only to be revered and believed. If we believe
not, how shall we be persuaded of the existence of a God? For how do you know
that there is a God, when you call Him to account? The knowledge of God is
best shown by believing in Him without proofs and demonstrations. Even the
Greeks know this; for they believed their Gods telling them, says one, even
without proof; and what?— That they were the offspring of the Gods. But why
do I speak of the Gods? In the case of the man, a deceiver and sorcerer, (I speak
of Pythagoras,) they acted in like manner, for of him it was said, He said it. And
over their temples was an image of Silence, and her finger on her mouth,
compressing her lips, and significantly exhorting all that passed by to be silent.
And were their doctrines so sacred, and are ours less so? And even to be
ridiculed? What extreme madness is this! The tenets of the Greeks indeed are
rightly questioned. For they were of that nature, being but disputes, conflicts of
reasonings, and doubts, and conclusions. But ours are far from all these. For
human wisdom invented theirs, but ours were taught by the grace of the Spirit.
Their doctrines are madness and folly, ours are true wisdom. In their case there is
neither teacher nor scholar; but all alike are disputants. Here whether teacher or
scholar, each is to learn of him from whom he ought to learn, and not to doubt,
but obey; not to dispute, but believe. For all the ancients obtained a good report
through faith, and without this everything is subverted. And why do I speak of it