and raiment wrought with gold, and a jewelled crown, when the soul is in
captivity to the passions? What gain is there in outward freedom when the ruling
element within us is reduced to a state of disgraceful and pitiable servitude. For
just as when a fever penetrates deep, and inflames all the inward parts, there is
no benefit to be got from the outward surface of the body, although it is not
affected in the same way: even so when our soul is violently carried away by the
passion within, no outward government, not even the imperial throne, is of any
profit, since reason is deposed from the throne of empire by the violent
usurpation of the passions, and bows and trembles beneath their insurrectionary
movements. Now to prevent this taking place prophets and apostles concur on all
sides in helping us, repressing our passions, and expelling all the ferocity of the
irrational element within us, and committing a mode of government to us far
more dignified than the empire. This is why I said that they who deprive
themselves of this care receive a blow in the vital parts, sustaining greater
damage than can be inflicted from any other quarter inasmuch as they who come
here get greater gain than they could derive from any other source: even as
Scripture has declared. The law said "You shall not appear before the Lord
empty;" [Exodus 23:15] that is, enter not into the temple without sacrifices. Now
if it is not right to go into the house of God without sacrifices, much more ought
we to enter the assembly accompanied by our brethren: for this sacrifice and
offering is better than that, when you bring a soul with you into the Church. Do
you not see doves which have been trained, how they hunt for others when they
are let out? Let us also do this. For what kind of excuse shall we have, if
irrational creatures are able to hunt for an animal of their own species, while we
who have been honoured with reason and so much wisdom neglect this kind of
pursuit? I exhorted you in my former discourse with these words: "Go, each of
you to the houses of your neighbours, wait for them to come out, lay hold of
them, and conduct them to their common mother: and imitate those who are mad
upon theatre going, who diligently arrange to meet each other and so wait at
early dawn to see that iniquitous spectacle." Yet I have not effected anything by

this exhortation. Therefore I speak again and shall not cease speaking, until I
have persuaded you. Hearing profits nothing unless it is accompanied by
practice. It makes our punishment heavier, if we continually hear the same things
and do none of the things which are spoken. That the chastisement will be
heavier, hear the statement of Christ. "If I had not come and spoken to them they
had not sin: but now they have no cloke for their sin." [John 15:22] And the
Apostle says "for not the hearers of the law shall be justified." [Romans 2:13]
These things He says to the hearers; but when He wishes to instruct the speaker
also, that even he will not gain anything from his teaching unless his behaviour
is in close correspondence with his doctrine, and his manner of life is in
harmony with his speech, hear how the Apostle and the prophet address
themselves to him: for the latter says "but to the sinner said God, why do you
preach my laws and takest my covenant in your mouth, whereas you have hated
instruction?" And the Apostle, addressing himself to these same again who
thought great things of their teaching, speaks on this wise: "You are confident
that you yourself art a leader of the blind, a light of those who are in darkness,
an instructor of the foolish, a teacher of babes: thou therefore that teachest
another do you not teach yourself?" [Romans 2:19-21] Inasmuch then as it could
neither profit me the speaker to speak, nor you the hearers to hear, unless we
comply with the things which are spoken, but rather would increase our
condemnation, let us not limit the display of our zeal to hearing only, but let us
observe what is said, in our deeds. For it is indeed a good thing to spend time
continually in hearing the divine oracles: but this good thing becomes useless
when the benefit to be derived from hearing is not linked with it.
Therefore that you may not assemble here in vain I shall not cease
beseeching you with all earnestness, as I have often besought you before,
"conduct your brethren to us, exhort the wanderers, counsel them not by word
only but also by deed." This is the more powerful teaching— that which comes
through our manners and behaviour— Even if you do not utter a word, but yet,
after you have gone out of this assembly, by your mien, and your look, and your