look ye," he says, "so earnestly on us, as though by our own power or holiness
we had made this man to walk?" [Acts 3:12] If this troubles and confounds you,
learn Who was the Doer, and be not amazed. And observe how on all occasions
when he refers to God, and says that all things are from Him, then he fearlessly
chides them: as above where he said, "A man approved of God among you."
[Acts 2:22] And on all occasions he reminds them of the outrage they had
committed, in order that the fact of the Resurrection may be established. But
here he also subjoins something else; for he no more says, "of Nazareth," but
what? "The God of our fathers has glorified His Servant Jesus." [Acts 3:13]
Observe also the modesty. He reproached them not, neither did he say at once,
"Believe then now: behold, a man that has been forty years lame, has been
raised up through the name of Jesus Christ." This he did not say, for it would
have excited opposition. On the contrary, he begins by commending them for
admiring the deed, and again calls them after their ancestor: "You men of Israel."
Moreover, he does not say, It was Jesus that healed him: but, "The God of our
fathers has glorified," etc. But then, lest they should say, How can this stand to
reason— that God should glorify the transgressor? Therefore he reminds them of
the judgment before Pilate, showing that, would they but consider, He was no
transgressor; else Pilate had not wished to release Him. And he does not say,
"when Pilate was desirous," but, "was determined to let Him go." "But ye denied
the Holy One," etc. (v. 13-14.) Him who had killed others, you asked to be
released; Him Who quickens them that are killed, you did not wish to have! And
that they might not ask again, How should it be that God now glorifies Him,
when before He gave no assistance? He brings forward the prophets, testifying
that so it behooved to be. "But those things which God before had showed," etc.,
[ infra Acts 3:18] Then, lest they should suppose that God's dispensation was
their own apology, first he reproves them. Moreover, that the denying Him "to
Pilate's face," was no ordinary thing; seeing that he wished to release Him. And
that you cannot deny this, the man who was asked in preference to Him is
witness against you. This also is part of a deep dispensation. Here it shows their

shamelessness and effrontery; that a Gentile, one who saw Him for the first time,
should have discharged Him, though he had heard nothing striking; while they
who had been brought up among His miracles, have done the very opposite! For,
as he has said, "When he (Pilate) had determined to let Him go," that it may not
be imagined that he did this of favor, we read, And he said, It is a custom with
you to release one prisoner: will you therefore that I release unto you this man?
[Matthew 27:15] "But ye denied the Holy One and the Just." [Mark 15:6] He
does not say, "You delivered up;" but everywhere, "You denied." For, said they,
"We have no king but Cæsar." [John 19:15] And he does not say only, You did
not beg off the innocent, and, "You denied" Him but, "You slew" Him. While
they were hardened, he refrained from such language; but when their minds are
most moved, then he strikes home, now that they are in a condition to feel it. For
just as when men are drunk we say nothing to them, but when they are sober, and
are recovered from their intoxication then we chide them; thus did Peter: when
they were able to understand his words, then he also sharpened his tongue,
alleging against them many charges; that, Whom God had glorified, they had
delivered up; Whom Pilate would have acquitted they denied to his face; that
they preferred the robber before Him.
Observe again how he speaks covertly concerning Christ's power, showing
that He raised Himself: just as in his first discourse he had said, "Because it was
not possible that He should be holden of it" [Acts 2:24], so here he says, "And
killed the Prince of Life." [Acts 3:15] It follows that the Life He had was not
from another. The prince (or author) of evil would be he that first brought forth
evil; the prince or author of murder, he who first originated murder; so also the
Prince (or Author) of Life must be He Who has Life from Himself. "Whom God
raised up," he continues: and now that he has uttered this, he adds, And his
name, upon faith in his name, has made this man strong, whom you see and
know; yea, the faith which is by Him has given Him this perfect soundness. [The
faith which is by Him [ἡ] [δι᾿ αὐτοὕ πίστις] .] And yet it was [ἡ] [εἰς αὐτὸν
πιστις], "the faith which is in Him" (as its object) that did all. For the Apostles