SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.52, C.2.

teaching: whereas if he act beside the Law and without contempt,
and without detriment to things necessary for salvation, it will be a
venial sin.
Reply to Objection 1: No man desires the deformity of imprudence,
but the rash man wills the act of imprudence, because he wishes to
act precipitately. Hence the Philosopher says (Ethic. vi, 5) that "he
who sins willingly against prudence is less to be commended."
Reply to Objection 2: This argument takes imprudence in the
negative sense. It must be observed however that lack of prudence
or of any other virtue is included in the lack of original justice which
perfected the entire soul. Accordingly all such lack of virtue may be
ascribed to original sin.
Reply to Objection 3: Repentance restores infused prudence, and
thus the lack of this prudence ceases; but acquired prudence is not
restored as to the habit, although the contrary act is taken away,
wherein properly speaking the sin of imprudence consists.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.52, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether imprudence is a special sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that imprudence is not a special sin. For
whoever sins, acts against right reason, i.e. against prudence. But
imprudence consists in acting against prudence, as stated above
(Article 1). Therefore imprudence is not a special sin.
Objection 2: Further, prudence is more akin to moral action than
knowledge is. But ignorance which is opposed to knowledge, is
reckoned one of the general causes of sin. Much more therefore
should imprudence be reckoned among those causes.
Objection 3: Further, sin consists in the corruption of the
circumstances of virtue, wherefore Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iv) that
"evil results from each single defect." Now many things are requisite
for prudence; for instance, reason, intelligence docility, and so on,
as stated above (Questions 48,49). Therefore there are many species
of imprudence, so that it is not a special sin.
On the contrary, Imprudence is opposed to prudence, as stated
above (Article 1). Now prudence is a special virtue. Therefore
imprudence too is one special vice.
I answer that, A vice or sin may be styled general in two ways; first,
absolutely, because, to wit, it is general in respect of all sins;
secondly, because it is general in respect of certain vices, which are
its species. In the first way, a vice may be said to be general on two
counts: first, essentially, because it is predicated of all sins: and in
this way imprudence is not a general sin, as neither is prudence a
general virtue: since it is concerned with special acts, namely the
very acts of reason: secondly, by participation; and in this way
imprudence is a general sin: for, just as all the virtues have a share
of prudence, in so far as it directs them, so have all vices and sins a
share of imprudence, because no sin can occur, without some defect
in an act of the directing reason, which defect belongs to
imprudence.
If, on the other hand, a sin be called general, not simply but in some
particular genus, that is, as containing several species of sin, then
imprudence is a general sin. For it contains various species in three
ways. First, by opposition to the various subjective parts of