Which then is high? He that is superior to his passions, or he that is their
slave? He that trembles at them and is afraid of them, or he that is unsubdued,
and never taken by them? Which kind of bird should we say flies higher? That
which is higher than the hands and the arrows of the hunter, or that which does
not even suffer the hunters to need an arrow, from his flying along the ground,
and from not being able ever to elevate himself? Is not then the arrogant man
like this? For indeed every net readily catches him as crawling on the ground.
6. But if you will, even from that wicked demon prove thou this. For what
can be baser than the devil, because he had exalted himself; what higher than the
man who is willing to abase himself? For the former crawls on the ground under
our heel (For, "ye tread," He says, "upon serpents and scorpions"), but the latter
is set with the angels on high.
But if you desire to learn this from the example of haughty men also,
consider that barbarian king, that led so great an army, who knew not so much as
the things that are manifest to all; as, for instance, that stone was stone, and the
images, images; wherefore he was inferior even to these. But the godly and
faithful are raised even above the sun; than whom what can be higher, who rise
above even the vaults of heaven, and passing beyond angels, stand by the very
throne of the king.
And that you may learn in another way their vileness; who will be abased?
He who has God for his ally, or he with whom God is at war? It is quite plain
that it is he with whom He is at war. Hear then touching either of these what says
the Scripture. "God resists the proud, but gives grace unto the humble."
[James 4:6]
Again, I will ask you another thing also. Which is higher? He who acts as a
priest to God and offers sacrifice? Or he who is somewhere far removed from
confidence towards Him? And what manner of sacrifice does the lowly man
offer? One may say. Hear David saying, "The sacrifice of God is a contrite
spirit; a contrite and humbled heart God will not despise."
Do you see the purity of this man? Behold also the uncleanness of the other;

for "every one that is proud in heart is unclean before God." Besides, the one
has God resting upon him, ("For unto whom will I look," says He, "but to him
that is meek and quiet, and trembles at my words"), [Isaiah 66:2] but the other
crawls with the devil, for he that is lifted up with pride shall suffer the devil's
punishment. Wherefore Paul also said, "Lest, being lifted up with pride, he
should fall into the condemnation of the devil." [1 Timothy 3:6]
And the thing opposite to what he wishes, befalls him. For his wish is to be
arrogant, that he may be honored; but the most contemned of all is this character.
For these most of all are laughing stocks, foes and enemies to all men, the most
easy to be subdued by their enemies, the men that easily fall into anger, the
unclean before God.
What then can be worse than this, for this is the extremity of evils? And
what is sweeter than the lowly, what more blessed, since they are longed after,
and beloved of God? And the glory too that comes of men, these do most of all
enjoy, and all honor them as fathers, embrace them as brothers, receive them as
their own members.
Let us then become lowly, that we may be high. For most utterly does
arrogance abase. This abased Pharaoh. For, "I know not," he says, "the Lord,"
[Exodus 5:2] and he became inferior to flies and frogs, and the locusts, and after
that with his very arms and horses was he drowned in the sea. In direct
opposition to him, Abraham says, "I am dust and ashes," [Genesis 18:27] and
prevailed over countless barbarians, and having fallen into the midst of
Egyptians, returned, bearing a trophy more glorious than the former, and,
cleaving to this virtue, grew ever more high. Therefore he is celebrated
everywhere, therefore he is crowned and proclaimed; but Pharaoh is both earth
and ashes, and if there is anything else more vile than these. For nothing does
God so abhor as arrogance. For this object has He done all things from the
beginning, in order that He might root out this passion. Because of this are we
become mortal, and are in sorrows, and wailings. Because of this are we in toil,
and sweat, and in labor continual, and mingled with affliction. For indeed out of