equally suitable words, "Let the dry land appear."
Reply to Objection 1: According to Augustine [Gen. ad lit. ii, 7,8; iii,
20], Scripture does not say of the work of the third day, that it was
made, as it says of those that precede, in order to show that higher
and spiritual forms, such as the angels and the heavenly bodies, are
perfect and stable in being, whereas inferior forms are imperfect and
mutable. Hence the impression of such forms is signified by the
gathering of the waters, and the appearing of the land. For "water,"
to use Augustine's words, "glides and flows away, the earth
abides" (Gen. ad lit. ii, 11). Others, again, hold that the work of the
third day was perfected on that day only as regards movement from
place to place, and that for this reason Scripture had no reason to
speak of it as made.
Reply to Objection 2: This argument is easily solved, according to
Augustine's opinion (De Gen. Contr. Manich. i), because we need not
suppose that the earth was first covered by the waters, and that
these were afterwards gathered together, but that they were
produced in this very gathering together. But according to the other
writers there are three solutions, which Augustine gives (Gen. ad lit.
i, 12). The first supposes that the waters are heaped up to a greater
height at the place where they were gathered together, for it has
been proved in regard to the Red Sea, that the sea is higher than the
land, as Basil remarks (Hom. iv in Hexaem.). The second explains the
water that covered the earth as being rarefied or nebulous, which
was afterwards condensed when the waters were gathered together.
The third suggests the existence of hollows in the earth, to receive
the confluence of waters. Of the above the first seems the most
probable.
Reply to Objection 3: All the waters have the sea as their goal, into
which they flow by channels hidden or apparent, and this may be the
reason why they are said to be gathered together into one place. Or,
"one place" is to be understood not simply, but as contrasted with
the place of the dry land, so that the sense would be, "Let the waters
be gathered together in one place," that is, apart from the dry land.
That the waters occupied more places than one seems to be implied
by the words that follow, "The gathering together of the waters He
called Seas."
Reply to Objection 4: The Divine command gives bodies their natural
movement and by these natural movements they are said to "fulfill

His word." Or we may say that it was according to the nature of water
completely to cover the earth, just as the air completely surrounds
both water and earth; but as a necessary means towards an end,
namely, that plants and animals might be on the earth, it was
necessary for the waters to be withdrawn from a portion of the earth.
Some philosophers attribute this uncovering of the earth's surface to
the action of the sun lifting up the vapors and thus drying the land.
Scripture, however, attributes it to the Divine power, not only in the
Book of Genesis, but also Job 38:10 where in the person of the Lord
it is said, "I set My bounds around the sea," and Jer. 5:22, where it is
written: "Will you not then fear Me, saith the Lord, who have set the
sand a bound for the sea?"
Reply to Objection 5: According to Augustine (De Gen. Contr.
Manich. i), primary matter is meant by the word earth, where first
mentioned, but in the present passage it is to be taken for the
element itself. Again it may be said with Basil (Hom. iv in Hexaem.),
that the earth is mentioned in the first passage in respect of its
nature, but here in respect of its principal property, namely, dryness.
Wherefore it is written: "He called the dry land, Earth." It may also be
said with Rabbi Moses, that the expression, "He called," denotes
throughout an equivocal use of the name imposed. Thus we find it
said at first that "He called the light Day": for the reason that later on
a period of twenty-four hours is also called day, where it is said that
"there was evening and morning, one day." In like manner it is said
that "the firmament," that is, the air, "He called heaven": for that
which was first created was also called "heaven." And here, again, it
is said that "the dry land," that is, the part from which the waters had
withdrawn, "He called, Earth," as distinct from the sea; although the
name earth is equally applied to that which is covered with waters or
not. So by the expression "He called" we are to understand
throughout that the nature or property He bestowed corresponded to
the name He gave.