hereby a high degree of austerity.
The tempest therefore being thoroughly excited, and the sea raging, "They
awake Him, saying, Lord, save us: we perish." [Matthew 8:25] But He rebuked
them before He rebuked the sea. Because as I said, for discipline these things
were permitted, and they were a type of the temptations that were to overtake
them. Yea, for after these things again, He often suffered them to fall into more
grievous tempests of fortune, and bare long with them. Wherefore Paul also said,
"I would not, brethren, have you ignorant, that we were pressed out of measure
beyond strength, insomuch that we despaired even of life;"
[2 Corinthians 1:8, 10] and after this again, "Who delivered us from so great
deaths." Signifying therefore hereby, that they ought to be confident, though the
waves rise high, and that He orders all things for good, He first of all reproves
them. For indeed their very alarm was a profitable occurrence, that the miracle
might appear greater, and their remembrance of the event be rendered lasting.
Since when anything strange is about to happen, there are prepared beforehand
many things to cause remembrance, lest after the miracle has passed by, men
should sink into forgetfulness.
Thus Moses also first is in fear of the serpent, and not merely in fear, but
even with much distress: and then he sees that strange thing come to pass.
[Exodus 4:3-4] So these too, having first looked to perish, were then saved, that
having confessed the danger, they might learn the greatness of the miracle.
Therefore also He sleeps: for had He been awake when it happened, either
they would not have feared, or they would not have besought Him, or they
would not so much as have thought of His being able to do any such thing.
Therefore He sleeps, to give occasion for their timidity, and to make their
perception of what was happening more distinct. For a man looks not with the
same eyes on what happens in the persons of others, as in his own. Therefore
since they had seen all benefitted, while themselves had enjoyed no benefit, and
were supine (for neither were they lame, nor had they any other such infirmity);
and it was meet they should enjoy His benefits by their own perception: He

permits the storm, that by their deliverance they might attain to a clearer
perception of the benefit.
Therefore neither does He this in the presence of the multitudes, that they
might not be condemned for little faith, but He has them apart, and corrects
them, and before the tempest of the waters He puts an end to the tempests of
their soul, rebuking them, and saying,
"Why are you fearful, O you of little faith:" instructing them also, that men's
fear is wrought not by the approach of the temptations, but by the weakness of
their mind.
But should any one say, that it was not fearfulness, or little faith, to come
near and awaken Him; I would say this, that that very thing was a special sign of
their wanting the right opinion concerning Him. That is, His power to rebuke
when awakened they knew, but that He could do so even sleeping, they knew not
as yet.
And why at all marvel that it was so now, when even after many other
miracles their impressions were still rather imperfect? Wherefore also they are
often rebuked; as when He says, "Are ye also yet without understanding?"
Marvel not then, if when the disciples were in such imperfect dispositions, the
multitudes had no exalted imagination of Him. For
"They marvelled, saying, What manner of man is this, that even the sea and
the winds obey Him?" [Matthew 8:27]
But Christ chode not with them for calling Him a man, but waited to teach
them by His signs, that their supposition was mistaken. But from what did they
think Him a man? First from His appearance, then from His sleeping, and His
making use of a ship. So on this account they were cast into perplexity, saying,
"What manner of man is this?" since while the sleep and the outward appearance
showed man, the sea and the calm declared Him God.
For because Moses had once done some such thing, in this regard also does
He signify His own superiority, and that the one works miracles as a slave, the
other as Lord. Thus, He put forth no rod, as Moses did, neither did He stretch