Another possible explanation is to understand by the firmament that
was made on the second day, not that in which the stars are set, but
the part of the atmosphere where the clouds are collected, and which
has received the name firmament from the firmness and density of
the air. "For a body is called firm," that is dense and solid, "thereby
differing from a mathematical body" as is remarked by Basil (Hom. iii
in Hexaem.). If, then, this explanation is adopted none of these
opinions will be found repugnant to reason. Augustine, in fact (Gen.
ad lit. ii, 4), recommends it thus: "I consider this view of the question
worthy of all commendation, as neither contrary to faith nor difficult
to be proved and believed."
Reply to Objection 1: According to Chrysostom (Hom. iii in Genes.),
Moses prefaces his record by speaking of the works of God
collectively, in the words, "In the beginning God created heaven and
earth," and then proceeds to explain them part by part; in somewhat
the same way as one might say: "This house was constructed by
that builder," and then add: "First, he laid the foundations, then built
the walls, and thirdly, put on the roof." In accepting this explanation
we are, therefore, not bound to hold that a different heaven is spoken
of in the words: "In the beginning God created heaven and earth,"
and when we read that the firmament was made on the second day.
We may also say that the heaven recorded as created in the
beginning is not the same as that made on the second day; and there
are several senses in which this may be understood. Augustine says
(Gen. ad lit. i, 9) that the heaven recorded as made on the first day is
the formless spiritual nature, and that the heaven of the second day
is the corporeal heaven. According to Bede (Hexaem. i) and Strabus,
the heaven made on the first day is the empyrean, and the firmament
made on the second day, the starry heaven. According to
Damascene (De Fide Orth. ii) that of the first day was spherical in
form and without stars, the same, in fact, that the philosophers
speak of, calling it the ninth sphere, and the primary movable body
that moves with diurnal movement: while by the firmament made on
the second day he understands the starry heaven. According to
another theory, touched upon by Augustine [Gen. ad lit. ii, 1] the
heaven made on the first day was the starry heaven, and the
firmament made on the second day was that region of the air where
the clouds are collected, which is also called heaven, but
equivocally. And to show that the word is here used in an equivocal
sense, it is expressly said that "God called the firmament heaven";
just as in a preceding verse it said that "God called the light

day" (since the word "day" is also used to denote a space of twentyfour hours). Other instances of a similar use occur, as pointed out by
Rabbi Moses.
The second and third objections are sufficiently answered by what
has been already said.