who has in mind Him who has vouchsafed to love us in deed, and remembers
Him, when will he either feel anything painful, or dread anything fearful or
dangerous? When will he be of cowardly spirit? Never.
For all things appear to us difficult, because we do not have the
remembrance of God as we ought; because we do not carry Him about always in
our thoughts. For surely He might justly say to us, "You have forgotten Me, I
also will forget you." And so the evil becomes twofold, both that we forget Him
and He us. For these two things are involved in each other, yet are two. For great
is the effect of God's remembrance, and great also of His being remembered by
us. The result of the one is that we choose good things; of the other that we
accomplish them, and bring them to their end. Therefore the prophet says, "I will
remember You from the land of Jordan, and from the little hill of Hermon."
[Psalm 42:6] The people which were in Babylon say this: being there, I will
remember You.
7. Therefore let us also, as being in Babylon, [do the same]. For although
we are not sitting among warlike foes, yet we are among enemies. For some [of
them] indeed were sitting as captives, but others did not even feel their captivity,
as Daniel, as the three children [cf.Psalm 137:1]; who even while they were in
captivity became in that very country more glorious even than the king who had
carried them captive. And he who had taken them captive does obeisance to the
captives.
Do you see how great virtue is? When they were in actual captivity he
waited on them as masters. He therefore was the captive, rather than they. It
would not have been so marvelous if when they were in their native country, he
had come and done them reverence in their own land, or if they had been rulers
there. But the marvelous thing is, that after he had bound them, and taken them
captive, and had them in his own country, he was not ashamed to do them
reverence in the sight of all, and to "offer an oblation." [Daniel 2:46]
Do you see that the really splendid things are those which relate to God,
whereas human things are a shadow? He knew not, it seems, that he was leading

away masters for himself, and that he cast into the furnace those whom he was
about to worship. But to them, these things were as a dream.
Let us fear God, beloved, let us fear [Him]: even should we be in captivity,
we are more glorious than all men. Let the fear of God be present with us, and
nothing will be grievous, even though thou speak of poverty, or of disease, or of
captivity, or of slavery, or of any other grievous thing: Nay even these very
things will themselves work together for us the other way. These men were
captives, and the king worshipped them: Paul was a tent-maker, and they
sacrificed to him as a God.
8. Here a question arises: Why, you ask, did the Apostles prevent the
sacrifices, and rend their clothes, and divert them from their attempt, and say
with earnest lamentation, "What are you doing? We also are men of like passions
with you" [Acts 14:15]; whereas Daniel did nothing of this kind.
For that he also was humble, and referred [the] glory to God no less than
they, is evident from many places. Especially indeed is it evident, from the very
fact of his being beloved by God. For if he had appropriated to himself the honor
belonging to God, He would not have suffered him to live, much less to be in
honor. Secondly, because even with great openness he said, "And as to me, O
King, this secret has not been revealed to me through any wisdom that is in me."
[Daniel 2:30] And again; he was in the den for God's sake, and when the prophet
brought him food, he says, "For God has remembered me." [Daniel 14:38] Thus
humble and contrite was he.
He was in the den for God's sake, and yet he counted himself unworthy of
His remembrance, and of being heard. Yet we though daring [to commit]
innumerable pollutions, and being of all men most polluted, if we be not heard at
our first prayer, draw back. Truly, great is the distance between them and us, as
great as between heaven and earth, or if there be any greater.
What do you say? After so many achievements, after the miracle which had
been wrought in the den, do you account yourself so humble? Yea, he says; for
what things soever we have done, "we are unprofitable servants." [Luke 17:10]