one speaks his words, he takes his tongue. What kind of excuse then shall we
have; or rather, what manner of punishment shall we not undergo; when this our
tongue, wherewith we are allowed to taste of the Lord's flesh, when this, I say,
we overlook, speaking the devil's words?
Let us not overlook it, but let us use all diligence, in order to train it to
imitate its Lord. For if we train it to this, it will place us with great confidence at
Christ's judgment seat. Unless any one know how to speak thus, the judge will
not so much as hear him. For like as when the judge chances to be a Roman, he
will not hear the defense of one who knows not how to speak thus; so likewise
Christ, unless thou speak after His fashion, will not hear you, nor give heed.
Let us learn therefore to speak in such wise as our Judge is wont to hear; let
it be our endeavor to imitate that tongue. And should you fall into grief, take
heed lest the tyranny of despondency pervert your tongue, but that thou speak
like Christ. For He too mourned for Lazarus and Judas. Should thou fall into
fear, seek again to speak even as He. For He Himself fell into fear for your sake,
with regard to His manhood. the other sheep, that He might indicate the
unfruitfulness of the one, for no fruit will come from kids; and the great profit
from the other, for indeed from sheep great is the profit, as well from the milk, as
from the wool, and from the young, of all which things the kid is destitute.

## Homily 79 on Matthew

MATT. XXV. 31--41. 'When the Son of Man shall come in the glory of His
Father, and all the holy angels with Him, then shall He sit,' says He, 'upon the
throne of His glory, and He shall divide the sheep from the kids;'[and the one He
will accept, because they fed Him, when an hungered, and gave Him drink when
thirsty, and took Him in when a stranger, and clothed Him when naked, and
visited Him when sick, and came to see Him when in prison: and He will give
the kingdom to them. But the others, accusing them for the opposite things, He
will send into the eternal fire, prepared for the devil and his angels.]
Unto this most delightful portion of Scripture, which we do not cease
continually revolving, let us now listen with all earnestness and compunction,
this wherewith His discourse ended, even as the last thing, reasonably; for great
indeed was His regard for philanthropy and mercy. Wherefore in what precedes
He had discoursed concerning this in a different way; and here now in some
respects more clearly, and more earnestly, not setting forth two nor three nor five
persons, but the whole world; although most assuredly the former places, which
speak of two persons, meant not two persons, but two portions of mankind, one
of them that disobey, the other of the obedient. But here He handles the word
more fearfully, and with fuller light. Wherefore neither does He say, 'The
kingdom is likened,' any more, but openly shows Himself, saying, 'When the
Son of Man shall come in His glory.' For now is He come in dishonor, now in
affronts and reproaches; but then shall He sit upon the throne of His glory.
And continually does He make mention of glory. For since the cross was
near, a thing that seemed to be matter of reproach, for this cause He raises up the
hearer; and brings before his sight the judgment seat, and sets round him all the
world.
And not in this way only does He make His discourse awful, but also by