and in the instance of the virgins, sometimes of him that has advantage, as when
he said, "The men of Nineveh shall rise up and shall condemn this generation,
because they believed at the preaching of Jonas; and, behold, a greater than
Jonas is here;" and, "The queen of the south shall condemn this generation,
because she came to hear the wisdom of Solomon;" [Matthew 12:41-42] and of
an equal again, "They shall be your judges;" [Matthew 12:27] and again of one
at advantage, "Do you not know, that we shall judge angels, how much more
things that pertain to this life?" [1 Corinthians 6:3]
And here, however, it is of an equal; for he compares rich with rich, and
poor with poor. And not in this way only does He show the sentence justly
passed, by their fellow-servants having done what was right when in the same
circumstances, but also by their not being obedient so much as in these things in
which poverty was no hindrance; as, for instance, in giving drink to the thirsty,
in looking upon him that is in bonds, in visiting the sick. And when He had
commended them that had done right, He shows how great was originally His
bond of love towards them. For, "Come," says He, "you blessed of my Father,
inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world." To how
many good things is this same equivalent, to be blessed, and blessed of the
Father? And wherefore were they counted worthy of such great honors? What is
the cause? "I was an hungered, and you gave me meat; I was thirsty, and you
gave me drink;" and what follows.
Of what honor, of what blessedness are these words? And He said not,
Take, but, "Inherit," as one's own, as your Father's, as yours, as due to you from
the first. For, before you were, says He, these things had been prepared, and
made ready for you, forasmuch as I knew you would be such as you are.
And in return for what do they receive such things? For the covering of a
roof, for a garment, for bread, for cold water, for visiting, for going into the
prison. For indeed in every case it is for what is needed; and sometimes not even
for that. For surely, as I have said, the sick and he that is in bonds seeks not for
this only, but the one to be loosed, the other to be delivered from his infirmity.

But He, being gracious, requires only what is within our power, or rather even
less than what is within our power, leaving to us to exert our generosity in doing
more.
But to the others He says, "Depart from me, you cursed," (no longer of the
Father; for not He laid the curse upon them, but their own works), "into the
everlasting fire, prepared," not for you, but "for the devil and his angels." For
concerning the kingdom indeed, when He had said, "Come, inherit the
kingdom," He added, "prepared for you before the foundation of the world;" but
concerning the fire, no longer so, but, "prepared for the devil." I, says He,
prepared the kingdom for you, but the fire no more for you, but "for the devil
and his angels;" but since you cast yourselves therein, impute it to yourselves.
And not in this way only, but by what follows also, like as though He were
excusing Himself to them, He sets forth the causes.
"For I was an hungered, and you gave me no meat." For though He that
came to you had been your enemy, were not His sufferings enough to have
overcome and subdued even the merciless? Hunger, and cold, and bonds, and
nakedness, and sickness, and to wander everywhere houseless? These things are
sufficient even to destroy enmity. But you did not do these things even to a
friend, being at once friend, and benefactor, and Lord. Though it be a dog we see
hungry, often we are overcome; and though we behold a wild beast, we are
subdued; but seeing the Lord, are you not subdued? And wherein are these
things worthy of defense?
For if it were this only, were it not sufficient for a recompense? (I speak not
of hearing such a voice, in the presence of the world, from Him that sits on the
Father's throne, and of obtaining the kingdom), but were not the very doing it
sufficient for a reward? But now even in the presence of the world, and at the
appearing of that unspeakable glory, He proclaims and crowns you, and
acknowledges you as His sustainer and host, and is not ashamed of saying such
things, that He may make the crown brighter for you.
So for this cause, while the one are punished justly, the others are crowned