true offspring; for it is not altogether born therefrom, since something
else is applied to the bodily thing in order that it may be formed from it,
namely, the sense of him who sees. And for this reason, to love this is to
be estranged. Therefore the will which unites both, viz. the quasi-parent
and the quasi-child, is more spiritual than either of them. For that bodily
thing which is discerned, is not spiritual at all. But the vision which
comes into existence in the sense, has something spiritual mingled with
it, since it cannot come into existence without the soul. But it is not
wholly spiritual; since that which is formed is a sense of the body.
Therefore the will which unites both is confessedly more spiritual, as I
have said; and so it begins to suggest (insinuare), as it were, the person of
the Spirit in the Trinity. But it belongs more to the sense that is formed,
than to the bodily thing whence it is formed. For the sense and will of an
animate being belongs to the soul, not to the stone or other bodily thing
that is seen. It does not therefore proceed from that bodily thing as from
a parent; yet neither does it proceed from that other as it were offspring,
namely, the vision and form that is in the sense. For the will existed
before the vision came to pass, which will applied the sense that was to be
formed to the bodily thing that was to be discerned; but it was not yet
satisfied. For how could that which was not yet seen satisfy? And
satisfaction means a will that rests content. And, therefore, we can
neither call the will the quasi-offspring of vision, since it existed before
vision; nor the quasi-parent, since that vision was not formed and
expressed from the will, but from the bodily thing that was seen.

### CHAP. 6.—OF WHAT KIND WE ARE TO RECKON THE REST (REQULES), AND END (FINIS), OF THE WILL IN VISION.

10. Perhaps we can rightly call vision the end and rest of the will, only
with respect to this one object .
For it will not will nothing else merely because it sees something which it
is now willing. It is not therefore the whole will itself of the man, of which
the end is nothing else than blessedness; but the will provisionally
directed to this one object, which has as its end in seeing, nothing but
vision, whether it refer the thing seen to any other thing or not. For if it
does not refer the vision to anything further, but wills only to see this,
there can be no question made about showing that the end of the will is

the vision; for it is manifest. But if it does refer it to anything further,
then certainly it does will something else, and it will not be now a will
merely to see; or if to see, not one to see the particular thing. Just as, if
any one wished to see the scar, that from thence he might learn that there
had been a wound; or wished to see the window, that through the window
he might see the passers-by: all these and other such acts of will have
their own proper  ends, which are referred to that  end
of the will by which we will to live blessedly, and to attain to that life
which is not referred to anything else, but suffices of itself to him who
loves it. The will then to see, has as its end vision; and the will to see this
particular thing, has as its end the vision of this particular thing.
Therefore the will to see the scar, desires its own end, that is, the vision of
the scar, and does not reach beyond it; for the will to prove that there had
been a wound, is a distinct will, although dependent upon that, of which
the end also is to prove that there had been a wound. And the will to see
the window, has as its end the vision of the window; for that is another
and further will which depends upon it, viz. to see the passers-by through
the window, of which also the end is the vision of the passers-by. But all
the several wills that are bound to each other, are a once right, if that one
is good, to which all are referred; and if that is bad, then all are bad. And
so the connected series of right wills is a sort of road which consists as it
were of certain steps, whereby to ascend to blessedness; but the
entanglement of depraved and distorted wills is a bond by which he will
be bound who thus acts, so as to be cast into outer darkness. Blessed
therefore are they who in act and character sing the song of the steps
;2 and woe to those that draw sin, as it were a long rope. And it
is just the same to speak of the will being in repose, which we call its end,
if it is still referred to something further, as if we should say that the foot
is at rest in walking, when it is placed there, whence yet another foot may
be planted in the direction of the man's steps. But if something so
satisfies, that the will acquiesces in it with a certain delight; it is
nevertheless not yet that to which the man ultimately tends; but this too
is referred to something further, so as to be regarded not as the native
country of a citizen, but as a place of refreshment, or even of stopping, for
a traveller.