exercise to learn self-command, an imitation of the life of angels.
Hear these things, as many as are poor; or rather also, as many as desire to
be rich. It is not poverty that is the thing to be feared, but the not being willing to
be poor. Account poverty to be nothing to fear, and it will not be to you a matter
for fear. For neither is this fear in the nature of the thing, but in the judgment of
feeble-minded men. Or rather, I am even ashamed that I have occasion to say so
much concerning poverty, to show that it is nothing to be feared. For if you
practise self-command, it is even a fountain to you of countless blessings. And if
any one were to offer you sovereignty, and political power, and wealth, and
luxury, and then having set against them poverty, were to give you your choice
to take which thou wouldest, you would straightway seize upon poverty, if
indeed you knew the beauty thereof.
4. And I know that many laugh, when these things are said; but we are not
troubled but we require you to stay, and soon ye will give judgment with us. For
to me poverty seems like some comely, fair, and well-favored damsel, but
covetousness like some monster shaped woman, some Scylla or Hydra, or some
other like prodigies feigned by fabulous writers.
For bring not forward, I pray you, them that accuse poverty, but them that
have shone thereby. Nurtured in this, Elias was caught up in that blessed
assumption. With this Eliseus shone; with this John; with this all the apostles;
but with the other, Ahab, Jezebel, Gehazi, Judas, Nero, Caiaphas, were
condemned.
But if it please you, let us not look to those only that have been glorious in
poverty, but let us observe the beauty itself of this damsel. For indeed her eye is
clear and piercing, having nothing turbid in it, like the eye of covetousness,
which is at one time full of anger, at another sated with pleasure, at another
troubled by incontinence. But the eye of poverty is not like this, but mild, calm,
looking kindly on all, meek, gentle, hating no man, shunning no man. For where
there are riches, there is matter for enmity, and for countless wars. The mouth
again of the other is full of insults, of a certain haughtiness, of much boasting,

cursing, deceit; but the mouth and the tongue of this are sound, filled with
continual thanksgiving, blessing, words of gentleness, of affection, of courtesy,
of praise, of commendation. And if you would see also the proportion of her
members, she is of a goodly height, and far loftier than wealth. And if many flee
from her, marvel not at it, for indeed so do fools from the rest of virtue.
But the poor man, you will say, is insulted by him that is rich. Again you
are declaring to me the praise of poverty. For who, I pray you, is blessed, the
insulter, or the insulted? It is manifest that it is the insulted person. But then, the
one, covetousness, urges to insult the other; poverty persuades to endure. "But
the poor man suffers hunger," you will say. Paul also suffered hunger, and was in
famine. "But he has no rest." Neither "had the Son of Man where to lay His
head." [Matthew 8:20]
Do you see how far the praises of poverty have proceeded, and where it
places you, to what men it leads you on, and how it makes you a follower of the
Lord? If it were good to have gold, Christ, who have the unutterable blessings,
would have given this to His disciples. But now so far from giving it them, He
forbad them to have it. Wherefore Peter also, so far from being ashamed of
poverty, even glories in it, saying, "Silver and gold have I none; but what I have
give I you." [Acts 3:6] And who of you would not have desired to utter this
saying? Nay, we all would extremely, perhaps some one may say. Then throw
away your silver, throw away your gold. "And if I throw it away, you will say,
shall I receive the power of Peter?" Why, what made Peter blessed, tell me? Was
it indeed to have lifted up the lame man? By no means, but the not having these
riches, this procured him Heaven. For of those that wrought these miracles,
many fell into hell, but they, who did those good things, attained a kingdom. And
this you may learn even of Peter himself. For there were two things that he said,
"Silver and gold have I none;" and, "In the name of Jesus Christ rise up and
walk."
Which sort of thing then made Him glorious and blessed, the raising up the
lame man, or the casting away his money? And this you may learn from the