without Him was nothing made;" for the Word was the author of form and beginning to all the
Æons that came into existence after Him. But "what was made in Him," says John, "is life."
Here again he indicated conjunction; for all things, he said, were made by Him, but in Him was
life. This, then, which is in Him, is more closely connected with Him than those things which were
simply made by Him, for it exists along with Him, and is developed by Him. When, again, he adds,
"And the life was the light of men," while thus mentioning Anthropos, he indicated also Ecclesia
by that one expression, in order that, by using only one name, he might disclose their fellowship
with one another, in virtue of their conjunction. For Anthropos and Ecclesia spring from Logos
and Zoe. Moreover, he styled life (Zoe) the light of men, because they are enlightened by her, that
is, formed and made manifest. This also Paul declares in these words: "For whatsoever doth make
manifest is light." Since, therefore, Zoe manifested and begat both Anthropos and Ecclesia, she
is termed their light. Thus, then, did John by these words reveal both other things and the second
Tetrad, Logos and Zoe, Anthropos and Ecclesia. And still further, he also indicated the first Tetrad.
For, in discoursing of the Saviour and declaring that all things beyond the Pleroma received form
from Him, he says that He is the fruit of the entire Pleroma. For he styles Him a "light which shineth
in darkness, and which was not comprehended" by it, inasmuch as, when He imparted form to
all those things which had their origin from passion, He was not known by it. He also styles Him
Son, and Aletheia, and Zoe, and the "Word made flesh, whose glory," he says, "we beheld; and
His glory was as that of the Only-begotten (given to Him by the Father), full of grace and truth."
(But what John really does say is this: "And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us; and
we beheld His glory, the glory as of the only-begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth.")
Thus, then, does he [according to them] distinctly set forth the first Tetrad, when he speaks of the
Father, and Charis, and Monogenes, and Aletheia. In this way, too, does John tell of the first Ogdoad,
and that which is the mother of all the Æons. For he mentions the Father, and Charis, and Monogenes,
and Aletheia, and Logos, and Zoe, and Anthropos, and Ecclesia. Such are the views of Ptolemæus.

John i. 5.
i.e., all those not belonging to the spiritual seed.

This is parenthetically inserted by the author, to show the misquotation of Scripture by these heretics.

### Chapter IX.—Refutation of the impious interpretations of these heretics.
1. You see, my friend, the method which these men employ to deceive themselves, while they
abuse the Scriptures by endeavouring to support their own system out of them. For this reason, I
have brought forward their modes of expressing themselves, that thus thou mightest understand
the deceitfulness of their procedure, and the wickedness of their error. For, in the first place, if it
had been John's intention to set forth that Ogdoad above, he would surely have preserved the order
of its production, and would doubtless have placed the primary Tetrad first as being, according to
them, most venerable and would then have annexed the second, that, by the sequence of the names,
the order of the Ogdoad might be exhibited, and not after so long an interval, as if forgetful for the
moment and then again calling the matter to mind, he, last of all, made mention of the primary
Tetrad. In the next place, if he had meant to indicate their conjunctions, he certainly would not have
omitted the name of Ecclesia; while, with respect to the other conjunctions, he either would have
been satisfied with the mention of the male [Æons] (since the others [like Ecclesia] might be
understood), so as to preserve a uniformity throughout; or if he enumerated the conjunctions of the
rest, he would also have announced the spouse of Anthropos, and would not have left us to find
out her name by divination.
2. The fallacy, then, of this exposition is manifest. For when John, proclaiming one God, the
Almighty, and one Jesus Christ, the Only-begotten, by whom all things were made, declares that
this was the Son of God, this the Only-begotten, this the Former of all things, this the true Light
who enlighteneth every man, this the Creator of the world, this He that came to His own, this He
that became flesh and dwelt among us,—these men, by a plausible kind of exposition, perverting
these statements, maintain that there was another Monogenes, according to production, whom they
also style Arche. They also maintain that there was another Saviour, and another Logos, the son of
Monogenes, and another Christ produced for the re-establishment of the Pleroma. Thus it is that,
wresting from the truth every one of the expressions which have been cited, and taking a bad
advantage of the names, they have transferred them to their own system; so that, according to them,
in all these terms John makes no mention of the Lord Jesus Christ. For if he has named the Father,
and Charis, and Monogenes, and Aletheia, and Logos, and Zoe, and Anthropos, and Ecclesia,
according to their hypothesis, he has, by thus speaking, referred to the primary Ogdoad, in which
there was as yet no Jesus, and no Christ, the teacher of John. But that the apostle did not speak
concerning their conjunctions, but concerning our Lord Jesus Christ, whom he also acknowledges
as the Word of God, he himself has made evident. For, summing up his statements respecting the
Word previously mentioned by him, he further declares, "And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt
among us." But, according to their hypothesis, the Word did not become flesh at all, inasmuch as
He never went outside of the Pleroma, but that Saviour [became flesh] who was formed by a special
dispensation [out of all the Æons], and was of later date than the Word.
3. Learn then, ye foolish men, that Jesus who suffered for us, and who dwelt among us, is
Himself the Word of God. For if any other of the Æons had become flesh for our salvation, it would