THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.86, C.3.

the aforesaid manner, together with a purpose of amendment; all of
which belongs to the nature of penance as a virtue. Therefore it is
impossible for a sin to be pardoned anyone without penance as a
virtue.
But the sacrament of Penance, as stated above (Question 88, Article
3), is perfected by the priestly office of binding and loosing, without
which God can forgive sins, even as Christ pardoned the adulterous
woman, as related in Jn. 8, and the woman that was a sinner, as
related in Luke vii, whose sins, however, He did not forgive without
the virtue of penance: for as Gregory states (Hom. xxxiii in Evang.),
"He drew inwardly by grace," i.e. by penance, "her whom He received
outwardly by His mercy."
Reply to Objection 1: In children there is none but original sin, which
consists, not in an actual disorder of the will, but in a habitual
disorder of nature, as explained in the FS, Question 82, Article 1, and
so in them the forgiveness of sin is accompanied by a habitual
change resulting from the infusion of grace and virtues, but not by
an actual change. On the other hand, in the case of an adult, in
whom there are actual sins, which consist in an actual disorder of
the will, there is no remission of sins, even in Baptism, without an
actual change of the will, which is the effect of Penance.
Reply to Objection 2: This argument takes Penance as a sacrament.
Reply to Objection 3: God's mercy is more powerful than man's, in
that it moves man's will to repent, which man's mercy cannot do.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.86, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether by Penance one sin can be pardoned

without another?
Objection 1: It would seem that by Penance one sin can be pardoned
without another. For it is written (Amos 4:7): "I caused it to rain upon
one city, and caused it not to rain upon another city; one piece was
rained upon: and the piece whereupon I rained not, withered." These
words are expounded by Gregory, who says (Hom. x super Ezech.):
"When a man who hates his neighbor, breaks himself of other vices,
rain falls on one part of the city, leaving the other part withered, for
there are some men who, when they prune some vices, become
much more rooted in others." Therefore one sin can be forgiven by
Penance, without another.
Objection 2: Further, Ambrose in commenting on Ps. 118, "Blessed
are the undefiled in the way," after expounding verse 136 ("My eyes
have sent forth springs of water"), says that "the first consolation is
that God is mindful to have mercy; and the second, that He
punishes, for although faith be wanting, punishment makes
satisfaction and raises us up." Therefore a man can be raised up
from one sin, while the sin of unbelief remains.
Objection 3: Further, when several things are not necessarily
together, one can be removed without the other. Now it was stated in
the FS, Question 73, Article 1. that sins are not connected together,
so that one sin can be without another. Therefore also one sin can
be taken away by Penance without another being taken away.
Objection 4: Further, sins are the debts, for which we pray for pardon
when we say in the Lord's Prayer: "Forgive us our trespasses," etc.
Now man sometimes forgives one debt without forgiving another.
Therefore God also, by Penance, forgives one sin without another.
Objection 5: Further, man's sins are forgiven him through the love of
God, according to Jer. 31:3: "I have loved thee with an everlasting
love, therefore have I drawn thee, taking pity on thee." Now there is
nothing to hinder God from loving a man in one respect, while being
offended with him in another, even as He loves the sinner as regards
his nature, while hating him for his sin. Therefore it seems possible
for God, by Penance, to pardon one sin without another.