SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.23, C.4.

measure of the giving of Christ."
Reply to Objection 1: The virtue in accordance with which God gives
His gifts to each one, is a disposition or previous preparation or
effort of the one who receives grace. But the Holy Ghost forestalls
even this disposition or effort, by moving man's mind either more or
less, according as He will. Wherefore the Apostle says (Col. 1:12):
"Who hath made us worthy to be partakers of the lot of the saints in
light."
Reply to Objection 2: The form does not surpass the proportion of
the matter. In like manner grace and glory are referred to the same
genus, for grace is nothing else than a beginning of glory in us. But
charity and nature do not belong to the same genus, so that the
comparison fails.
Reply to Objection 3: The angel's is an intellectual nature, and it is
consistent with his condition that he should be borne wholly
whithersoever he is borne, as stated in the FP, Question 61, Article 6.
Hence there was a greater effort in the higher angels, both for good
in those who persevered, and for evil in those who fell, and
consequently those of the higher angels who remained steadfast
became better than the others, and those who fell became worse.
But man's is a rational nature, with which it is consistent to be
sometimes in potentiality and sometimes in act: so that it is not
necessarily borne wholly whithersoever it is borne, and where there
are greater natural gifts there may be less effort, and vice versa.
Thus the comparison fails.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.23, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether charity can increase?

Objection 1: It would seem that charity cannot increase. For nothing
increases save what has quantity. Now quantity is twofold, namely
dimensive and virtual. The former does not befit charity which is a
spiritual perfection, while virtual quantity regards the objects in
respect of which charity does not increase, since the slightest
charity loves all that is to be loved out of charity. Therefore charity
does not increase.
Objection 2: Further, that which consists in something extreme
receives no increase. But charity consists in something extreme,
being the greatest of the virtues, and the supreme love of the
greatest good. Therefore charity cannot increase.
Objection 3: Further, increase is a kind of movement. Therefore
wherever there is increase there is movement, and if there be
increase of essence there is movement of essence. Now there is no
movement of essence save either by corruption or generation.
Therefore charity cannot increase essentially, unless it happen to be
generated anew or corrupted, which is unreasonable.
On the contrary, Augustine says (Tract. lxxiv in Joan.) [Ep. clxxxv.]
that "charity merits increase that by increase it may merit
perfection."
I answer that, The charity of a wayfarer can increase. For we are
called wayfarers by reason of our being on the way to God, Who is
the last end of our happiness. In this way we advance as we get nigh
to God, Who is approached, "not by steps of the body but by the
affections of the soul" [St. Augustine, Tract. in Joan. xxxii]: and this
approach is the result of charity, since it unites man's mind to God.
Consequently it is essential to the charity of a wayfarer that it can
increase, for if it could not, all further advance along the way would
cease. Hence the Apostle calls charity the way, when he says (1 Cor.
12:31): "I show unto you yet a more excellent way."
Reply to Objection 1: Charity is not subject to dimensive, but only to
virtual quantity: and the latter depends not only on the number of
objects, namely whether they be in greater number or of greater
excellence, but also on the intensity of the act, namely whether a