said, there is no desire of information in these their doings. For this cause "He
also left them, and departed."
4. "And when His disciples," so it is said, "had come to the other side, they
forgot to take bread. Then Jesus said unto them, Take heed and beware of the
leaven of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees." [Matthew 16:5-6]
And why said He not plainly, Beware of their teaching? His will is to
remind them of what had been done, for He knew they had forgotten. But for
accusing them at once there seemed to be no reasonable ground, but to take the
occasion from themselves, and so to reprove them, would make the charge
admissible. "And why did He not then reprove them, when they said, 'Whence
should we have so many loaves in the wilderness?' for it seemed a good time
then to say what He says here." That He might not seem to rush hastily on the
miracle. And besides, He would not blame them before the multitude, nor seek
honor in their presence. And now too the accusation had greater reason, for that
after repetition of the miracle they were so minded.
Wherefore also He works another miracle, and then and not till then He
reproves; I mean, He brings forward what they were reasoning in their hearts.
But what were their reasonings? "Because," so it is said, "we have taken no
bread." For as yet they were full of trepidation about the purifications of the
Jews, and the observances of meats.
Wherefore on all accounts He attacks them even with severity, saying,
"Why reason ye in yourselves, O you of little faith, because you have brought no
bread? Perceive ye not yet, neither understand? Have ye your heart hardened?
Having eyes, see ye not? Having ears, hear ye not? [Mark 8:17-18] Do ye not
remember the five loaves of the five thousand, and how many baskets ye took up?
Neither the seven loaves of the four thousand, and how many baskets ye took
up?" [Matthew 16:9-10]
Do you see intense displeasure? For nowhere else does He appear to have
so rebuked them. Wherefore then does He so? In order again to cast out their
prejudice about the meats. I mean that with this view, whereas then He had only

said, "Perceive ye not, neither understand?" in this place, and with a strong
rebuke, He says, "O you of little faith."
For not everywhere is lenity a good thing. And as He used to allow them
freedom of speech, so does He also reprove, by this variety providing for their
salvation. And mark at once His reproof, how strong, and His mildness. For all
but excusing Himself to them for His severe reproofs to them, He says, "Do ye
not yet consider the five loaves, and how many baskets ye took up; and the seven
loaves, and how many baskets ye took up?" And to this end He sets down also
the numbers, as well of the persons fed as of the fragments, at once both
bringing them to recollection of the past, and making them more attentive to the
future.
And to teach you how great the power of His reproof, and how it roused up
their slumbering mind, hear what says the evangelist. For Jesus having said no
more, but having reproved them, and added this only, "How is it that you do not
understand, that I spoke it not to you concerning bread that you should beware,
but of the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees;" He subjoined, saying, "Then
understood they that He bade them not beware of the leaven of bread, but of the
doctrine of the Pharisees and Sadducees," [Matthew 14:12] although He had not
uttered that interpretation.
See how much good His reproof wrought. For it both led them away from
the Jewish observances, and when they were remiss, made them more heedful,
and delivered them from want of faith;