the birth of Christ was on this wise. When His mother was espoused to Joseph, before they came
together, she was found with child of the Holy Ghost." Then, when Joseph had it in contemplation
to put Mary away, since she proved with child, [Matthew tells us of] the angel of God standing by
him, and saying: "Fear not to take unto thee Mary thy wife: for that which is conceived in her is of
the Holy Ghost. And she shall bring forth a son, and thou shalt call His name Jesus; for He shall
save His people from their sins. Now this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of
the Lord by the prophet: Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bring forth a son, and they shall call
His name Emmanuel, which is, God with us;" clearly signifying that both the promise made to the
fathers had been accomplished, that the Son of God was born of a virgin, and that He Himself was
Christ the Saviour whom the prophets had foretold; not, as these men assert, that Jesus was He who
was born of Mary, but that Christ was He who descended from above. Matthew might certainly
have said, "Now the birth of Jesus was on this wise;" but the Holy Ghost, foreseeing the corrupters
[of the truth], and guarding by anticipation against their deceit, says by Matthew, "But the birth of
Christ was on this wise;" and that He is Emmanuel, lest perchance we might consider Him as a
mere man: for "not by the will of the flesh nor by the will of man, but by the will of God was the
Word made flesh;" and that we should not imagine that Jesus was one, and Christ another, but
should know them to be one and the same.
3. Paul, when writing to the Romans, has explained this very point: "Paul, an apostle of Jesus
Christ, predestinated unto the Gospel of God, which He had promised by His prophets in the holy
Scriptures, concerning His Son, who was made to Him of the seed of David according to the flesh,
who was predestinated the Son of God with power through the Spirit of holiness, by the resurrection
from the dead of our Lord Jesus Christ." And again, writing to the Romans about Israel, he says:
"Whose are the fathers, and from whom is Christ according to the flesh, who is God over all, blessed
for ever." And again, in his Epistle to the Galatians, he says: "But when the fulness of time had
come, God sent forth His Son, made of a woman, made under the law, to redeem them that were
under the law, that we might receive the adoption;" plainly indicating one God, who did by the
prophets make promise of the Son, and one Jesus Christ our Lord, who was of the seed of David
according to His birth from Mary; and that Jesus Christ was appointed the Son of God with power,
according to the Spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from the dead, as being the first begotten in
the reading of the Vulgate in the passage.
have read !" É #$%&&'() here, and not *+ É #$%&&'(),-&. Tertullian quotes the verse to the same effect (Lib. de Carne Christi,
cap. 19 and 24).