that you should tell him the Master's judgment? You see that it was possible to
perceive the deceit, but she would not, and yet God gave many proofs of his own
beneficence and showed forth his care of his works. For he formed man, who
had not existed before; and breathed a soul into him, and made him according to
his image, making him ruler of all things upon the earth, and granted him a
helpmate, planted Paradise, and having committed to him the use of the rest of
the trees, refused him the taste of one only: and this very prohibition he made for
man's advantage. But the Devil manifested no good things by his deed, whether
little, or great: but exciting the woman with mere words and puffing her up with
vain hopes, thus he deceived her. But nevertheless she considered the Devil to be
more worthy of credit than God, although God showed forth his good will by his
works. The woman believed in one who professed mere words, and nothing else.
Do you see how, from folly alone and sloth, and not from force, the deceit
happened? And in order that you may learn it more clearly hear how the
scripture accuses the woman: For it does not say, being deceived, but "seeing the
tree that it was fair, she ate." So that the blame belongs to her uncontrolled
vision, not to the deceit alone which comes from the Devil. For she was defeated
by yielding to her own desire, not by the wickedness. of the Demon. On this
account she did not have the benefit of pardon, but though she said, "the serpent
deceived me," she paid the uttermost penalty. For it was in her power not to have
fallen. And in order that you may understand this more clearly, come, let us
conduct our discourse to the case of Job; from the defeated to the vanquisher,
from the conquered to the conqueror. For this man will give us greater zeal, so
that we may raise our hands against the Devil. There he who deceived and
conquered was a serpent; here the tempter was a woman, and she did not prevail:
and yet at least she was far more persuasive than he. For to Job after the
destruction of his wealth, after the loss of his children, after being stripped bare
of all his goods, her wiles were added. But in the other case there was nothing of
this kind. Adam did not suffer the destruction of his children, nor did he lose his
wealth: he did not sit upon a dunghill, but inhabited a Paradise of luxury and

enjoyed all manner of fruits, and fountains and rivers, and every other kind of
security. Nowhere was there labour or pain, or despair and cares, or reproaches,
and insults, or the countless ills which assailed Job: but nevertheless, when
nothing of this kind existed, he fell and was overthrown. Is it not evident that it
was on account of sloth? Even so therefore as the other, when all these things
beset him, and weighed upon him, stood nobly and did not fall, is it not evident
that his steadfastness was owing to his vigilance of soul?
5. On both sides, beloved, reap the utmost gain, and avoid the imitation of
Adam knowing how many ills are begotten of indolence: and imitate the piety of
Job, learning how many glorious things spring from earnestness. Consider him,
the conqueror throughout, and you shall have much consolation in all pain and
peril. For as it were in the common theatre of the world that blessed and noble
man stands forth, and by means of the sufferings which happened to him
discourses to all to bear all things which befal them nobly, and never give in to
the troubles which come upon them. For verily, there is no human suffering
which cannot receive consolation from thence. For the sufferings which are
scattered over the whole world, these came together, and bore down upon one
body, even his. What pardon then shall there be for him who is unable to bear
with thankfulness his share of the troubles which are brought upon him? Since
he appears not bearing a part only, but the entire ills of all men, and in order that
you may not condemn the extravagance of my words, come, and let us take in
hand severally the ills that came upon him, and bring forward this fulfilment of
them. And if you wishest, let us first bring forward that which seems to be the
most unendurable of all, I mean poverty, and the pain which arises from it. For
everywhere all men bewail this. What was poorer then than Job, who was poorer
than the outcasts at the baths, and those who sleep in the ashes of the furnace,
poorer in fact than all men? For these indeed have one ragged garment, but he
sat naked, and had only the garment which nature supplies, the clothing of the
flesh, and this the Devil destroyed on all sides, with a distressing kind of decay.
Again these poor folk are at least under the roof of the porches at the baths, and