'when I am persecuted, when I am driven up and down, when I am plotted
against, then am I strong, then the rather I prevail over, and get the better of them
that plot against me, because that grace rests upon me, more largely. It is then in
this third sense that Paul uses "weakness;" and this is what he means by it;
aiming again, as I said also before, at that point, his seeming to them to be mean
and contemptible. For indeed he had no desire to boast, nor to seem to be what
he really was, nor yet to display the power which he possessed of punishing and
revenging; whence also he was accounted to be mean. When then as so
accounting they were going on in great indifference and insensibility, and
repented not of their sins, he seizes a favorable opportunity, discourses with
much vigor upon these points also, and shows that it was not from weakness he
did nothing, but from long-suffering.
3. Then, as I said, by transferring the argument from himself to Christ, he
enhances their fear, he increases his threat. And what he says is this; 'for even
supposing I should do something and chastise and take vengeance on the guilty
ones, is it I that chastise and take vengeance? It is He that dwells in me, Christ
Himself. But if you do not believe this, but are desirous of receiving a proof by
deeds of Him that dwells in me, you shall know presently; "For he is not weak to
you-ward, but is even powerful."' And wherefore added he "to you-ward," seeing
He is mighty everywhere? For should He be minded to punish unbelievers, He is
able; or demons, or anything whatsoever. What then is the import of the
addition? The expression is either as shaming them exceedingly by remembrance
of the proofs they have already received; or else as declaring this, that
meanwhile He shows His power in you who ought to be corrected. As he said
also in another place, "For what have I to do to judge them also that are
without?" [1 Corinthians 5:12] 'For those that are without,' he says, 'He will then
call to account in the day of judgment, but you even now, so as to rescue you
from that punishment.' But nevertheless even this instance of his solicitude,
although arising from tender affection, observe how he combines with fear and
much anger, saying, "Who to you-ward is not weak, but is powerful in you."

2 Corinthians 13:4
"For though He was crucified through weakness, yet He lives through the
Power of God."
What is, "though He was crucified through weakness?" 'For though He
chose,' he says, 'to endure a thing which seems to carry a notion of weakness,
still this in no way breaks in upon His Power. That still remains invincible, and
that thing which seems to be of weakness, has nothing harmed it, nay this very
thing itself shows His Power most of all, in that He endured even such a thing,
and yet His Power was not mutilated.' Let not then the expression "weakness"
disturb you; for elsewhere also he says, "The foolishness of God is wiser than
men, and the weakness of God is stronger than men;" [1 Corinthians 1:55]
although in God is nothing either foolish or weak: but he called the Cross so, as
setting forth the conception of the unbelieving regarding it. Hear him, at least,
interpreting himself. "For the preaching of the Cross is to them that perish
foolishness, but unto us which are saved it is the power of God." [1 Corinthians
1:18] And again; "But we preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a stumblingblock, and unto the Greeks foolishness; but unto them which are called, both
Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God and the wisdom of God." (Ib. 23, 24.)
And again; "But the natural man receives not the things of the Spirit, for they are
foolishness unto him." [1 Corinthians 2:14] Observe, how in every place he
expresses the conception of the unbelieving, who look upon the Cross as
foolishness and weakness. And so, in truth, here also he means not "weakness"
really such, but what was suspected to be such with the unbelieving. He does not
then say this, that because He was weak He was crucified. Away with the
thought! For that He had it in His power not to have been crucified He showed
throughout; when He now cast men down prostrate, now turned back the beams
of the sun, and withered a fig-tree, and blinded their eyes that came against Him,
and wrought ten thousand other things. What then is this which he says,