SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.184, C.4.

It is otherwise in the government of the natural order, where that
which is higher in the natural order is for that very reason more fitted
to dispose of those that are lower.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.184, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether a bishop may lawfully forsake the

episcopal cure, in order to enter religion?
Objection 1: It seems that a bishop cannot lawfully forsake his
episcopal cure in order to enter religion. For no one can lawfully
pass from a more perfect to a less perfect state; since this is "to look
back," which is condemned by the words of our Lord (Lk. 9:62), "No
man putting his hand to the plough, and looking back, is fit for the
kingdom of God." Now the episcopal state is more perfect than the
religious, as shown above (Question 184, Article 7). Therefore just as
it is unlawful to return to the world from the religious state, so is it
unlawful to pass from the episcopal to the religious state.
Objection 2: Further, the order of grace is more congruous than the
order of nature. Now according to nature a thing is not moved in
contrary directions; thus if a stone be naturally moved downwards, it
cannot naturally return upwards from below. But according to the
order of grace it is lawful to pass from the religious to the episcopal
state. Therefore it is not lawful to pass contrariwise from the
episcopal to the religious state.
Objection 3: Further, in the works of grace nothing should be
inoperative. Now when once a man is consecrated bishop he retains
in perpetuity the spiritual power of giving orders and doing like
things that pertain to the episcopal office: and this power would
seemingly remain inoperative in one who gives up the episcopal
cure. Therefore it would seem that a bishop may not forsake the
episcopal cure and enter religion.
On the contrary, No man is compelled to do what is in itself unlawful.
Now those who seek to resign their episcopal cure are compelled to
resign (Extra, de Renunt. cap. Quidam). Therefore apparently it is not
unlawful to give up the episcopal cure.
I answer that, The perfection of the episcopal state consists in this
that for love of God a man binds himself to work for the salvation of
his neighbor, wherefore he is bound to retain the pastoral cure so
long as he is able to procure the spiritual welfare of the subjects
entrusted to his care: a matter which he must not neglect---neither
for the sake of the quiet of divine contemplation, since the Apostle,
on account of the needs of his subjects, suffered patiently to be

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.184, C.5.

delayed even from the contemplation of the life to come, according
to Phil. 1:22-25, "What I shall choose I know not, but I am straitened
between two, having a desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ,
a thing by far better. But to abide still in the flesh is needful for you.
And having this confidence, I know that I shall abide"; nor for the
sake of avoiding any hardships or of acquiring any gain whatsoever,
because as it is written (Jn. 10:11), "the good shepherd giveth his life
for his sheep."
At times, however, it happens in several ways that a bishop is
hindered from procuring the spiritual welfare of his subjects.
Sometimes on account of his own defect, either of conscience (for
instance if he be guilty of murder or simony), or of body (for example
if he be old or infirm), or of irregularity arising, for instance, from
bigamy. Sometimes he is hindered through some defect in his
subjects, whom he is unable to profit. Hence Gregory says (Dial. ii,
3): "The wicked must be borne patiently, when there are some good
who can be succored, but when there is no profit at all for the good,
it is sometimes useless to labor for the wicked. Wherefore the
perfect when they find that they labor in vain are often minded to go
elsewhere in order to labor with fruit." Sometimes again this
hindrance arises on the part of others, as when scandal results from
a certain person being in authority: for the Apostle says (1 Cor.
8:13): "If meat scandalize my brother, I will never eat flesh":
provided, however, the scandal is not caused by the wickedness of
persons desirous of subverting the faith or the righteousness of the
Church; because the pastoral cure is not to be laid aside on account
of scandal of this kind, according to Mt. 15:14, "Let them alone,"
those namely who were scandalized at the truth of Christ's teaching,
"they are blind, and leaders of the blind."
Nevertheless just as a man takes upon himself the charge of
authority at the appointment of a higher superior, so too it behooves
him to be subject to the latter's authority in laying aside the accepted
charge for the reasons given above. Hence Innocent III says (Extra,
de Renunt., cap. Nisi cum pridem): "Though thou hast wings
wherewith thou art anxious to fly away into solitude, they are so tied
by the bonds of authority, that thou art not free to fly without our
permission." For the Pope alone can dispense from the perpetual
vow, by which a man binds himself to the care of his subjects, when
he took upon himself the episcopal office.
Reply to Objection 1: The perfection of religious and that of bishops