Jesus, and yet with him the Spirit descended, that we may learn, that it is God
who works all, that all is God's doing. I am about to say what may appear
strange, but be not astonished nor startled at it. The Offering is the same,
whether a common man, or Paul or Peter offer it. It is the same which Christ
gave to His disciples, and which the Priests now minister. This is nowise inferior
to that, because it is not men that sanctify even this, but the Same who sanctified
the one sanctifies the other also. For as the words which God spoke are the same
which the Priest now utters, so is the Offering the same, and the Baptism, that
which He gave. Thus the whole is of faith. The Spirit immediately fell upon
Cornelius, because he had previously fulfilled his part, and contributed his faith.
And this is His Body, as well as that. And he who thinks the one inferior to the
other, knows not that Christ even now is present, even now operates. Knowing
therefore these things, which we have not said without reason, but that we may
conform your minds in what is right, and render you more secure for the future,
keep carefully in mind what has been spoken. For if we are always hearers, and
never doers, we shall reap no advantage from what is said. Let us therefore
attend diligently to the things spoken. Let us imprint them upon our minds. Let
us have them ever engraved upon our consciences, and let us continually ascribe
glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

## Homily 3 on Second Timothy

[2 Timothy 1:13-18]
"Hold fast the form of sound words, which you have heard of me, in faith
and love which is in Christ Jesus. That good thing which was committed unto
you keep by the Holy Ghost Which dwells in us. This you know, that all they
which are in Asia be turned away from me; of whom are Phygellus and
Hermogenes. The Lord give mercy unto the house of Onesiphorus; for he oft
refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chain: but, when he was in Rome, he
sought me out very diligently, and found me. The Lord grant unto him that he
may find mercy of the Lord in that day: and in how many things he ministered
unto me at Ephesus, you know very well."
Not by letters alone did Paul instruct his disciple in his duty, but before by
words also which he shows, both in many other passages, as where he says,
"whether by word or our Epistle" [2 Thessalonians 2:15], and especially here.
Let us not therefore suppose that anything relating to doctrine was spoken
imperfectly. For many things he delivered to him without writing. Of these
therefore he reminds him, when he says, "Hold fast the form of sound words,
which you have heard of me." After the manner of artists, I have impressed on
you the image of virtue, fixing in your soul a sort of rule, and model, and outline
of all things pleasing to God. These things then hold fast, and whether you are
meditating any matter of faith or love, or of a sound mind, form from hence your
ideas of them. It will not be necessary to have recourse to others for examples,
when all has been deposited within yourself.
"That good thing which was committed unto you keep,"— how?— "by the
Holy Ghost which dwells in us." For it is not in the power of a human soul, when
instructed with things so great, to be sufficient for the keeping of them. And
why? Because there are many robbers, and thick darkness, and the devil still at