intention of marriage as fulfilling an office of nature, it belongs to its
first intention as a sacrament of the Church. Hence, from the
moment it was made a sacrament of the Church, as long as it
remains such it cannot be a matter of dispensation, except perhaps
by the second kind of dispensation.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether it was lawful to divorce a wife under the

Mosaic law?
Objection 1: It would seem that it was lawful to divorce a wife under
the Mosaic law. For one way of giving consent is to refrain from
prohibiting when one can prohibit. It is also unlawful to consent to
what is unlawful. Since then the Mosaic law did not forbid the putting
away of a wife and did no wrong by not forbidding it, for "the law . . .
is holy" (Rm. 7:12), it would seem that divorce was at one time
lawful.
Objection 2: Further, the prophets spoke inspired by the Holy Ghost,
according to 2 Pt. 1:21. Now it is written (Malachi 2:16): "When thou
shalt hate her, put her away." Since then that which the Holy Ghost
inspires is not unlawful, it would seem that it was not always
unlawful to divorce a wife.
Objection 3: Further, Chrysostom [Hom. xxxii in Opus Imperfectum]
says that even as the apostles permitted second marriages, so
Moses allowed the bill of divorce. But second marriages are not
sinful. Therefore neither was it sinful under the Mosaic law to divorce
a wife.
Objection 4: On the contrary, our Lord said (Mt. 19:8) that Moses
granted the Jews the bill of divorce by reason of the hardness of
their heart. But their hardness of heart did not excuse them from sin.
Neither therefore did the law about the bill of divorce.
Objection 5: Further, Chrysostom says [Hom. xxxii in Opus
Imperfectum] that "Moses, by granting the bill of divorce, did not
indicate the justice of God, but deprived their sin of its guilt, for
while the Jews acted as though they were keeping the law, their sin
seemed to be no sin."
I answer that, on this point there are two opinions. For some say that
under the Law those who put away their wives, after giving them a
bill of divorce, were not excused from sin, although they were
excused from the punishment which they should have suffered
according to the Law: and that for this reason Moses is stated to
have permitted the bill of divorce. Accordingly they reckon four
kinds of permission: one by absence of precept, so that when a

greater good is not prescribed, a lesser good is said to be permitted:
thus the Apostle by not prescribing virginity, permitted marriage (1
Cor. 7). The second is by absence of prohibition: thus venial sins are
said to be permitted because they are not forbidden. The third is by
absence of prevention, and thus all sins are said to be permitted by
God, in so far as He does not prevent them whereas He can. The
fourth is by omission of punishment, and in this way the bill of
divorce was permitted in the Law, not indeed for the sake of
obtaining a greater good, as was the dispensation to have several
wives, but for the sake of preventing a greater evil, namely wifemurder to which the Jews were prone on account of the corruption
of their irascible appetite. Even so they were allowed to lend money
for usury to strangers, on account of corruption in their
concupiscible appetite, lest they should exact usury of their
brethren; and again on account of the corruption of suspicion in the
reason they were allowed the sacrifice of jealousy, lest mere
suspicion should corrupt their judgment. But because the Old Law,
though it did not confer grace, was given that it might indicate sin,
as the saints are agreed in saying, others are of opinion that if it had
been a sin for a man to put away his wife, this ought to have been
indicated to him, at least by the law or the prophets: "Show My
people their wicked doings" (Is. 58:1): else they would seem to have
been neglected, if those things which are necessary for salvation
and which they knew not were never made known to them: and this
cannot be admitted, because the righteousness of the Law observed
at the time of the Law would merit eternal life. For this reason they
say that although to put away one's wife is wrong in itself, it
nevertheless became lawful by God's permitting it, and they confirm
this by the authority of Chrysostom, who says [Hom. xxxii in Opus
Imperfectum] that "the Lawgiver by permitting divorce removed the
guilt from the sin." Although this opinion has some probability the
former is more generally held: wherefore we must reply to the
arguments on both sides [FS, Question 105, Article 4, ad 8; FS,
Question 108, Article 3, ad 2; Contra Gentes iii, cap. 123].
Reply to Objection 1: He who can forbid, sins not by omitting to
forbid if he has no hope of correcting, but fears by forbidding to
furnish the occasion of a greater evil. Thus it happened to Moses:
wherefore acting on Divine authority he did not forbid the bill of
divorce.
Reply to Objection 2: The prophets, inspired by the Holy Ghost, said
that a wife ought to be put away, not as though this were a command