Rom. iv. 3.

Righteously, therefore, having left his earthly kindred, he followed the Word of God, walking as
a pilgrim with the Word, that he might [afterwards] have his abode with the Word.
4. Righteously also the apostles, being of the race of Abraham, left the ship and their father,
and followed the Word. Righteously also do we, possessing the same faith as Abraham, and taking
up the cross as Isaac did the wood, follow Him. For in Abraham man had learned beforehand,
and had been accustomed to follow the Word of God. For Abraham, according to his faith, followed
the command of the Word of God, and with a ready mind delivered up, as a sacrifice to God, his
only-begotten and beloved son, in order that God also might be pleased to offer up for all his seed
His own beloved and only-begotten Son, as a sacrifice for our redemption.
5. Since, therefore, Abraham was a prophet and saw in the Spirit the day of the Lord's coming,
and the dispensation of His suffering, through whom both he himself and all who, following the
example of his faith, trust in God, should be saved, he rejoiced exceedingly. The Lord, therefore,
was not unknown to Abraham, whose day he desired to see; nor, again, was the Lord's Father,
for he had learned from the Word of the Lord, and believed Him; wherefore it was accounted to
him by the Lord for righteousness. For faith towards God justifies a man; and therefore he said, "I
will stretch forth my hand to the most high God, who made the heaven and the earth." All these
truths, however, do those holding perverse opinions endeavour to overthrow, because of one passage,
which they certainly do not understand correctly.

### Chapter VI.—Explanation of the words of Christ, "No man knoweth the Father, but the Son,"
etc.; which words the heretics misinterpret. Proof that, by the Father revealing the Son, and
by the Son being revealed, the Father was never unknown.

1. For the Lord, revealing Himself to His disciples, that He Himself is the Word, who imparts
knowledge of the Father, and reproving the Jews, who imagined that they, had [the knowledge of]
God, while they nevertheless rejected His Word, through whom God is made known, declared,
"No man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, save the Son, and
he to whom the Son has willed to reveal [Him]." Thus hath Matthew set it down, and Luke in
like manner, and Mark the very same; for John omits this passage. They, however, who would
be wiser than the apostles, write [the verse] in the following manner: "No man knew the Father,
but the Son; nor the Son, but the Father, and he to whom the Son has willed to reveal [Him];" and

Matt. xi. 27; Luke x. 22.

they explain it as if the true God were known to none prior to our Lord's advent; and that God who
was announced by the prophets, they allege not to be the Father of Christ.
2. But if Christ did then [only] begin to have existence when He came [into the world] as man,
and [if] the Father did remember [only] in the times of Tiberius Cæsar to provide for [the wants
of] men, and His Word was shown to have not always coexisted with His creatures; [it may be
remarked that] neither then was it necessary that another God should be proclaimed, but [rather]
that the reasons for so great carelessness and neglect on His part should be made the subject of
investigation. For it is fitting that no such question should arise, and gather such strength, that it
would indeed both change God, and destroy our faith in that Creator who supports us by means of
His creation. For as we do direct our faith towards the Son, so also should we possess a firm and
immoveable love towards the Father. In his book against Marcion, Justin does well say: "I would
not have believed the Lord Himself, if He had announced any other than He who is our framer,
maker, and nourisher. But because the only-begotten Son came to us from the one God, who both
made this world and formed us, and contains and administers all things, summing up His own
handiwork in Himself, my faith towards Him is stedfast, and my love to the Father immoveable,
God bestowing both upon us."
3. For no one can know the Father, unless through the Word of God, that is, unless by the Son
revealing [Him]; neither can he have knowledge of the Son, unless through the good pleasure of
the Father. But the Son performs the good pleasure of the Father; for the Father sends, and the Son
is sent, and comes. And His Word knows that His Father is, as far as regards us, invisible and
infinite; and since He cannot be declared [by any one else], He does Himself declare Him to us;
and, on the other hand, it is the Father alone who knows His own Word. And both these truths has
our Lord declared. Wherefore the Son reveals the knowledge of the Father through His own
manifestation. For the manifestation of the Son is the knowledge of the Father; for all things are
manifested through the Word. In order, therefore, that we might know that the Son who came is
He who imparts to those believing on Him a knowledge of the Father, He said to His disciples:
"No man knoweth the Son but the Father, nor the Father but the Son, and those to whomsoever the
Son shall reveal Him;" thus setting Himself forth and the Father as He [really] is, that we may not
receive any other Father, except Him who is revealed by the Son.
4. But this [Father] is the Maker of heaven and earth, as is shown from His words; and not he,
the false father, who has been invented by Marcion, or by Valentinus, or by Basilides, or by
Carpocrates, or by Simon, or by the rest of the "Gnostics," falsely so called. For none of these was
the Son of God; but Christ Jesus our Lord [was], against whom they set their teaching in opposition,
book iv. c. 18, where this passage of Irenæus is quoted. [The vast importance of Justin's startling remark is that it hinges on the
words of Christ Himself, concerning His antecedents and notes as set forth in the Scriptures, St. John v. 30—39.]
seems to have been inadvertently omitted in this place where the repetition is desirable.]