should never happen, as was said above (Question 22, Article 2). Let
us then consider the whole of the human race, as we consider the
whole universe. God wills to manifest His goodness in men; in
respect to those whom He predestines, by means of His mercy, as
sparing them; and in respect of others, whom he reprobates, by
means of His justice, in punishing them. This is the reason why God
elects some and rejects others. To this the Apostle refers, saying
(Rm. 9:22,23): "What if God, willing to show His wrath, and to make
His power known, endured with much patience vessels of wrath,
fitted for destruction; that He might show the riches of His glory on
the vessels of mercy, which He hath prepared unto glory" and (2 Tim.
2:20): "But in a great house there are not only vessels of gold and
silver; but also of wood and of earth; and some, indeed, unto honor,
but some unto dishonor." Yet why He chooses some for glory, and
reprobates others, has no reason, except the divine will. Whence
Augustine says (Tract. xxvi. in Joan.): "Why He draws one, and
another He draws not, seek not to judge, if thou dost not wish to err."
Thus too, in the things of nature, a reason can be assigned, since
primary matter is altogether uniform, why one part of it was
fashioned by God from the beginning under the form of fire, another
under the form of earth, that there might be a diversity of species in
things of nature. Yet why this particular part of matter is under this
particular form, and that under another, depends upon the simple
will of God; as from the simple will of the artificer it depends that this
stone is in part of the wall, and that in another; although the plan
requires that some stones should be in this place, and some in that
place. Neither on this account can there be said to be injustice in
God, if He prepares unequal lots for not unequal things. This would
be altogether contrary to the notion of justice, if the effect of
predestination were granted as a debt, and not gratuitously. In things
which are given gratuitously, a person can give more or less, just as
he pleases (provided he deprives nobody of his due), without any
infringement of justice. This is what the master of the house said:
"Take what is thine, and go thy way. Is it not lawful for me to do what
I will?" (Mt. 20:14,15).

### ARTICLE 6. Whether predestination is certain?

Objection 1: It seems that predestination is not certain. Because on
the words "Hold fast that which thou hast, that no one take thy
crown," (Rev 3:11), Augustine says (De Corr. et Grat. 15): "Another
will not receive, unless this one were to lose it." Hence the crown
which is the effect of predestination can be both acquired and lost.
Therefore predestination cannot be certain.
Objection 2: Further, granted what is possible, nothing impossible
follows. But it is possible that one predestined---e.g. Peter---may sin
and then be killed. But if this were so, it would follow that the effect
of predestination would be thwarted. This then, is not impossible.
Therefore predestination is not certain.
Objection 3: Further, whatever God could do in the past, He can do
now. But He could have not predestined whom He hath predestined.
Therefore now He is able not to predestine him. Therefore
predestination is not certain.
On the contrary, A gloss on Rm. 8:29: "Whom He foreknew, He also
predestinated", says: "Predestination is the foreknowledge and
preparation of the benefits of God, by which whosoever are freed will
most certainly be freed."
I answer that, Predestination most certainly and infallibly takes
effect; yet it does not impose any necessity, so that, namely, its
effect should take place from necessity. For it was said above
(Article 1), that predestination is a part of providence. But not all
things subject to providence are necessary; some things happening
from contingency, according to the nature of the proximate causes,
which divine providence has ordained for such effects. Yet the order
of providence is infallible, as was shown above (Question 22, Article
4). So also the order of predestination is certain; yet free-will is not
destroyed; whence the effect of predestination has its contingency.
Moreover all that has been said about the divine knowledge and will
(Question 14, Article 13; Question 19, Article 4) must also be taken
into consideration; since they do not destroy contingency in things,
although they themselves are most certain and infallible.
Reply to Objection 1: The crown may be said to belong to a person in