beseech you flee fornication, and the mother of it, drunkenness. Why sow where
reaping is impossible, or rather even if you dost reap, the fruit brings you great
shame? For even if a child be born, it at once disgraces yourself, and has itself
had injustice done it in being born through you illegitimate and base. And if you
leave it never so much money, both the son of an harlot, and that of a servantmaid, is disreputable at home, disreputable in the city, disreputable in a court of
law: disreputable too will you be also, both in your lifetime, and when dead. For
if you have departed even, the memorials of your unseemliness abide. Why then
bring disgrace upon all these? Why sow where the ground makes it its care to
destroy the fruit? Where there are many efforts at abortion? Where there is
murder before the birth? For even the harlot thou dost not let continue a mere
harlot, but makest her a murderess also. You see how drunkenness leads to
whoredom, whoredom to adultery, adultery to murder; or rather to a something
even worse than murder. For I have no name to give it, since it does not take off
the thing born, but prevent its being born. Why then do you abuse the gift of
God, and fight with His laws, and follow after what is a curse as if a blessing,
and make the chamber of procreation a chamber for murder, and arm the woman
that was given for childbearing unto slaughter? For with a view to drawing more
money by being agreeable and an object of longing to her lovers, even this she is
not backward to do, so heaping upon your head a great pile of fire. For even if
the daring deed be hers, yet the causing of it is yours. Hence too come idolatries,
since many, with a view to become acceptable, devise incantations, and libations,
and love-potions, and countless other plans. Yet still after such great
unseemliness, after slaughters, after idolatries, the thing seems to many to belong
to things indifferent, aye, and to many that have wives too. Whence the mingle
([φορυτὸς]) of mischief is the greater. For sorceries are applied not to the womb
that is prostituted, but to the injured wife, and there are plottings without
number, and invocations of devils, and necromancies, and daily wars, and
truceless fightings, and home-cherished jealousies. Wherefore also Paul, after
saying, "not in chamberings and wantonness," proceeds, "not in strife and

envying," as knowing the wars that result therefrom; the upsetting of families,
the wrongs done to legitimate children, the other ills unnumbered. That we may
then escape from all these, let us put on Christ, and be with Him continually. For
this is what putting Him on is; never being without Him, having Him evermore
visible in us, through our sanctification, through our moderation. So we say of
friends, such an one is wrapped up ([ἐ] [νεδύσατο]) in such another, meaning
their great love, and keeping together incessantly. For he that is wrapped up in
anything, seems to be that which he is wrapped in. Let then Christ be seen in
every part of us. And how is He to be seen? If you do His deeds. And what did
He do? "The Son of Man," He says, "has not where to lay His head." [Luke 9:58]
This do thou also aim after. He needed the use of food, and He fared upon barley
loaves. He had occasion to travel, and there were no horses or beast of burden
anywhere, but He walked so far as even to be weary. He had need of sleep, and
He lay "asleep upon the pillow in the fore ([πρύμνῃ], here [πρώρας]) part of the
ship." [Mark 4:38] There was occasion for sitting down to meat, and He bade
them lie down upon the grass. And His garments were cheap; and often He
stayed alone, with no train after Him. And what He did on the Cross, and what
amidst the insults, and all, in a word, that He did, do thou learn by heart
([καταμαθὼν]) and imitate. And so will you have put on Christ, if you "make no
provision for the flesh to fulfil the lusts thereof." For the thing has no real
pleasure, since these lusts gender again others more keen, and you will never
find satisfaction, but wilt only make you one great torment. For as one who is in
a continual thirst, even if he have ten thousand fountains hard by him, gets no
good from this, as he is not able to extinguish the disorder, so is he that lives
continually in lusts. But if you keep to what is necessary, you will never come to
have this fear, but all those things will go away, as well drunkenness as
wantonness. Eat then only so much as to break your hunger, have only so much
upon you as to be sheltered, and do not curiously deck your flesh with clothing,
lest you ruin it. For you will make it more delicate, and wilt do injury to its
healthfulness, by unnerving it with so much softness. That you may have it then