such a husband I grant you that all the world over among men engaged in secular
affairs there have been few like him, so affectionate, so gentle, so humble, so
sincere, so understanding, so devout. And certainly if he had altogether perished,
and utterly ceased to be, it would be right to be distressed, and sorrowful; but if
he has only sailed into the tranquil haven, and taken his journey to Him who is
really his king, one ought not to mourn but to rejoice on these accounts. For this
death is not death, but only a kind of emigration and translation from the worse
to the better, from earth to heaven, from men to angels, and archangels, and Him
who is the Lord of angels and archangels. For here on earth while he was serving
the emperor there were dangers to be expected and many plots arising from men
who bore ill-will, for in proportion as his reputation increased did the designs
also of enemies abound; but now that he has departed to the other world none of
these things can be suspected. Wherefore in proportion as you grieve that God
has taken away one who was so good and worthy you ought to rejoice that he
has departed in much safety and honour, and being released from the trouble
which besets this present season of danger, is in great peace and tranquillity. For
is it not out of place to acknowledge that heaven is far better than earth, and yet
to mourn those who are translated from this world to the other? For if that
blessed husband of yours had been one of those who lived a shameful life
contrary to what God approved it would have been right to bewail and lament for
him not only when he had departed, but while he was still living; but inasmuch
as he was one of those who are the friends of God we should take pleasure in
him not only while living, but also when he has been laid to rest. And that we
ought to act thus you have surely heard the words of the blessed Paul "to depart
and to be with Christ which is far better." [Philippians 1:33] But perhaps you
long to hear your husband's words, and enjoy the affection which you bestowed
upon him, and you yearn for his society, and the glory which you had on his
account, and the splendour, and honour, and security, and all these things being
gone distress and darken your life. Well! The affection which you be stowed on
him you can keep now just as you formerly did.

For such is the power of love, it embraces, and unites, and fastens together
not only those who are present, and near, and visible but also those who are far
distant; and neither length of time, nor separation in space, nor anything else of
that kind can break up and sunder in pieces the affection of the soul. But if you
wish to behold him face to face (for this I know is what you specially long for)
keep your bed in his honour sacred from the touch of any other man, and do your
best to manifest a life like his, and then assuredly you shall depart one day to
join the same company with him, not to dwell with him for five years as you did
here, nor for 20, or 100, nor for a thousand or twice that number but for infinite
and endless ages. For it is not any physical relation, but a correspondence in the
way of living which qualifies for the inheritance of those regions of rest. For if it
was identity of moral constitution which brought Lazarus although a stranger to
Abraham into the same heavenly bosom with him, and qualifies many from east
and west to sit down with him, the place of rest will receive you also with the
good Therasius, if you will exhibit the same manner of life as his, and then you
shall receive him back again no longer in that corporeal beauty which he had
when he departed, but in lustre of another kind, and splendour outshining the
rays of the sun. For this body, even if it reaches a very high standard of beauty is
nevertheless perishable; but the bodies of those who have been well pleasing to
God, will be invested with such glory as these eyes cannot even look upon. And
God has furnished us with certain tokens, and obscure indications of these things
both in the Old and in the New Dispensation. For in the former the face of
Moses shone with such glory as to be intolerable to the eyes of the Israelites, and
in the New the face of Christ shone far more brilliantly than his. For tell me if
any one had promised to make your husband king of all the earth, and then had
commanded you to withdraw for twenty years on his account, and had promised
after that to restore him to you with the diadem and the purple, and to place you
again in the same rank with him, would you not have meekly endured the
separation with due self-control? Would you not have been well pleased with the
gift, and deemed it a thing worth praying for? Well then submit to this now, not