SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.179, C.2.

the senses or with the intellect, sometimes for love of the thing seen
because, as it is written (Mt. 6:21), "where thy treasure is, there is thy
heart also," sometimes for love of the very knowledge that one
acquires by observation. Wherefore Gregory makes the
contemplative life to consist in the "love of God," inasmuch as
through loving God we are aflame to gaze on His beauty. And since
everyone delights when he obtains what he loves, it follows that the
contemplative life terminates in delight, which is seated in the
affective power, the result being that love also becomes more
intense.
Reply to Objection 1: From the very fact that truth is the end of
contemplation, it has the aspect of an appetible good, both lovable
and delightful, and in this respect it pertains to the appetitive power.
Reply to Objection 2: We are urged to the vision of the first principle,
namely God, by the love thereof; wherefore Gregory says (Hom. xiv
in Ezech.) that "the contemplative life tramples on all cares and
longs to see the face of its Creator."
Reply to Objection 3: The appetitive power moves not only the bodily
members to perform external actions, but also the intellect to
practice the act of contemplation, as stated above.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.179, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the moral virtues pertain to the

contemplative life?
Objection 1: It would seem that the moral virtues pertain to the
contemplative life. For Gregory says (Hom. xiv in Ezech.) that "the
contemplative life is to cling to the love of God and our neighbor
with the whole mind." Now all the moral virtues, since their acts are
prescribed by the precepts of the Law, are reducible to the love of
God and of our neighbor, for "love . . . is the fulfilling of the
Law" (Rm. 13:10). Therefore it would seem that the moral virtues
belong to the contemplative life.
Objection 2: Further, the contemplative life is chiefly directed to the
contemplation of God; for Gregory says (Hom. xiv in Ezech.) that
"the mind tramples on all cares and longs to gaze on the face of its
Creator." Now no one can accomplish this without cleanness of
heart, which is a result of moral virtue [Question 8, Article 7]. For it is
written (Mt. 5:8): "Blessed are the clean of heart, for they shall see
God": and (Heb. 12:14): "Follow peace with all men, and holiness,
without which no man shall see God." Therefore it would seem that
the moral virtues pertain to the contemplative life.
Objection 3: Further, Gregory says (Hom. xiv in Ezech.) that "the
contemplative life gives beauty to the soul," wherefore it is signified
by Rachel, of whom it is said (Gn. 29:17) that she was "of a beautiful
countenance." Now the beauty of the soul consists in the moral
virtues, especially temperance, as Ambrose says (De Offic. i,
43,45,46). Therefore it seems that the moral virtues pertain to the
contemplative life.
On the contrary, The moral virtues are directed to external actions.
Now Gregory says (Moral. vi [Hom. xiv in Ezech.; Article 1, Objection
3]) that it belongs to the contemplative life "to rest from external
action." Therefore the moral virtues do not pertain to the
contemplative life.
I answer that, A thing may belong to the contemplative life in two
ways, essentially or dispositively. The moral virtues do not belong to
the contemplative life essentially, because the end of the
contemplative life is the consideration of truth: and as the
Philosopher states (Ethic. ii, 4), "knowledge," which pertains to the