strength, so that he needs to be helped by prayers; secondly,
because it is given to the dying, who are on the point of quitting the
courts of the Church, and rest in the hands of God alone, for which
reason they are committed to Him by prayer; thirdly, because the
effect of this sacrament is not such that it always results from the
minister's prayer, even when all essentials have been duly observed,
as is the case with the character in Baptism and Confirmation,
transubstantiation in the Eucharist, remission of sin in Penance
(given contrition) which remission is essential to the sacrament of
Penance but not to this sacrament. Consequently the form of this
sacrament cannot be expressed in the indicative mood, as in the
sacraments just mentioned.
Reply to Objection 1: This sacrament, like the others mentioned,
considered in itself, is sure of its effect. yet this effect can be
hindered through the insincerity of the recipient (though by his
intention he submit to the sacrament), so that he receives no effect
at all. Hence there is no parity between this sacrament, and the
others wherein some effect always ensues.
Reply to Objection 2: The intention is sufficiently expressed by the
act which is mentioned in the form, viz.: "By this holy unction."
Reply to Objection 3: These words in the indicative mood, which
some are wont to say before the prayer, are not the sacramental
form, but are a preparation for the form, in so far as they determine
the intention of the minister.

### ARTICLE 9. Whether the foregoing prayer is a suitable form

for this sacrament?
Objection 1: It would seem that the foregoing prayer is not a suitable
form for this sacrament. For in the forms of the other sacraments
mention is made of the matter, for instance in Confirmation, whereas
this is not done in the aforesaid words. Therefore it is not a suitable
form.
Objection 2: Further, just as the effect of this sacrament is bestowed
on us by the mercy of God, so are the effects of the other
sacraments. But mention is made in the forms of the other
sacraments, not of the Divine mercy, but rather of the Trinity and of
the Passion. Therefore the same should be done here.
Objection 3: Further, this sacrament is stated in the text (Sent. iv, D,
23) to have a twofold effect. But in the foregoing words mention is
made of only one effect, viz. the remission of sins, and not of the
healing of the body to which end James directs the prayer of faith to
be made (James 5:15): "The prayer of faith shall save the sick man."
Therefore the above form is unsuitable.
I answer that, The prayer given above (Article 8) is a suitable form for
this sacrament, for it includes the sacrament by the words: "By this
holy unction," and that which works in the sacrament, viz. "the
mercy of God," and the effect, viz. "remission of sins."
Reply to Objection 1: The matter of this sacrament may be
understood in the act of anointing, whereas the matter of
Confirmation cannot be implied by the act expressed in the form.
Hence there is no parity.
Reply to Objection 2: The object of mercy is misery: and because
this sacrament is given when we are in a state of misery, i.e. of
sickness, mention of mercy is made in this rather than in other
sacraments.
Reply to Objection 3: The form should contain mention of the
principal effect, and of that which always ensues in virtue of the
sacrament, unless there be something lacking on the part of the
recipient. Now bodily health is not an effect of this kind, as we shall