could it have entered the minds of men who came after the events had taken
place to foretell, for instance, that the Gospel should be preached in every part of
the whole world? That the Jewish institutions should cease, and never return
again? And they who gave up their lives for the Gospel, how would they have
endured to see the Gospel adulterated? And how would the writers have won
credit, miracles having ceased? And how could the writings have penetrated to
the region of Barbarians, and of Indians, and unto the very bounds of the ocean,
if the relators had not been worthy of credit? The writers, too, who were they?
When, how, and why, did they write at all? Was it to gain glory to themselves?
Why then inscribed they the books with other men's names? "Why, from a wish
to recommend the doctrine." As true, or as false? For if you say, they stuck to it,
as being false; their joining it at all was out of all likelihood: but if as being truth,
there was no need of inventions such as you speak of. And besides, the
prophecies are of such a kind, as that even until now time has been unable to
force aside the predicted course of things: ([ὡς μὴ δυνάσθαι βιαζὲσθαι χρόνῳ τα
εἰρημένα]) for the destruction indeed of Jerusalem took place many years ago;
but there are also other predictions which extend along from that time until His
coming; which examine as you please: for instance, this, I am with you always,
even unto the end of the world: [Matthew 28:20] and, "Upon this Rock I will
build My Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it:" [Matthew
16:18] and, "This Gospel shall be preached unto all nations:" [Matthew 24:14]
and that which the woman which was an harlot did: and many others more than
these. Whence then the truth of this prediction if indeed it were a forgery? How
did "the gates of hell" not "prevail" against "the Church?" How is Christ always
"with us?" For had He not been "with us," the Church would not have been
victorious. How was the Gospel spread abroad in every part of the world? They
also who have spoken against us are enough to testify the antiquity of the books;
I mean, such as Celsus and he of Batanea , who came after him. For they, I
suppose, were not speaking against books composed after their time.
[7] And besides, there is the whole world which with one consent has

received the Gospel. Now there could not have been so great agreement from
one end of the earth to the other, unless it had been the Grace of the Spirit; but
the authors of the forgery would have been quickly found out. Neither could so
great excellencies have originated from inventions and falsehoods. Do you not
see the whole world coming in; error extinguished; the austere wisdom
([φιλοσυφίαν]) of the old monks shining brighter than the sun; the choirs of the
virgins; the piety among Barbarians; all men serving under one yoke? For
neither by us alone were these things foretold, but also from the beginning, by
the Prophets. For you will not, I trow, cavil at their predictions also: for the
books are with their enemies, and through the zeal of certain Greeks they have
been transferred into the Greek tongue. Many things then do these also foretell
concerning these matters, showing that it was God who should come among us.
[8] Why then do not all believe now? Because things have degenerated: and
for this we are to blame. (For from hence the discourse is addressed unto us
also.) For surely not even then did they trust to signs alone, but by the mode of
life also many of the converts were attracted. For, "Let your light so shine before
men," says He, "that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father
which is in heaven." [Matthew 5:16] And, "They were all of one heart and one
soul, neither said any man that anything of the things which he possessed was
his own, but they had all things common; and distribution was made unto every
man, according as he had need;" [Acts 4:32-35] and they lived an angelic life.
And if the same were done now, we should convert the whole world, even
without miracles. But in the meanwhile, let those who will be saved attend to the
Scriptures; for they shall find there both these noble doings, and those which are
greater than these. For it may be added that the Teachers themselves surpassed
the deeds of the others; living in hunger, in thirst, and nakedness. But we are
desirous of enjoying great luxury, and rest, and ease; not so they: they cried
aloud, Even unto the present hour we both hunger, and thirst, and are naked, and
are buffeted, and have no certain dwelling place. [1 Corinthians 4:11] And some
ran from Jerusalem unto Illyricum, [Romans 15:19] and another unto the country