sins, let us choose the true riches and right wisdom, that we may obtain the
promised good things; to which may we all arrive, through the grace and
lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom and with whom, to the Father
and the Holy Ghost, be glory, now and ever and world without end. Amen.

Homily 44 on the Gospel of John
John 6:26-27
"Jesus answered them, and said, Verily, verily, I say unto you, You seek Me,
not because ye saw the miracles but because ye did eat of the loaves and were
filled. Labor not for the meat which perishes, but for that meat which endures
unto everlasting life."
1. The mild and gentle is not always useful, but there are times when the
teacher needs sharper language. For if the disciple be dull and gross, then, in
order to touch his dullness to the quick, we must rouse him with a goad. And this
the Son of God has done in the present as well as in many other cases. For when
the crowds had come and found Jesus, and were flattering Him, and saying,
"Master, when camest Thou hither?" to show that He desires not honor from
men, but looks to one thing only, their salvation, He answers them sharply,
wishing to correct them not in this way only, but also by revealing and exposing
their thoughts. For what says He? "Verily, verily, I say unto you," (speaking
positively and with a confirmation,) "You seek Me, not because ye saw miracles,
but because ye did eat of the loaves and were filled." He chides and reproves
them by these words, yet does not so abruptly or violently, but very sparingly.
For He says not, "O you gluttons and belly-slaves, I have wrought so many
wonders, and you never have either followed Me, or marveled at My doings";
but mildly and gently somewhat in this manner; "You seek Me, not because ye
saw miracles, but because ye did eat of the loaves and were filled"; speaking not
only of the past, but also of the present miracle. "It was not," He says, "the
miracle of the loaves that astonished you, but the being filled." And that He said
not this of them by conjecture they straightway showed, for on this account they
came the second time, as being about to enjoy the same (food) as before.

Wherefore they said, "Our fathers did eat manna in the wilderness." Again they
draw Him to (the subject of) carnal food, which was the chief accusation and
charge against them. But He stops not at rebukes, but adds instruction also,
saying, "Labor not for the meat which perishes, but for that meat which endures
unto everlasting life."
"Which the Son of Man gives unto you; for Him has God the Father
sealed."
What He says, is of this kind: "Make no account of this earthly, but of that
spiritual food." But since some of those who desire to live in doing nothing have
abused this speech, as though Christ would entirely abolish working, it is
seasonable to say somewhat to them. For they slander, so to speak, all
Christianity, and cause it to be ridiculed on the score of idleness. First however,
we must mention that saying of Paul. What says he? "Remember the Lord, how
He said, It is more blessed to give than to receive." [Acts 20:35] Now how can it
be possible for him to give who has not? How then says Jesus to Martha, "You
are careful and troubled about many things, but one thing is needful, and Mary
has chosen that good part"? [Luke 10:41-42]; and again, "Take no thought for
the morrow." [Matthew 6:34] For it is necessary now to resolve all these
questions, not only that we may check men if they would be idle, but also that
the oracles of God may not appear to bring in what is contradictory.
Now Paul in another place says, "But we beseech you, brethren, that you
increase more and more, that you study to be quiet, and to do your own business;
that you may walk honestly toward them that are without" [1 Thessalonians 4:1012]; and again; "Let him that stole, steal no more; but rather let him labor,
working with his own hands, that he may have to give to him that needs."
[Ephesians 4:28] Here the Apostle bids not simply "work," but to work so
vigorously and laboriously, as to have thereby somewhat to give to others. And
in another place the same says again; "These hands have ministered to my
necessities, and to them that were with me." [Acts 20:34] And writing to the
Corinthians he said, "What is my reward then? Verily, that when I preach the