But none of these things has he stated; but that which was able to touch them
most nearly, the disgracefulness of the thing.
Ver. 13. "But we would not have you ignorant, brethren, concerning them
that are asleep; that you sorrow not, even as the rest, which have no hope."
These two things, poverty and despondency, distressed them most, which
also pertain to all men. See therefore how he remedies them. But their poverty
arose from their goods being taken from them. But if he commands those, whose
goods had been taken from them for Christ's sake, to support themselves by
working, much more then others. For that they were taken away is manifest from
his saying, You became partakers with the churches of God. How partakers with
them? "And ye took joyfully the spoiling of your possessions." [Hebrews 10:34]
Here he proceeds now to start his discourse concerning the Resurrection.
And why? Had he not discoursed with them upon that point? Yes, but here he
glances at some further mystery. What then is this? "That we that are alive," he
says, "that are left unto the coming of the Lord, shall in nowise precede them that
are fallen asleep." The discourse then of the Resurrection was sufficient to
comfort him that was grieving. But that which is now said is sufficient also to
make the Resurrection eminently worthy of credit. But first let us speak of what
precedes, "But we would not have you ignorant, brethren, concerning them that
are asleep; that you sorrow not, even as the rest, which have no hope." See how
here also he treats them mildly. He does not say, "Are ye so without
understanding?" as he said to the Corinthians, "foolish"? That, knowing there is
a resurrection, you so sorrow, as those who do not believe; but he speaks very
mildly, showing respect to their other virtues. And he has not said "concerning
the dead," but "them that are asleep," even at the beginning suggesting
consolation to them. "That ye sorrow not," he says, "even as the rest, which have
no hope." Therefore to afflict yourselves for the departed is to act like those who
have no hope. And they justly. For a soul that knows nothing of the
Resurrection, but thinks that this death is death, naturally afflicts itself, and
bewails and mourns intolerably as for lost ones. But you, who expectest a

resurrection, on what account do you lament? To lament then is the part of those
who have no hope.
Hear this, you women, as many of you as are fond of wailing, as many as at
times of mourning take the sorrow impatiently, that you act the part of heathens.
But if to grieve for the departed is the part of heathens, then tell me whose part it
is to beat one's self, and tear the cheeks? On what account do you lament, if you
believe that he will rise again, that he has not perished, that the matter is but a
slumber and a sleep? You say, On account of his society, his protection, his care
of our affairs, and all his other services. When therefore you lose a child at an
untimely age, who is not yet able to do anything, on what account do you
lament? Why do you seek to recall him? He was displaying, you say, good
hopes, and I was expecting that he would be my supporter. On this account I
miss my husband, on this account my son, on this account I wail and lament, not
disbelieving the Resurrection, but being left destitute of support, and having lost
my protector, my companion, who shared with me in all things— my comforter.
On this account I mourn. I know that he will rise again, but I cannot bear the
intermediate separation. A multitude of troubles rushes in upon me. I am
exposed to all who are willing to injure me. Those of my servants who formerly
feared me now despise me, and trample upon me. If any one has been benefited,
he has forgotten the benefit he received from him; if any one was ill-treated by
the departed, to return the grudge against him, he lets loose his anger upon me.
These things do not suffer me to bear my widowhood. It is for these things that I
afflict myself, for these things I bewail.
How then shall we comfort such? What shall we say? How shall we banish
their sorrow? In the first place I shall endeavor to convict them, that their
wailing proceeds not from these things they say, but from an unreasonable
passion. For if you mourn for these things, you ought always to mourn the
departed. But if when a year has passed away, you forget him as if he had never
been, you do not bewail the departed nor his protection. But you cannot endure
the separation, nor the breaking off of your society? And what can they say, who