THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.74, C.5.

otherwise those celebrating in fermented bread would be Judaizing,
because the Jews offered up fermented bread for the first-fruits.
Reply to Objection 3: Leaven denotes charity on account of one
single effect, because it makes the bread more savory and larger;
but it also signifies corruption from its very nature.
Reply to Objection 4: Since whatever is fermented partakes of
corruption, this sacrament may not be made from corrupt bread, as
stated above (Article 3, ad 4); consequently, there is a wider
difference between unleavened and leavened bread than between
warm and cold baptismal water: because there might be such
corruption of fermented bread that it could not be validly used for the
sacrament.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.74, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether wine of the grape is the proper matter of

this sacrament?
Objection 1: It seems that wine of the grape is not the proper matter
of this sacrament. Because, as water is the matter of Baptism, so is
wine the matter of this sacrament. But Baptism can be conferred
with any kind of water. Therefore this sacrament can be celebrated in
any kind of wine, such as of pomegranates, or of mulberries; since
vines do not grow in some countries.
Objection 2: Further, vinegar is a kind of wine drawn from the grape,
as Isidore says (Etym. xx). But this sacrament cannot be celebrated
with vinegar. Therefore, it seems that wine from the grape is not the
proper matter of this sacrament.
Objection 3: Further, just as the clarified wine is drawn from grapes,
so also are the juice of unripe grapes and must. But it does not
appear that this sacrament may be made from such, according to
what we read in the Sixth Council (Trull., Can. 28): "We have learned
that in some churches the priests add grapes to the sacrifice of the
oblation; and so they dispense both together to the people.
Consequently we give order that no priest shall do this in future."
And Pope Julius I rebukes some priests "who offer wine pressed
from the grape in the sacrament of the Lord's chalice."
Consequently, it seems that wine from the grape is not the proper
matter of this sacrament.
On the contrary, As our Lord compared Himself to the grain of
wheat, so also He compared Himself to the vine, saying (Jn. 15:1): "I
am the true vine." But only bread from wheat is the matter of this
sacrament, as stated above (Article 3). Therefore, only wine from the
grape is the proper matter of this sacrament.
I answer that, This sacrament can only be performed with wine from
the grape. First of all on account of Christ's institution, since He
instituted this sacrament in wine from the grape, as is evident from
His own words, in instituting this sacrament (Mt. 26:29): "I will not
drink from henceforth of this fruit of the vine." Secondly, because, as
stated above (Article 3), that is adopted as the matter of the
sacraments which is properly and universally considered as such.
Now that is properly called wine, which is drawn from the grape,