But having said, "I speak not of you all," in order not to attach fear to more
than one, He at last separates the traitor, speaking thus; "He that eats bread with
Me." For the, "not of you all," does not direct the words to any single one,
therefore He added, "He that eats bread with Me"; showing to that wretched one
that He was not seized in ignorance, but even with full knowledge; a thing which
of itself was most of all fitted to restrain him. And He said not, "betrays Me,"
but, "has lifted up his heel against Me," desiring to represent the deceit, the
treachery, the secrecy of the plot.
3. These things are written that we bear not malice towards those who
injure us; but rebuke them and weep for them; for the fit subjects of weeping are
not they who suffer, but they who do the wrong. The grasping man, the false
accuser, and whoso works any other evil thing, do themselves the greatest injury,
and us the greatest good, if we do not avenge ourselves. Such a case as this:
some one has robbed you; have you given thanks for the injury, and glorified
God? By that thanksgiving you have gained ten thousand rewards, just as he has
gathered for himself fire unspeakable. But if any one say, "How then, if I 'could'
not defend myself against him who wronged me, being weaker?" I would say
this, that you could have put into action the being discontented, the being
impatient, (for these things are in our power,) the praying against him, who
grieved you, the uttering ten thousand curses against him, the speaking ill of him
to every one. He therefore who has not done these things shall even be rewarded
for not defending himself, since it is clear that even if he had had the power, he
would not have done it. The injured man uses any weapon that comes to hand,
when, being little of soul, he defends himself against one who has injured him,
by curses, by abuse, by plotting. Do thou then not only not do these things, but
even pray for him; for if you do them not, but wilt even pray for him, you have
become like God. For, "pray," it says, "for them, that despitefully use you— that
you may be like your Father which is in Heaven." [Matthew 5:44-45] Do you see
how we are the greatest gainers from the insolence of others? Nothing so
delights God, as the not returning evil for evil? But what say I? Not returning

evil for evil? Surely we are enjoined to return the opposite, benefits, prayers.
Wherefore Christ also repaid him who was about to betray Him with everything
opposite. He washed his feet, convicted him secretly, rebuked him sparingly,
tended him, allowed him to share His table and His kiss, and not even by these
was he made better; nevertheless (Christ) continued doing His own part.
But come, let us teach you even from the example of servants, and (to make
the lesson stronger) those in the Old (Testament), that you may know that we
have no ground of defense when we remember a wrong. Will you then that I tell
you of Moses, or shall we go yet farther back? For the more ancient the instances
that can be pointed out, the more are we surpassed. "Why so?" Because virtue
was then more difficult. Those men had no written precepts, no patterns of
living, but their nature fought, unarmed, by itself, and was forced to float in all
directions unballasted. Wherefore also when praising Noah, God called him not
simply perfect, but added, "in his generation" [Genesis 7:1]; signifying, "at that
time," when there were many hindrances, since many others shone after him, yet
will he have nothing less than they; for in his own time he was perfect. Who then
before Moses was patient? The blessed and noble Joseph, who having shone by
his chastity, shone no less by his long suffering. He was sold when he had done
no wrong, but was waiting on others, and serving, and performing all the duties
of domestics. They brought against him an evil accusation, and he did not defend
himself, though he had his father on his side. Nay, he even went to carry food to
them in the desert, and when he found them not, he did not despair or turn back,
(yet he had an excuse for doing so had he chosen,) but remained near the wild
beasts and those savage men, preserving the feeling of a true brother. Again,
when he dwelt in the prison house, and was asked the cause, he spoke no evil of
them, but only, "I have done nothing," and, "I was stolen out of the land of the
Hebrews"; and after this again, when he was made lord, he nourished them, and
delivered them from ten thousand dangers. If we be sober, the wickedness of our
neighbor is not strong enough to cast us out of our own virtue. But those others
were not like him; they both stripped him, and endeavored to kill him, and